                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE INCIDENCE AND EFFICIENCY COSTS
                            OF CORPORATE TAXATION WHEN
                         CORPORATE AND NONCORPORATE FIRMS
                               PRODUCE THE SAME GOOD




                                 Jane G. Gravelle

                              Laurence J. Kotlikoff




                              Working Paper No. 2462




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 1987




We thank Alan Auerbach, Guillermo Calvo, Christophe Chamley, Arnold Harberger,
Martin Feldstein, Michael Manove, Joe Pechman, Andy Postlewaite, Steven Salop,
Vito Tanzi, Jack Taylor, Andrew Weiss and seminar participants at Boston University,
Harvard, Pennsylvania, and the National Bureau for very helpful discussions.
This research was conducted while Professor Kotlikoff was a visiting scholar at
the International Monetary Fund. We are grateful to the International Monetary
Fund for supporting this research and to Ghazala Mansuri for independently checking
our calculations. The views in this study do not necessarily represent those
of the Congressional Research Service or the Library of Congress. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Support from the Pew Charitable Trusts is qratefully acknowledged.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #2462
                                                    December 1987



             The Incidence and Efficiency Costs of Corporate Taxation
            when Corporate and Noncorporate Firms Produce the Same Good




                                     ABSTRACT

       This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of Arnold Harberger's
  celebrated model of the corporation income tax. While the model has been
  enormously useful as an analytical device for studying two sector economies,
  its usefulness for understanding the incidence and excess burden of the
  corporate income tax remains in question. One difficulty confronting all
  empirical analyses of the Harberger Model is how to treat noncorporate
  production in primarily corporate sectors and corporate production in
  primarily noncorporate sectors. The Harberger Model provides no real guide to
  this question since it assumes that one good is produced only by corporations
  and the other good is produced only by noncorporate firms. Stated
  differently, Harberger models the differential taxation of capital used in the
  production of different goods, rather than the taxation of capital used by
  corporations per se.

      This paper presents a two good model with corporate and noncorporate
 production of both goods. The incidence of the corporate tax in our Mutual
 Production Model (MPM) can differ markedly from that in the Harberger model.
 A hallmark of Harberger's corporate tax incidence formula is its dependence on
 differences across sectors in elasticities of substitution between capital and
 labor. In contrast, the incidence of the corporate tax in the MPM may fall
 100 percent on capital regardless of sector differences in substitution
 elasticities.

      The difference between the two models in the deadweight loss from
 corporate taxation is also stiking. Using the Harberger - Shoven data and
 assuming unitary substitution and demand elasticities, the deadweight loss is
 over ten times larger in the CES version of the MPM than in the Harberger
 Model. Part of the explanation for this difference is that in the Harberger
 Model only the difference in the average corporate tax in the two sectors is
 distortionary, while the entire tax is distortionary in the MPM. A second
 reason for the larger excess burden in the MPM is that the MPM has a very
 large, indeed infinite, substitution elasticity in demand between corporate
 and noncorporate goods; in contrast, applications of the Harberger Model
 assume this elasticity is quite small.




Jane G. Gravelle                                   Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Congressional Research Service                     NBER
Library of Congress                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Washington, DC                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     —1—



     This year marks the twenty—fifth anniversary of Arnold Harberger's (1962)

celebrated model of the corporation income tax. The Harberger Model, as it

has come to be called, has been remarkably influential. The model not only

vanquished earlier theoretical analyses, but also shifted the debate from one

of theory to one of the proper measurement of the model's parameters. There

is now a voluminous literature that uses the Harberger Model or extensions of

the Harberger Model to measure the incidence and efficiency costs of corporate

taxation.

     One issue confronting all empirical analyses of the Harberger Model is

how to treat noncorporate production in primarily corporate sectors and

corporate production in primarily noncorporate sectors. The Harberger Model

provides no real guide to this question since it assumes that one good is

produced only by corporations and the other good is produced only by

noncorporate firms. Stated differently, Harberger models the differential

taxation of capital used in the production of different goods, rather than the

taxation of capital used by corporations per Se. In empirical work the common

finesse, initiated by Harberger, is to assume that all firms in a sector are

identical and face taxation of capital at a rate equal to the sector's average

rate of capital taxation. This assumption is, unfortunately, far from

innocuous. In treating each sector as consisting of identical firms facing

the same tax rate, Harberger ignores the substitution that can arise between

corporate and noncorporate producers. Moreover, as Ebrill and Hartman

(1982,1983) and Cravelle (1981) point out, the Harberger model cannot be

easily modified to permit noncorporate production of the corporate good. If

there is even a single, equally efficient noncorporate producer of the

corporate good, corporate production will entirely disappear in response to

the imposition of a tax on corporate income.
                                     —2—

     This paper presents a two good (sector) model with corporate and

noncorporate production of both goods. This mutual production model has three

productive factors: capital, labor, and managerial input (entrepreneurial

input in the case of noncorporate firms). Each agent is free to be a

corporate manager, an entrepreneur, or a worker. While agents are equally

productive as corporate managers or workers, they are not equally productive

as entrepreneurs. In equilibrium, those agents who are most productive as

entrepreneurs will establish their own firms, with the marginal entrepreneur

just indifferent between establishing his own firm and employment as a

corporate manager or worker. Entrepreneurs manage their firms solely by

themselves, and their firms may be quite small. In contrast, corporations

must operate at greater than a minimum scale. This minimum scale requirement

insures that the corporate sector will not disappear in the presence of a

corporate income tax.

     The incidence of the corporate tax in the Mutual Production Model (MPM)

can differ markedly from that in the Harberger model. A hallmark of

Harberger's corporate tax incidence formula is its dependence on differences

across sectors in elasticities of substitution between capital and labor. In

contrast, the incidence of the corporate tax in the Mutual Production Model

may fall 100 percent on capital regardless of sector differences in

substitution elasticities. This result holds for a large class of production

functions, including the CES function, if each sector initially has the same

capital shares as well as the same corporate share of output.

    While one might expect that the two incidence formulae would, in general,

differ, the implicit suggestion in the Harberger finesse is that the two

formulae will converge as one sector becomes more corporate intensive and the

other less corporate intensive. Such, however, is not the case. The Mutual
                                     —3—

Production Model incidence formula converges to something quite different from

that in the Harberger Model. The difference in the two models is further

illustrated by assuming CES production functions and using Harberger's (1966)

and Shoven's (1976) data to calculate pre— and post—tax equilibria. With

these data, there are significant differences in incidence in the MPM and

Harberger Model for a variety of combinations of demand and production

elasticities. For example, assuming elasticities of substitution equal to .5

and a demand elasticity equal to 1, the share of the corporate tax borne by

capital in the Mutual Production Model is 141 percent while it is only 82

percent in the Harberger model.

     The difference between the two models in the deadweight loss from

corporate taxation is also stiking. Using the Harberger — Shoven data and

assuming unitary substitution and demand elasticities, the deadweight loss is

over ten times larger in the CES version of the Mutual Production Model than

in the Harberger Model. Much of the explanation for this difference is that

in the Harberger Model only the difference in the average corporate tax in the

two sectors is distortionary, while the entire tax is distortionary in the

Mutual Production Model. Stated differently, if each sector is equally

corporate intensive, the Harberger analysis predicts zero distortion from the

corporate tax, whereas the Mutual Production Model predicts a potentially

significant deadweight loss arising from within sector substitution of

noncorporate for corporate production.

     The second reason that dead weight loss is so much greater in the MPM

than in the Harberger Model involves the elasticity of product demand. A

larger elasticity in demand between corporate and noncorporate output appears,

ceteris paribus, to increase the extent of substitution away from corporate
                                    —4—

capital and to increase the excess burden. In the MPM the source of excess

burden is primarily within—sector substitution of noncorporate for corporate

capital, whereas the source of excess burden in the Harberger model is

between—sector substitution; in the MPM the within—sector elasticity of demand

for corporate and noncorporate output is infinite. In contrast, the between—

sector elasticity of demand, which plays an important role in determining

excess burden in the Harberger model, is thought to be quite small.

     The paper proceeds in the next Section, II, by pointing out the extent of

mutual production in particular industries as well as changes through time in

the extent of mutual production. This section indicates that at the two digit

level of aggregation all goods are mutually produced. On the other hand, at

finer levels of aggregation, there appears, for some goods, to be production

only by firms subject to the corporate tax. For example, there appear to be

no noncorporate manufacturers of televisions. The fact that there is zero

noncorporate production of some goods is not, however, a problem for the MPM.

The minimum requirement of the MPM model is that there be corporate production

of both goods, but not necessarily noncorporate production of both goods.

There appear to be very few goods which are not produced by firms subject to

the corporate tax.

     Section III motivates our modeling of the corporate tax as a tax on

capital of large firms which are not owned and operated solely by the same

individual or solely by a small number of individuals. While this is a

multifaceted definition of the base of the corporate tax, such a multifaceted

definition appears to be used in practice. Indeed, Reg 301.7701--2(a)(l) of

the IRS code states "An organization will be taxed as a corporation if its

characteristics are such that it more closely resembles a corporation than a

partnership or trust."
                                      —5—

     Section IV presents the Mutual Production Model (MPM). Section V

compares the corporate tax incidence formula of the MPM with that of

Harberger. Section VI describes the calculation of no—tax and post—tax

equilibria in the MPM and Harberger models which can be evaluated using the

Harberger — Shoven data. Section VII compares the incidence and excess burden

of corporate taxation in the two models. Section VIII summarizes the paper

and suggests further applications and extensions of the model.



Section II. The Extent of Mutual Production

     Table 1 indicates that there has been and continues to be corporate

production in all two digit industries as well as all three digit industries

for which data are available. There is also noncorporate production in

virtually all the two and three digit industries; only four of the 50 two and

three digit industries listed in Table 1 have solely corporate production. In

a large number of industries that Harberger includes in the "corporate

sector", the share of noncorporate output has often been quite large. For

example, the noncorporate share of output in retail apparel was 38.1 percent

in 1957; the 1982 figure is smaller, only 19.6 percent. In retail food,

noncorporate production accounted for almost half of output in 1957; more

recently it has accounted for over one quarter of output.

     There has been considerable change over time in many industries in the

corporate share of production. One example is drug stores, whose corporate

share of output rose from 38.4 percent in 1957 to 91.4 percent in 1982. Or

consider agriculture, in which the corporate share of output rose from only

9.2 percent in 1957 to 29.3 percent in 1982. While most industries have

become significantly more corporate, several, including mining and motion

pictures, have become somewhat more noncorporate. These data certainly
                                     —6—

suggest a very substantial degree of within industry substitution of corporate

for noncorporate production over the last three decades.

     The increase in the corporate share of output since 1957 may, in part,

reflect changes in technology. And undoubtedly a small amount of the increase

reflects doctors, lawyers, and others in the service sector using pensions and

retained earnings to shelter their labor income. But much of the increase in

the corporate share of output may reflect changes in corporate versus

noncorporate tax treatment of capital income. The general shift toward

corporate production coincided with a reduction in the differential taxation

of corporate and noncorporate capital income. Gravelle (1987) calculates

marginal tax rates on corporate and noncorporate source capital income, taking

into account both personal and corporate taxes. She reports that the total

(personal plus corporate) effective tax rate on corporate capital income

exceeded that on noncorporate capital income by .52 in 1957, by .44 in 1962,

by .42 in 1971, by .45 in 1975, by .39 in 1982, by .40 in 1986, and by .32 in

1987.1



Section III. What Capital is Subject to the Corporate Tax?

     The Internal Revenue Service's definition of a corporation as an

organization that most closely resembles a corporation becomes a little less

circular when we add the IRS' list of corporate characteristics. These

include (1) associates, (2) an objective to carry on business and divide the

profits, (3) continuity of life, (4) centralization of management, (5)

liability for corporate debts limited to corporate property, and (6) free

transferability of interests. While these are the corporate characteristics,

firms can have these characteristics and still not be subject to the corporate

tax. An S corporation is a corporation with 35 or fewer shareholders and is
                                      —7---


 taxed as a partnership. Limited partnerships also fall close to the line with

respect to the corporate income tax. Reg. 301.770l—2(a)(2) says that if the

limited partnership has "more corporate characteristics than noncorporate

characteristics", it will be subject to the corporate tax.

     One recent response to the rather vague demarcations between corporate

and noncorporate enterprises has been the creation of master limited

partnerships, some of which have thousands of partners. But it appears,

according to The Wall Street Journal of June 30, 1987, that such enterprises

have become sufficiently "corporate" that Congress may soon declare them

subject to the corporate tax. As Robert McIntyre of Citizens for Tax Justice

told The Journal, "If they (the master limited partnerships) want to play with

the big boys, they ought to pay taxes with them."

     One is likely to come away from the preceding two paragraphs with the

sense that defining capital subject to the corporate tax is like trying to

define money, "nobody knows precisely what it is, but they know it when they

see it." In "seeing" capital that should be subject to corporate tax the

government appears to be looking both at the size of the enterprise and the

diversity of ownership. Enterprises that are both very large and have a large

numbers of owners appear to be fair game.

     But if the criteria for "corporateness" is size and number of owners, why

don't large firms with multiple owners simply break up into small firms with a

single owner or a small number of owners? The answer is surely that for many

products there are some economies, at least for a range, in operating on a

large scale. Large scale production does not necessarily mean integrated

ownership; i.e., in principal one could imagine different owners of robots,

conveyor belts, etc. in an auto plant assembly line. But in the language of

Grossman and Hart (1986), integrated ownership provides residual rights of
                                     —8—

control of physical assets that may be important in settings in which complete

ex—ante contracting is too costly.

     But given that some enterprises are large, why should they have more than

a very small number of owners? The answer here appears to involve a number of

factors: diversification of risk, the desire to limit liability, information

costs of becoming fully informed about all the activities of a large

enterprise, and liquidity. These reasons for multiple owners are

interrelated. For example, it may be very difficult for any one owner to

become fully informed about a large firm's activities; but the lack of full

information may make investing in a large firm riskier. The limits on full

information provide investors with a further interest in reducing their

exposure in a particular firm, including limiting their liability.

     Granted that many firms are likely to be quite large for technological

reasons and that their size induces multiple owners, how is it that

proprietorships and partnerships that produce the same good, but are typically

small, can compete? Our answer is that there is an offsetting technological

advantage to running an enterprise as a partnership or proprietorship, and

that this advantage involves information and control. Entrepreneurs, with a

major stake in their own firm, will have an incentive to stay better informed

about their firm's behavior and to control more fully their firm's behavior

than will shareholders in large companies. In short, the offsetting advantage

to proprietorships and partnerships is less of a principal—agent problem than

arises in the case of large scale corporations. But this advantage to

proprietorships and partnerships dissipates with size. In other words, there

are decreasing returns in adding additional factors to the entrepreneurial

input.

     The Mutual Production Model presented in the next Section is designed to

capture, in an admittedly highly stylized setting, the relative advantages
                                       —9—

both of large scale production with multiple owners and the typically smaller

scale production by proprietors and partners. The MPM provides a

technological advantage to more efficient entrepreneurs that permits them to

compete with large corporate firms, but their advantage is subject to

decreasing returns.2 The large corporate firms, on the other hand, have a

technical advantage relative to less efficient entrepreneurs. In order for

the corporate firms to produce, however, they must produce at greater than a

specified minimum scale. Corporate fir+ms will thus coexist with more

efficient entrepreneurships both prior to and after the imposition of a

corporate tax. The difference in corporate and noncorporate technologies is,

however, solely with respect to an efficiency coefficient on managerial

(entrepreneurial) input; the forms of the corporate and noncorporate

production functions within each sector are identical. In particular,

corporate and noncorporate firms within each sector exhibit identical

substitution elasticities.



Section IV. The Mutual Production Model

A. Profit Maximization

      Equation (1) presents corporate output in sector    Qi' as a function of

the number of managers, Md, the number of workers, Lcl, and the amount of

capital, Ki, in sector 1.     Equation (2) is the analogous expression for

sector 2.


(1)                  H(DiMci,Lc1,Kci) if M1
            (                                 —
                 o                   ifMi<M1
(2)             c2 G(D2Mc2,Lc2,Kc2) if M2     M2
            {                                 —
                 0                   ifMc2<Mc2
                                                 —10—

The minimum scale constraints in equations (1) and (2) are specified with

respect to managerial input. The terms                  and D2 are the respective corporate

managerial efficiency coefficients in industries 1 and 2. The functions

H( ,   ,   ) and   G( ,   ,    ) are   assumed to be linear homogeneous and quasi—concave.

Assuming positive production by corporations in both sectors, output per

manager of corporations in the respective sectors 1 and 2, q and                     can be

written as:


(3)                    h(Di,lci,kci)
                   =
(4)                    g(D2,l2,k2)

       The production functions expressing output per entrepreneur in the two

sectors are identical, respectively, to those in (3) and (4) except with

respect to the managerial (entrepreneurial) efficiency coefficient. Equations

(5) and (6) express output per entrepreneur in the two sectors for

entrepreneurs with respective efficiency coefficients A and B:


(5)          q1(A) =          h(A,l1, k1)
(6)          q2(B) =          g(B,l2,k2)
The symbol n stands for non—corporate.

       Each agent in the economy can potentially become an entrepreneur in one

of the two sectors; alternatively, the agent can be a manager or worker.

While all agents are equally productive as managers or workers, as

entrepreneurs their productivity depends on their efficiency coefficients.3

Each agent has a pair of coefficients A and B. The number of agents with the

pair of coefficients A and B is given by the joint density function f(A,B)

times the labor force, L.

       Profit maximization by corporations in sector 1 implies the following

first order conditions:
                                           —11—



(7)       6h(D1,11,k1)/611 = W/P1



(8)       Sh(Di,11,ki)/6k1 = R(l +



(9)                                            —               =
          cl P1h(D1,lci,kc1) —          Wl1        R(1+r)k1         W




where P1 is the price of good 1, r is the corporate tax rate, c1 is corporate

profit per manager in sector 1, W is the wage rate, and R is the net return to

capital. Since agents are equally productive as workers or managers, they

must receive the same wage in either occupation; equations (7) and (9) express

this point. The analogous profit maximizing conditions for sector 2 are given

below.




(10)      &g(D2,l2,k2)/&l2          W/P2



(11)      5g(D2,l2,k2)/6k2 = R(l +



(12)                                —          —                    W
          rc2 =   P2h(D2,lc2,kc2)       Wlc2       R(l+r)kc2


Using the fact that the partial derivatives of F( ,             ,   ) and   G( ,   , ) are
homogeneous of degree zero, equations (7) and (8) can be reexpressed as:



(13)      1c1     D1m1(W/P1,R(l+r)/P1)



(14)      kci = D1n1(W/P1,R(l+r)/P1)
                                            —12—

And equations (10) and (11) may be written as:



(15)         1c2     D2m2(W/P2,R(1+r)/P2)



(16)         kc2     D2n2(W/P2,R(1+r)/P2)



Substituting (13) and (14) into (9) indicates that corporate profits per

manager in sector         xci' can be written as D1 times a function x1 of W,

R(1+r), and P1; i.e.,



(9')         c1 D1x1(W,R(1+r),P1)



Analogously:



(12')        c2 D2x2(W,R(1+r),P2)


        Since entrepreneurs in sectors 1 and 2 have the same production function

as corporations in their respective sectors, except for the efficiency

coefficient, their factor demands can be written as:




(17)         11(A) = Am1(W/P1,R/P1)



(18)        kni(A) = An1(W/P1,R/P1)



(19)         1n2 =      Bni2(W/P2,R/P2)



(20)         k2(B)      Bn2(W/P2,R/P2)
                                                  —13—



Note that these expressions do not include the corporate tax rate, r.

       Profits per entrepreneur in sector 1 and 2, ir1(A) and lrn2(B), can be

written using the x1( ,       ,   ) and   x2( ,    ,   ) functions   as:




(21)                 =
                         Ax1(W,R,P1)



(22)        ir2(B) = Bx2(W,R,P2)



B. Choice of Occupation

   In deciding whether to be an entrepreneur or to be a worker or manager,

each agent considers the profits he would make as an entrepreneur in either

industry A or B as well as the wage paid to workers and managers. An agent

who is just indifferent between becoming an entrepreneur in industry A and

working as either a manager or a worker satisfies the following:

                                                                 =
(23)        tni( Ax1(W,R,P1) = D1x1(W,R(l+r),P1)W

where A is the efficiency coefficient that would make an agent just

indifferent between the three occupation. The corresponding minimum


efficiency coefficient B is defined by:


(24)                     Bx2(W,R,P1)       D2x2(W,R(l+r),P2)
                                                                      W

Combining (21) with (23) and (22) with (24) implies:

(25)        ,r1(A)       (A/A)W


(26)         1T2(B) = (B/B)W


       Agents who choose to be entrepreneurs in sector 1 must earn profits at

least as large as W, but their profits as entrepreneurs in sector 1 must also
                                                —14—

 be at least as large as what they can earn as entrepreneurs in sector 2.

 Agents who are just indifferent between being entrepreneurs in the two sectors

 satisfy:


 (27)             Tn2 or            A/A = B/B

 Agents with values of A and B less than A and B, respectively, will be workers

 or managers. Those with A > A and B < AB/A will be entrepreneurs in sector 1;

 Those with B > B and A < BA/B will be entrepreneurs in sector 2. The terms A

 and B are maximum values of A and B, respectively.


C. General Equilibrium Conditions

        The conditions that the supplies of labor and capital equal their

respective demands are given in equations (28) and (29).


(28)        L =
                  Md
                       +   Li   + Mc2 + Lc2 +          + Ln2 +   E1
                                                                      +

(29)        K=Kci+K2+Kni+K2
The terms L and K stand for the total supplies of labor and capital.
                                                                          L1
and '-2 are total noncorporate labor demands in sectors 1 and 2, while

and Kn2 are total noncorporate capital demands in sectors 1 and 2. Recall

that:

(30)        L1 = M1        D1m1(W/P1,R(l+r)/P1)
(31)        Lc2 = Mc2 D2m2(W/P2,R(l÷r)/P2)

(32)        Kcl    Md D1n1(W/P1,R(l+r)/P1)
(33)        K2 = Mc2       D2n2(W/P2,R(l+r)/P2)


The noncorporate demands for capital and labor are given by:
                                           —15--




                               AB/A

(34)     L1 = L J                        f(A,B) dAdB
                          J 11(A)

                               BA/B

(35)     L2 = 1 J                12(B)   f(A,B) dAdB
                          0J

                      —        AB/A

(36)     K1 =                    k1(A) f(A,B) dB
                 JA        J


                               BA/B

(37)     K2 = L J                        f(A,B) dAdB
                  B       0
                            J k2(B)



The limits of integration in, for example, equation (34) may be explained in

the following way. For an agent to choose to be an entrepreneur in sector

1, the agent's A must be at least as large as A, and his B must be less than


AB/A. Equation (34) sums the labor demands of all entrepreneurs whose

values of A and B satisfy these conditions. The remaining terms in (28) to be

defined, E1 and E2, stand for number of entrepreneurs in sectors 1 and 2,

respectively. E1 and E2 satisfy:
                                                       —l 6—



                             -        AB/A

 (38)               =
                        tf        J f(A,B)          dAdB




                                  BA/B

                    =                 f(A,B)
                        tj
 (39)
                                 01



        Following Harberger, equation (40) specifies that the relative aggregate

demand for the two goods depends only on their relative price:



(40)        Q1/Q2       V(P1/P2)



The terms Q1 and Q2 are the respective total supplies of goods 1 and 2, i.e.


                                                           -    AB/A
(41)        Q1 =         + ni          =        +
                                                                    q1(A) f(A,B) dB
                                                      A1       01




                                                        —       BA/B
                                      =         +
(42)                c2 +     n2            c2                  01 q2(B)
                                                                          f(A,B) dAdB
                                                      JB



Finally, equation (43) states that the value of output equals the value of

national income I, which is taken as the model's numeraire.



(43)       P1Q1 + P2Q2 =     I
                                            —17—

D. Solving the Model and Comparisons with the Harberger Model

       The model's solution can be determined as follows. From equations (23)

and (24) one can write A as a function of W and R and P1 and B as a function

of W and R and P2. These relationships plus (17) through (20) imply that L1,

L2, I<nl, ISi2 as well as E1 and E2 can each be written as functions of W and R

and P1 and P2. Substituting these relationships into equations (28) and (29)

and also using (13) through (16) gives two equations in W, R, Md, Mc2, Pl,

and P2. Substituting using (3) through (6) as well as (13) through (20) into

equations (40) and (43) gives two additional equations in these six variables.

The final two equations needed to solve for these six variables arise from

equating (7) and (9) as well as (10) and (12) and substituting in from (13)

through (16).

       The differentials of these last two equations, presented in (44) and

(45), as well as the differentials of (23) and (24), presented in (46) and

(47), are important for understanding how the MPM differs from the Harberger

Model.




(44)            =
                    (l—i)   +          +


(45)        P2 =    (l—2)   +    2(R   +


(46)       A (1—) +                — P1
                     (1—crl—l)

(47)       B =
                    (1—2)   +      — P2



                            "
In the above equations           stands for percentage change. The terms l and

are the respective income shares of capital in sectors 1 and 2 in the pre—tax

equilibrium; and l and a2 are the respective income shares of workers in

corporate sectors 1 and 2 in the pre—tax equilibrium. Note that in the pre—
                                       —18—

tax equilibrium the income shares of corporate and noncorporate firms within a

sector are identical; in the pre—tax equilibrium each noncorporate firm looks

just like its corporate counterpart except for the scale of its inputs and

production.

     Equations (44) and (45) indicate that if each sector's initial income

shares are identical, P1 and P2 will change by the same percentage. This

result is quite different from that in the Harberger model in which the

relative price of the two goods always changes regardless of initial income

shares. Intuitively, since corporations in each sector in the MPM model will

still be producing after the tax is imposed, they will both experience the

same percentage increase in marginal cost (which equals the price of output)

if their initial factor shares are identical. This property that relative

output prices aren't necessarily affected by the corporate tax holds

regardless of the relative corporateness of the two sectors, provided there is

nonzero corporate production in each sector.

     Equations (46) and (47) indicate how the minimum efficiency

coefficients A and B respond to changes in factor and output prices when the

corporate tax is imposed. Combining (44) with (46) as well (45) with (47)

indicates that both minimum efficiency coefficients fall in response to the

corporate tax; hence, the tax leads to an increase in the number of

noncorporate firms.



Section V. Corporate Tax Incidence in the Mutual Production Model

A. Capital's Share of the Tax Burden

     The Appendix derives the formula, presented in equation (48), for the

incidence of the corporate tax in the MPM.
                                            —19—
             A   A


(48)         R/r
 + (2—fi1)2K1K2/(1K2      +482K1)

 + Kn2{     2tkw+Ol2lkr)(.82) — 2lw+0l2l)hlr2J
 +   Knl[(fllekw+02   l2)kr)8l) —
_Kcl[(l_fil)2kr_21(1_l)w+a148lf1w] —

                                          + K2[(l_$2)2t)kr_2/32(l_fl2)?7kw+a22t)lw]
                                               —
                                                   (fl2   1)2K1K2/(fi1K2 +2K1)


In (48) all terms above the line are in the numerator, and all terms below the

line are in the denominator.            and r1ij are the elasticities of demand of

factor i in response to a change in the input price of factor j for sectors 1

and 2, respectively. The term           is the elasticity of substitution in demand

of good 1 for good 2 in response to a change in the relative price of the two

goods. The term 1         —
                              2     is the share of total national income spent on

good 1. Note that the formula is general with respect to the extent of

noncorporate production; i.e., zero noncorporate production in either one or

both industries can be considered simply by specifying that K1 and/or K2 are

zero.

        While the incidence formula seems rather formidable, it simplifies

considerably in the case that l               In this case the terms involving the

demand elasticity, , drop out, which is to be expected given (44) and (45)

which indicate that there is no change in the relative price of the two goods

in the case of equal initial shares. Alternatively, a simpler expression

results if one assumes that:



(49)        alelw =   (l—i)E,
            a2t7l =   (l—2).
                                        —20—

              1kr = (l—ai)eir
              2'kr 2lr
The equalities in (49) hold for the CES family of production functions given

in (50), where       is the managerial efficiency coefficient, and Hi' a, b,

and p (i=l,2) are production function parameters. They may hold for other

production functions as well, at least locally.



(50)      =                       +   aiLi_Pi + bjKi_Pi]_l/Pi     i        1,2



       With the equalities in (49), the incidence formula simplifies to:


(51)


—R                                    + (2—1)[O2(o1—)K1               —
                                                                          1(a2—)K2]
       = [(l—2)+(2—1)O1][a1Kc1+a2Kc2}
                                           +                      —
         [(l—2)-f(82—1)91][a1K1+a2K2}          (2—1)[92(a1—)K1            G1(a2—)K2]




According to (51), as in Harberger's model, if all elasticities are equal, the

burden of the tax falls 100 percent on capital. Alternatively, if the capital

shares are equal and if ai = a2, the incidence will also be 100 percent on

capital. However, unlike Harberger's model, the incidence of the corporate

tax can be 100 percent on capital regardless of the elasticities of

substitution in production. In (51) if l =        2'   the case of equal capital

shares, and if Kci/K1 = Kc2/K2, the incidence on capital is 100 percent

regardless of the values of      and a2.

       In the case of equal capital shares, but unequal elasticities of

substitution and unequal corporate intensiveness, the incidence formula,

expressed as capital's share of the tax burden, simplifies to:
                                                —2 1—




                                      +
(52)        —        —   [1K1/K           o2K2/K]
                                  +
                rK       a1K1/K       a2K2/Kj



In (52) K stands for total corporate capital. Note that the incidence on

corporate capital equals the elasticities of substitution in each sector

weighted by each sector's share of corporate capital divided by the

elasticities of substitution weighted by each sector's share of total capital.

In the extreme cases in which ai (a2) equals infinity, the reduction in the

after tax return to capital is the same that would arise if there was only

sector 1 (2).

       It may be useful to compare (52) with the corresponding Harberger

incidence formula in the case of equal capital shares. This formula (see

Kotlikoff and Summers, 1987) is given in (53), where sector i is assumed to be

the corporate sector.


                A        K
(53)
                         K   [Ak+



In (53) Ak is capital's share of total national income.

       In contrast to the MPM formula (52) in which the incidence can be 100

percent on capital regardless of the values of a1 and a2, in the Harberger

formula (53) the incidence will generally differ from 100 percent in the case

of unequal elasticities of substitution. For example, if      =   0, capital and
labor are used in fixed proportions in industry 1. Hence, in the Harberger

model taxing capital in industry 1 is equivalent to taxing both factors at the

same rate, and the incidence on capital equals capital's share of national
                                        —22—

income, Ak. In the MPM, on the other hand, capital's share of the tax burden

when a 0 is (K2/K)/(K2/K). This term can be greater than 100 percent or

close to zero depending on whether sector 2's share of corporate capital

exceeds or is less than its share of total capital. The same results for the

two models also hold when 02 =     . Suppose       next that a = or a2 = 0.   In

this case Harberger's formula predicts that more than 100 percent of the tax

burden will fall on capital. In contrast, capital's share of the tax burden

in the MPM model is (Kci/Kc)/(Ki/K)•

        The limiting case in the MPM model when K2 approaches zero and

approaches K1 is particularly instructive. Here the MPM incidence on capital

approaches a1K/(a1K1 + a2K2), which is different from (53), despite the fact

that the economy looks increasingly Harbergian in that virtually all corporate

capital is in sector 1.

        While the assumptions given in (49) which lead to (51) are satisfied by a

wide class of functions, there are other quite plausible functional forms that

do not satisfy (49) and imply a different incidence outcome. For example,

equation (54) presents a production function which is Cobb—Douglas between

managerial (entrepreneurial) input and a CES function of labor and capital.




(54)               =                           +                          i=l,2
              Q1



Equation (55) gives the incidence formula in the case of equal capital shares

       =
           2 = ) that results from assuming that each sector's corporate and
noncorporate production functions are of the form given in (54). This

equation is clearly quite different from equation (52).
                                           —23—




                (l—)[(cr1o1+ )K1+ (a2a2+ )K2] — [a1(l—o1)K1+ a2(l—a2)K21

(55)
        R
        A
                         a1+fl                          al
                                                        —
                       (l—)[(a1a1+ )K1 +   2a2+             [1(l—a1)K1+   a2(l—u2)K2]
                                           a2+$

B. The Incidence on Workers. Managers, and Entrepreneurs

       In the MPM the wage rate is likely to fall even in cases when capital

bears more than 100 percent of the tax. In contrast to workers, managers, and

capital owners, all of whom are likely to be made worse off by the corporate

tax, entrepreneurs who were producing prior to the tax are made better off.

The reason is that in the presence of the tax they become a relatively scarce

factor input; their productive input is equivalent to that of a larger number

of managers, but their productive output is untaxed. In other words, they are

the sine—qua—non of non—taxed noncorporate production.

       The formula for the change in the wage rate is determined by combining

equations (44), (45), and Appendix equation (Al.7):




(56)
            A
            W =    —
                           °ll    +          A
                                            (R +
                                                   A
                                                   r)
                         alL_l)    +




According to (56), the wage falls unless the rental rate on capital falls by
more than the increase in the tax rate; i.e., unless the pre—tax cost of

capital falls in the corporate sector. In the CES case with equal capital

income shares the wage unambiguously falls. The formula for this case is

given by:
                                         —24—


                           (ci1K1 + a2K2)
(57)        W—
            A        A

                    (l—)    (a1K1 + O•2K2)
                                             A
                                             r




Using   (57), if both sectors are equally corporate intensive, one can show that

the decline in labor income as a share of tax revenue equals the ratio cz/(l—fl)

times the ratio of noncorporate to corporate capital.



Section VI. Calculating No—Tax and Post—Tax Equilibria in the MPM and
                             Harberger Models


A. Method of Initializing Model

        In measuring the incidence and efficiency cost of corporate taxation in

the MPM model we follow Harberger and Shoven in using observed average

corporate tax rates. We acknowledge that the effective marginal corporate

income tax may differ from the observed average corporate tax because of debt

finance as discussed by Stiglitz (1974) and Gordon and Malkiel (1981).    Our

purpose here, however, is not to question Harberger and Shoven's choice of

data, but simply to illustrate using their data and procedures how the

predictions of the Mutual Production Model can differ from those of the

Harberger Model.

        We follow Shoven in calculating no—tax and post—tax equilibria rather

than simply evaluating derivative formulae, such as (51); such formulae are

valid only for small tax changes and must be evaluated with data on the pre-

tax equilibrium which, unfortunately, is unobservable. In calculating no—tax

and post—tax equilibria we use the CES production function, given in (50), and

assume the following CES utility function:
                                         —25—

(58)        U [dQ1 + (l—d)Q2]/7


We also assume that the joint density function, f(A,B), is the product of two

independent exponential functions, exp(—'A) and I'exp(—l'B). The values of the

two parameters       and F were chosen to produce the observed post—tax ratios of

corporate to noncorporate capital in each sector. To test the sensitivity of

the results to the choice of this joint density function, we also calculated

no—tax and post—tax equilibria assuming a fixed number of entrepreneurs in

each sector.

       The observed post—tax equilibria provides us with parameter values that

are used in computing the no—tax equilibria. We measure factors and goods in

units such that R, W, P1, and P2 equal unity in the post—tax equilibrium. We

also set       and D2 equal to unity. These conventions together with

information on factor and output shares, information on average corporate tax

rates in each sector, a specified level of national income, I, the choice of

         and 4,,   and the calibrated values of '' and F, permit us to solve

for the values of K and L. Given these parameter values, solving for the no—

tax equilibrium is straightforward.

       To make these statements precise, Table 2 lists the equations of the MPM

in the post—tax equilibrium for the case of CES production and utility

functions. In the Table the tax rate t levied on pre—tax capital income is

related to the tax rate r on post—tax capital income according to t=r/(l+r).

We express these formulae in terms of t since the U.S. corporate tax is levied

on pre—tax capital income. The parameters ad and ac2 are the income shares

of workers in the two industries in both corporate and non—corporate firms in

the post—tax equilibrium. While we subscript a here by c, the corporate and

noncorporate post—tax labor shares within a sector are identical. Note also
                                          —26—

that the       terms here are post—tax shares, whereas the ais used above and in

the Appendix are no—tax shares. The parameters cl and c2 equal the

corporate ratios in industries 1 and 2 of pre—tax capital income to the value

of output.

     The parameters          and     (i=l,2) are related to the underlying CES

production function parameters as well as the tax rate t according to the

formulae: a= a                               ci b1i [H(l_t)]i1i
     Given the values of acl,crc2,flcl,8c2,t,d,7,I, p1, and p2 as well as the

parameters, ''   aid   r, (59) — (76) can readily be solved for the values

of K and L .     Once we have these total factor supplies we can solve for the

pre—tax equilibrium using the equations listed in Table 3. These equations

correspond to those of Table 2 except that output and factor prices are now

endogenous. In Table 3 there are 16 equations in the 16 unknowns K1, K2,

Kni, I<n2, Lcl, Lc2, Lnl, Ln2, R, W, P1, P2, M, Mc2, A, and B. The two
outputs Q1 and Q2 are not additional unknowns since they can be expressed via

the production functions in terms of the factor inputs.



B. Parameterization of the Model

     Table 4 lists the values of the parameters appearing in Tables 3 and 4

that are used in calculating pre— and post—tax equilibria. In the 1957 data

used by Shoven (1976) I is $296 billion, with the capital income share equal

to .60 in the "noncorporate" sector and .20 in the "corporate" sector. In

analyzing the MPM we let sector 1 correspond to the "noncorporate" sector and

sector 2 correspond to the "corporate" sector. The 1957 post—tax share of

total national income of sector 1, 0, equals .15 (Shoven, 1976). The MPM

requires knowledge of the post—tax shares of income paid to workers in the two

sectors, ad    and ac2. Note that for the CES model these shares are     identical
                                                —27—

for corporate and noncorporate firms within each sector. The values of

and ac2 were determined using the 1959 proprietorship tax returns which report

labor payments for the industries in the two sectors.4

        Determining the values of cl and c2 is a bit more involved. To

calculate the values of cl and c2 we use the following relationships:


                           (K./K.) + (K
(93)            .
               ci
                     2.1                                         for   i =   1,2
                           (K./K.) + (K./K.)(l—t)


where          stands for the sector i's share of capital income (.60 for sector 1

and .20 for sector 2). This equation simply relates capital's (unobserved)

net of tax income share for corporate firms to the overall pre—tax share of

capital income in the sector (which is observed). Not surprisingly, the

equation involves the corporate and, non—corporate shares of capital in the

sector as well as the tax rate t. It also uses the following relationship

between noncorporate and corporate net of tax capital shares:

  •
 ni
       = 'ci
         ''
        The value of t, the average corporate tax rate, for 1957 is .45 according

to data reported in The Economic Report of the President. l987. To solve for

the post—tax corporate and noncorporate shares of capital within each sector

entering (93), we use the following relationships:



               K .         t.(l—t)        K .       t   —   t.
(94)                 =                          =                i =   1,2
               K.          t(l—t.)   '
                                           K.       t(l—t•)


where t is the average corporate tax rate reported in 1957 in sector i. The

specific values determined from Rosenberg's (1969) data are t1 = .014 and t2 =

.340.    Equation (94) simply exploits the idea that if the tax t is levied only
                                                          —28—

on corporate firms and one observes the average tax rate t in sector i, where

the average is computed using total sector i capital, one can infer the

corporate share of the sector's capital, i.e., the share of the capital that

is subject to the tax t. The calculated values of Kcl/Kl and Kc2/K2 are .017

and .630, respectively. These values as well as the values for                            appear in

equation (93) and Table 4's formulae for cl and c2 Note that for a given

value of t,          depends on the value of c.

     In addition to observing indirectly the ratios of corporate to

noncorporate capital in each sector, we can also indirectly observe each

sector's post—tax share of total capital.6 Taken together, these ratios

determine the post—tax ratios K1/K, and K2/K as well as the ratios

K1/K and K2/K. These four ratios can be used to determine K in the

following manner: the four ratios plus equations (67)—(70) and (73)—(74)

can be substituted using the production function into equation (75)

yielding one equation in the unknown K. Given this value we can determine the

levels of K         K     ,   K        ,
                                           and K     .   Next these capital values can be used
           ni   ,
                     n2           ci            c2
together with equations (67) —                     (70) and (73)—(74) to determine Lcl Lc2 Mi
M2, Lni and L2. Plugging these six values into equation (66) and using

the formulae (38) and (39) for E1 and E2 yields a single equation in

the remaining unknown parameters L, , and                        1'.   Equations (71) and (72), given

the values of K and K                         represent the other two equations needed to solve
                    ni                 n2
for these three remaining parameters. Note that these three equations involve

p1 and p2; hence, the values of L, 'Z', and r will differ with each choice of

the two elasticities of substitution in production.
                                        —29—

 Section VII. A Comparison of Tax Incidence and Excess Burden
               in the MPM and Harberger Models



A. Tax Incidence

     Table 5 presents the share of the tax burden borne by capital for

different combinations of demand and production substitution elasticities for

the MPM CES example and the Harberger Model. For many combinations of

elasticities the incidence in the two models is quite different. For example,

if the demand elasticity is unity and both production elasticities equal .5,

capital bears only 82 percent of the tax burden according to the Harberger

Model, but it bears 141 percent of the tax burden according to the MPM. The

difference in the predicted incidence in this case is over half the total tax.

     Capital's share of the tax burden can be both larger and smaller in the

Harberger model compared with the MPM; in the case that the corporate and

noncorporate substitution elasticities are .5 and 2, respectively, and the

demand elasticity is unity, capital's share of the tax burden is 61 percent in

the Harberger model, but only 27 percent in the MPM. Another difference in

the incidence results is that, ceteris paribus, a higher demand elasticity

raises capital's share of the tax burden in the MPM, but lowers capital's

share in the Harberger Model.

     The incidence in the MPM is a bit different for some parameters if one

assumes that the number of entrepreneurs is fixed in each sector. For

example, in the case that both corporate and noncorporate substitution

elasticities equal .5 and the demand elasticity equals unity, capital's share

of the tax burden is 131 percent of the revenue (compared with 141 percent in

the case of a variable number of entrepreneurs). Another example is the case

of a unitary demand elasticity and respective corporate and noncorporate

substitution elasticities of 2 and 1.    In this case the incidence on capital
                                    —30—

is 129 percent of the tax revenue when entrepreneurs are in variable supply,

but 134 percent of revenue when they are in fixed supply.

     Table 6 presents the incidence of the corporate tax in the MPM on workers

and managers as a group and on entrepreneurs. The results are very sensitive

to the choice of elasticities. For the case of unitary elasticities the

income of workers and managers falls by 28 percent of the tax revenue in

response to the corporate tax, while the profits of entrepreneurs rises by 28

percent. For the case that the corporate and noncorporate substitution

elasticities are 1 and 2 respectively, the loss to workers exceeds 60 percent

of the tax revenue, while the gain to entrepreneurs is almost a quarter of tax

revenue. Finally, if the corporate and noncorporate elasticities are 2 and

.5, respectively, the income of workers and managers rises by over one third

of revenue, while that of entrepreneurs rises by almost one fifth of revenue.



B. Excess Burden



1. Estimates

     Table 7 compares the dead weight loss in the two models. Our excess

burden measure is based on a compensating variation. We determine the amount

of additional income needed in the post—tax equilibrium to regain the no—tax

level of utility. Measuring the distortion based on an equivalent variation,

that determines the amount of pre—tax income that needs to be taken away to

achieve the post—tax utility level, yielded quite similar results.

     The excess burden measured as a fraction of tax revenues is more than ten

times larger in the MPM than in the Harberger Model for all elasticity

combinations. For most of the combinations, the dead weight loss in the MPM

model exceeds the tax revenue. Consider the case of unitary production and
                                       —31—

  demand elasticities. In this case the excess burden in the Harberger Model is

  only 8 percent of revenue, while it is 123 percent of revenue in the Mutual

  Production Model. Even if all elasticities are smaller, for example, .5, the

 MPM predicts a sizeable distortion, 129 percent of revenue, while the

 Harberger Model's predicted distortion is only 4 percent of revenue.

      The excess burden in the MPM is considerably smaller if one assumes that

 entrepreneurs are in fixed supply. For example, in the case that all

 elasticities are unity, holding fixed the number of entrepreneurs reduces the

 excess burden from 123 percent to 74 percent of revenue. If all elasticities

 equal .5, the excess burden is reduced from 129 percent of revenue to 66

 percent of revenue. But even with the supply of entrepreneurs fixed, the

 excess burden in the MPM is still at least 7 times that in the
                                                                  Harberger
Model.




2. Understanding the Differences in Excess Burden

     One reason that the excess burden in the MPM is so much greater than in

the Harberger Model involves the size of the distortionary tax rates in the

two analyses. Although the MPM results are based on the same tax data,

including the same tax revenue, the effective distortionary wedge in the MPM

model is 82 percent, while it is only 50 percent in the Harberger — Shoven

procedure. Since excess burden roughly rises with the square of the tax rate,

the difference in effective distortionary taxes can, by itself, account for an

MPM excess burden that is 2.6 times the Harberger Model's excess burden.

     To understand these differences note that in the MPM model the economy—

wide average corporate tax rate, calculated as total corporate revenues

divided by total corporate income, is .45. In terms of the model's tax

variable r, this value of .45 for t corresponds to a value of r of .82, since
                                       —32—

r =   t/(l—t).   With such a large distortionary tax, the considerable size of

the distortion in the MPM is not surprising. In contrast, in the Harberger —

Shoven analysis the distortionary corporate tax is the difference between the

average corporate tax rates in the two sectors. But this average tax in each

sector is computed based on total sector capital income, not simply the

corporate income in the sector. By averaging over noncorporate as well as

corporate capital in determining the tax rates in each sector, Harberger and

Shoven dilute the effective distortionary corporate tax. Since t1        .014 and

   = .340, the effective distortionary tax in the Harberger — Shoven procedure

is only .50, which corresponds to (.340 —     .014)/[(1—.340)(l.014)].
       The second reason that the excess burden is so much larger in the MPM

than in the Harberger Model involves differences in the two models in the

source of the inefficiency in conjuncture with differences in within—sector

and between—sector demand elasticities. To understand this point first note

that the approximation formula for excess burden is the same in both models,

namely .5r23Kc/3r, where       stands for total corporate capital. But the

change in corporate capital in the MPM model is due, ultimately, to within—

sector substitution of noncorporate capital as well as other factors for

corporate capital. Indeed, were there no within—sector substitution, i.e.,

were there no noncorporate production either before or after the tax, 3K/8r

in the MPM would be zero. In contrast to the MPM, in the Harberger Model

3K/8r is negative because of between—sector substitution of capital.

       The fact that the MPM's ultimate source of the inefficiency is within—

sector rather than between—sector changes in capital, does not by itself

suggest that excess burden is larger in the MPM. But one needs to consider

these differences in the source of excess burden in light of differences in

the within— versus between—sector elasticities of demands for corporate and
                                      —33—

noncorporate goods. In the MPM the within—sector demand elasticity between

corporate and noncorporate output is infinite. In contrast, in both models,

the between—sector demand elasticity between corporate and noncorporate goods

is assumed to be small, typically unity or less. To appreciate how this

difference in demand elasticities may affect the reduction in corporate

capital and, thus, excess burden, consider how excess burden in the Harberger

Model changes as the between—sector demand elasticity increases. Assuming

unitary elasticities of substitution in production, raising the demand

elasticity in the Harberger model from unity to 10 increases the excess burden

by a factor of 3. Together with the 2.6 factor arising from differences in

effective tax wedges, this factor of 3 suggests an excess burden in the MPM

that could easily exceed that in the Harberger Model by a factor of 7.



3.   Does the Method of Aggregation Affect the MPM Results?

     Harberger allocated U.S. industries to "corporate" and "noncorporate"

sectors based on the size of their average tax. While this was appropriate

for Harberger's purposes, his two sector division is not necessarily the most

appropriate two sector division from the perspective of the MPM. Hence, it is

important to understand how the MPM results would differ if the two sectors

were chosen differently.

      If all production functions of the underlying products are locally

identical (all own and cross factor demand elasticities as well as factor

shares are the same for all goods) the method of aggregation affects neither

incidence nor excess burden in the MPM. To see this, consider the general

formula of tax incidence, equation (48). In the case that sector 1 and 2 have

the same technology locally, the incidence on capital is independent of both

the ratio of K1 to K2 and the degree of corporate intensity in the two
                                                —34—

sectors. Next consider the triangle approximation formula for excess burden

in the MPM. As in the Harberger Model, this formula is given by .5r2dKc/dr.

Some additional differentiation of the MPM leads to the following formula for




(95)            = k K
                      A
                         + k K
                                   A
                                           + [
                                                     1       2
                                                             ] WA
                                                                —   I   f(A,B)dB
                                                                          —
          dr       ni ni    n2 n2
                                                    l-—Th
                                            r
                   + [ ______ ] 2WB—        I   f(A,B)dA
                                                    —
                          l—a2 82

                           B               B                 A
                                                             —      rB2AB
                               1       —        2        2
                  +                                      w           B         ,B)dB
                          —a1—1            1 22 B2 B                       —


When sectors 1 and 2 have the same technology locally, the percentage change

in k1 equals the percentage change in k2. Hence, equation (95) indicates

that when the two technologies are locally identical, dX/dr is independent of

the ratio of Knl to Kn2• In this case the MPM's excess burden is the same

regardless of whether one allocates all noncorporate production to one sector

or spreads the noncorporate output between the two sectors.

       This last statement may seem surprising in light of the above argument

that it is the infinite within—sector corporate—noncorporate demand elasticity

that explains the large excess burden; how can the MPM excess burden be large

if the within—sector demand elasticity is not relevant for one of the sectors

because the sector is totally corporate? The answer is that in the case of

identical local technologies, all that is needed is one sector in which the

demand elasticity between corporate and noncorporate goods is infinite

provided that sector has all the noncorporate capital.

       From equation (95) and some additional calculations with the model it

appears that excess burden in the MPM is larger if one chooses the two sectors
                                     —35—

to maximize the difference between capital income shares. In other words,

aggregations which do not maximize the differences between capital income

shares will understate the excess burden. Oddly enough, Harberger's division

of output into two sectors produces two sectors with quite different capital

income shares. Hence, we believe the excess burden reported above for the MPM

would be only slightly larger for other choices of the two sectors with even

more divergent capital income shares. This discussion and our additional

calculations also suggest that disaggregating the MPM into more than two

sectors would also increase the excess burden.
                                    —36—

Section VIII Summary and Suggestions for Additional Research

     The model developed in this paper exhibits mutual production of each good

by corporate and noncorporate firms. Noncorporate firms arise endogenously;

those individuals who choose to become entrepreneurs are more efficient than

corporate managers, but since their managerial input is fixed, their output is

subject to diminishing returns. In addition, entrepreneurs can only produce

by themselves. Corporate firms have a technological advantage relative to

less efficient entrepreneurs in producing at a large scale. Hence, corporate

firms co—exist with the limited number of more efficient entrepreneurs both

prior to and after the introduction of a corporate income tax, although the

tax induces production by less efficient entrepreneurs. While the efficiency

of their managerial input differs, both corporate and noncorporate firms

within each sector have identical production functions.

     In contrast to the mutual production model, Harberger's model of the

corporate tax collapses in the presence of corporate and noncorporate

production of the same good, with the corporate sector disappearing.

Harberger's model is really not a model of a tax on the income of corporations

per Se. Instead of analyzing a tax on the corporate form, Harberger models

the differential taxation of capital used in the production of different

goods. The U.S. corporate income tax, however, does not apply differentially

to producers of different commodities, rather it is levied on corporate as

opposed to noncorporate firms. By ignoring noncorporate production in

primarily corporate sectors and corporate production in primarily noncorporate

sectors, Harberger's model ignores the potential substitution of noncorporate

for corporate production within each sector.

     This within—sector substitution permits a source of inefficiency not

included in Harberger's formulation, namely the substitution of less efficient
                                        —37—

noncorporate production for more efficient corporate production. The within—

sector substitution explains why the deadweight loss from corporate taxation

is many times larger in the Mutual Production Model than in the Harberger

Model. Indeed, the excess burden in the CES illustration of the MPM is

typically larger than the corporate tax revenue.

     The within—sector substitution also obviates much of the source of

relative price changes arising in the Harberger model and alters the effects

of sector differences in substitution elasticities. These are the major

reasons why the incidence of the corporate income tax can differ so greatly in

the MPM and Harberger Model. In contrast to the Harberger incidence formula,

demand effects drop out of the MPM incidence formula if both sectors have CES

production functions and also have the same initial shares of capital income.

If, in addition, each sector is equally corporate intensive, the MPM's tax

incidence is 100 percent on capital regardless of differences in substitution

elasticities between the two sectors.

     The CES results for 1957, while striking, must be viewed in perspective.

First, we have followed Harberger and Shoven in using average, rather than

effective marginal tax rates in the calculations and in ignoring personal

taxes. Using Cravelle's (1987) estimates of the total (corporate plus

personal) marginal tax wedge would raise our estimate of excess burden for

1957. Parenthetically, Cravelle's estimates indicate a much lower excess

burden for 1987 and a much larger efficiency gain from the 1986 tax reform act

than has previously been suggested. Second, like Harberger and Shoven, we

have ignored depreciation; proper adjustment for depreciation would reduce the

dead weight loss estimates. Third, if marginal—debt equity ratios differ from

average debt—equity ratios, the marginal effective tax wedge would differ from

the average corporate tax rate considered in this paper as well as the total
                                     —38—

(personal plus corporate) tax wedge calculated by Gravelle (1987). Forth, the

results might differ if the model were disaggregated, as in Shoven (1976) and

Ballard, et. al (1985), to include many sectors. Fifth, the joint density

function determining entrepreneur's abilities should be estimated empirically.

Sixth, the model could be expanded to treat managerial and entrepreneurial

input, on the one hand, and labor, on the other hand, as distinct production

factors. And seventh, the assumption that corporate and noncorporate

production functions are identical within a sector needs to be tested and

potentially relaxed. These issues provide ample scope for additional

research.

     In conclusion, perhaps the best celebration of the 25th anniversary of

Harberger's remarkably influential model would be a rebirth of analytical

attention to the questions of what constitutes a corporation and what

precisely does the corporation income tax tax.
                                                    —39—


                                                Appendix

The A symbol refers below to the percentage change in a variable

All prices initially equal 1.

        The differential of the demand equation (40) can be expressed as:


(Al)                     =
            Q1—Q2

where      is the elasticity of substitution between the two products.

       The differential of output in industry 1 is:



                                                      lKl cl
            A                    A                     A                     A
(A2)        Q1 = (1—a1--1)M1 Q                  +
                                                           Q       + c:zlL1
                                                                                    Q1

                                BA


                    +
                               f[dl1(A)         +
                                                    dk1(Afl f(A,B) dB


                        EdA
                    -                       +
                        — J {l+11(A)            knl   (A)] f(A,B)dB




                -   L
                        [A2
                              .---
                                     j JA   [ + 11(A)       +
                                                                kni(A)   ]
                                                                                 f(A,A   )AdA
                                                      —40--




       The change in output in industry 2 can similarly be written as:

             A                  A                       A       c2            A
(A3)         Q2       (l—a2--2)M2             +
                                                   2Kc                   +
                                                                             a L2 2
                                    AB


                  +            0j'[d12(B) +                 dk2(B)]      f(A,B) dAdB
                      —— J

             —    LdB     A

                      2                       k2(Bfl          f(A,B)dA

                   dBA dA

                                                                +
                                      BJ[ +           1n2(B)        k2(B)] f[_BJBdz




       We combine (Al), (A2), and (A3) noting that:                            Kci     Md +   kci
Tcl Mcl+ 1c1            K2 Mc2 + kc2              Lc2         Mc2+ 1c2'           Q1    K/ K1, and

2' 2 K2/ K2.


                                          K1      +                                           f(A,B)dBdA
(Al)                  lk1+ a1Il]



                                                                                  -
        -   tdA                                                 A2
                  J{l+11(A)+k1(A)} f(A,B)dB -
                                                                      Q        ArL ÷l1(A)+k1(A))
                                xLfA,A AdA
                                                                    BA


        —         +                      K2   —                                           f(A,B)dBdA
                      2kc2+                                 j f [d12(B)+dk2(B)]
            [c2               a212]
                                                                  —41—




       +LdB—                  A                                                      dBA
                                                                                            - dA
                              N[l+l n2—
                                      (B)           +   kn2—
                                                           (B)] f(A,B)
                                                                   —   +
                2
                B                                             lAB
       xLI I—+1n2
        —               I B
                                                                                =
                                                                                     42— l]
            J           B           (B)+k2(B)j               f[_B]BdB

                                                                                                               which yields;
  We now differentiate (29) and divide by MCi1k                                 ci    (i.e., by 1<C1)



                               A    A
                                                         Mk
                                                          c 2c2
                                                                      M
                                                                          c2
                                                                               kc2 A
(A4)                 O=M ci+k ci
                               -fI                                    +            k
                                                                                kci c2
                                                    c2 M1 k1 Mci
                                                BA
                                                A

                    +
                              L
                                                        dkni(A) f(A,B)dB - ____
                                                                           M k                             ki(A)   f(A,B)dB
                        M     k     I       I
                            clclAj 0J                                                  cicl0       j




                                                                  A
                                    dAB —               dB
                                                         —
                                                                  kni(A) f[A__j AdA
                                                                                     BA1

                             k
                            dci    [A2                  A]
                                                        —     I




                                                    AB
                                                    B                                                      A
                                    rB          r                                          LdB
                    Mk
                     cicij                      I
                                                         dkn2 (B) f(A,B)dAdB —         M    k
                                                                                           diciJ
                                                                                                       I   k2(B)   f(A,B)dA




                                    dBA                 dA
                                                              I k
                         Mdci
                           k [—;—-i—]
                                   —                              n2 (B) f[L__B)BdB
                                                                           B
                                                              j
                                                                —42—



       The first four terms represent the changes in corporate capital in the

two sectors. The next three terms are the changes in capital for non—

corporate production in industry 1 due, respectively, to changes in capital in

existing firms, changes due to new firms established by former corporate

managers and workers, and by new firms established by entrepreneurs who

previously had firms in industry 2.


       We similarly differentiate equation (28) for a fixed stock of labor and

divide by M1l1 (which equals Lcl )


                                                              c2 Mc2(1+1c2)
                             [1+1 ci]                     M                          M
           0 =
                    A
                                           +
                                                A
                                                      +                     +
                                                                                      c2 1c2 1c2
(A5)                N1            1
                                      cl
                                               1c1             M 1
                                                                dci                  M
                                                                                      cl 1ci

                                               BA

                                      rA       rA
                        —
                        L
                                                                                 LdA
           +                                        dl 1(A) f(A,B)dBdA —                     [1+1n     f(A,B)dB
                N                                                                M       1
                    ciciA                  0                                         clcl0




            —
                    —
                        L
                                  B        —
                                               dB                          BA
                                                                       f A,—- AdA
                M
                    dcl       [   A2           ]— j[l+ii(A).]                —




                                               AB



           +
                M
                    ciciB
                         1
                                  J        0Jn2               f(A,B)dAdB -
                                                                                clcl0Ji+l2(B)}
                                                                                                     f(A,B)dA
                                                               —43—


                                                 rB
                      IdBA              dA                                AB
      —                             —                                             ,B BdB
                     [ B2
                M 1                     B             [l÷12(B)]               B
                 dci                    —                                     —




          To solve the model, we solve equation (Al.4) for                                 and substitute

into (Al') and into (AS). Then the new equation for (A5) is solved

for c2 The resulting expression for c2 is then substituted into the

final version of (Al'). In the course of this substitution several

of the terms with integrals will cancel out. When equation Al.4 is
                                            B
                                                         LdA              f
substituted into A5', the term                                                k1(A) f(A,B)dB which is now
                                                        Mdci
                                                          k

                     (1+1 c                                           LdA
multiplied by                       will cancel the term
                      1
                          cl
                                                                      M 1    l[l+lni(A)]       f(A,B)dB
                                                                       clcl0J
since 1 (A)
               nl—    1
                          cl   ,    and k (A) =
                                             ni—         kci   .   When equation Al.4 is



                                                                      LdA
substituted into equation Ai.l', the term
                                                                      M             J k1(A) f(A,B)dB
                                                                      cl ci



                                             K
                                              ci
which is now multiplied by                             (recall that EMcikci= Ki]) will cancel
                                                 1


          rB
LdA
—     0
               [l+11(A)   +
                                   k1(B)J    f(A,B)dB by virtue of the fact that
                                                                          —44—


1+1nl(A)
      — +kni(A)
             —
                                    =                            By the same reasoning the term
                                                  K1



           d               dB                                        BA
                                                                           AdA   will   cancel the term
Mk
ci ci
               2
               A
                            A
                                                            f A,
                                                                     A




                       dB1IA                                                       BA
LdAB               —                                        +                            MA.    The same reasoning will
                                                 +lni(A)         k1(A) f A,
       A2
                                    j
also   result in terms canceling out when the new (Al.5) is substituted into

(Al').



       The only integrals which do not cancel out through this process are

those relating to the switching of existing entrepreneurs from one industry

to another. These terms, which are each multiplied by

                                        1                    1
                       1
                                +                                                   , are   given by:
                           cl       ] c2[(1+1 ci)kc2—(1+1c2)kci]


                                                                 B
       —                            dBA                dA                         A,B
   —
       L(l+12)ki[                           B2
                                                  —
                                                       ]J                    f[ B B]BdB




                                dBA               dA                              A,B
   ÷Lk cik2c [—p;
                                                 —-t]                                   B]BdB
                                                              —45—




     —
         —
         L(1+11)k2
                            [
                                dAB
                                 A2
                                          —
                                              ]
                                              dB


                                                       A'
                                                                            B,A
                                                             k1(A) f[A A JAdA




                       dAB           dB
                                                   A
         —                                                                 B,A
 +       L                       —
              k1k2 [    A2
                                               AJ [1+1l(A)]f[A A JAdA



         Note, however, that if we bring c2 with the first term inside the

integral it becomes l2B which is 1n2' and if we bring k2 in the second

term into the integral it becomes k2B which is k2(B)B. Thus these parts of

the integral will cancel, and similarly, parts of the second two terms will

will cancel. Moreover, since the number of entrepreneurs switching must net

to zero, the term with l's cancel.



         We are left with:
                                          B
          -     dBA         dA                                A,B
     —                  —
                                              k2(B)
          Lk1[    B2
                                      J                     f[ B )BIBdB




                                                                B, A
     -                  —                                                  AdA
          tk2                                           f [A
                            _—]                                        j
                                                  —46—

                                                                             dB
                                     B    A
By substituting k2(B) k2— and k1(A) kl—A ,and expressing —i-— as B and

dA
--asA:



               A                             AB
                     [ B—A ]        B2 f          ,B dB
     —Lk1k2
               —               BJ




      +   t kk      A2
                                ]
                                    AJA      fA,— JdA


                                         A
By using the relationship A = —s-- B, which holds along the path of

integration, these terms also cancel.



      We note that                 —               which appears in the final equation
                         (1+1 cl)k
                                 c2      (1+1c2)kcl
is equal to          1)q1q2, where the q terms stand for output per corporate

manager. The terms             and n2' etc. refer to changes in non—corporate

capital and refer to the solution to the integrals which reflect changes in

capital and labor of existing noncorporate firms. The final equation is:


(Al'')


                   Kn1n1] [1_fl1) +       (Kc2c2+     Kn2fl2) [i_s2)



     — K1l1
           A
               +
                                         A
                    Klll a1— [K212 + K21ja2]
                         A                            A           1    l2
                                                                 2 l K1 K2
                                                                             =
                                                                                  A      A
                                                            —47—


        We now substitute into (Al.l") from equations (A1.6). In this

substitution we use the facts that (i/i)Eir=
                                                                       6kw and 2'21r kw


(A6)
              =
                  iw      —
                                      + ir        + r — P1)

        cl =      Icw —               +           +—

        11
                          —           +
                                          lr      —


        nl                —
                                      + ek(R      -.




        1C2
              =
                  'lw — P2)           +
                                          'lr + —           P)
                          —
                              P2)
                                      +
                                          'kr     +     —



                          —
                                      + 1r — P2)
        k2 'icw —                     + 'kr —
        The incidence formula (48) results from the above substitution and

the relationships (Al.7) —                    (A1.ll)   given below:

(A7)                              = 0     ,   which is the result of differentiating (43).



(A8)                  =       - ______
                                      Den.


                  A
(A9)
              A
                              —   ______
              W—P2                    Den.




                                  [       1)ft
(AlO)
              1RlJ                               e!.92112
(All)
                                  [l_482)ft
              1'2)                               Den.
                                                                  —48—




In (A8) —   (All)      the term Den =
                                                    O1(l_8l)
                                                                                +
                                                                                    O2(12).
For the CES function given in (50) it is easy to show that the factor

demands for capital per manager and labor per manager satisfy:

                                            A               A      A                      A           A
                           a.[(l—a.)(R + r                      —P              +   a1. (W        —   P.)]
(A12)
              A
             k .=
              ci
                       —
                            1     1
                                    (l—a—)
                                                                       1-
                                                                            )
                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                          il,2
                                       ii

              A            a.[(l—.)(W —
                                            A
                                                            .) + .(RA+ AA
(A13)         1        —                                                                                                  i=l,2
                  ci            (l—a—)
                                   ii
In the case of the Cobb Douglas/CES function capital per manager and labor

per manager satisfy for i =                1,2:
                                       A   A        A                               A                             A       A      A

              A            .(R +
                                A
                                       r — P.)
                                             1
                                               + a.(W —
                                                  1                                  i
                                                                                    P )       +   aii   ii
                                                                                                   a (1—a —.)(R       +   r   — W)
                            1
(A14)             ci                (1—a1 —.)(a.+.)
                                           1                    11
                                                A                    A   A                                        A       A      A
                                A      A
                                    + r —P                      + a (W — P.)
                                                                   i         — fl.a.(1—a —.)(R +
                                                                                                      1I     ii           r   — W)
(A15)
              A
              1 .=     —
                            1                       i   )
                                                                           1
                  ci                (l—cr.—.)(a.+fl.)
                                        1   1                   11
                                   —49—

                                  Table 1:
                    CORPORATE SHARE OF OUTPUT BY INDUSTRY


                                  Corporate Percentage      Percentage
                                      of Output               Change:
                                   1957         1982        1957—1982

"NON—CORPORATE"                      6.2       20.4          227.3
 Agriculture                         9.2       29.3          219.7
   Production                        9.6       22.8          136.5
   Services                          4.0       62.4         1463.3
Housing                              1.3        2.4           25.0
Crude Oil & Gas                     74.7       84.8           13.6

"CORPORATE"                         75.8       86.4           13.9
 Mining                             87.2       84.4           —3.3
 Construction                       55.8       73.1           31.0
 Manufacturing                      95 .8      97 .6           1 .   9
   Food                             93.9       97.8            4.1
   Tobacco                         100.0      100.0            0.0
   Textiles                         97.0       99.0            2.1
  Apparel                           85.7       94.3           10.0
  Lumber, wood                      70.8       85.0           19.9
  Furniture                         90.5       97.1            7.3
  Paper                            100.0      100.0            0.0
  Printing                          89.3       89.3            0.0
  Chemicals                         98.6       97.4           —1.3
  Petroleum                        100.0      100.0            0.0
  Rubber                           100.0      100,0            0.0
  Leather                           96.9       98.6            1.8
  Stone, Clay & Glass               92.3       96.8            4.9
  Primary Metals                    98.6       97.3           —1.3
  Fabricated Metals                 94.7       97.8            3.2
  Machinery                         96.5       98.1            1.6
  Electronics                       99.1       99.5            0.5
  Transportation Equipment          99.5       98.7           —0.9
  Other                             89.7       88.4           —1.5
Transportation, Communication,
 and Public Utilities               92.1       92.3            2.0
  Transportation                    86.0       81.7           —0.4
  Communication, Utilities          99.0       98.8           —0.3
Trade                               62.7       82.9           32.3
  Wholesale                         76.2       91.7           20.5
  Retail                            52.6       74.5           41.6
  Food                              52.8       75.5           43.1
  General Merchandise               84.6       96.9           14.5
  Apparel                           61.9       80.4           29.9
  Furniture                         46.5       68.0           46.3
  Auto, Gasoline                    50.9       70.7           39.0
  Drug Stores                       38.4       91.4          138.0
  Eating & Drinking Places          28.5       59.0          106.8
  Building Materials, Hardware      51.0       75.5           47.9
                                    —50—



                              Table 1 (cont'd)
                    CORPORATE SHARE OF OUTPUT BY INDUSTRY


                                    Corporate Share      Percentage
                                       of Output           Change:
                                    1957        1982       1957—1982

Trade (cont'd)
   Other                             38.8       62.9          62.3
Finance, Insurance, Real Estate      60.4       74.1          22.8
   Securities Dealers                13.2       24.5          85.1
   Other Finance                     90.5       80.9         —10.6
   Insurance                         80.7       94.7          17.5
   Real Estate                       34.0       36.8           8.2
Services                             38.4       61.1          59.2
   Hotels                            52.6       59.2          12.6
   Personal Services                 34.6       47.6          37.7
   Business Services                 62.1       67.9           9.4
   Auto Repair                       32.6       54.9          68.1
   Other Repair                      33.8       50.3         49.0
   Amusements                        68.2       73.5           7.8
     Motion Pictures                 89.6       79.5         —11.3
     Other                           47.0       70.3          49.7
   Other Services                     9.0       53.6         498.4


Source: Output Shares for Housing are based on estimates of net stocks of
residential capital. ("Fixed Capital Stock in the United States: Revised
Estimates, 1925—1979," and "Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth in the United
States, 1980—83", both by John C. Musgrave, Survey of Current Business,
Department of Commerce, February 1981 and August 1984 respectively). Output
shares for all other industries are taken from business receipts reported in
Department of the Treasury, Statistics of Income, U.S. Business Tax Returns:
1957—1958. Partnership Returns. 1978—82), Corporation Income Tax Returns.
1982; "Sole Proprietorship Returns, 1982", SOI Bulletin, Summer 1984.
Agricultural business receipts for proprietorships, which is no longer
included in the proprietorship returns, is reported for 1982 in "Sole
Proprietorship Returns, 1984, SOl Bulletin, Summer 1986, footnote 4, p. 23.
Data on Subchapter S corporations for 1982 is reported only by major
industrial division. These receipts were allocated among subcategories based
on the distribution of non—corporate output. The Table double counts the
leasing of residential structures; leasing of residential structures is
included both in the real estate industry and the housing industry.
                                                         _51—




(59')                                (60')

(6'X)                                (62')



(63')


                                                                (p2')/P2
(6W)


(65')          C2        1.(



(66')          4-
                    C2
                                    t
(67')                               (i_a

(63')     tC2                  C2                C2


(69')
          t4"Cl.



(70')     -
          c2
          C2
                     C2(_t)
                        _—




                                                                           ,
(72') 2                                                                        \re (')oP
                                        pv
(1 3')


                     g                  P 2, (14- P2')
(7 W)
                         C2
                              —52—


(75)   i+ Q2=
                I

       Qi           1/(1+y)
(76)
                                                    —53—

Table 3.        Equations of No—Tax Equilibrium

(77) ciK +K
         c2
            +K
            ni
               +K
               n2
                  =K (78) ciL +L
                               c2
                                  +L
                                   ni
                                      +L
                                       n2
                                          +M
                                           ci
                                              +M
                                               c2
                                                  +E+E
                                                   1  2
                                                        =L
(79)       Lci/     M
                     ci          aci/(1—aci4Bci)           (80)   Lc2/   M
                                                                             c2
                                                                                  = a
                                                                                     c2 /(l—ac2
                                                                                              —p8c2 )


           K
               cl       ci (l—t)111
                    = _______________
                                                —l/(l+p1)
                                                R
(81)
                           ci —ci )
                        (1—a
           M
               ci


           K                        (i—t)2     2)    —l/(i+p2)
               c2       c2
                    = _______________           R
(82)
           M
               c2


(83)
           P1       [(i—.i)                         i(R( t))i°11 (i+pi)/pi

(84)       P2 =                                                                    (i+p2)/p2
                    [(i—$2)
                                                                         AB/A
                                                                          — —

(85)       K
                       ci_t1/R —l/(l+p1) L—
                    = ____________                                  I             A Fe                 dAdB
               ni       (i—aci     (—--)   )                             T
                                      ci
                                                                  AU
                                                                         BA/B
                                                                          — —

(86)       K
                            c2(1t2/2)
                      ____________
                    = _____________              R —i/(i+p2)
                                                             —
                                                             L      I             B Te—(A+rB) dAdB
               n2       (1—a
                                 c2   c2 )     (——)                      J
                                                                  BO
           K
            ni              ci                  R —i/(i+p1)
(87)
           L
            ni                  ci

           K
                            c2 (i—t)2'2        —i/(i+p2)
                                                R
(88)
           L
            n2
                            a                  (—--)               (89) P1Q +           P2Q2
                                                                                               =   I
            n2               c2


                        =       d
(90)                                   i/(i+-y) [2]i/(i+7)
                            (i—d)1               P1


(91)       A—i

(92)        B—i
                                          —54—

Table 4.   Parameter Values for the Mutual Production and Harberger Models




           .5, .75, 1, 2                          L (Described in Text)
     a1


           .5,    .75, 1, 2                       K    $59.5 billion
     C2


                                                  9=.15


     ai = .19                                     f(A,B) =    rexp—(A-1-rB)

            .57                                   ,   I'   (described in text)
     ac2

        — .60 [.017 + .983(l_t)C1]
     c1 —   .017 + .983(1—t)


        — .20 [.630
     c2 —
                         + .37O(l_t)C2]
             .630 +      .370(1—t)


     t = .45



     I = $296 billion                            (j )l/(1+•Y) =



     y=lq                                         .=l—cJ              (i=l,2)
                                      —55—



                                   Table 5

             Comparison of the Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax
                         in the MPM and Harberger Models



                                     Share of Tax Burden Falling on Capital
  Elasticity of Substitution                (by Demand Elasticity)
    in Production
                                   Mutual Production Model      Harberger Model
Corporate"     Noncorporate"                 .   5   4      1    = .5         1



   1                 1                   .94             1.00   1.08      1.00

   2                 2                 1.02              1.03   1.15      1.12

       .75               .75           1.00              1.10   1.04        .93

       .50               .50           1.23              1.41     .97       .82

   1                 2                  .60               .63     .93       .87

   1                     .75           1.11              1.20   1.13      1.04

   1                     .50           1.37              1.47   1.19      1.08

   2                 1                 1.26              1.29   1.27      1.22

       .75           1                  .79               .88    .99       .89
       .50           1                  .58               .71    .84       .73

   2                     .50           1.53              1.57   1.34      1.27

       .50           2                  .21               .27    .68       .61
                                   —56—



                                  Table 6
      Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax on Workers and Managers and on
                         Entrepreneurs in the MPM




    Elasticities of Substitution       Incidence as Share of Tax Burden
        in Production
                                                              Entrepreneurs
Corporate         "Noncorporate"          =
                                      Workers and Managers
                                                  .5    =l     3S .5 ó1
    1.00                 1.00               .34         .28   —.28    —.28

    2.00                 2.00               .12         .12   —.14    —.15

     .75                  .75               .32         .22   —.32    —.33

     .50                  .50               .16         .00   —.39    —.41

    1.00                 2.00               .63         .61   —.23    —.24

    1.00                  .75               .18         .10   —.29    —.31

    1.00                  .50             —.05         —.14   —.32    —.33

    2.00                 1.00             —.10         —.12   —.16    —.17

     .75                 1.00               .51         .43   —.30    —.31

     .50                 1.00               .73         .61   —.31    —.32

    2.00                  .50             —.34         —.38   —.19    —.19

     .50                 2.00             1.04         1.00   —.25    —.27
                                        —57—



                                    Table 7

          Comparison of the Excess Burden of the Corporate Income Tax

                          in the MPM and Harberger Models



                                      Excess Burden Divided by Tax Revenue
Elasticity of Substitution                   (by Demand Elasticity)
    in Production
                                    Mutual Production Model   Harberger Model
"Corporate"   "Noncorporate"           q=.5 Sl                          q= 1

   1                1                   1.22      1.23         .07       .08

   2                2                   1.22      1.22         .11       • 13


    .75             .75                 1.24      1.26         .05       .07

    .50             .50                 1.29      1.30         .04       .05

   1                2                    .99      1.00         .08        10

   1                .75                 1.29      1.30         .06       .08

   1                .50                 1.37      1.38         .06       .07

   2                1                   1.39      1.40         .07        10

   .75              1                   1.16      1.18         .06       .07

   .50              1                   1.10      1.13         .05       06

   2                .50                 1.50      1.51         .11       .13

   .50              2                    .84       .85         .06       06
                                      —58—



                                     Notes

1. These tax rates represent marginal effective (personal plus corporate) tax
rates on new investment. For the corporate sector the return after all taxes
to stockholders and creditors is grossed up by personal taxes on dividends,
interest, and capital gains (adjusted for the value of capital gains deferral
and the taxation of the inflationary component of capital gains). The
marginal tax rate methodology (see Gravelle, 1982) uses a discounted cash flow
method to determine the pre—tax real return necessary to pay stockholders and
creditors the after—tax return. A similar process is used to measure the non—
corporate pre—tax return required to yield the same after—tax return. The
differential between these two pre—tax returns is used to measure the
corporate—noncorporate tax wedge. This wedge is given by 1 —
where p is the total effective tax rate on corporate capital, and t is the
total effective tax rate on noncorporate capital.

2. Williamson (1967) and Calvo and Wellisz (1978) present models explaining
the possible limits of entrepreneurial supervision and the attendant loss of
control.

3. After developing our model we became aware of Lucas' (1978) paper that also
models entrepreneurs as managers with differing abilities, but demonstrates
how such a model can explain secular changes in firm size. Chamley (1983) is
another example of an early analysis of differing entrepreneurial abilities
and the choice of occupation.

4. Harberger and Shoven measure capital income as the sum of interest,
profits, rents, and property taxes. These items, except for property taxes,
appear on the proprietorship tax returns. Property taxes were inputed based
on their fraction of capital income as reported in Rosenberg (1969). Labor
payments as a share of total factor income were weighted by industry. Lessors
of real estate were used to determine values for housing. For this industry
there appears to be an error in the 1959 data (the first year for which the
necessary detail is available). For this reason the ratio of labor income to
total factor income for the next available year, 1962, was used.

5. The revenue base for measuring this tax rate is corporate profits plus
interest. Note that the .45 tax rate, which does not consider personal
taxation, is smaller than the .52 tax rate cited in Section II which
corresponds to the 1957 differential tax on corporate versus noncorporate
capital income taking into account both personal and corporate taxation.
Hence, considering personal taxes would increase the estimates of excess
burden in the MPM reported in Section VII.

6. K1/K2 —   0111(l—t1)/92l2(l—t2)
                                      —59--.


                               References

 Auerbach, Alan J. and Dale Jorgenson, "Inflation—Proof Depreciation of
 Assets," Harvard Business Review, 58 (5), Sept./Oct. 1980.

 Ballard, Charles A., Don Fullerton, John B. Shoven, and John Whalley, A
 General Equilibrium Model for Tax Policy Evaluation, NBER volume, Chicago:
 University of Chicago Press, 1985.

Calvo, Guillermo A. and Stanislaw Wellisz, "Supervision, Loss of Control, and
the Optimum Size of the Firm," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 86, no. 5,
October 1978.

Chamley, Christophe, "Entrepreneurial Abilities and Liabilities in a Model of
Self—Selection," Bell Journal of Economics, Spring 1983.

Ebrill, Liam P. and David G. Hartman, "On the Incidence and Excess Burden of
the Corporation Income Tax", Public Finance, 37, 1982.

                                     "The Corporate Income Tax,
Entrepreneurship, and the Noncorporate Sector," Public Finance Quarterly, 11,
Oct. 1983.

Fullerton, Don, and Yolanda K. Henderson, "The Impact of Fundamental Tax
Reform on the Allocation of Resources," February 1986.

Gordon, Roger H., and Burton C. Malkiel, "Corporation Finance" in How Taxes
Affect Economic Behavior, ed. by Henry J. Aaron and Joseph A. Pechman,
Brookings Institution, 1981, 131—92.

Gravelle, Jane C., "The Social Cost of Nonneutral Taxation: Estimates for
Nonresidential Capital," in Depreciation. Inflation, and the Taxation of
Income from Capital, ed. by Charles R. Hulten, Washington: The Urban
Institute, 1981.

Gravelle, Jane C., "Effects of the 1981 Depreciation Revisions on the Taxation
of Income from Business Capital, The National Tax Journal, vol. 35, no.1,
March 1982, 1—20.

Cravelle, Jane C., "Effective Tax Rates in the Tax Reform Act of 1986," mimeo,
November 1987.

Grossman, Stanford J. and Oliver D. Hart, "The Costs and Benefits of
Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration," Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 94, no. 4, August 1986, 691—719.

Harberger, Arnold, "Efficiency Effects of Taxes on Income from Capital," in
Effects of the Corporation Income Tax, ed. by Marianne Krzyzniak. Detroit:
Wayne State University Press, 1966.

                    "The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax," Journal of
Political Economy, 70 (3), June 1962.
                                     —60—

                 and Neil Bruce, "The Incidence and Efficiency Effects of
Taxes on Income from Capital: A Reply," Journal of Political Economy, 84 (6),
Dec. 1976.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Lawrence H. Summers, "Tax Incidence," in Handbook
of Public Economics, ed. by Alan J. Auerbach and Martin S. Feldstein, North
Holland Publishing Co., 1987.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "On the Size Distribution of Business Firms", The Bell
Journal of Economics, vol. 7, no. 2, Autumn 1978.

Rosenberg, Leon C., "Taxation of Income from Capital by Industry Croup," in
The Taxation of Income from Capital, ed. by Arnold C. Harberger and Martin J.
Bailey, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1969.

Shoven, John B., "The Incidence and Efficiency Effects of Taxes on Income from
Capital," Journal of Political Economy, 84 (6), Dec. 1976.

Stiglitz, Joseph, "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and the Cost of
Capital," Journal of Public Economics, 1973.

U.S. Dept. of Commerce, "Fixed Capital Stock in the United States: Revised
Estimates," by John C. Musgrave, Survey of Current Business, February 1981,
57—68.

                        "Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth in the United
States, 1980—83," by John C. Musgrave, Survey of Current Business, August
1984, 54—59.

U.S. Dept. of Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, Statistics of Income,
various issues.

Williamson, Oliver E., "Hierarchical Control and Optimum Firm Size," Journal
of Political Economy, vol. 75, no. 2, April 1967, 123—38.
