NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHANGES IN NUTRIENT INTAKE AT RETIREMENT
Melvin Stephens Jr.
Desmond Toohey
Working Paper 24621
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24621

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018

Peter Hudomiet and He Yang provided excellent research assistance. We thank Peter Ganong
and seminar participants at the ASSA meetings, Maryland AREC, Michigan Labor Lunch, the
MRRC Researcher Workshop, UC-Berkeley, and Wharton for helpful comments and suggestions.
We thank Mark Aguiar and Erik Hurst for generously making their data and programs available.
Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute On Aging of the
National Institutes of Health under Award Number R03AG046503 and the Michigan Center on
the Demography of Aging. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Melvin Stephens Jr. and Desmond Toohey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Changes in Nutrient Intake at Retirement
Melvin Stephens Jr. and Desmond Toohey
NBER Working Paper No. 24621
May 2018
JEL No. E21,J26
ABSTRACT
While the literature finding a decrease in food expenditures at retirement suggests households do
not adequately save for retirement, subsequent evidence that nutrient intake is unaffected by
retirement has tempered these concerns. We further examine nutrient intake changes at
retirement both by analyzing a much wider range of datasets, including longitudinal data, and by
improving upon the empirical methodology used in earlier work. Our analysis yields four main
results. First, unlike prior work, we find that caloric and nutrient intake fall at retirement in
numerous cross-sectional datasets. We can reconcile these contrasting results as being due to
well-documented differences and improvements in methodologies used to measure food intake.
Second, using longitudinal data, we also find that intake falls at retirement. Third, we show that a
food consumption index used in prior work to capture the relationship between permanent income
and foods eaten can severely underestimate the impact of retirement on consumption. We show
that a minor methodological revision circumvents this bias and that the revised consumption
index falls at retirement. Finally, while unemployment reduces the consumption index, we find,
in contrast to prior work, that the impact of retirement on the consumption index is larger.
Overall, we consistently find that retirement reduces food intake.

Melvin Stephens Jr.
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
356 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
mstep@umich.edu
Desmond Toohey
Department of Economics
University of Delaware
420 Purnell Hall
Newark, DE, 19716
dtoohey@udel.edu

1

Introduction

Are households adequately saving for retirement? The “retirement-consumption puzzle,” the finding in numerous studies that expenditure falls at retirement, in particular when retirement is
expected, suggests that households are ill-prepared to exit the labor force.1 Complementary results indicate, however, that this evidence alone does not refute the Life-Cycle/Permanent Income
Hypothesis (LCPIH). Some studies show that the expenditure decline is found primarily in food
and work-related expenditures.2 In addition, the influential work of Aguiar and Hurst (2005) finds
that, although food expenditure decreases at retirement, measures of nutrient intake do not change
at retirement.
In this paper, we dramatically expand the investigation of nutrient intake changes at retirement
by using cross-sectional datasets that span over forty years and, for the first time in this literature,
longitudinal data. We also show that the novel approach used in prior work for linking an individual’s basket of food intake to permanent income can severely attenuate the estimated impact
of retirement on consumption. We propose an alternative approach that circumvents this bias.
Our analysis across these numerous data sources and methodologies finds that food consumption
falls at retirement, indicating that adjustments to home production are not enough to fully smooth
consumption at retirement.
The issue of retirement savings adequacy generates much interest among economists for numerous reasons including the dramatic decline in the aggregate savings rate (e.g., Parker 1999),
changing household retirement wealth risk as employers shifted from defined benefit to defined
contribution pension plans (e.g., Poterba 2014), and the lack of household retirement planning and
financial sophistication (e.g., Lusardi and Mitchell 2007). Although assessing savings adequacy can
be difficult due to heterogeneity in income, preferences, risk attitudes, etc. across households, a
1
Examples of such studies include Banks, Blundell, and Tanner (1998), Bernheim, Skinner, and Weinberg (2001),
Lundberg, Startz, and Stillman (2003), Smith (2006), Haider and Stephens (2007), and Fisher, Johnson, Marchand,
Smeeding, and Torrey (2008). Hurd and Rohwedder (2003, 2006, 2008) and Ameriks, Caplin, and Leahy (2007) find
that households anticipate a decline in expenditures at retirement which is somewhat larger than the realized decline
at retirement. Blau (2008) finds that the average observed retirement consumption decrease is substantially larger
than would be predicted by a model with an uncertain date of retirement. Studies using data from Italy (Minicaci,
Monfardini, and Weber 2010) and Japan (Stephens and Unayama 2012), countries in which workers receive large
lump sum payments at the time of retirement, find smaller consumption changes at retirement.
2
These studies include Fisher, Johnson, Marchand, Smeeding, and Torrey (2008), Battistin, Brugiavini, Rettore,
and Weber (2009), Aguila, Attanasio, and Meghir (2011), Li, Shi, and Wu (2014), and Dong and Yang (2014).

1

number of techniques based on the Life-Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis (LCPIH) have been
utilized to answer this question. In addition to examining expenditure changes at retirement, authors compare pre-retirement income to their post-retirement annuitized income (e.g., Moore and
Mitchell 1997; Gustman and Steinmeier 1998) and compare simulated optimal savings levels with
observed household wealth (e.g., Engen, Gale, and Uccello 1999; Scholz, Seshadri, and Khitatrakun
2006). Results based on the latter approach find that roughly 25 percent of households have inadequate retirement savings while the other studies find that consumption falls by nine to twelve
percent at retirement. Complementary work by Olafsson and Pagel (2018), which uses detailed
data on both household spending and balance sheets, shows workers increasing their savings upon
entering retirement rather than dissaving as one would expect from rational LCPIH agents with
adequate pre-retirement savings.
Aguiar and Hurst (2005) question whether expenditures are the appropriate measure of consumption to analyze at retirement. The LCPIH implies that households should smooth the marginal
utility of consumption over time, not consumption expenditures per se. While non-durable consumption expenditures might reasonably approximate the marginal utility of consumption in some
contexts, the large change in the amount of time available to invest in consumption-related activities upon retiring may dramatically alter the way in which consumption expenditures generate
utility. For example, more time available for grocery shopping and meal preparation may allow
households to generate the same level of (marginal) utility after retirement even with lower food
expenditures. Using cross-sectional data from the early to mid-1990s, Aguiar and Hurst find that at
retirement households: decrease food expenditure, keep food intake constant, spend more time in
food preparation, and spend less time eating out. They interpret these findings as showing strong
support of the LCPIH augmented with household production.3
We expand upon the Aguiar and Hurst analysis in multiple dimensions and, in each analysis, we
find that food consumption falls at retirement. We first use cross-sectional data spanning 1971-2012
to examine changes in nutrient intake at retirement. One concern from using OLS regressions to
3

In contrast, Been, Rohwedder, and Hurd (2017) jointly analyze expenditure, consumption, and time use in data
from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and find little evidence of households replacing decreased market
expenditures with home-produced goods, even in market consumption categories that are well-subsituted by home
production.

2

investigate this issue is that unobservable differences across households may bias estimates of the
impact of retirement on food intake. For example, more patient individuals may both save more
and retire later which would confound these estimates. Following the prior literature, we use age
as an instrument, exploiting the non-linear age-retirement profile induced by retirement incentives
found in the Social Security system. We find a significant decrease in caloric intake at retirement
both in our OLS and two-stage least squares (2SLS) regressions. We also find a significant decrease
at retirement for a number of nutrients including vitamin E and protein.
We are able to reconcile the differences between our findings and those of Aguiar and Hurst
(2005). Aguiar and Hurst examine the change in food intake at retirement using the 1989-91
and 1994-96 waves of the Continuing Survey of Food Intake of Individuals (CSFII). As we discuss in detail below, dramatic methodological changes occurred between these two waves of the
CSFII stemming from important methodological and implementation concerns with the contractor who fielded the 1989-91 CSFII. The immediate result was a sizable change in reported food
intake between the 1989-91 and 1994-96 waves of the CSFII as well as in the estimated impact
of retirement on food intake. Using numerous nationwide food intake surveys that did not suffer
from these methodological concerns as well as restricting our analysis to surveys collected after
the methodological changes were implemented yields a large and significant drop in food intake
at retirement. Analysis of this data using quantile regressions and quantile instrumental variable
regressions (Chernozhukov and Hansen 2005) indicates that the decrease is fairly constant across
the intake distribution.
We then turn to longitudinal data with repeated measures of caloric intake. Following Hall’s
(1978) seminal work on the LCPIH, the vast majority of the subsequent literature has tested the
model’s implication that households should smooth (the marginal utility of) consumption over time.
The first difference framework accounts for unobserved time-invariant household characteristics that
may be associated with consumption changes. Following this tradition, we find that caloric intake
falls at retirement. While we again use age as an instrument for retirement, the first difference
estimator implicitly accounts for a linear change in caloric intake with age such that our results
account for linear physiological changes in food intake with age.
We also expand on Aguiar and Hurst’s consumption index which relates individuals’ entire food
3

consumption baskets to permanent income. They project the foods eaten by prime-age workers
onto their permanent incomes. The estimated relationships between the foods eaten and permanent
income are then used as weights to produce an index measuring the implied permanent incomes of
workers based on their food consumption. Aguiar and Hurst find that this consumption index does
not fall at retirement.
We show that their methodology for producing the consumption index will attenuate the estimated impact of retirement on this index. Aguiar and Hurst regress predicted permanent income on
food intake categories to generate weights for their index. However, their predicted permanent income measure understates the true variability in permanent income across individuals. As a result,
which we show formally, the index weights created in this way will understate the true variability
in the index and, in turn, attenuate the estimated impact of retirement on consumption. We show
that using actual income in place of predicted permanent income, an approach which is valid under
the Life-Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis, circumvents this concern. Our approach yields a
statistically significant and economically meaningful decrease in consumption at retirement.
Finally, we re-examine the impact of unemployment on consumption. Aguiar and Hurst find
that unemployment reduces consumption expenditures and, most notably, find that unemployment
reduces the consumption index even though retirement has no affect on the consumption index.
While we find a similar impact of unemployment on consumption. when we use our revised consumption index, we find the exact opposite of Aguiar and Hurst: the impact of retirement on
consumption is larger than the impact of unemployment on consumption.
Overall, we find consistent evidence across numerous datasets and multiple empirical methodologies that nutrient intake falls at retirement. While home production may allow households to
mitigate the loss in welfare that would occur in response to a ceteris paribus drop in expenditures
at retirement, we find that, nonetheless, nutrient intake declines at retirement. Our results are consistent with the literatures that find that many households do not have adequate retirement savings
(see the survey of Poterba 2014) and both lack financial literacy and fail to plan for retirement (see
the survey of Lusardi and Mitchell 2014).

4

2

Theoretical Motivation

We use the Life-Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis (LCPIH) as a framework for understanding
how changes in food intake inform the question of whether households are adequately saving for
retirement. Households are assumed to maximize their utility over the remainder of their lives, Vt ,
with
"
Vt = max Et
{Ct ,Lt }

#
k−t
T 
X
1
U (Ck , Lk ; θk )
1+δ

(1)

k=t

subject to the asset equation


Ak+1 = (1 + r)(Ak + wk L̄ − Lk − Ck ), ∀k = t, . . . , T

(2)

where Ct , Lt , wt , and At are (composite) consumption, leisure, wage, and assets in year t, respectively, U (·) is the period specific utility function, θt are variables (which may or may not be
time-varying) thought to affect utility such as age and family size, L̄ is the maximum annual amount
of time available for leisure, r is a constant interest rate, and δ is the subjective discount rate.
Using standard optimization techniques, it is straightforward to show that the marginal utility
of consumption in year t is equal to the marginal utility of assets in period t, λt , or

UC (Ct , Lt ; θt ) = λt

(3)

If U (·) is additively separable in consumption and leisure, then UC (Ct , Lt ; θt ) will not depend on
Lt . Under such an assumption, along with standard utility functions (e.g., constant relative risk
aversion), the marginal utility of consumption can be proxied by consumption expenditures alone
if appropriate measures of θt are available. However, if U (·) is not separable in consumption and
leisure, then UC (Ck , Lk ; θt ) will depend upon hours of work decisions, including whether or not
one retires, as well as consumption expenditures.
One mechanism for such a non-separability, as noted by Aguiar and Hurst (2005), is the production of household goods. Becker (1965) argues that consumption is based on “final goods” which
are, in turn, functions of market goods and time spent in conjunction with the market goods (e.g.,

5

cooking meals, watching TV, etc.). The importance of time allocation is, perhaps, particularly
acute when examining retirement given the sharp reduction in time spent working. Households
may still enjoy the same level of food consumption after retirement even if their food expenditures
fall, given that they have more time available to spend in the household production of food. E.g.,
Aguiar and Hurst (2005) find more time spent shopping, more time preparing meals, and less time
eating out for the retired relative to the non-retired. Thus, the marginal utility of actual consumption may not change at retirement even if expenditures decline when workers leave the labor
force. Rather, a measure of actual food consumption, such as food intake, is arguably much more
appropriate to use for analyzing the consumption response at retirement.
Alternatively, the resulting Euler Equation which determines the household’s optimal allocation
of consumption between periods t and t + 1 is

UC (Ct , Lt ; θt ) =

1+r
1+δ


Et [UC (Ct+1 , Lt+1 ; θt+1 )]

(4)

Again, if U (·) is additively separable in consumption and leisure then we should not observe changes
in expenditures at retirement within households as marginal utility is a function of only expenditures. However, non-separabilities between consumption and leisure induced by home production
invalidate the use of within-household changes in expenditures as a test of whether or not households are adequately prepared for retirement. Changes in food intake, on the other hand, might
provide a better metric by which to estimate retirement consumption changes.

3
3.1

Changes in Intake at Retirement: Cross-Sectional Data
Data

Our cross-sectional analysis uses numerous nationally-representative datasets that contain information on food intake. All these surveys collect food intake using the 24-hour food recall method
in which detailed data is recorded on all foods consumed during the prior day. Some of the surveys
collect up to two days of additional individual intake data using recall or food consumption diaries.
We briefly discuss the relevant features of these datasets below while more detail is found in the

6

Data Appendix.
The first set of studies that we use were collected by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
We use the 1989-91 and 1994-96 Continuing Survey of Food Intake of Individuals (CSFII), which are
the datasets used by Aguiar and Hurst (2005, hereafter AH). The 1989-91 CSFII collected three days
of food intake per respondent while the 1994-96 collected intake for two days for reasons we shall
discuss below. We also use the 1977-78 and 1987-88 waves of the Nationwide Food Consumption
Survey (NFCS).4 The NFCS recorded detailed food intake from all household members over three
days. The NFCS imposed a higher burden on households than the CSFII as it also asked households
to provide details on food items consumed by the household over a seven day period. Both the
CSFII and NFCS contain measures of food expenditures at home and away from home as well as
demographic, health, and labor market information.
We also use data collected by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). The
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) is well-known as a survey in which
participants undergo a comprehensive health exam, but it also obtains food intake information
using 24-hour recalls. The first three waves, NHANES I (1971-75), NHANES II (1976-80), and
NHANES III (1988-94), each contain a single day of food intake information in addition to health,
labor market, and demographic data. However, these surveys did not obtain food expenditures.
Moreover, household income in the NHANES surveys is a categorical variable, not a continuous
one.
NHANES returned to the field in 1999 and continued to collect one day of food intake. Beginning
in 2002, HHS and USDA agreed to merge the CSFII with the NHANES and have fielded this
survey on an on-going basis in all subsequent years. Starting in 2003, the Continuous NHANES
has collected two days of food intake from respondents. Since 2007 the survey has also collected
food expenditure information, both at home and away from home. We use Continuous NHANES
data from 1999-2012.
4

The first national survey to collect individual-level food intake was the 1965-66 Household Food Consumption
Survey (HFCS). However, this earlier wave of the survey did not collect labor force information except for an indicator
as to whether or not the female household head worked thirty-five or more hours. As such, we make limited use of
the 1965-66 HFCS.

7

3.2

Empirical Methodology

Based on equation (3), we follow AH by estimating cross-sectional specifications

yi = γRi + Xi β + i

(5)

where yi is a measure of food intake, such as calories, expenditure, or macronutrients, Xi is a
vector of individual and household level characteristics, and Ri is an indicator for whether or
not the respondent is retired.5 While we closely follow the empirical specifications used by AH,
we must make minor adjustments due to differences in the data collected across surveys. Xi
includes indicators for black, four education groups, nine household size groups, five categories of
self-reported health, and calendar year effects that differ by survey.6
One concern is that the error term, i , may be correlated with retirement status, Ri , which could
occur if, for example, relatively more impatient individuals tended to accumulate less in assets and
retire earlier which could lead to a spurious negative correlation between retirement and food
intake. To circumvent this concern, Aguiar and Hurst use the non-linear relationship between age
and retirement status, which is driven primarily by the early and normal Social Security retirement
ages in the United States, as an instrumental variable for retirement. The corresponding first stage
equation is
Ri = ψagei + Xi δ + ui

(6)

where agei is a vector of age indicators. As long as this non-linear age pattern is not systematically
related to the unobserved differences in food intake across households then the instrument will be
valid. Since Xi does not include any other age terms, this approach assumes that age only affects
food intake through changes in retirement status, e.g., there are no physiological changes in food
intake needs across the ages used in the analysis, 57-71.
As with most of the literature examining retirement consumption changes, we focus our analysis
5

We define individuals as retired who self-report recent activity both as retired and not working. I.e., if someone
states that they are retired but still report that they are working, we do not define them as being retired.
6
AH also include indicators for residing in an urban area, four Census regions, and seven health conditions,
variables which are not available in all surveys. However, in results not shown here but available from the authors,
excluding these variables has little effect on the findings. We thank Mark Aguiar and Erik Hurst for providing their
data and programs with which we were able to exactly replicate their findings using the CSFII.

8

on the retirement of the male household head (Banks, Blundell, and Tanner 1998; Bernheim,
Skinner, and Weinberg 2001; Haider and Stephens 2007). Given that men historically have been
the primary household earners, restricting to men generally limits the analysis to households in
which retirement changes are likely to have a large impact on income and expenditure. To define
male household heads, we adopt the convention used by the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
wherein married/partnered households the male is deemed to be the household head while singleheaded households can have either a male or a female head.7 Table A1 presents summary statistics
for the cross-sectional studies that we use in our analysis. The age, race, and household size
composition of the samples remain fairly constant across the samples. Predictably, education levels
are higher for the more recent surveys than in the earlier ones.
Table 1 presents the OLS estimates of changes in log household income and log food expenditure
at retirement using the subset of surveys which contain food expenditure information: NFCS,
CSFII, and NHANES (2007-2012).8 Each coefficient in the table is from a separate regression
using equation (5) and is an estimate of the parameter γ on the retired indicator. Our 2SLS
estimates shown in the second and fourth columns using age indicators as instruments show a
significant impact of retirement on income and food expenditure. In addition, the OLS estimate
for the impact of retirement on food expenditure for men is near the nine percent to twelve percent
range found in the aforementioned longitudinal studies, although our 2SLS estimate is somewhat
larger than the findings in the earlier literature.9

3.3

The Impact of Retirement on Caloric Intake

Before turning to our estimates of the impact of retirement on caloric intake, we briefly examine the
age-retirement profiles which are the variation used to identify the impact of expected retirement
on intake. Figure 1 plots the coefficients on the complete set of age dummies from estimating
the first stage equation (6) where the excluded age is age 57. When pooling across all the crosssectional studies, as shown in the top left panel of the Figure, retirement rates are relatively flat
7
Since we encounter very few married/partnered households with same-gendered heads in our samples, we drop
such households from our analysis.
8
Since household income is a categorical variable in all of the NHANES surveys, we restrict our income regressions
to the NFCS and CSFII.
9
As we noted above, we follow Aguiar and Hurst by not including age among the regressors in Xi .

9

from age 57 to 61 but then rise sharply at subsequent ages beginning with a pronounced jump at
age 62. The first stage F statistic for the excluded instruments, shown in brackets at the top of each
panel, is 56.4 for the pooled sample. The remaining panels of the Figure show broadly consistent
age-retirement patterns for each of the individual studies.10
Our estimates of the impact of retirement on caloric intake are shown in Table 2. Each coefficient
shown in the table is from a separate regression and is an estimate of the parameter on the retired
indicator in (5) with log calories consumed as the dependent variable. The first column presents
the finding from Table 2 of Aguiar and Hurst (2005) for the impact of retirement on caloric intake
using both waves of the CSFII. This 2SLS estimate is generated using age indicators as instruments
for retirement in a regression including controls for race, sex, education, household size, year,
self-reported health, Census region, urbanicity, and seven individual health conditions.11 As AH
highlight in their work, the estimated effect of retirement is economically small and statistically
not different from zero.
Column (2) of Table 2 reports OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effect of retirement on log
caloric intake using the same data source as AH (the two waves of the CSFII) but modifying the
specification to include only variables that are available across all the cross-sectional datasets.12
In addition, we follow the prior literature by, as discussed above, restricting the sample in column
(2) to men only.13 These changes to the specification produce a 2SLS estimate in column (2) that
is nearly identical to the AH result in column (1). Although not shown here, subsets of these
changes similarly do not have meaningful effects on the finding. In contrast to the 2SLS estimate,
the OLS coefficient in the adjusted replication of column (2) suggests that there is a measurable,
if modestly-sized, decrease in caloric intake associated with retirement in the CSFII data.
10

The F statistics for the excluded instruments shown in the Figure all exceed conventional levels.
The health conditions controls are indicators for self-reporting any history of diabetes, high blood pressure, heart
disease, cancer, osteoporosis, high cholesterol, and stroke.
12
For a consistent specification, we exclude the indicators for urban, region, and the individual health conditions
from the original AH set of regressors. We also make a slight change to the coding of the retirement variable, only
coding individuals as retired if they self-report their labor force status as retired (as in AH) and they report that
they are not currently working. This change affects only 17 of the 985 retired individuals in the AH sample of column
(1) and allows us to have a consistent definition of retirement in other surveys that ask about retirement only when
respondents are not working.
13
We also include observations from the oversample of low-income households in CSFII 1989-91, which are excluded
from column (1), and weight the regressions using the CSFII’s sampling weights. Restricting to male household heads
but including the low-income sample produces an estimation sample that is approximately one-fifth smaller than that
used by AH.
11

10

We next apply this same analysis to a pooled sample of all the cross-sectional datasets described
in Section 3.1.14 As we find in column (3) of Table 2, the OLS estimate of the impact of retirement
on consumption in this pooled sample is quite similar to what we find for the CSFII sample in
column (2). However, the magnitude of the 2SLS estimate, on the other hand, dramatically jumps
from two log points to nearly 18 when pooling all the studies. At -0.175, the 2SLS estimate of
the effect of retirement on log caloric consumption is highly statistically significant, economically
meaningful, and approaches the magnitude of the effect of retirement on food expenditure in Table
1. Taken together, the estimates of columns (1), (2), and (3) show that the different results obtained
from using the larger group of datasets is not due to differences in specification but due to differences
in the relationship between retirement and food consumption observed across the datasets.15
Table 3 further highlights the differences across datasets by presenting the results for each
of the individual cross-sectional datasets, ordered by when they were first in the field. When
applying OLS, we find a decrease in intake at retirement in every dataset with the majority of
these estimates being statistically significant. When using 2SLS, we find a large and significant
decrease in caloric intake at retirement for five of the eight individual datasets. For one study,
the CSFII 1994-96 (column (7) of Table 3), we find a negative and economically meaningful but
statistically insignificant effect of retirement on intake. However, the NFCS 1987-88 and CSFII
1989-91 (columns (4) and 6) of Table 3, respectively) stand out in that we find positive but small
and insignificant estimates when using these two studies. Thus, the 2SLS estimates are similar
across the datasets with the exception of the NFCS 1987-88 and the two waves of the CSFII. As
AH make exclusive use of food intake data from both waves of the CSFII, we next turn to examining
14

One issue with pooling across multiple datasets is potential changes in the age-retirement profile induced by
changes in the Social Security normal retirement age. For those reaching normal retirement age across all of our
sample periods, this age was 65 for those born in 1937 and earlier, increased by two months each year for those born
in 1938-1942, and then was age 66 for those born in 1943-1954. Early retirement age has remained at age 62 for all
of these cohorts. Thus, changes in the normal retirement age likely have little impact on our results when pooling
across multiple datasets and even less effect when we focus on individual datasets in Table 3.
15
Although we have excluded women from our analysis, we have also estimated the impact of retirement on caloric
intake including women in the sample. To do so, we also add an indicator for gender to equation (5). Our CSFII
only adjusted replication, analogous to the 2SLS estimate in column (2) of Table 2, yields a point estimate of -0.004
with a standard error of 0.046 when including women. Thus, we continue to find a result very similar to that of AH
when limiting the analysis to the CSFII only. When we pool all studies, analogous to column (3) of Table 2, we find
an estimated impact of retirement on caloric intake of -0.157 (0.029) when including women. Thus, the dramatic
change in the estimated impact of retirement on caloric intake when moving from only using the CSFII to including
a broader range of surveys is unaffected by including women in the sample.

11

differences in the survey methodologies used across these surveys.

3.4

Reconciling Estimates Across Cross-Sectional Datasets

Both the 1987-88 NFCS and 1989-91 CSFII were conducted within close temporal proximity (19871991) and, as such, use variation from very similar birth cohorts (since the analysis is restricted
to men aged 57-71). One possibility is that time period and/or cohort effects may explain why
the estimates when using these two datasets differ substantially from those found when using the
remaining datasets. E.g., the strong economic growth during the late 1980s may have allowed
for higher-than-expected retirement benefits for those exiting the labor force during this period
and lowered the income drop at retirement. However, the estimate from NHANES III (column
(6) of Table 3), which was fielded contemporaneously (1988-1994), shows a large and significant
decline in intake at retirement, which runs counter to an explanation based on time periods and
cohorts. Instead, we believe that differences in data quality across these surveys can explain the
discrepancies in estimated retirement effects.
Concerns about the quality of the NFCS 1987-88 were raised in a report by the US General Accounting Office (GAO) (US GAO, 1991). The GAO found many reasons to question the quality of
the NFCS data including the household response rate of 34 percent, a lengthy interview averaging
three hours with very small monetary compensation for participation, the contractor’s failure to
follow the planned sampling design, and high turnover among the contractor’s staff along with a
failure to maintain minimum staff training levels. The NFCS surveys had the feature that households were asked to record all food that was consumed or disposed of for a seven day period after
which they then recorded their individual food intakes for three consecutive days. The concerns
raised by the GAO led the US Department of Agriculture’s Human Nutrition Information Service
(USDA HNIS) to convene an expert panel to examine the issue of non-response in the NFCS 198788. The panel “concluded that it is not possible, with absolute certainty, to demonstrate either the
presence or absence of nonresponse bias in the 1987-88 NFCS data” but went on to state that it
“does not recommend use of the data from the 1987-88 NFCS.” (USDA HNIS 1991a, p.13).16
16

The low household response rate of 34 percent for the 1987-88 NFCS was part of a longer trend. As shown in
Appendix Table A2, the household response rate previously had fallen from 85 percent for the 1965-66 HFCS to 61
percent for the 1977-78 NFCS, both of which had a similar design as the 1987-88 survey. To some extent, this trend

12

The USDA subsequently implemented a major redesign in its methodology for collecting information on individual food intake in concert with a number of other federal agencies (USDA
1994). Among the changes included a reduction from three days of individual intake to two days,
collecting all days using 24-hour recall (whereas previously the first day was 24-hour recall followed
by a two-day food diary left with the household), and a restructured 24-hour recall methodology
to encompass a wider array of recall strategies used by respondents (USDA-ARS 1997). However,
these changes were first implemented in the CSFII 1994-96. The methods employed to collect
individual intake in the 1989-91 CSFII were the same as those used in the 1987-88 NFCS.
The graphs in Figure 2 provide some insight into how these issues affected reported dietary
intake. The darker, solid line in each panel of the Figure plots average caloric intake for men by age
for each of the cross-sectional datasets as well as the 1965-66 HFCS.17 The lighter, dashed line in
each panel is the average caloric intake for men across all the studies pictured. Average male caloric
intake in both the 1987-88 NFCS and the 1989-91 CSFII lies substantially below average caloric
intake across all studies. Relative to these two surveys and consistent with the implementation of
better dietary recall methods, the Figure shows that male caloric intake rises sharply in the 1994-96
CSFII. The survey re-design also had a dramatic effect on the individual response rate to the first
day of food intake which, as shown in Appendix Table A2, jumped from 58 percent for the 1989-91
CSFII to 80 percent for the 1994-96 CSFII.18
parallels the rise in earnings non-response in the Current Population Survey which rose from 11 percent in 1968 to
18 percent in 1978 to 27 percent in 1982 (Lillard, Smith, and Welch 1986). While these CPS nonresponse rates are
conditional on participating in the survey, they are consistent with a broader change in the willingness to provide
information to surveys during this period.
17
As we discussed above, the 1965-66 HFCS does not include relevant information on labor force participation and
therefore it cannot be used in our regression analysis.
18
The household response rate jumped from 67 percent for the 1989-91 CSFII to 85 percent for the 1994-96 CSFII.
The fact that the CSFII did not contain the seven day household food use component likely contributed to the
higher CSFIII response rates relative to the 1987-88 NFCS. Aguiar and Hurst (2005, p. 922, footnote 4) report the
response rates for “eligible households” as 80 and 85 percent, respectively. The discrepancy between our reported
response rates and those reported by Aguiar and Hurst is that Aguiar and Hurst fail to account for, as is done in
the official computation of the response rates, the responses during the initial screening of households to determine
which households are eligible. As shown in Text Table 10 of Tippett et al. (1995), the screening rate, which is the
fraction of occupied households that responded to the initial survey contact to determine the household roster, is
84.5% in the 1989-91 CSFII. Multiplying this number by the eligible household response rate reported by Tippett et
al. of 79.6% (corresponding to the 80% figure reported by Aguiar and Hurst) yields our household response rate of
67%. The screening rate for the CSFII 1994-96, as reported in Table 4-2 of USDA-ARS (1997), is 98.5%. As such,
adjusting for the initial screening has a negligible effect on the household response rate for the 1994-96 CSFII which
is why the 85% household response reported by Aguiar and Hurst matches the response rate that we report. Finally,
note that in Appendix Table A2 we report unconditional individual response rates, i.e, those which subsume response
to the screening interview as well as household participation in the survey. The individual response rates reported

13

Figure 2 also shows that NHANES III has higher levels of caloric intake than the two studies
fielded contemporaneously, the 1987-88 NFCS and the 1989-91 CSFII. Recall that in Table 3 we
find a significant retirement intake decline in NHANES III but no such decline at retirement in
either of the contemporaneous studies. The dietary recall methods for NHANES were dramatically
revised between NHANES II and NHANES III which likely contributed to the increase in caloric
intake between these two NHANES waves as shown in Figure 2.19 In fact, the contractor that both
helped develop the improved CSFII dietary intake methodology and fielded the 1994-96 CSFII
is the same one that fielded NHANES III. These NHANES revisions, pre-dating those that were
implemented in the 1994-96 CSFII, help explain why NHANES III has higher caloric intake levels
than either the 1987-88 NFCS or the 1989-91 CSFII.20
The changes in survey methodology not only affected the level of caloric intake but also the
slope of the age-caloric intake profile. This slope is directly relevant for the 2SLS estimates shown
in Table 3 since age is the instrument used in the analysis. The panels of Figure 2 also report the
slope of the age-caloric intake profile for ages 57-71, the same ages as are used in Table 3. At these
ages, the slope of the age-caloric intake profile is -3.8 in the 1987-88 NFCS and -5.8 in the 1989-91
CSFII. These are, by far, the smallest such slopes shown in the Figure. In fact, the slope of -19.5
for the 1994-96 CSFIII is nearly four times larger than what is found in the 1989-91 CSFII.
In light of these data quality issues, including the recommendation of the USDA-HNIS’s expert
panel, it seems quite clear that we should not use the 1987-88 NFCS in our analysis. Given that
by Aguiar and Hurst (2005, p. 922, footnote 4) are conditional on the household’s participation in the survey.
19
These revisions included moving from a paper and pencil to a computerized system, changing from a manual
to an automated coding system, and implementing more systematic methods for probing respondents to recall food
items (McDowell et al. 1994). As shown in Appendix Table A2, this change only had modest effects on the NHANES
dietary intake response rate which was 74 percent for NHANES I, 73 percent for NHANES II, and 79 percent for
NHANES III. Continuous NHANES response rates range between 75 and 80 percent except for 2011-2012 which is
70 percent.
20
The NHANES surveys have dramatically lower rates of proxy reporting for dietary intake, i.e., one household
member reporting the intake of another household member, than either the NFCS or the 1989-91 CSFII. This
difference is explained, in part, by the fact that the NHANES 24 hour recall is collected when respondents undergo
the physical exam portion of the survey which requires the respondent to be present. In addition, while proxy
reporting was allowed in the 1989-91 CSFII (USDA HNIS 1991b), it was not in the 1994-96 CSFII except for those
“who could not report for themselves due to physical or mental limitations” (USDA-ARS 1997, p.54). However,
within each survey, we find that the relationship between proxy reporting and calorie levels in the retirement-age
sample cannot explain the differences in calorie levels across surveys. The effect of proxy reporting on caloric intake is
statistically insignificant for most surveys after including our set of controls. In NFCS87-88, proxy reports are slightly
higher than self-reports and in Continuing NHANES, proxy reports are slightly lower. In any case, the estimates of
equation (5) across surveys are not appreciably changed by either including a control for poxy reporting or restricting
the sample to observations without proxy reporting. These results are available from the authors.

14

the 1987-88 NFCS and 1989-91 CSFII used the same individual intake survey methodology and
the documented impact of the methodological changes on individual intake shown in Figure 2, we
would argue that the 1989-91 CSFII should be excluded as well. Returning to Table 2, we report
estimates when dropping these low-response-rate studies in column (4). Our 2SLS estimate of the
impact of retirement on caloric intake becomes -0.206 with a standard error of 0.034, yielding a
statistically significant decline in caloric intake at retirement.
Alternatively, we can focus only on the surveys implemented after the major improvements to
survey methodology. As shown in Table 3, the 2SLS estimate in the Continuous NHANES survey is
-0.205 and is highly statistically significant. If we combine the 1994-96 CSFII with the Continuous
NHANES data as in Table 2 column (5), our 2SLS estimate of the impact of retirement on caloric
intake is -0.194 with a standard error of 0.048, again yielding a statistically significant decline in
caloric intake at retirement.21 Overall, our estimates using cross-sectional data show a significant
decrease in caloric intake at retirement.

3.5

Quantile and Quantile IV Estimates

Because prior studies have found heterogeneity in the consumption response at retirement, we
also examine the decrease in caloric intake across the intake distribution. Bernheim, Skinner, and
Weinberg (2001) find relatively larger decreases in expenditure for those in the lower wealth and
income quartiles. Scholz, Seshadri, and Khitatrakun (2006), find that a majority of households have
wealth levels which match or exceed those predicted by a stochastic life-cycle model although 20
percent are saving less than their target level. Aguiar and Hurst (2005) find much larger decreases
in caloric intake for the 10 percent of their sample they identify as being low wealth. Since we
do not have a consistent measure of wealth across our numerous surveys, we instead examine
heterogeneity in the expenditure and intake responses at retirement by estimating quantile and
quantile instrumental variables regressions.22
Figure 3 shows quantile and quantile IV estimates for caloric intake in the sample of pooled
21
If Continuous NHANES and the 1994-96 CSFII are combined with NHANES III, which also made use of a new
methodological dietary intake survey instrument as noted above, our 2SLS estimate of the impact of retirement on
caloric intake is -0.197 with a standard error of 0.044.
22
We implement the quantile instrumental variable estimator developed by Chernozukhov and Hansen (2005). As
before, we use age indicators as instruments for retirement with age dummies.

15

studies excluding those with low response rates, as in column 4 of Table 2.23 The two panels
show the quantile estimates along with the associated 95 percent confidence intervals for each fifth
quantile. The horizontal dashed line represents the corresponding OLS estimate in the left panel
and the corresponding 2SLS estimate in the right panel.
In both panels, the caloric intake estimates are relatively constant across the quantiles. Across
the distribution, the standard quantile estimates are negative and quite similar to the OLS estimate.
The quantile IV estimates are again larger in magnitude but very similar to the corresponding 2SLS
estimate. Due to rather wide confidence intervals, we are unable to reject the null hypothesis of
no effect on caloric intake at the lowest quantile we examine, although the quantile point estimate
remains quite similar to the 2SLS estimate. Overall, the retirement caloric intake response does
not vary dramatically across the distribution.

3.6

The Impact of Retirement on Nutrient Intake

In addition to the amount of calories eaten, the transition into retirement may affect the quantity of
nutrients that individuals consume. Table 4 presents the estimated impact of retirement on a wide
range of nutrients: vitamins A, C, and E, calcium, cholesterol, saturated fat, and protein. These
nutrients were selected to match those examined by AH. Each coefficient reported in the Table
is the parameter on the retirement indicator found when applying 2SLS to estimate specifications
using equation (5).
The results in column (1) of Table 4 use data from pooling all the studies except for the 1987-88
NFCS and the CSFII 89-91 for reasons discussed in the previous subsection.24 Each point estimate
shown is for the coefficient on the retirement indicator when estimating equation (5) where the
outcome is noted on the left side of each row. As discussed above, we find that caloric intake drops
dramatically at retirement when pooling these samples. We also find that all the nutrients either
significantly decline at retirement (vitamin E, calcium, cholesterol, saturated fat, and protein) or
23

The low-response surveys we drop in this analysis are the NFCS 1987-88 and CSFII 1989-91. We obtain similar
results by restricting to the the post-revision studies used in column 5 of Table 2: CSFII 1994-96 and Continuous
NHANES.
24
Since information on individual nutrients are not available in all of the studies, the sample sizes vary across each
regression as detailed in the notes to Table 4.

16

yield a positive but insignificant estimate for the impact of retirement (vitamins A and C).25
Of course, changes in income may lead to a different response for different nutrients. To understand variation in the response across nutrients, AH regress intake of each nutrient on a measure
of permanent income using a sample of employed individuals.26 They find that intake of vitamins
A, C, and E, and calcium increase with permanent income, intake of cholesterol and saturated
fat decrease with permanent income, and that there is no effect of permanent income on protein
intake. Comparing these permanent income responses to our findings in column (1), the transition
into retirement is not consistent with either an increase or a decrease in permanent income.
For their analogous set of results, AH include calories as a control in the specifications. They
interpret their findings as providing insight into diet quality holding calories constant. However,
since caloric intake changes dramatically at retirement in our data, calories should be treated as
an endogenous regressor when it is included as a control. In the absence of a plausible instrument
for calories, in column (2) of Table 4 we present results which control for calories with the caveat
that these results should be treated cautiously. After controlling for calories, we find positive and
significant effects vitamins A and C as well as for calcium. The remaining nutrients do not change
significantly at retirement.
The large changes in caloric intake at retirement complicate the interpretation of the calorieconstant results in column (2) of Table 4. For example, we find that the level of calcium intake falls
at retirement (column (1)) but that calorie-constant calcium intake increases at retirement (column
(2)). Even ignoring the endogeneity of caloric intake, it is difficult to interpret the finding that
calorie-constant calcium intake rises at retirement as a beneficial outcome given that total calcium
intake falls at retirement. Similarly, the calorie-constant null effect of retirement on protein fails to
convey the overall dramatic drop in protein intake at retirement.
In the final two columns of Table 4, we present the nutrient intake results from using both
CSFII waves, the same data that is used by AH. In the CSFII sample, the results for each nutrient
are invariant to the inclusion of caloric intake as a control, as shown by comparing the results in
25

While these surveys collected information on vitamin supplement use, this information pertains to supplement
use over the past 30 days and is not recorded as part of the dietary intake data. Beginning in 2007, NHANES collected
vitamin supplement data that directly corresponds to the 24 hour recall period. However, the 24 hour supplement
use data is contained in separate files from the dietary intake data and is not used here.
26
See Table 2 of Aguiar and Hurst (2005) for more details on this procedure.

17

columns (3) and (4).27 This finding is consistent with the result at the top of column (3) which
shows that caloric intake does not change at retirement in the CSFII sample. Given this lack of
caloric intake response in the CSFII, the treatment of caloric intake as exogenous by AH makes
sense for their analysis. However, since we find that caloric intake falls at retirement, in our data
we believe that the results in column (1), which do not control for calories, are the relevant set of
findings for understanding whether intake falls at retirement. As such, we view the results in Table
4 as evidence that nutrient intake falls at retirement.

4

Changes in Intake at Retirement: Longitudinal Data

4.1

Data

As discussed in the theoretical section, one concern with the cross-sectional analysis is that the
included covariates may not adequately capture heterogeneity in preferences and lifetime resources
across households. Ideally, the 2SLS estimates would yield consistent estimates by exploiting variation in retirement driven by incentives that are orthogonal to these unobserved characteristics.
However, that analysis relies on the strong identifying assumption that nutrient intake differences
across ages are driven by retirement propensities and not other time-varying characteristics such
as physiological changes. To address these concerns, we also present results using longitudinal
food intake data. Our first difference estimates presented below not only allow us to account for
fixed sources of heterogeneity across households, but also subsume a linear rate of change in the
level of food intake in the intercept term such that the 2SLS estimates, as discussed below, are
identified by non-linearities in the age-retirement profile. This combination of features of the longitudinal analysis further mitigates concerns that the estimated caloric intake response to retirement
is biased.
The Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial for the Prevention of Coronary Heart Disease
(MRFIT) sample of nearly 13,000 men aged 35 to 58 at initial contact was interviewed on multiple
occasions beginning in 1973 and extending over the next six to eight years (Multiple Risk Factor
Intervention Trial Research Group 1982). The survey obtained demographic, labor market, health
27

Our results in column (4) are quite similar to those reported by AH in their Table 2.

18

exam information, and food intake using 24-hour recall during the initial visit as well as during
seven annual follow-up visits. However, not all of this information was collected at each visit which
influences the analysis that we are able to perform below.
All participants were asked to provide 24-hour food recall information at the initial visit as well
as at the first, second, third, and sixth annual visits. However, direct information on current labor
force status, including whether or not the participant is currently retired, was only collected at two
points in time: the initial interview and the sixth annual visit. Therefore, our main longitudinal
analysis will focus on the change in food intake between the initial visit and the sixth annual visit.
MRFIT was an experiment designed to investigate whether a multiple intervention treatment
affected coronary heart disease. The multiple interventions, which were provided as a bundle,
included treatment for hypertension, smoking cessation advice, and counseling on lowering cholesterol.28 Since the treatment group received advice on modifying their diet, we focus our primary
analysis on the control group, which is roughly half of the sample. To use a sample with ages that
are roughly comparable to those in the cross-sectional sample, we restrict our analysis to those who
are ages 47 to 58 at the initial visit, which means they are ages 53 to 64 at the sixth annual visit.
This restriction cuts our sample roughly in half.
The income information collected in MRFIT during the initial visit and the sixth annual visit is
categorical with the values for the nine categories remaining constant over time.29 In our analysis,
we follow the convention used in the MRFIT data which is to assign the midpoint of each interval
as the income value for all but the lowest and highest categories.30 Since we do not use limited
dependent variable methods to analyze the income data, we view our income results as descriptive
in that they demonstrate that income falls at retirement in the MRFIT sample.
28

More broadly, the third intervention “sought to encourage the development of lifelong shopping, cooking, and
eating patterns” (Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial Research Group 1982, p.1466). The treatment group was
also given recommendations regarding limits on fat intake as a share of total calories.
29
The categories were less than $4,200, $4,200 to $7,199, $7,200 to $9,999, $10,000 to $11,999, $12,000 to $14,999,
$15,000 to $17,999, $18,000 to $24,999, $25,000 to $34,999, and $35,000 and over.
30
The lowest category is assigned to be $4,200 while the highest category is assigned $45,000.

19

4.2

Empirical Methodology

Based on the Euler Equation (4), we estimate longitudinal specifications

∆yit = γRit + ∆Xit β + eit

(7)

where ∆yit is the change in caloric intake between the initial visit and the sixth annual visit, ∆Xit
is the change in time-varying individual and household level characteristics over this same time
span, and Rit is an indicator for whether the respondent retired between the initial visit and the
sixth annual visit. By using a first-difference specification, any endogeneity that is attributable
to permanent, fixed differences across individuals (e.g., impatient individuals retire sooner) will
be eliminated from the analysis and OLS will yield consistent estimates. Given the limited set
of time-varying covariates available in MRFIT, ∆Xit includes changes in the indicator for being
married and, in the caloric intake regressions, changes in indicators for high blood pressure, heart
disease, stroke, diabetes, and cancer.
If retirement between visits is endogenous, e.g., due to unanticipated changes in health status
between surveys, then OLS estimates of equation (7) will be inconsistent. One approach is to
account for time-varying factors that may be correlated with caloric intake and the decision to
retire. Our specifications which include controls for changes in health conditions are designed to
address this concern. However, to account for unobserved factors that may affect the retirement
decision, we again instrument for retirement using age indicators.
One subtle but important benefit to note with the first-difference equation (7) is how it accounts
for changes in the dependent variable that occur with age. Specifically, if the outcome depends
linearly on age in the level equation, then this age dependence will be part of the constant term after
applying the first differencing. Thus, both our OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effect of retirement
on caloric intake using equation (7) are not simply identified by a linear age-calorie relationship
which is a potential concern with the cross-sectional analysis.

20

4.3

2SLS Estimates

We present our results examining the impact of retirement on outcomes in the MRFIT data in Table
5. We limit our samples to individuals employed at the initial survey so that we are comparing
outcomes for those who retire against those who do not. Before turning to the longitudinal analysis,
we first present the results of applying the cross-sectional methods used in the previous section to
the second wave of the MRFIT data. We do so to compare the findings across the data sources,
especially since our MRFIT sample is somewhat younger at the second wave (ages 53 to 64) than
the cross-sectional samples (ages 57 to 71).
Panel A of Table 5 presents the results of the cross-sectional analysis using MRFIT data. The
first row of the Panel shows that income falls at retirement both when using OLS and 2SLS. The
estimates are quite similar in magnitude to what we find for our sample in Table 1.31 The second
row shows the impact on caloric intake. The OLS estimate is slightly smaller than those found in
Table 3. The 2SLS estimates are significant and somewhat larger than the analogous cross-sectional
estimates shown in Table 3.32 Thus, even though our longitudinal sample is slightly younger than
our cross-sectional sample, the results from applying cross-sectional methods are similar in both
the cross-sectional and longitudinal samples.
Our findings from applying the longitudinal methods to the MRFIT data are shown in Panel
B of Table 5. In the first row of the Panel, we find that the decrease in income at retirement
when estimating the first-difference specification is quite similar to our results from using the crosssectional approach. Our OLS estimates of the change in caloric intake at retirement in the firstdifference specification are also similar to our findings from using the cross-sectional specification
and again are insignificant. The 2SLS estimates of the effect of retirement on caloric intake are
marginally significant. Overall, our results from using the longitudinal data are quite similar to
findings from using cross-sectional data and further indicate that caloric intake falls at retirement.
31
32

We also include a indicator for married, black, and four education categories.
The corresponding first stage estimates are presented in Appendix Table A3.

21

5

Changes in a Food Intake Index at Retirement

The results from the previous two sections show that caloric and nutrient intake fall at retirement both in cross-sectional and longitudinal data. Aguiar and Hurst also examine the impact of
retirement on a more comprehensive measure of food intake: a consumption index which relates
permanent income to individual food items eaten by the respondent. Consistent with their earlier
results, they find that this measure of intake does not fall at retirement. Using the same CSFII
data as AH, we show that their finding is not robust: a seemingly innocuous change in the method
relating permanent income to consumption yields strikingly different results.33 Intuitively, by first
predicting permanent income, their method inadvertently removes some of the variation in permanent income across households which attenuates the coefficients of their consumption index and, in
turn, attenuates the relationship between the consumption index and retirement.34

5.1

Baseline Results

AH formally link an index of food intake to permanent income by extending the first order condition
found in (3) by assuming that consumption, C, is an aggregator function of J home-produced goods,
λt can be approximated as a linear projection on permanent income, age, and additional controls,
and assuming a CRRA utility function.35 The resulting empirical specification is

ln(y perm ) = β0 + α1 c1 + . . . + αJ cJ + βS ln St + βθ θt
+ βage aget + βage2 age2t + βhours hourst + βhours2 hours2t + εt

(8)

where the y perm is permanent income, cj variables include information on actual food intake from
the 24 hour recalls including calories, eleven nutrients, and nearly 80 food category indicators in
33

Although we have highlighted our concerns with the CSFII data in Section 3.4, we can only apply the AH consumption index methodology to datasets which have continuous income measures. Unfortunately, the only other
available datasets with such measures are the NFCS surveys which both were fielded prior to the survey methodology changes discussed above (The Continuing NHANES has categorical income measures). Thus, we limit our
consumption index analysis in sections 5 and 6 to the CSFII.
34
Although we have focused on the male only sample in the previous sections, we use the same sample as AH in
this section to emphasize that the differences between their results and what we find in this section are driven entirely
by methodological considerations.
35
See the working paper version of their paper for more details (Aguiar and Hurst 2003).

22

order to capture a broad spectrum of food items, St is total household spending on market goods
in year t, and θt are variables (which may or may not be time-varying) thought to affect utility
such as self-reported health and family size and hourst is weekly hours worked.
AH estimate equation (8) using a sample of full-time workers between the ages of 25 and 55
for whom, by assumption, the first order condition (3) holds. They then use these estimates to
b which relates food intake to permanent income where ln C
b=α
produce an index, ln C,
b1 c1 + . . . +
α
bJ cJ + βbS ln St + βbθ θt .36 These estimated parameters can be used to link observed food intake
to the permanent income of all individuals ages 57 to 71 including retired individuals for whom
b is used as the outcome
current income is likely a poor proxy for lifetime resources. Finally, ln C
when estimating the cross-sectional equation (5) to test whether the consumption index changes at
retirement on the sample of 57 to 71 year olds.
Since permanent income is unobserved, AH choose to construct a measure of permanent income
to use as the depedent variable when estimating equation (8). Thus, they first regress the log of
observed income, ln(y observed ), on a number of observable characteristics thought to be correlated
with permanent income including occupation, education, their interactions, as well as sex and race
perm ),
interactions. They use these estimates to predict permanent income for each household, ln(yd

and then use this predicted value as the dependent variable when estimating equation (8). The
bAH .
results of this last specification are used to construct the consumption index ln C
Alternatively, we can estimate equation (8) by replacing ln(y perm ) with the log of observed
income, ln(y observed ) which is, in turn, the sum of permanent and transitory income.37 Since
consumption decisions should be unaffected by transitory income for unconstrained households
under the LCPIH, the regressors in (8) are correlated with the permanent component of income
but not with the transitory component of income. Thus, using ln(y observed ) as the dependent
36

b to account for differences
AH include total household spending both in equation (8) and when computing ln C
in prices paid across households. Also, in the text of their article where AH describe the construction of their index,
bθ θt . However, they do include β
bθ θt in the programs they kindly provided with which we were
they do not include β
bθ θt as part of ln C.
b We discuss below how
able to exactly replicate their published results. As such, we include β
bθ θt from the index affects the analysis.
dropping β
37
In our context, the log of observed income equals the sum of the log of permanent income and the log of transitory
income. E.g., in his analysis of buffer stock consumers, Carroll (1997) specifies income in year t as Yt = Pt Vt where
Pt is permanent income (which, in logs, evolves as a random walk with drift) and Vt is a multiplicative transitory
income shock with mean one. Taking logs of both sides yields ln(Yt ) = ln(Pt ) + ln(Vt ), the specification of observed
income that we consider here.

23

variable will generate consistent estimates of the parameters in (8) for the same reasons that AH
are able to consistently estimate (8) when predicted permanent income is the dependent variable.
bST .
These estimates can then be used to construct the consumption index, ln C
Both of these approaches for constructing the consumption index are imperfect. A concern
bST is that the transitory component of income may be correlated with
with the construction of ln C
the consumption measures. However, since the LCPIH predicts that only the annuity value of
transitory income will be spent on current consumption and the average individual in the full-time
bST should be rather
worker sample is relatively young, the impact of transitory income on ln C
bAH consumption index only uses variation in permanent insmall. On the other hand, the ln C
come that is associated with the characteristics that appear in the permanent income regression.
Moreover, it further relies on the extent to which these characteristics are, in turn, correlated with
the consumption measures. By understating the true variation in permanent income, this procebAH , and also attenuates the estimated
dure attenuates the estimates in the consumption index, ln C
impact of retirement on consumption.38
b are shown in
The results of estimating equation (5) using both methods of constructing ln C
the first row of Table 6.39 The result in the first column replicates the estimate of -0.006 found
bST , we find
by AH. However, using the alternative approach proposed above to construct ln C
that the impact of retirement on consumption is -0.078 as shown in the second column. Because
the dependent variable in these regressions is generated, we estimate standard errors using 1000
repetitions of two bootstrap procedures. The first, reported in parentheses, is a block bootstrap
clustered at the level of primary sampling unit stratified by the two CSFII surveys. The second,
bST is marginally
reported in brackets, is unclustered and unstratified.40 The result using ln C
significant at conventional levels.41 Further, it is economically meaningful and markedly larger
bAH estimate.42
than the ln C
38

We provide a formal discussion of this issue below.
As discussed in the notes to Table 6, we drop five observations with zero income from the original AH sample in
bAH and ln C
bST .
order to use the exact same sample when creating ln C
40
The clustered, stratified bootstrap is intended to account for the sampling design of the CSFII surveys and
is analogous to the clustering we employ in our other analyses. The alternate bootstrap without clustering or
stratification is the procedure employed by Aguiar and Hurst (2005).
41
bST has a larger standard error than the estimate using ln C
bAH . However, that is consistent
The result using ln C
b
bST as is shown below.
with the fact that the variability in ln CAH is attenuated relative to that found in ln C
42
b
As we noted above, the text of the Aguiar and Hurst article suggests that βθ θt is excluded from their index while
39

24

5.2

Understanding the Retirement Impact Across Food Indices

This subsection provides a formal discussion of why first predicting permanent income as opposed
to directly using observed income when estimating equation (8) attenuates the impact of retirement
on consumption. We can illustrate the difference in the estimated retirement consumption response
between these two approaches beginning with a stylized version of the estimating equations. Let

ln(y perm ) = π0 + π1 C + u

(9)

be an equation that is analogous to (8) but relates permanent income to a single measure of
household consumption, C. The OLS regression of observed income on C, where C is correlated with
permanent but not transitory income, yields

π
b1 =

Cov(ln(y perm ), C)
Cov(ln(y observed ), C)
=
V ar(C)
V ar(C)

b=π
The resulting consumption index is ln C
b0 + π
b1 C.
To generate a consumption index as in AH, we first estimate

ln(y perm ) = δ0 + δ1 W + v

(10)

where W is a single regressor that is associated with permanent income but uncorrelated with
transitory income (e.g., educational attainment). The OLS regression of observed income on W
yields
Cov(ln(y observed ), W )
Cov(ln(y perm ), W )
δb1 =
=
.
V ar(W )
V ar(W )
perm ) =
Comparable to the method used by AH, the predicted measure of permanent income, ln(yd

δb0 + δb1 W , can be used as the outcome when estimating (9) which results in the OLS estimator for
bθ θt in the index. We have have also estimated the impact of retirement
the programs they provided to us include β
bST becomes
on the consumption indices by excluding these covariates. We find that the impact of retirement on ln C
b
somewhat less negative, changing from -0.078 to -0.056. The impact on ln CAH is also shifted in a positive direction,
changing from -0.006 to 0.009. Thus, we still find a substantially more negative estimate of the impact of retirement
on consumption when using our consumption index.

25

the coefficient on C being

π
e1 =

perm ), C)
Cov(ln(yd
Cov(δb1 W, C) b Cov(W, C) b
=
= δ1
= δ1 · ω
b1
V ar(C)
V ar(C)
V ar(C)

where ω
b1 is the OLS estimator for the coefficient on C in the equation
W = ω0 + ω1 C + ε

(11)

e=π
Thus, the resulting consumption index is ln C
e0 + π
e1 C = π
e0 + δb1 ω
b1 C.
Specifying the equation relating the consumption index to the binary retirement indicator, R,
as
ln C = λ0 + λ1 R + e

(12)

the IV estimators for the effect of retirement on consumption corresponding to the two approaches
for constructing the consumption indexes, where A (e.g., age) is the single instrumental variable,
are
Cov(C, A)
π1 C, A)
Cov(C, A)
π1 C, A)
e1 = Cov(e
b1 = Cov(b
=π
b1 ·
and λ
=π
e1 ·
λ
Cov(R, A)
Cov(R, A)
Cov(R, A)
Cov(R, A)
The relative estimated impact of retirement on consumption across the two methods for creating
the consumption index reduces to
b1
π
b1 ·
λ
=
e1
λ
π
e1 ·

Cov(C,A)
Cov(R,A)
Cov(C,A)
Cov(R,A)

=

ρperm,C
π
b1
=
ρperm,W · ρW,C
δb1 ω
b1

where ρperm,C is the correlation between permanent income and C, ρperm,W is the correlation
between permanent income and W , and ρW,C is the correlation between W and C.43
To the extent that changes in permanent income are perfectly reflected by changes in consumption, as AH assume when using the first order condition to relate permanent income and
consumption, we anticipate that ρperm,C = 1. At the same time, we have no reason to believe that
both changes in permanent income are perfectly correlated with changes in the observable charac43

This simplification makes repeated use of the fact that the slope coefficient from the two variable regression of Y
on X equals ρX,Y · (SDY /SDX ) where ρX,Y is the correlation between X and Y and SDn is the standard deviation
of n.

26

teristic, W , and changes in the observable characteristic are perfectly correlated with changes in
b1 ≥ λ
e1 where the inequality is almost
consumption. Thus, ρperm,C ≥ ρperm,W · ρW,C and, as such, λ
certainly non-binding.44 Thus, the method for constructing the consumption index implemented
by AH almost certainly will yield an estimate of the impact of retirement on consumption that is
smaller in magnitude than one generated by the valid alternative proposed above.
We next extend the analysis by replacing the single permanent income instrument, W , with j in0
perm ) =
struments, W1 , W2 , . . . , Wj . Using the resulting predicted permanent income measure, ln(yd
P
0 W , to estimate (9) yields the consumption index
δb00 + δb10 W1 + · · · + δbj0 Wj = δb00 + jm=1 δbm
m

e0 = π
ln C
e00 + π
e10 C where
π
e10

0
P
j
0 W , C)
perm ) , C)
X
Cov( jm=1 δbm
Cov(ln(yd
m
0 Cov(Wm , C)
=
=
δbm
=
V ar(C)
V ar(C)
V ar(C)
m=1

Whereas π
e1 is the product of the OLS estimators resulting from the use of a single income instrument, W , the estimator π
e10 is the sum of j products, one for each instrument Wm . Assuming that
each Wm is positively correlated with permanent income and is also positively correlated with C, we
e0 > λ
e1 and the estimated impact of
will find that π
e10 > π
e1 . It follows that, under these conditions, λ
1
retirement on consumption will be increase when using multiple instruments for permanent income.
However, each term in π
e10 accounts for the relationship between permanent income and consumption only through the correlations of each with the instruments Wm . The analogous estimator, π
b1 ,
from using observed income to construct the consumption index, directly captures the relationship
between permanent income and consumption. Again assuming that each Wm is positively correlated with permanent income and is also positively correlated with C, we will find that π
b1 > π
e10 .45
b1 > λ
e0 whereby the estimated impact of retirement on consumpAs such, we expect to find that λ
1
tion will be larger when using observed income to construct the consumption index relative to using
multiple instruments for permanent income.
44
For this result to hold, notice that it need not be the case that ρperm,C = 1 but only that the correlation between
permanent income and the consumption measure is larger than the product ρperm,W · ρW,C .
45
This result will hold except for the unlikely scenario in which the portion of permanent income that is unexplained
by the Wm is negatively correlated with the consumption measure.

27

We can also expand the analysis to allow for k consumption measures, C1 , C2 , . . . , Ck ,
ln(y perm ) = π0 + π1 C1 + · · · + πk Ck + u

(9’)

Assuming that each consumption measure is correlated with permanent but not transitory income,
the OLS estimators for the slope coefficients of (9’) when using observed income as the dependent
variable are
π
bj00

perm
)
i=1 r̂ij · ln(yi
,
PN 2
i=1 r̂ij

PN
=

j = 1, . . . , k

where r̂ij is the residual from regressing Cj on the remaining consumption measures.46 Each estimator, π
bj00 , captures the relationship between permanent income and consumption measure Cj . The
P
b 00 = π
resulting consumption index is ln C
b000 + kj=1 π
bj00 Cj .
If we were to instead use the predicted permanent income measure as the outcome, then in the
case with a single W predicting permanent income, the resulting OLS estimators for equation (9’)
become
π
ej00

PN
=

i=1 r̂ij · δ1 Wi
PN 2
i=1 r̂ij

b

PN
= δb1 ·

i=1 r̂ij · Wi
= δb1 · ω
bj00 , j = 1, , . . . , k
P
N
2
r̂
i=1 ij

where the ω
bj00 ’s are the OLS estimators for the coefficients in
W = ω0 + ω1 C1 + · · · + ωk Ck + ε

(11’)

In this case, each estimator, π
ej00 , captures the relationship between permanent income and consumption measure Cn to the extent that it works through the permanent income instrument W .
P
P
e 00 = π
Thus, the resulting consumption index is ln C
e000 + kj=1 π
ej00 Cj = π
e000 + kj=1 δb1 ω
bj00 Cj .
Using these indexes comprised of multiple consumption measures as the outcome when estimating equation (12), the resulting IV estimators for the coefficient on retirement are
k

X Cov(Cj , A)
b 00
b00 = Cov(ln C , A) =
λ
π
bj00
1
Cov(R, A)
Cov(R, A)
j=1

46

k

X
e 00
Cov(Cj , A)
e00 = Cov(ln C , A) =
and λ
δb1 ω
bj00
1
Cov(R, A)
Cov(R, A)
j=1

This expression for the OLS estimators when using multiple regression can be found in Wooldridge (2016).

28

These estimators are different weighted averages of the impact of retirement on each individual measure that enters the consumption index. When using observed income to construct the consumption
index, the weights are the relationship between permanent income and consumption measure Cn .
However, when first predicting permanent income, the weights only capture the relationship between permanent income and each consumption measure through their individual relationship with
the instrument W . If the direct relationship is stronger than the product of the indirect relationbST will be larger than that found by
ship, then the impact of retirement on consumption using ln C
bAH .
using ln C
The remaining rows in Table 6 show how varying the number of permanent income instruments
and the number of consumption measures affects the impact of retirement on the the consumption
bAH and ln C
bST . The second row of the Table shows the results when we repeat the
indexes ln C
methodology as above except only using a single years of schooling measure to predict permanent
income and only including total food expenditure, S, in the consumption index.47 Consistent with
our derivations, when we first predict permanent income the estimated drop in consumption at
retirement of -0.010 (column 1) is nearly ten times smaller in magnitude than our estimate of -0.097
from using observed income. This result confirms that predicting permanent income first removes
much of the important variation in permanent income. In the third row, we include the entire set of
permanent income instruments used by AH but maintain the single regressor, S, to measure C. We
find, as our analysis anticipates, that the drop in consumption at retirement increases by a factor
of nearly five to 0.048 (relative to the second row) due to dramatically increasing the variation
bST does not use the
in permanent income used in the analysis. Because the construction of ln C
permanent income instruments (W ), the estimate in row 3 as the same as in row 2.
The final row in Table 6 uses only educational attainment to predict permanent income but
bAH index we find that
uses the complete set of measures in the consumption index. Using the ln C
bST index we again report
the change in consumption at retirement is 0.001 while using the ln C
that the change is -0.078.48 As these results are quite comparable to the full specification shown
47

We include all the remaining covariates in the other regressions. Our formulas in this section are applicable after
first transforming these variables to remove the effects of the remaining covariates analogous to an application of the
Frisch-Waugh-Lovell Theorem.
48
bST does not use W , the estimated impact in row 4 is exactly the same as that in row 1.
Because ln C

29

in the first row of the Table, it suggests that the differences in the estimated impact of retirement
on consumption are driven entirely by the weighting of the impact of retirement on each individual
b00 and λ
e00 . As we argued above, the weights
consumption measure shown in our expressions for λ
1
1
bAH will likely understate the impact of retirement on consumption
resulting from the use of ln C
bST .
relative to those that arise from using ln C
Overall, our analysis of the estimated impact of retirement on consumption using the constructed
consumption index indicates that the method used by AH inadvertently attenuates the estimates.
As we have shown empirically, the extent of the attenuation can be quite dramatic as the point
bST suggests an economically significant reduction in
estimate of -0.078 that results from using ln C
consumption at retirement.

6

The Impact of Unemployment on Intake

The prior literature finds a significant reduction in expenditures for workers who become unemployed (Dynarski and Gruber 1997; Stephens 2001; Saporta-Eksten 2014). Although the unemployed are a heterogeneous group, including those with both short and long-term unemployment
spells, the defining characteristic is the intention to find future employment. Thus, unemployment
is a transitory state which stands in contrast to retirement. However, the fact that both the unemployed and the retired undergo large earnings losses as well as being non-employed provides a
useful point of comparison for understanding how intake responds to changes in earnings.
Indeed, using the two waves of the CSFII, Aguiar and Hurst (2005) find comparable expenditure
losses and increases in food preparation time for the retired and the unemployed. However, while
they find no effect of retirement on their consumption index, they find a significant drop in the
consumption index for the unemployed, suggesting that the index is able to measure consumption
responses to income shocks. They interpret these contrasting results as further evidence that intake
does not fall at retirement.
To increase the number of unemployed respondent observations in their analysis of the impact
of unemployment, AH include the 1989-91 CSFII low-income “oversample” in their analysis. This
separate sample was collected by restricting data collection to households with income at or below

30

130 percent of the federal poverty line (USDA HNIS 1991b). In addition, the sampling procedures
targeted the low income sample to be 50% the size of the “basic” sample, which means that onethird of the combined sample is from the low income oversample.
However, AH do not use sampling weights when combining the samples for their unemployment
analysis and therefore fail to get a consistent population estimate of the impact of unemployment on
intake. In addition, although the 1994-96 CSFII does not have a separate oversample, it “included
an oversampling of the low-income population,” (p. 3, USDA-ARS 1997) and, thus, analysis of
these data also requires sampling weights. Therefore, we re-examine the effect of unemployment on
intake after applying sampling weights and extending the analysis to include the alternative intake
index discussed in Section 5.
Table 7 reports estimates from regressions of the the form of

yi = γUi + Xi β + i

(13)

which is analogous to equation (5) except it includes the binary unemployment indicator Ui in
place of the retirement indicator Ri . Each estimate shown in Table 7 is the coefficient on Ui from a
separate regression of (13). We use the same sample that AH use in their unemployment analysis,
restricting to prime-age workers who are either full-time employed or unemployed. To investigate
the impact of weighting, we show results for the analysis both without (column (1)) and with
(column (2)) the use of sampling weights.
We replicate the main AH unemployment findings as shown in column (1) of Table 7. They
find a significant decrease in both food expenditure (-0.187) and their food intake index (-0.053)
due to unemployment.49 As shown in the last row of the column, we also find a substantially larger
unemployment decrease when using our alternative food intake index (-0.133), consistent with our
analysis in Section 5.
However, although we find a comparable impact on food expenditure when applying sample
weights, we find strikingly different estimates for the impact of unemployment on the food intake
index. We estimate the impact of unemployment on the AH food intake index to be -0.013 which is
49

We are able to replicate the unemployment findings reported in the first and last rows of Table 6 in Aguiar and
Hurst (2005).

31

not only much smaller than the unweighted estimate of -0.053, but is also statistically insignificant.
We find a much larger estimate of -0.045 when using our alternative food intake index, although
this result is also statistically insignificant.
Importantly, the estimated impact of unemployment on the food intake index (-0.045) is smaller
in magnitude than our estimated impact of retirement on the food intake (-0.078).50 These findings
stand in contrast to AH who find no effect of retirement on the food intake index but do find
an effect due to unemployment. As our results are based on the use of sampling weights and
the alternative food index, we believe that they provide a more appropriate comparison for the
estimated retirement and unemployment effects. These estimates indicate a larger consumption
response to retirement than to unemployment and provide additional support for the finding that
food intake falls at retirement.

7

Conclusion

Evidence accumulated across multiple datasets and countries shows that expenditures fall, on average, at retirement. Important work by Aguiar and Hurst, however, finds that food intake does
not fall at retirement. In this paper, we dramatically expand the investigation of nutrient intake
changes at retirement by using cross-sectional datasets that span over forty years and by using
longitudinal data. We show how the methodology used to create consumption indices in prior work
will greatly attenuate the estimated impact of retirement on consumption and how to construct
these indices in a way that circumvents this concern. Across multiple methods, we find that nutrient
intake falls at retirement.
Our results run counter to those of Aguiar and Hurst (2005) who find that food intake does
not fall at retirement. As we document, major revisions to the survey methodology used to collect
dietary intake data had substantial effects on both survey response rates and the level of reported
intake in the data used in their analysis. Either using studies where these concerns are less pertinent
50

While our analysis of the impact of retirement on food intake in Table 6 does not use sampling weights, consistent
with AH’s methodology, we estimate the impact of retirement on the alternative food intake index is also -0.078 when
we use sampling weights. The retirement coefficient is likely invariant to the use of sampling weights, whereas the
unemployment estimate is not, since the AH retirement analysis does not include the low income oversample which
has the large disparity in sampling weights as noted above.

32

or limiting the analysis to datasets fielded after the improved survey methods were implemented
yields consistent evidence that nutrient intake falls at retirement. We provide further evidence by
using longitudinal data to estimate specifications analogous to Euler Equations and also find that
nutrient intake falls at retirement. While the use of age as an instrument for retirement raises
potential concerns, our longitudinal first-difference estimates, which implicitly control for a linear
trend in age, yield an estimate which is quite similar in magnitude to our cross-sectional findings.
Finally, we show that a consumption index relating the type of food consumed to permanent income
also falls at retirement and that this decline is larger than that found for the unemployed.
Another possible concern is that food intake may fall at retirement if individuals expend less
energy and, hence, have lower intake requirements. Our 2SLS estimates across both methodological
approaches could then be viewed as providing evidence on the magnitude of the planned reduction
in intake at retirement. Such a planned drop in intake would not refute the Life-Cycle/Permanent
Income Hypothesis. On the other hand, our finding of a significant intake reduction at retirement,
in contrast to the AH findings, does not confirm this hypothesis either.
Do our findings contradict evidence of an increase in household production at retirement? We
do not believe so. Prior evidence of increased time spent shopping and lower prices paid after
retirement indicates that households shift the composition of consumption upon leaving the labor
force. However, shifts in time allocation may not be part of an optimal life-cycle plan but rather
a response to a fall in resources at retirement brought about by a failure to adequately save. A
growing literature has found that not only do a large share of adults lack basic financial literacy
but that financial literacy is strongly associated with retirement planning (e.g., see the survey
by Lusardi and Mitchell (2014)). Another strand of literature sharpens the foundations of the
observed (lack of) planning behavior, as in the boundedly rational agents of Gabaix (2016), who
weigh the costs and benefits of being attentive to the retirement planning problem and rationally
undersave relative to canonical benchmarks. In a related context, Ganong and Noel (2017) show
that consumption expenditure falls at another largely predictable income drop: the exhaustion
of unemployment benefits. They find that, out of a broad set of models, the observed patterns
are only consistent with an economy partially populated by hand-to-mouth consumers who do not

33

smooth their consumption through the income drop.51 This is evidence of similar behavior to that
which is reflected by our results. Future research linking financial literacy, retirement planning,
and changes in consumption and intake at retirement could provide insight on the extent to which
retirement preparedness (or lack thereof) can explain our findings.

References
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. (2003) “Consumption vs. Expenditure,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 10307.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. (2005) “Consumption vs. Expenditure,” Journal of Political Economy, 133(5):919-48.
Aguila, Emma, Orazio Attanasio, and Costas Meghir (2011) “Changes in Consumption at Retirement: Evidence from Panel Data,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3):1094-1099.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, and John Leahy (2007) “Retirement Consumption: Insights from
a Survey,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2): 265-274.
Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and Sarah Tanner (1998) “Is There a Retirement-Savings Puzzle?”
American Economic Review, 88(4):769-88.
Battistin, Erich, Agar Brugiavini, Enrico Rettore, and Guglielmo Weber (2009) “The Retirement
Consumption Puzzle: Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Approach,” American Economic
Review, 99(5):2209-2226.
Becker, Gary S. (1965) “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal, 75:299, 493-517.
Been, Jim, Susann Rohwedder, and Michael Hurd (2017) “Households’ consumption spending and
home production responses to retirement: Do retirees substitute consumption spending?” Unpublished Working Paper.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg (2001). “What Accounts for the
Variation in Retirement Wealth Among U.S. Households?” American Economic Review, 91:4,
51

Fadlon and Laibson (2017) show that, even in the presence of non-optimizing households, the government can
use policy levers to ensure that household Euler equations hold on average, effectively substituting for the lack of
optimization by some households. However, this result and those that follow require the government to behave in the
manner of a rational, benevolent social planner. It is unclear the extent to which existing retirement policy reflects
such design.

34

832-57.
Blau, David M. (2008) “Retirement and Consumption in a Life Cycle Model,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 26(1):35-71.
Caggiula, Arlene W., George Christakis, Marilyn Farrand, Stephen B. Hulley, Ruth Johnson, Norman L. Lasser, Jeremiah Stamler, Graham Widdowson (1981) “The Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT): IV. Intervention on Blood Lipids,” Preventive Medicine, 10(4):443-475.
Carroll, Christopher D. (1997) “Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1):1-55.
Chernozhukov, Victor and Christian Hansen (2005) “An IV Model of Quantile Treatment Effects,”
Econometrica, 73(1):245-261.
Dong, Yingying and Dennis Yang (2014) “Mandatory Retirement and the Consumption Puzzle:
Prices Decline or Quantities Decline?” Unpublished Manuscript.
Dynarski, Susan and Jonathan Gruber (1997) “Can Families Smooth Variable Earnings?” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 229-84.
Engen, Eric M., William G. Gale, and Cori E. Uccello (1999) “The Adequacy of Household Saving,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1999:3, 65-187.
Fadlon, Itzik and David Laibson (2017) “Paternalism and Pseudo-Rationality,” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper No. 23620.
Fisher, Jonathan D., David S. Johnson, Joseph Marchand, Timothy M. Smeeding, and Barbara
Boyle Torrey (2008) “The Retirement Consumption Conundrum: Evidence from a Consumption
Survey,” Economics Letters, 99:482-485.
Gabaix, Xavier (2017) “Behavioral Macroeconomics Via Sparse Dynamic Programming,” Unpublished Working Paper.
Ganong, Peter and Pascal Noel (2017) “Consumer Spending during Unemployment: Positive and
Normative Implications,” Unpublished Working Paper.
Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier (1998) “Effects of Pensions on Saving: Analysis with
Data From the Health and Retirement Study,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 6681.
Haider, Steven J. and Melvin Stephens Jr. (2007) “Is There a Retirement-Consumption Puzzle?
35

Evidence Using Subjective Retirement Expectations” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2):
247-264.
Hall, Robert E. (1978) “Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income Hypothesis:
Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 86(6):971-87.
Hurd, Michael D. and Susann Rohwedder (2003) “The Retirement-Consumption Puzzle: Anticipated and Actual Declines in Spending at Retirement,” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper no. 9586.
Hurd, Michael D. and Susann Rohwedder (2006) “Some Answers to the Retirement-Consumption
Puzzle,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 12057.
Hurd, Michael D. and Susann Rohwedder (2008) “The Retirement Consumption Puzzle: Actual
Spending Change in Panel Data,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no.
13929.
Interagency Board for Nutrition Monitoring and Related Research. (2000) Nutrition monitoring in
the United States: The directory of Federal and State nutrition monitoring and related research
activities. Bialostosky K, ed. Hyattsville, Maryland: National Center for Health Statistics.
Li, Hongbin, Xinzheng Shi, and Binzhen Wu (2014) “The Retirement Consumption Puzzle Revisited: Evidence from the Mandatory Retirement Policy in China,” Unpublished Manuscript
Lillard, Lee, James P. Smith, and Finis Welch (1986) “What Do We Really Know about Wages? The
Importance of Nonreporting and Census Imputation,” Journal of Political Economy, 94(3):489506.
Lundberg, Shelly, Richard Startz, and Steven Stillman (2003). “The Retirement-Consumption
Puzzle: A Marital Bargaining Approach,” Journal of Public Economics, 87(5-6):1199-1218.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell (2007) “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Role of
Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(1):205224.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell (2014) “The Economic Importance of Financial Literacy:
Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Economic Literature, 52(1), 5-44.
McDowell MA, BriefeI RR, Alaimo K et al. (1994) “Energy and Macronutrient Intakes of Persons
Ages 2 Months and Over in the United States: Third National Health and Nutrition Examination
36

Survey, Phase 1, 1988-91,” Advance Data from Vital and Health Statistics, No. 255. Hyattsville,
Maryland: National Center for Health Statistics.
Minicaci, Raffaele, Chiara Monfardini, and Guglielmo Webber (2010) “How Does Consumption
Change Upon Retirement?” Empirical Economics, 38:257-280.
Moore, James F. and Olivia S. Mitchell (1997) “Projected Retirement Wealth and Savings Adequacy in the Health and Retirement Study,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 6240.
Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial Research Group (1982) “Multiple Risk Factor Intervention
Trial. Risk Factor Changes and Mortality Results,” The Journal of the American Medical
Association, 248(12):1465-77.
Olafsson, Arna and Michaela Pagel (2018) “The Retirement-Consumption Puzzle: New Evidence
from Personal Finances,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 24405.
Parker, Jonathan (1999) “Spendthrift in America? On Two Decades of Decline in the United States
Saving Rate,” in B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomic Annual 1999.
Poterba, James M. (2014) “Retirement Security in an Aging Population,” American Economic
Review, 104(5): 1-30.
Reese, Robert B. (1977) The 1977-78 Nationwide Food Consumption Survey [Memorandum]. Washington, DC: US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service.
Saporta-Eksten, Itay (2014) “Job Loss, Consumption and Unemployment Insurance,” Unpublished
Working Paper.
Scholz, John Karl, Ananth Seshadri, and Surachai Khitatrakun (2006) “Are Americans Saving
‘Optimally’ for Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy, 114(4): 607-643.
Smith, Sarah (2006) “The Retirement-Consumption Puzzle and Involuntary Early Retirement:
Evidence from the British Household Panel Survey,” The Economic Journal, 116:C130-C148.
Stephens Jr., Melvin (2001) “The Long-Run Consumption Effects of Earnings Shocks,” The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 83(1):28-36.
Stephens Jr., Melvin and Takashi Unayama (2012) “The Impact of Retirement on Household Consumption in Japan,” Journal of The Japanese and International Economies, 26:62-83.
Tippett, Katherine S., Sharon J. Mickle, Joseph D. Goldman, et al. (1995) Food and Nutrient
37

Intake by Individuals in the United States, 1 Day, 1989-91. Continuing Survey of Food Intakes
by Individuals, 1989-91, Nationwide Food Surveys Rep. No. 91-2.
US Department of Agriculture (1994) 1992 Report on USDA Human Nutrition Research and Education Activities: A Report to Congress, Washington, DC.
US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service (1997) Design and Operation: The
Continuing Survey of Food Intakes by Individuals and the Diet and Health Knowledge Survey,
1994-96, NFS Report No.96-1, Washington, DC.
US Department of Agriculture, Human Nutrition Information Service (1991a) Impact of Nonresponse on Dietary Data From the 1987-88 Nationwide Food Consumption Survey, Washington,
DC.
US Department of Agriculture, Human Nutrition Information Service (1991b) The Continuing
Survey of Food Intakes by Individuals and the Diet and Health Knowledge Survey, 1989, Survey
Operations Report, Washington, DC.
US General Accounting Office (1991) Nutrition Monitoring: Mismanagement of Nutrition Survey
Has Resulted in Questionable Data, GAO/RCED-91-117, Washington, DC.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., (2016) Introductory Econometrics : A Modern Approach, 6E. Mason, Ohio
:South-Western Cengage Learning.

38

8

Data Appendix

8.1

NFCS 1977-78

The 1977-78 Nationwide Food Consumption Survey was a survey of American eating patterns conducted from the second quarter of 1977 through the first quarter of 1978. The survey was fielded by
National Analysts, Inc. under contract with the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).
Approximately 15,000 households in the contiguous US were selected to participate in the main
arm of the survey through a stratified, multistage sampling design. In addition to this representative sample, the survey also included oversamples of the elderly and low-income populations and
samples from Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. Basic interviews were conducted in-home, with the
main meal planner and food preparer answering questions about household food either consumed
or disposed of over the previous seven days. Households were contacted in advance requesting that
they maintain records, if necessary, for the prior week’s household food consumption. Household
data were also collected on demographics, location, lodging, income, shopping behavior, usual food
expenditure, participation in food programs, and patterns of eating at and away from home.
Labor force data were collected for the male and female heads of household. We code heads of
household as retired if they did not work during the week prior to the interview and they reported
being retired. The day of the initial interview, all individual household members completed a
24-hour food recall for the day prior to the interview. They were also given two-day food diaries
to be completed for the interview day and the following day. In the first quarter of the survey,
all household members completed individual food records. In the final three quarters, they were
completed by all members aged 18 or younger and half of adults aged 19 or older. A few days
after initial interviews, interviewers returned to collect diaries, check for errors or inconsistencies,
and provide compensation. The main portion of the survey was intended to be self-weighting, but
completion rates varied significantly across PSUs. Weights were calculated at the PSU-by-quarter
level to recover the expected number of completed intake schedules.

39

8.2

NFCS 1987-88

The 1987-88 Nationwide Food Consumption Survey collected data on American food consumption
between April 1987 and August 1988. The survey was conducted by National Analysts, Inc. under
contract with the USDA. Households from the contiguous US were selected to participate through
a stratified, multistage sampling design. Interviewers visited homes to conduct the main portion
of the interview, in which the main meal planner and food preparer answers questions about
household food either consumed or disposed of over the previous week. Households were contacted
in advance requesting that they maintain records, if necessary, for the prior week’s household food
consumption. Household data were collected on demographics, location, lodging, income, shopping,
usual food expenditure, participation in food programs, and patterns of eating at and away from
home.
The survey asked what each of the household members aged 15 and older were doing most during
the prior week. A follow-up question asked whether those who did not report working performed
any work in the prior week. We code individuals as retired if their response to the first question was
“retired” and their response to the follow-up question was that they did not work at all. Household
members performed 24-hour food recall with the interviewer at the time of the in-home interview.
They were then given two-day food diaries and instructed in their use for completing intake data
for the interview day and the following day. Interviewers later returned one more time to collect the
diaries and provide compensation. Weights were developed to match the population mean values
of household size and 14 characteristics related to household food consumption.

8.3

CSFII 1989-91

The 1989-91 Continuing Survey of Food Intakes by Individuals surveyed Americans on their food
consumption from April of 1989 through March of 1992. The survey was conducted by National
Analysts, Inc. under contract with the USDA. The 1989-91 Diet and Health Knowledge Survey
(DHKS) was administered to household main meal preparers at the same time. A stratified,
multistage sampling design selected households for a main sample and an oversample of low-income
households. Interviewers visited every address in person and attempted to meet with the main meal

40

preparer. A household questionnaire collected data on demographics, location, lodging, income,
shopping, usual food expenditure, participation in food programs, and patterns of eating at and
away from home.
The survey asked what each of the household members aged 15 and older were doing most
during the prior week. A follow-up question asked whether those who did not report working
performed any work in the prior week. We code individuals as retired if their response to the
first question was “retired” and their response to the follow-up question was that they did not
work at all. Household members performed 24-hour food recall with the interviewer at the time
of the in-home interview. They were then given two-day food diaries and instructed in their use
for completing intake data for the interview day and the following day. Interviewers later returned
one more time to collect the diaries and provide compensation. Inverse probability of selection was
computed for each household, then adjusted to account for nonresponse at the area segment level.
This was done individually for basic and low-income samples. The samples were then combined and
weights were adjusted using regression techniques to match a number of population characteristics.

8.4

CSFII 1994-96

The 1994-96 Continuing Survey of Food Intakes by Individuals initially surveyed Americans on their
food consumption initially from the beginning of 1994 through the end of 1996. A later fielding in
1998 sampled only children aged nine or under. The survey was conducted by Westat, Inc. under
contract with the USDA. In each household, one adult who had completed dietary intake data was
surveyed as part of the 1994-96 DHKS. A stratified, multistage sampling design selected households
for a main sample and an oversample of low-income households. Interviewers visited every address
in person and attempted to meet with the main meal preparer. A household questionnaire collected
data on demographics, location, lodging, income, shopping, usual food expenditure, participation
in food programs, and patterns of eating at and away from home.
Household members aged 15 or older were asked if they worked at all in the previous week. If
they did not work and did not report being temporarily absent from work, they were asked the
reason for not working. We code individuals as retired if they did not work during the previous
week and were described as retired when asked for a reason. Household members performed a
41

24-hour food recall with the interviewer at the time of the first in-home interview. A second day
of 24-hour recall data was collected between three and ten days after the first day of recall while
avoiding the same day of the week as the first recall day. In a small number of cases (3% in 1994),
the second day of recall data was collected by telephone. Base weights were calculated as the inverse
of sampling probability, where sampling probability incorporated the probability of selecting the
PSU, the segment, the household, retaining the dwelling, and the probability of selecting a sample
person in the household. Within sample person classes (given by grouping segments by region, MSA
status, percent of the segment that was black or Hispanic, and quarter of operations), weights were
increased to correspond to nonresponse. Weights were then scaled so the sum of weights matched
the March CPS totals within a number of demographic, geographic, timing, and labor force cells.

8.5

NHANES I

The first National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES I) was a detailed study of
the health and dietary intake of Americans conducted by the National Center for Health Statistics
(NCHS) from 1971 to 1975. The target population was the civilian, noninstitutionalized population ages 1 to 74 in the contiguous US, excluding Native American reservations. Low-income
individuals, young children, women of childbearing age, and the elderly were oversampled. Households and sample persons were selected using a stratified, multistage sampling design. Data was
collected using three Mobile Examination Centers (MECs) that moved between stands associated
with primary sampling units over the survey period. The MECs stayed at each stand from three to
six weeks and examined 300 to 600 people. The main dietary and health portion of the survey was
fielded over two 2-year cycles from 1971 to 1974. A subset of respondents aged 25 to 74 completing
the main portion of the survey also completed a more detailed supplemental health examination.
Additional respondents examined in 1974 and 1975 completed only the detailed health examination
and not the dietary survey.
Initial screening was completed and household data were collected during in-home visits. As
part of the household questionnaire, data was collected on the working activity of adults aged 17
and over. Specifically, respondents were coded as working, keeping house, or doing “something
else” over the prior three months. An additional question was asked about those who were doing
42

something else, allowing for these respondents to be reported as retired. Follow-up questions
probed whether respondents participated at all in the labor force during the prior week. We code
individuals as retired if they were reported as being retired and diid not perform any work, have
a job, or look for work during the prior week. If household members were selected for the full
examination, appointments were made for these sample persons to visit the MECs. In addition
to a completing a detailed health examination, sample persons also recorded food intake during
their MEC visits. A small number of respondents provided their intake data when interviewed at
home. Both a 24-hour dietary recall and a food frequency questionnaire were completed by most
respondents. Sampling weights were constructed to account for nonresponse and adjust the sample
to match the US population in age-sex-race groups at the survey midpoint.

8.6

NHANES II

The second National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES II) was a detailed study
of the health and dietary intake of Americans conducted by the NCHS from 1976 to 1980. The
design of the survey was broadly similar to that of NHANES I. Dietary data was collected for all
sample persons and a detailed health questionnaire and examination was completed for those over
the age of 12. The target population was the civilian, noninstitutionalized population of all 50
states between six months and 74 years of age. Children and households living in poverty were
oversampled. Households and sample persons were selected using a stratified, multistage sampling
design. Data was collected using three MECs that moved between stands associated with primary
sampling units over the survey period. The MECs stayed at each stand from four to six weeks and
examined 300 to 600 people.
Initial screening was completed and household data were collected during in-home visits. As
part of the household questionnaire, data was collected on the working activity of adults aged
17 and over. Specifically, respondents were coded as working, keeping house, or doing something
else over the prior twelve months. An additional question was asked about those who were doing
something else, allowing for these respondents to be reported as retired. Follow-up questions probed
whether respondents participated at all in the labor force during the prior two weeks. We code
individuals as retired if they were reported as being retired and did not perform any work, have a
43

job, or look for work during the prior two weeks. If household members were selected for the full
examination, appointments were made for these sample persons to visit the MECs. In addition to
a completing a detailed health examination, sample persons also recorded food intake during their
MEC visits. Both a 24-hour dietary recall and a food frequency questionnaire were completed by
most respondents. Sampling weights were constructed to account for nonresponse and adjust the
sample to match the US population in age-sex-income groups at the survey midpoint.

8.7

NHANES III

The third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III) was a detailed study
of the health and dietary intake of Americans conducted by the NCHS through a contract with
Westat, Inc. from 1988 to 1994. Dietary data was collected for all sample persons and a detailed
health questionnaire and examination was completed for those over the age of 17. The target
population was the civilian, noninstitutionalized population of all 50 states older than two months.
Areas with high shares of black and Mexican-American populations were oversampled, as were
young children and elderly individuals. Households and sample persons were selected using a
stratified, multistage sampling design. The survey was fielded in two three-year phases, allowing
for individual estimates of outcomes for each phase. Data was collected using three MECs that
moved between stands associated with primary sampling units over the survey period. The MECs
stayed at each stand from four to six weeks and examined 300 to 600 people.
Initial screening was completed and household data were collected during in-home visits. Household questionnaires were given and examination appointments were made. As part of the household adult questionnaire, respondents were asked about their labor force status during the prior
12 months. We code respondents as retired if that was the given status and they did not work
during the prior two weeks, did not have a job during the prior two weeks, and were not on layoff
or looking for a job. A food frequency questionnaire was completed by individuals 17 and older in
the home interview. If household members were selected for the full examination, appointments
were made for these sample persons to visit the MECs. A small proportion of individuals were
examined at home. Sample persons provided 24-hour food recall during the MEC visit. In the first
three-year phase, a subset of these respondents aged 50 and older were also eligible to participate
44

in a follow-up telephone 24-hour recall data collection. Base weights were generated from the inverse probability of sampling. These were adjusted for nonresponse, generally by weighting classes
defined by age group, sex, race-ethnicity, income, SMSA residence, and region. Final weights were
further adjusted to match the total population in each age-sex-ethnicity group at the midpoint of
the study.

8.8

Continuous NHANES

The Continuous National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (Continuous NHANES) is a
survey of the health and diet of Americans conducted by the NCHS through a contract with Westat, Inc. It was born out of two-year NHANES cycles starting in 1999. In 2003, the program was
combined with the CSFII to officially become the Continuous NHANES that is ongoing in twoyear cycles as of 2016. Households and sample persons are selected using a stratified, multistage
sampling design for each cycle. Although each individual year is a representative sample of the
population, data is released in two-year cycles because of the imprecise estimates and potential loss
of confidentiality associated with single years of data. Non-Hispanic black persons have always been
oversampled. Low-income white persons have been oversampled since 2000 Mexican-American persons and pregnant women were oversampled in the first four two-year cycles (1999-2006). Hispanic
persons have been oversampled since 2007. Persons aged 70 and over were oversampled in the first
four two-year cycles after which persons aged 80 and over have been oversampled. An oversample
of adolescents aged 12 to19 was discontinued in 2007.
A screener and basic questionnaire are completed as part of initial in-home visits. A randomizing
computer algorithm selects sample persons from household rosters. Sample individuals complete
a questionnaire covering demographic, dietary, socioeconomic, and health topics. A questionnaire
covering consumer behavior has been included since the 2007 survey cycle. Family questionnaires
are given for any family unit including a sampled person. The data do not include a flag for
household head, so we count individuals as household head if their gender, age, education, marital
status, and place of birth match those recorded for the household head. Data on labor force activity
is recorded for respondents aged 16 and over. We code the individuals as retired if the given reason
is retired and the respondent is not working, looking for work, or with a job but absent. Following
45

the in-home interview, selected sample persons make appointments to visit MECs for detailed
examination. Intake data is recorded using a 24-hour recall in the MEC. Since the 2003 survey
cycle, a second recall has been completed over the phone 3 to 10 days after examination. Weights
are calculated by survey cycle and are designed to account for the probability of selection, the rate
of nonresponse, and the differences between the final sample and the total population.

8.9

MRFIT

The Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial for the Prevention of Coronary Heart Disease (MRFIT)
was a randomized controlled trial aimed at studying the effectiveness of counseling men at high risk
for coronary heart disease to change to modifiable risk factors. Screening of potential participants
began in the early 1970s and ultimately produced 12,866 men who appeared to be at high risk for
coronary heart disease but could possibly lower their risk through modified behavior. Nearly half
the sample was assigned to a treatment program, in which they were counseled to follow particular nutritional guidelines, cease smoking, and manage hypertension through weight maintenance
and medication. The remaining participants, the control sample, was instructed to continue any
standard care through their physicians or other providers and were not given specific counseling or
instructions on behavior through the study. We restrict our main analysis to this latter (control)
group.
Individuals in both the treatment and control groups participated in an initial screening as
well as follow-up visits which occurred at annual intervals. At these visits, respondents completed
questionnaires covering various activities and behaviors and also participated in a number of tests
to record biomarker data. At the initial screening, as well as the visits that occur one, two, three,
and six years after program enrollment, participants also completed 24-hour recall questionnaires
covering food consumption during the prior day.
Current retirement status was asked directly at the initial screening visit and the sixth annual
visit. At the initial screening, in response to a question whether the participant holds two or more
jobs, the possible responses are yes, no, and retired. At the sixth annual visit, respondents were
asked to describe their present job status as “working at a job full-time for pay,” “working at a
job part-time for pay,” or “unemployed.” Those who reported “unemployed” were then asked an
46

additional question allowing themselves to report as one of “temporarily laid off,” “temporarily
disabled,” “permanently disabled,” “retired,” or “other.”
We use five health conditions as controls in the analysis: high blood pressure, heart disease,
stroke, diabetes, and cancer. At baseline, participants are asked if a doctor has ever told them that
they have each of these conditions (plus a number of additional conditions). For the remaining
annual visits, participants are asked if a doctor told them in the last twelve months that they
have each condition. We construct a cumulative measure of having been ever told that you have a
condition equals one if participants state that they were affirmatively told they had the condition
at baseline or if they responded yes to being told they had the condition in the last twelve months
either at the current annual visit or at any of the prior annual visits.

47

Table 1: Impact of Retirement on Income and Food Expenditure in Cross-Sectional Data
yi = γRi + Xi β + i
Log Income
Retired

Log Food Expenditure

OLS

2SLS

OLS

2SLS

-0.256

-0.510

-0.081

-0.227

(0.032)

(0.066)

(0.026)

(0.067)

Notes - The expenditure estimation sample is restricted to male heads of household ages 57 to 71 amounting to
4,382 observations from the CSFII 1989-91 and 1994-96, NFCS 1977-78 and 1987-88, and NHANES 2007-12. The
NHANES data are excluded from the income regressions because only categorical income information is available,
as are any respondents from the other surveys that are missing income data. The remaining 2,983 men compose
the income estimation sample. The regressors included in Xi are indicators for black, four education groups, nine
household size groups, five self-reported health groups, and year-by-survey controls. Exact year is not reported in
the public Continous NHANES data, so two-year cycles are used instead. Estimates are generated using sampling
weights. Retirement is instrumented with age dummies in 2SLS regressions. The first stage F statistics are 41.9 for
the income regression and 48.1 for the expenditure regression. Huber/White/sandwich standard errors are clustered
at the survey*PSU level.

Table 2: Impact of Retirement on Caloric Intake in Pooled Cross-Sectional Data
AH
Result
(1)

Adjusted
Replication
(2)

Pooling
Studies
(3)

Dropping Low
Response Studies
(4)

Post-Revision
Studies Only
(5)

-0.048
(0.021)

-0.060
(0.013)

-0.059
(0.015)

-0.047
(0.020)

-0.02
(0.03)

-0.021
(0.047)

-0.175
(0.031)

-0.206
(0.034)

-0.194
(0.048)

2,052

1,654

9,610

8,513

3,429

A. OLS
Retired

B. 2SLS
Retired

N

Notes - The estimation sample is restricted to household heads ages 57 to 71. Each coefficient is estimated from
a different regression of the form of equation (5) with log calories consumed as the dependent variable. Column
(1) shows the result from Table 2 of Aguiar and Hurst (2005) which uses the CSFII 1989-91 and CSFII 1994-94
surveys. Column (2) is our replication of the Aguiar and Hurst result in column (1) using the same survey data
except restricting to male heads of household, weighting the regressions with sampling weights, including the CSFII
1989-94 low-income sample, and omitting the urban, region, and individual health condition indicators used by Aguiar
and Hurst. Column (3) is our estimate using all the cross-sectional datasets discussed in the text. Column (4) uses
the same data as in column (3) except for the NFCS 1987-88 and CSFII 1989-91. Column (5) only uses the CSFII
1994-96 and the Continuous NHANES. The regressors included in Xi are indicators for black, four education groups,
nine household size groups, year-by-survey, and self-reported health status. The 2SLS results use age dummies as
instruments for retirement. The first stage estimates are shown in Figure 1. The first stage F statistics are 42.4, 24.2,
56.4, 48.4, and 24.1 for columns (1) through (5), respectively. In columns (2)-(5), the estimates are generated using
sampling weights and we use Huber/White/sandwich standard errors that are clustered at the survey*PSU level.

Table 3: Impact of Retirement on Caloric Intake in Individual Cross-Sectional Surveys

A. OLS
Retired

B. 2SLS
Retired

N

NHANES
I
(1)

NHANES
II
(2)

NFCS
1977-78
(3)

NFCS
1987-88
(4)

NHANES
III
(5)

CSFII
1989-91
(6)

CSFII
1994-96
(7)

Continuous
NHANES
(8)

-0.172
(0.048)

-0.043
(0.021)

-0.087
(0.020)

-0.090
(0.040)

-0.050
(0.030)

-0.039
(0.036)

-0.059
(0.024)

-0.044
(0.023)

-0.180
(0.087)

-0.237
(0.050)

-0.203
(0.035)

0.030
(0.088)

-0.221
(0.077)

0.034
(0.073)

-0.089
(0.059)

-0.205
(0.055)

570

1,938

1,181

490

1,395

607

1,047

2,382

Notes - The estimation sample is restricted to male household heads ages 57 to 71. The regressors included in Xi
are indicators for black, four education groups, nine household size groups, year-by-survey, and self-reported health
status. The 2SLS results use age dummies as instruments for retirement. The first stage estimates are shown in
Figure 1. The first stage F statistics are 24.2, 28.1, 30.3, 13.2, 19.5, 13.0, 23.5, and 18.5 for columns (1) through
(8), respectively. The estimates are generated using sampling weights. Huber/White/sandwich standard errors are
clustered at the survey*PSU level.

Table 4: Impact of Retirement on Nutrient Intake in Cross-Sectional Data
Surveys Used:

All Surveys Except
NFCS 87-88 and
CSFII 89-91
(1)
(2)

Both Waves
of CSFII
(3)
(4)

Log Calories

-0.206
(0.034)

Log Vitamin A

0.068
(0.082)

0.215
(0.080)

0.366
(0.130)

0.383
(0.117)

Log Vitamin C

0.122
(0.099)

0.276
(0.097)

0.328
(0.120)

0.348
(0.105)

Log Vitamin E

-0.174
(0.078)

-0.009
(0.072)

0.108
(0.090)

0.131
(0.072)

Log Calcium

-0.080
(0.045)

0.088
(0.040)

0.048
(0.076)

0.067
(0.059)

Log Cholesterol

-0.192
(0.064)

-0.026
(0.060)

-0.061
(0.073)

-0.042
(0.066)

Log Saturated Fat

-0.236
(0.059)

-0.043
(0.039)

-0.119
(0.064)

-0.094
(0.044)

Log Protein

-0.189
(0.036)

-0.038
(0.028)

-0.082
(0.051)

-0.065
(0.031)

No

Yes

No

Yes

Calories Control?

-0.021
(0.047)

Notes - Each point estimate shown is the estimated coefficient on the retired indicator from a separate 2SLS regression
of equation (5) using age dummies as instruments for retirement. The estimation sample is restricted to male
household heads ages 57 to 71. Not all nutrients are observed in all surveys in columns (1) and (2), so some outcomes
are estimated using restricted samples. In particular, Vitamin E and Saturated Fat are not recorded in NHANES
I, NHANES II, or NFCS 1977-78. Cholesterol is also not recorded in NFCS 1977-78. Accordingly, while the sample
size for most outcomes in columns (1) and (2) is 8,513, the sample size for Log Vitamin E and Log Saturated Fat
is 4,824, and the sample size for Log Cholesterol is 7,328. The sample is consistently 1,654 across all outcomes in
columns (3) and (4). The regressors included in Xi are indicators for black, four education groups, nine household
size groups, year-by-survey, and self-reported health status. The first stage F statistics for column (1) are 48.4 for
most outcomes, but are 29.1 for Log Vitamin E and Log Saturated Fat and 40.7 for Log Cholesterol. For the column
(2) estimates, first stage F statistics are 47.9 for most outcomes, but are 29.0 for Log Vitamin E and Log Saturated
Fat and 40.3 for Log Cholesterol. The first stage F statistics are all 24.2 for column (3) and 24.6 for column (4).
The estimates are generated using sampling weights. Huber/White/sandwich standard errors are clustered at the
survey*PSU level.

Table 5: Impact of Retirement on Income and Caloric Intake in MRFIT
A. Cross-Sectional Analysis
yi = γRi + Xi β + i
OLS
Outcome:
Log Income
Log Caloric Intake

2SLS

-0.212

-0.584

(0.025)

(0.094)

-0.020

-0.389

(0.025)

(0.084)

B. Longitudinal Analysis
∆yit = γRit + ∆Xit β + eit
OLS
2SLS
Outcome:
Log Income
-0.231
-0.492
Log Caloric Intake

(0.028)

(0.107)

-0.016

-0.174

(0.025)

(0.097)

Notes - The sample is restricted to individuals from the control sample ages 47 and older at the initial visit. The
income and caloric intake regressions use 2,532 and 2,609 observations, respectively. The standard errors are clustered
at the clinic level (22 clinics). Retirement is instrumented with age dummies in 2SLS regressions. Panel A: The crosssectional analysis of MRFIT uses observations in the second wave which is six years after baseline. All cross-sectional
regressions include indicators for married, black, and four education categories. The health controls included in the
caloric intake regressions are indicators for high blood pressure, heart disease, stroke, diabetes, and cancer. Panel
B: The longitudinal analysis of MRFIT examines changes between the baseline period and the observation six years
later. All first difference regressions include the change in the indicator for married. The health controls used in the
caloric intake regressions are changes in indicators for high blood pressure, heart disease, stroke, diabetes, and cancer.

Table 6: Impact of Retirement on a Food Intake Index, 2SLS Estimates
Consumption Index:
bAH
ln C
(1)

bST
ln C
(2)

A. Full Specification

-0.006
(0.024)
[0.025]

-0.078
(0.040)
[0.044]

B. One W , One C

-0.010
(0.003)
[0.004]

-0.097
(0.025)
[0.027]

C. Full W , One C

-0.048
(0.013)
[0.014]

-0.097
(0.025)
[0.027]

D. One W , Full C

0.001
(0.021)
[0.021]

-0.078
(0.040)
[0.044]

Notes - Each point estimate is an estimated coefficient on a retirement indicator from a separate 2SLS regression
with a consumption index as the dependent variable and age indicators as the excluded instruments. All regressions
also include indicators for male, black, four education groups, nine household size groups, year, urban residency, and
Census region. The sample for these regressions is 2,052 household heads ages 57 to 71 from the CSFII 1989-91
and CSFII 1994-96, the composition of which is discussed in detail Aguiar and Hurst (2005). The construction of
the dependent variables is detailed in Section 5. The regressions of permanent income on consumption categories,
using equation (8), are estimated on a sample of 2,961 full-time employed household heads ages 25 to 55 which
is five fewer observations than are used by Aguiar and Hurst (2005). This discrepancy is due to the dropping of
five household heads with zero income such that there are identical samples used in columns (1) and (2); column
(1) would be exactly the same to the third decimal place if these observations were included. Standard errors in
parentheses are generated by 1000 repetitions of a bootstrap stratified by survey and clustered at the level of primary
sampling unit. Standard errors in brackets are generated by 1000 repititions of an unstratified, unclustered bootstrap.

Table 7: Impact of Unemployment on Intake, 2SLS Estimates

Log Expenditure
bAH
Log ln C
bST
Log ln C

Unweighted
(1)

Weighted
(2)

-0.187
(0.034)
-0.053
(0.011)
-0.133
(0.025)

-0.146
(0.063)
-0.013
(0.018)
-0.045
(0.035)

Notes - Each point estimate is an estimated coefficient on a retirement indicator from a separate 2SLS regression
with a consumption index as the dependent variable and age indicators as the excluded instruments. All regressions
also include indicators for sex, black, four education categories, nine household size groups, and Census region. The
construction of the indices in rows two and three is described in section 5 and the notes for Table 6. The sample for
all regressions is 3,874 household heads ages 25 to 55 from the CSFII 1989-91 and CSFII 1994-96 who report either
full-time employment in actual hours or report being unemployed and looking for a job. The first two point estimates
in column (1) replicate results reported in Aguiar and Hurst (2005). Estimates in column (2) are generated using
CSFII sample weights. Huber/White/sandwich standard errors are reported in parentheses for the Log Expenditure
regressions. Standard errors reported in parentheses for the index regressions are generated by 1000 repetitions of a
bootstrap stratified by survey and clustered at the level of primary sampling unit.

57

57

57

59

59

59

63

65

65

63
Age

65

CSFII 1989-91 [13.0]

63

NFCS 1977-78 [30.3]

61

61

61

All [56.4]

67

67

67

69

69

69

71

71

71

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

57

57

57

59

59

59

65

63

65

63

Age

65

CSFII 1994-96 [23.5]

61

61

63

67

67

67

NFCS 1987-88 [13.2]

61

NHANES I (1971-75) [24.2]

69

69

69

71

71

71

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

-0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

-0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

57

57

57

59

59

59

63

65

67

63

65

67

61

63

Age

65

67

NHANES 1999-2012 [18.5]

61

NHANES III (1988-94) [19.5]

61

NHANES II (1976-80) [28.1]

69

69

69

71

71

71

Notes - Each panel shows the estimated coefficients from first-stage regressions of the form of equation (6) for a different sample used in the 2SLS crosssectional caloric intake regressions reported in Table 3. The solid line in each panel shows the estiamted coefficients on the excluded instruments: age
indicators for each age from 58 to 71, with age 57 serving as the omitted group. The dashed lines are 95 percent confidence intervals calculated from
Huber/White/sandwich variance estimation clustered at the survey*PSU level. These regressions also include indicators for black, four education groups,
nine household size groups, year-by-survey, and self-reported health status, all of which are included as controls in the second stage regressions. The F
statistics on the excluded instruments are displayed in brackets in the title for each panel.

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Figure 1: First Stage Estimates

Average Calories

Average Calories

47

52

72

77

80+

47

52

80+

47
52
57
62
Age range midpoint

67

72

77

80+

1000
42

1000

37

1500

1500

32

2000

3000

2000

27

slope 57-71=-5.8

2500

22

3500

2500

3000

3500

22

27

27

32

32

37

37

42

42

47

52

57

47

52

62

67

57

67

47
52
57
62
Age range midpoint

67

slope 57-71=-19.5

62

slope 57-71=3.1

N= 5,056

22

42

CSFII 1994-96

67

77

37

N= 4,218

62

72

32

CSFII 1989-91

57

1000
42

1000

37

1500

1500

32

2000

2000

27

2500

2500

slope 57-71=-33.5
3000

22

3500

3000

3500

27

N= 3,107

22

NFCS 1987-88

67

N= 6,963

62

slope 57-71=-19.0

NFCS 1977-78

57

1000
42

1000

37

1500

1500

32

2000

2000

27

2500

2500

22

3000

slope 57-71=-39.1

3500

N= 6,321

N= 2,745

3000

3500

NHANES I (1971-75)

HFCS 1965-66

72

72

72

77

77

77

80+

80+

80+

Figure 2: Age Profiles of Caloric Intake for Men

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

3500

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

3500

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

3500

22

22

22

27

27

27

32

32

32

37

37

37

47

52

57

62

47

52

57

62

42

67

47
52
57
62
Age range midpoint

67

slope 57-71=-29.4

N=16,838

NHANES 1999-2012

42

67

slope 57-71=-26.2

N= 7,784

NHANES III (1988-94)

42

slope 57-71=-24.5

N= 5,613

NHANES II (1976-80)

72

72

72

77

77

77

80+

80+

80+

Notes - Means are generated using single-day data for all men appearing in each survey. The darker, solid line in each panel shows mean caloric intake by
age for the indicated survey. Xs mark age ranges used in the retirement analysis. The lighter, dashed line shows mean caloric intake across all surveys and
is identical across panels. We use sampling weights and group ages into into five-year ranges. Reported slope for each panel is the coefficient estimate from
a regression of calories on a linear age term only using respondents ages 57 to 71 in each survey.

Average Calories

0.0

0.2

0.4

Quantile

0.6

Quantile IV Estimates

0.8

1.0

Note: These estimates are generated using male heads of household from the pooled sample of cross-sectional surveys excluding those with low response
rates. This sample matches the sample used to produce the results appearing in column 4 of Table 2. The controls also match those used to produce those
results.

Quantile

-0.40
1.0

-0.40
0.8

-0.30

-0.30

0.6

-0.20

-0.20

0.4

-0.10

-0.10

0.2

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.10

0.10

Quantile Estimates

Figure 3: Quantile Effects of Retirement on Caloric Intake

0.26
0.20
0.25

0.24
0.34
0.18
0.06
0.40
2,127
9,610

Education:
HS Grad
Some College
College Grad

Self-Reported Health:
Very Good
Good
Fair
Poor

Retired
Calories
N

0.36
1,925
570

0.23
0.32
0.23
0.08

0.24
0.09
0.10

63.0
0.08
2.36

NHANES
I
(2)

0.34
1,990
1,938

0.21
0.30
0.23
0.12

0.24
0.12
0.12

63.3
0.08
2.30

NHANES
II
(3)

0.41
2,064
1,181

0.00
0.48
0.23
0.09

0.29
0.13
0.12

63.4
0.09
2.39

NFCS
1977-78
(4)

0.37
1,926
490

0.25
0.33
0.20
0.04

0.35
0.13
0.20

63.7
0.05
2.41

NFCS
1987-88
(5)

0.45
2,180
1,395

0.24
0.33
0.19
0.07

0.29
0.14
0.21

63.7
0.08
2.32

NHANES
III
(6)

0.49
1,892
607

0.25
0.34
0.19
0.05

0.35
0.13
0.26

64.1
0.11
2.27

CSFII
1989-91
(7)

0.55
2,059
1,047

0.29
0.34
0.15
0.05

0.35
0.17
0.25

63.8
0.09
2.33

CSFII
1994-96
(8)

0.38
2,239
2,382

0.27
0.32
0.17
0.05

0.23
0.26
0.32

63.3
0.09
2.18

Continuous
NHANES
(9)

excluded education and health categories are high school dropout and excellent, respectively.

Notes - The sample is restricted to male household heads from ages 57 to 71. Sample weights are used to compute the statistics shown in the table. The

63.4
0.09
2.26

Age
Black
Hhld Size

Pooled
Studies
(1)

Table A1: Summary Statistics

Table A2: Dietary Intake Survey Response Rates
Household
Response Ratea

Individual Day 1
Response Rateb

Average Male
Caloric Intake

HFCS 1965-66

85

81

2,536

NFCS 1977-78

61

57

2,280

NFCS 1987-88

34

31

2,119

CSFII 1989-91

67

58

2,202

CSFII 1994-96

85

80

2,445

NHANES I (1971-75)

99

74

2,308

NHANES II (1976-80)

91

73

2,371

NHANES III (1988-94)

86

78

2,654

73 to 84

70 to 80

2,593

Survey

Continuing NHANES
(1999-2012)
a
b

For NHANES, this column reports the response rate to the in-home interview.

For NHANES, this column reports the response rate to mobile exam which includes the 24 hour recall interview.

Notes - The individual response rates shown are unconditional, i.e., they are the product of the household response
rate and the conditional individual response rate to the first day food intake instrument given that the household
participates in the survey.

First day caloric intake averages shown in the final column are restricted to men

ages 25-75 due to an upper age limit in some NHANES surveys and are calculated using sampling weights.
HFCS 1965-66 response rates reported by Reese (1977).

NFCS 1977-78 and NHANES I, II, and III response

rates reported by Interagency Board for Nutrition Monitoring and Related Research (2000).

NFCS 1987-88

response rates reported by US GAO (1991). CSFII 1989-91 response rates reported by Tippett et al. (1995).
CSFII 1994-96 response rates reported by USDA-ARS (1997). Continuing NHANES response rates sourced from
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/response_rates_cps.htm.

Table A3: First Stage Estimates for MRFIT
Cross-Sectional
Analysis
Age=54
Age=55
Age=56
Age=57
Age=58
Age=59
Age=60
Age=61
Age=62
Age=63
Age=64
F statistic

Longitudinal
Analysis

0.014

0.016

(0.014)

(0.014)

0.027

0.029

(0.012)

(0.013)

0.060

0.059

(0.015)

(0.015)

0.040

0.043

(0.016)

(0.016)

0.085

0.092

(0.028)

(0.029)

0.115

0.120

(0.020)

(0.020)

0.150

0.155

(0.032)

(0.031)

0.161

0.165

(0.038)

(0.037)

0.254

0.257

(0.042)

(0.041)

0.312

0.320

(0.039)

(0.041)

0.391

0.406

(0.096)

(0.095)

23.3

24.7

Notes - The sample is restricted to individuals from the control sample from MRFIT who are ages 47 and older
at the initial visit. The standard errors are clustered at the clinic level (22 clinics). See the notes to Table 5 for
information on the additional regressors included in the analysis.

