                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE POLITICAL BOUNDARIES OF ETHNIC DIVISIONS

                                       Samuel Bazzi
                                      Matthew Gudgeon

                                      Working Paper 24625
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24625


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2018




We thank Eli Berman, Chris Blattman, Monica Martinez-Bravo, Ruben Enikolopov, Claudio
Ferraz, Thiemo Fetzer, Jeremy Magruder, Stelios Michalopoulos, Ted Miguel, Dilip Mookherjee,
Ben Olken, Gerard Padro-i-Miguel, Debraj Ray, Enrico Spolaore, Mathias Thoenig, Oliver
Vanden Eynde, as well as seminar participants at the NBER Political Economy Summer Institute
meeting, the NBER Economics of National Security Winter meeting, UC Berkeley, Stanford
SITE, Georgetown, Boston University, the BREAD/NBER pre-conference meeting, NEUDC,
PacDev, University of Arkansas, ESOC, and ABCDE for helpful comments. Gudgeon is grateful
to the Weiss Family Program Fund for financial support. We thank Ben Olken, Monica Martinez-
Bravo, Andreas Stegmann, Jan Pierskalla, Audrey Sacks, and the Indonesian National Violence
Monitoring System for sharing data. Andrea Adhi and Gedeon Lim provided excellent research
assistance. All errors remain ours. A previous version of this paper circulated under the title,
“Local Government Proliferation, Diversity, and Conflict.” The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Samuel Bazzi and Matthew Gudgeon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Political Boundaries of Ethnic Divisions
Samuel Bazzi and Matthew Gudgeon
NBER Working Paper No. 24625
May 2018
JEL No. D72,D74,H41,H77,O12,Q34

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper argues that redrawing subnational political boundaries can transform ethnic divisions.
We use a natural policy experiment in Indonesia to show how the effects of ethnic diversity on
conflict depend on the political units within which groups are organized. Redistricting along
group lines can reduce conflict, but these gains are undone or even reversed when the new
borders introduce greater polarization. These adverse effects of polarization are further amplified
around majoritarian elections, consistent with strong incentives to capture new local governments
in settings with ethnic favoritism. Overall, our findings illustrate the promise and pitfalls of
redistricting in diverse countries.


Samuel Bazzi
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
sbazzi@bu.edu

Matthew Gudgeon
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Rd.
Boston, MA 02215
mgudgeon@bu.edu




An online appendix is available at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24625
1    Introduction
Ethnic divisions are a persistent source of instability in diverse countries. Interethnic tensions are widely
associated with weak public goods provision and conflict (Alesina et al., 1999; Esteban et al., 2012; Mon-
talvo and Reynal-Querol, 2005). With few exceptions, though, the longstanding literature on diversity
offers mostly fatalistic conclusions, leaving policymakers with little insight on how to ameliorate ethnic
divisions. This paper investigates the promise and pitfalls of one potential policy option: redrawing
subnational boundaries.
    Changing political boundaries can transform ethnic divisions by changing the incentives for group
mobilization. If political control is a key source of interethnic contestation, then changes in the com-
position of the electorate could affect violence. Pioneering work on ethnicity and conflict recognized
this possibility (Horowitz, 1985), but it is has not yet been tested empirically. The global proliferation
of administrative units over the last 30 years of decentralization offers a unique opportunity to do so.
This massive wave of redistricting constitutes perhaps the largest shift in the locus of politics since the
creation of new nation states after World War II.1
    The key contribution of this paper is to show that political boundaries endogenously determine
whether ethnic diversity causes instability. We exploit a natural policy experiment in Indonesia to es-
timate the effects of redistricting on social conflict. Where feasible, creating homogenous new political
units reduces violence. Yet, in practice, redistricting along group lines is rarely so simple and may in-
stead foster new divisions.2 We show that the potential gains in stability are often undone and even
reversed in areas where new group divisions become salient and polarizing. These boundary-induced
changes in ethnic divisions necessarily change the way different groups interact and compete for polit-
ical relevance. In newly polarized settings, we find that the ensuing majoritarian electoral contests to
control valuable public resources further amplify incentives for violence and may lead to fresh cycles of
conflict beyond the first few years after redistricting.
    Indonesia offers a rich setting to study changes in ethnic divisions. First, like many other new democ-
racies, political violence remains a major policy concern (Butcher and Goldsmith, 2017). After the fall
of a highly centralized, authoritarian regime, many feared the diverse country would break apart as
local conflicts tore at ethnic, religious, and regional seams. These large-scale internecine conflicts have
subsided, replaced by more sporadic outbursts of low-intensity social conflict and recurring electoral
violence. Amplified by decentralization, ethnic mobilization around elections and political patronage
are pervasive.3 Meanwhile, institutional constraints on violence remain relatively weak. While distinct
from civil wars, these outbreaks of local conflict may accumulate over time and also exert lasting adverse
effects by eroding trust in the political process (Dercon and Gutiérrez-Romero, 2012), by undermining
1
  Grossman and Lewis (2014) document the global pervasiveness of this phenomenon across all levels of administration. For ex-
  ample, from 1990 to 2010, Nigerian states increased from 22 to 37, Ugandan districts from 34 to 112, and Kenyan districts from
  47 to 70. Czechoslovakia and Hungary increased their municipalities by 50 percent from 1989 to 1993. Brazilian municipalities
  increased from 3,974 in 1980 to 5,560 in 2000. Vietnam increased its provinces from 40 to 64 from 1996 to 2003.
2
  Consider a stylized case where two minority groups break away to form their own district. Previously pitted together against
  a larger majority, these two groups now face fresh incentives for conflict in the newly polarized district.
3
  Aspinall (2011, p. 298) notes that, “Since the introduction of direct local government head elections, there has been a shift in
  favor of alignment between the ethnic identity of local government heads and the local populations they govern. Electoral
  winners tend to be drawn from the largest ethnic group in the district or province.” We provide further qualitative context
  in Appendix D.1, which also shows that greater diversity within newly created district boundaries is associated with closer
  elections and stronger individual preferences for politicians’ ethnicities and patronage.


                                                                1
local institutions (Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013), by weakening social capital and deepening
ethnic cleavages (Dower et al., 2017; Rohner et al., 2013a), and by planting the seeds for more serious,
future conflict (Rohner et al., 2013b).
    Second, the Indonesian context allows us to overcome a host of endogeneity and measurement chal-
lenges typically associated with identifying the effects of changing political boundaries. Decentraliza-
tion reforms beginning in the late 1990s led to a dramatic increase in the number of district governments
across the archipelago from 302 in 1999 to 514 in 2014 (see Figures 1 and 2). Motivated by a desire to
reduce sociopolitical tensions, the central government created a very favorable environment for such
redistricting.4 This allows us to rule out first order concerns about strategic violence aimed at achieving
or preventing certain types of partitions. Moreover, we show that an abrupt centrally-imposed morato-
rium between 2004 and 2006 generates plausibly exogenous variation in the timing of redistricting across
locations.5 We exploit this staggered process in a generalized difference-in-difference (DiD) framework.
    Using universal Population Census data from 2000, we measure how homogenized the new, smaller
districts are relative to the original district based on the same, initial populations. Indonesia is home to
over 1,000 self-identified ethnic groups, allowing us to distinguish two key measures in the literature:
fractionalization and polarization. Ethnic fractionalization (F ), which captures the likelihood of meeting
someone outside your group, declines substantially on average at the original district level. However,
some of the newly drawn borders encompass fewer, large groups, thereby increasing ethnic polarization
(P ), which also captures differences in preferences across groups proxied by language. Indeed, while
homogenization was an objective of redistricting in many areas, policy constraints directly limited the
feasible changes in diversity. We isolate these constraints to show that the cross-district variation in
feasible redistricting schemes drives the changes in diversity and conflict.
    We estimate the effects of these changes in ethnopolitical boundaries on conflict using new data de-
veloped by the Indonesian National Violence Monitoring System. Based on systematic coding of print
newspaper archives, the data capture over 230,000 violent incidents at a high spatial and temporal fre-
quency from 2000 to 2014. While limited initially to high-conflict regions, these data offer more com-
prehensive coverage than other sources for Indonesia and rival some of the best geospatial event-based
sources in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia (e.g., ACLED) in terms of depth and detail.6 Reported vio-
lent events include, among others, attempts to influence the allocation of resources and express popular
dissatisfaction with local governance (Barron et al., 2014). Vigilantism and public mobilization along
ethnic lines are common (Wilson, 2015) as is strategic violence around elections (Harish and Toha, 2017).
    Despite policymakers’ goals, redistricting does not change the average incidence of social conflict.
This somewhat surprising finding can be explained by heterogeneous changes in ethnic divisions. Re-
ductions in conflict in newly homogenous units are offset by increases in newly polarized units. Our
estimates suggest that political boundaries can explain around half of the endogenous long-run correla-
tion between ethnic polarization and conflict in the cross-section. These changes arise in both the parent

4
  Mietzner (2014, p. 62) notes that decentralization “was designed to secure the long-term survival of the nation-state by rec-
  onciling the regions with a capital that had systematically undermined their local identities since the 1950s.” And Aspinall
  (2013, p. 39) notes that the policy “rationale for creating a new district out of an old one is to provide an administrative home
  for a local ethnic or sub-ethnic group that lives in a concentrated area and to ameliorate tension with other groups.”
5
  We build upon Burgess et al. (2012) who use similar variation in their study of deforestation externalities due to redistricting.
6
  The overlap of split districts with the violence data introduces sample size limitations that we address, but the Indonesian
  setting is perhaps the best available to credibly identify the effects of changes in political boundaries on conflict.


                                                                2
district, which retains the original seat of government, and the child district, which acquires a new local
government and capital (see Figure 3 for an example). Robustness checks, including a machine learning
approach to selecting controls, rule out numerous other confounding effects of redistricting and changes
in media attention. Overall, the abrupt reconfiguration of the diverse electorate gives rise to fresh incen-
tives for violence that are amplified in polarized settings.
   These border-induced changes in ethnic divisions may have persistent effects on conflict as a result
of political cycles. Violence ratchets up around the first mayoral elections, particularly where they are
closely contested. New ethnic divisions, and polarization in particular, exacerbate violence around these
majoritarian elections, especially in child districts where the stakes are high given the fundamental role
of the initial administration in establishing the new government and its first budget. We see no such
amplification around parliamentary elections, which is consistent with incentives for violence differing
under proportional representation. Moreover, this amplification effect persists into the next mayoral
election five years later and also drives violence in intervening periods, pointing to new cycles of polit-
ical conflict. The more pronounced cycles in child districts are consistent with differences in the scale
of changes in contestable public resources but may also point to nascent differences in local state capac-
ity. Ethnic favoritism helps rationalize electoral violence and perpetuate grievances, a mechanism we
validate using nighttime light intensity to capture village-level changes in access to publicly-provided
electricity after redistricting.
   Our results line up nicely with case studies in Indonesia. In Section 6.3, we discuss a case of re-
districting in West Kalimantan that illustrates how border-induced changes in ethnic divisions affect
conflict. Diprose (2009) offers similar insights on Central Sulawesi as do Nolan et al. (2014) on Papua,
noting that “local elections in relatively new districts can exacerbate existing social fault lines.” With a
bottom-up approach to redistricting, it is sometimes difficult for local parties to foresee all the complex
new divisions that might arise with new borders. Wilson (2015, p. 33) nicely summarizes the Indone-
sian context, arguing that redistricting “created confusion regarding lines of authority” and “involved
renegotiating the boundaries of collective identities” as “local government bureaucratic precincts were
altered, and some networks of resource distribution that relied upon state agents were disrupted or ex-
cluded by these shifting boundaries.” As a result, “ethnic identities have been politicised as clientilistic
networks. . . mobilising support along communal lines.” Of course, conflict is by no means a foregone
conclusion. However, by localizing political contestation, redistricting may make it easier to solve col-
lective action problems that might otherwise forestall violence.
   Similar findings may be at play outside Indonesia as well. In Uganda, for example, Green (2008)
argues descriptively that “the huge expansion in the number of new districts has led to local-level con-
flict by altering relations between local ethnic groups.” Although dramatic, the wave of redistricting we
study is comparable in scale and purpose to efforts across sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, and Eastern Europe
(see Grossman and Lewis, 2014; Grossman et al., 2017). A small but growing political science literature
examines this process, documenting similar institutional underpinnings (see Pierskalla, 2016a, for a sur-
vey). In diverse countries, as in Indonesia, the resulting shift in the locus of politics can fundamentally
change relevant group boundaries. How these changes affect incentives for conflict is very much an
open question to which the Indonesian setting is uniquely well suited to answer.

Related Literature.      This paper makes several contributions to the political economy literature. Our

                                                     3
central contribution is to show that subnational borders can reshape the ethnic divisions underlying
conflict. We argue that the ethnic divisions underlying widely-used diversity measures are neither fixed
nor exogenous and instead depend on the political boundaries within which groups are organized. Case
studies as well as lab and survey experiments across Africa find that interethnic preferences are context-
dependent (Berge et al., 2015; Eifert et al., 2010; Habyarimana et al., 2007; Lowes et al., 2015; Posner,
2004), and Blouin and Mukand (forthcoming) and Yanagizawa-Drott (2014) show that public media can
manipulate these preferences. We show that subnational boundaries are a policy choice that can change
ethnic cleavages by reorienting which groups are relevant to one’s own.7 While prior literature has
recognized this political endogeneity of ethnic divisions (see Fearon, 2006; Posner, 2017), we provide
the first empirical test using border changes. Our findings highlight important policy tradeoffs and
demonstrate how majoritarian elections may exacerbate the new ethnic divisions.
    More generally, we offer policy lessons that go beyond the otherwise pessimistic conclusions from
the literature on diversity and conflict. Alesina et al. (2011) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2016)
identify adverse long-run effects of colonial partitioning of ethnic groups across national borders. Al-
though infeasible to undo most national borders, within-country redistricting may change the equilib-
rium relationship between diversity and conflict. Amodio and Chiovelli (forthcoming) also study equi-
librium changes but focused on geographic mobility, showing that abrupt, migration-induced changes
in local polarization exacerbate conflict in post-Apartheid South Africa. Our effect sizes are smaller. This
is intuitive because their results are based on changes in the underlying population, which introduces
new groups and non-ethnic divisions (e.g., immigrant–native). By comparison, redistricting holds the
local population fixed and instead reorients the relevant group divisions within new boundaries. This is
important from a policy perspective given that redistricting is typically more feasible than resettlement.
    Furthermore, we provide a rich context to identify which configurations of diversity stoke lower-
intensity political conflict. Esteban and Ray (2011a) show that in conflict over public goods (e.g., political
power), polarization should be relatively more important than fractionalization as polarization captures
differences in intergroup preferences and the strength of in-group ties.8 Esteban et al. (2012) provide
supportive cross-country evidence using proxies for the relative publicness of resources within countries.
Redistricting and local government proliferation offer a more precise public resource shock. We find that
polarization matters relatively more than fractionalization, particularly in child districts, where new
government institutions are being formed and elections are being held for the first time. We explicitly
link polarization to violence around majoritarian elections but not proportional-representation elections,
a distinction in line with predictions in Esteban and Ray (2008b). These results help clarify both the
type of conflict and the type of diversity that might matter in new democracies undergoing similar
decentralization processes.

7
  In this respect, our identification strategy is somewhat akin to Hjort (2014) who uses the random assignment of workers
  to ethnically mixed teams to understand how diversity shapes productivity in a flower plant in Kenya around a period of
  national interethnic strife. Hence, our notion of time-varying diversity is distinct from variation due to migration or differential
  mortality and fertility, which may be confounded with a host of other factors whose effects on conflict are of separate interest.
8
  Spolaore and Wacziarg (2017) make similar points in a related setup with the additional insight that contests over rival goods
  may be more likely between groups with similar preferences, a prediction borne out empirically when examining international
  conflict, which typically involves contestation of private resources such as oil (Caselli et al., 2015; Spolaore and Wacziarg,
  2016). Other models of conflict emphasize the conditions giving rise to mobilization along ethnic as opposed to other group
  lines (e.g., Caselli and Coleman, 2013; Esteban and Ray, 2008a, 2011b). Consistent with some of these predictions, our results
  highlight the important role of ethnic markers in mobilizing around newly contestable local politics.


                                                                  4
      Finally, our results suggest that the growing number of studies exploiting subnational variation in
diversity should use spatial boundaries at levels of aggregation that are outcome-relevant.9 This echoes
recent work arguing that local diversity can have different effects than diversity at the aggregate, coun-
try level given the different nature of interaction within and between jurisdictions (Alesina and Zhu-
ravskaya, 2011; Desmet et al., 2016; Montalvo and Reynal-Querol, 2017).

Roadmap.          Section 2 details the context of decentralization and district proliferation in Indonesia.
Section 3 presents motivating evidence on diversity and conflict and a conceptual framework showing
how redistricting can reshape ethnic divisions. Section 4 proposes measures of border-induced changes
in diversity and presents the new conflict data. Section 5 develops the empirical strategy and presents
core results. Section 6 identifies electoral mechanisms linking the changing ethnic divisions to new
conflict dynamics. Section 7 concludes with a discussion of policy implications and future research.


2     Background: Local Government Proliferation
The number of districts in Indonesia increased by nearly 70 percent over a 15 year period. This back-
ground section details the central role districts play in government, key features of the redistricting
process, and the fundamental changes in the scope of government that follow. For reference, Appendix
Figure A.1 provides a timeline of key events discussed below.


2.1     Decentralization and the Transfer of Power to District Governments

Indonesia has four main tiers of government. The largest tier is the province, of which there were 34 in
2014. Provinces are divided into districts known as kabupaten in rural areas and kota in urban areas. In
2014, there were 514 districts. Districts are in turn divided into 7,094 subdistricts (kecamatan), which are
further subdivided into more than 80,000 villages, the smallest unit of government.
      The resignation of President Suharto in May 1998 ushered in a wave of decentralization reforms that
shifted the balance of power away from the central government and provinces and towards the districts.
Effective January 2001, districts assumed responsibility for nearly all public policy with the exception
of the few areas naturally reserved for the central government (e.g., foreign affairs, fiscal and monetary
policy). Accordingly, districts assumed extensive decision-making power over local expenditures.
      District heads or mayors, known as bupati and walikota, supervise the budget process, amalgamating
spending requests from lower levels of government and submitting the final budget to local parliament
for approval. The district executive plays a significantly larger role than local parliament in determining
the composition and allocation of public goods (see Lewis, 2017b; Martinez-Bravo et al., 2017).10 While

9
 As better data on subnational diversity become available (e.g., Gershman and Rivera, 2016), it is tempting to take the analysis
 to increasingly granular geography. This might be appropriate for questions about intergroup contact and preferences but
 perhaps less appropriate for studying conflict if the resources being contested are determined and allocated at higher levels
 of administration. This is in line with the warning by Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2017) regarding the modifiable areal
 unit problem (MAUP) in the use of spatial data where results depend on the level of aggregation.
10
   Mayors also appoint all subdistrict heads beginning in 2004 and have long appointed village heads in urban areas (Martinez-
   Bravo, 2014). These local officials play important roles in local public goods provision by navigating relations with the district
   government where the resources initially flow from the center (see, e.g., Section 6.2 on electricity). They also play an important
   role in mobilizing voters around elections, effectively greasing the patronage politics discussed in Section 3.


                                                                 5
parliamentarians remain important, they tend to be less individually accountable than mayors and more
beholden to national party politics than to the local population (Lewis, 2017a).
      Major electoral reforms also accompanied decentralization. Previously appointed by the central gov-
ernment, district heads were now elected via majority vote by members of the local parliament, who
were in turn popularly elected according to a closed-list proportional representation system. Democracy
deepened further in 2005 as district heads and their running mates were now directly elected via plu-
rality/majority voting. Given the power of the district executive, these quinquennial mayoral elections,
which occur at different times across districts, are a focal point of local political contestation.11


2.2     Creating New Districts

Until the late 1990s, district boundaries were relatively stable (Booth, 2011). Many boundaries origi-
nated under colonial rule when the Dutch used local leaders for indirect rule. In practice, these admin-
istrative divisions spanned large swathes of territory with many different groups (Cribb, 2013). Post-
independence, new districts arose with the goal of uniform population (Charras, 2005). However, due to
imbalances in population density across islands, many districts continued to span large areas and mul-
tiple ethnic homelands. These expansive, arbitrary (post-)colonial boundaries remained largely in place
until the fall of Suharto, when subsequent governments facilitated dramatic redrawing of the district
map. The number of districts ballooned from 302 in 1999 to 514 in 2014 (see Figure 1) through a process
known colloquially as pemekaran or blossoming.

Redistricting Process.         Subdistricts break off from their original district to create new districts. After a
split, the original district is divided in (at least) two: The single parent district contains the original district
name and capital with pre-existing institutions. The child district(s) receives a new name, capital, district
head, parliament, and government apparatus. Figure 3 provides an example of this distinction with the
original district of Aceh Tenggara splitting into the parent of Aceh Tenggara and the child of Gayo Lues.
This also highlights the fact that original districts split up along contiguous, pre-existing subdistrict lines.
      Local elites and interest groups initiate the action to split in accordance with a redistricting law
passed in 2000. The regulation stipulates that new districts must have: (i) at least three subdistricts,
(ii) support among the original district mayor and parliamentarians, and (iii) demonstrated socioeco-
nomic capacity in terms of basic public goods and economic infrastructure.12 We discuss these policy
constraints in Section 4.1 as they determined the scope of feasible changes in ethnic divisions.
      For identification purposes, we focus on the wave of redistricting from 2001–3 and 2007–8.13 The
central government twice stopped the redistricting process via national moratoria, the first of which
occurred from 2004–6 and the second from 2009–2012 as clearly seen in Figure 1.14 In both cases, the
11
   As Aspinall (2011, p. 305) notes, decentralization “shifted state resources and hence the focus of political contestation down
   toward the base of the political system.” Booth (2011, p. 46) argues, “Certainly the devolution of resources to the district level,
   where it has occurred has made the job of district head. . . very attractive to those who in the past had only managed to achieve
   lower-level positions in provincial or regional bureaucracies, or who had been largely excluded from official positions.”
12
   Given the favorable returns to parent and child districts (see below), splitting proposals were generally widely supported by
   original district parliamentarians who represent constituencies in both areas prior to redistricting (Pierskalla, 2016b).
13
   The redistricting in 1999 occurred before the new government regulation on pemekaran and substantively differs from later
   rounds of redistricting. Several were long-standing requests from the Suharto era, and others were initiated by the central
   government (Fitrani et al., 2005). These areas only enter our main analysis if they later split again.
14
   The primary stated reason for the moratoria was the drain on fiscal resources and lack of capacity to meet the staffing needs


                                                                  6
duration and enforcement of the ban was uncertain. Indeed, applications for new districts continued to
arrive at the national parliament with more than 100 proposals at various stages of completion awaiting
consideration in 2005–6 (BAPPENAS, 2007). Our main empirical strategy, which builds on Burgess et al.
(2012), exploits this first moratorium by comparing districts that split around this policy shock. What
is crucial for our identification is that the timing of redistricting is not driven by trends in conflict or
correlated factors therein.15 Section 4 provides supportive evidence.

Changes in Local Government.                 To understand how redistricting reshapes local government, a brief
timeline is instructive. After a new child district is ratified, an interim executive along with local parlia-
mentarians oversee the transition process with a focus on the first mayoral election. On average, those
quinquennial elections first take place within 21 months after redistricting. The mayor is then tasked
with operationalizing and staffing up to 30 new local government agencies in the new capital. By this
time, roughly two years after redistricting, central government transfers have begun flowing into child
district coffers. Local public expenditures begin increasing shortly thereafter, taking similar shape as
in other districts with around 40–50 percent of spending on personnel. In the parent district, elections
take place on the same local, five-yearly timeline as they would have absent redistricting, but in the
meantime, local institutions undergo restructuring as the governed area and populace change.
    Taking the original district as a whole, there are considerable gains to redistricting in terms of po-
litical representation and public resources as shown in Appendix A. First, most child district residents
experience a significant reduction in distance to government representatives and institutions in the dis-
trict capital. Second, the number of legislators per capita always (weakly) increases with redistricting
due to apportionment rules. Third, fiscal allocation rules imply a significant, roughly 20 percent long-run
increase in annual transfers, relative to a base of around 200 USD per capita. While the scale of changes
in local government may differ between parent and child districts, the significant shock to politically-
relevant ethnic divisions is shared by residents of both. We describe these changes and their potential
implications for violence in the following sections.


3    Conceptual Framework: The Political Boundaries of Ethnic Divisions
Implicit in much of the literature on diversity is the notion that ethnic divisions are shaped by political
boundaries. The scope for ethnic mobilization and patronage networks depends on the size and cohesion
of groups within the electorate. This suggests that by changing political boundaries, redistricting has the
potential to reshape these intergroup divisions and, in turn, social tensions and conflict. But whether
this actually happens, and how quickly it happens in practice, is unclear and yet crucial for informing
policy. In the remainder of this section, we provide motivating evidence on diversity and conflict in
Indonesia and then propose a simple conceptual framework showing how redistricting can change the

   of new child district governments. Upon lifting the first moratorium, the government tightened the law on redistricting by
   increasing the minimum number of subdistricts to five and requiring original districts to have existed for at least seven years.
15
   Note that this design does not exploit variation from districts that never split. This prioritizes internal over external validity,
   a tradeoff we discuss further in Section 5.5. Prior studies identify incentives for creating new districts, including efficiency
   gains in the provision of public goods, ethnic homogenization, and rent seeking (see Fitrani et al., 2005; Nolan et al., 2014;
   Pierskalla, 2016b). While we find similar evidence, what’s important for identification is that these underlying incentives do
   not predict early versus later timing of redistricting.


                                                                  7
ethnic divisions underlying this relationship.


3.1     Motivating Evidence on Diversity and Conflict in Indonesia

Ethnic diversity has long been associated with adverse social consequences ranging from weaker social
capital to greater conflict. Since the seminal book by Horowitz (1985), researchers have identified these
relationships across many countries.
      Similar patterns hold in Indonesia. Indeed, in the late 1990s, ethnic divisions were a factor in ma-
jor conflicts across the archipelago, including, among others, separatist movements in Aceh and Papua,
communal violence in Maluku and Central Sulawesi, and political violence in West and Central Kali-
mantan (Barron et al., 2014).16 Consistent with these pervasive divisions, Mavridis (2015) shows that
residents of more ethnically diverse districts exhibit lower generalized trust and less community partic-
ipation. Even as many of the most intense conflicts subsided by the mid-2000s, ethnicity remained a key
vehicle for political mobilization across the country (see Allen, 2014; Aspinall, 2011; Fox and Menchik,
2011). The introduction of direct majority/plurality elections for mayors reinforced this tendency.17 In-
deed, we show in Appendix D.1 that electoral competition is much stiffer in diverse districts, where
fractionalization and polarization are associated with narrower victory margins, especially in newly cre-
ated districts. Relatedly, clientelism and patronage pervade local politics, with patronage networks often
based on local ethnic identities and intermediated by lower-level officials such as village heads (Aspinall,
2013; Aspinall and Sukmajati, eds, 2016).
      As in other countries, these ethnic group dynamics occasionally manifest in conflict. Ideally, group-
based contests over distributive goods occur peacefully through the political process. However, in set-
tings with weak institutions (e.g., newly democratic countries), violence may be an effective means of
influencing elections or the allocation of public resources. These low-intensity, localized bouts of vio-
lence are prevalent in modern Indonesia.18 While distinct from full-blown civil war, these episodes of
violence are a major policy concern given their potential to undermine efforts to build local state capacity
and to snowball into more systematic, large-scale conflict.
      Using new data detailed in Section 4.2, we document a strong positive correlation between ethnic
diversity—as measured by either fractionalization or polarization—and the incidence of conflict in In-
donesian districts since 2000. Simple regressions suggest that a one standard deviation increase in frac-
tionalization (polarization) is associated with a 15 (8) percent increase in the likelihood of conflict.




16
   Like Fearon (2006), we view ethnicity as determined by descent but subject to politics and history and not merely biological.
17
   Ethnic or regional political parties are effectively banned in Indonesia due to a host of legal requirements implemented
   with democratization in 1999, mandating that political parties must have widespread geographic coverage—in terms of
   institutional presence—in order to be eligible to contest elections (see Hillman, 2012, for details). Nevertheless, mobilization
   along identity lines in local elections is widespread (Aspinall, 2011). At the same time, class cleavages and family dynasties
   are less important in local politics than elsewhere in Southeast Asia (see Aspinall and Asad, 2016).
18
   For example, Tadjoeddin (2012) finds that violence occurred in 23 percent of the first direct mayoral elections between 2005–
   2007. Harish and Toha (2017) show that conflict around local elections is a persistent problem. They classify over 1,000
   electoral violence episodes into voter-targeted, candidate-targeted, and government-targeted. We provide examples using
   our data in Section 4.2 and discuss their findings in Appendix B.2.


                                                                8
3.2       A Simple Model

We present here a simple conceptual framework to clarify how redistricting can change the ethnic di-
visions linking diversity to conflict. We focus on what Ray and Esteban (2016) call social conflict that is
often organized around groups. Esteban and Ray (2011a) formally model the equilibrium effects of di-
versity on group-based conflict over rival (private) and non-rival (public) goods. They note that political
power is a leading example of contestable public goods, and, for exposition purposes, we emphasize as
much given the implications of redistricting. They show that in a contest over a purely public resource,
the level of per capita conflict is increasing in group polarization, the value of the resource, and within-
group cohesion. We use a vastly simplified two-group model below to frame our discussion of how
redistricting affects violence by changing political boundaries.

Baseline Setup. Suppose an original district O is composed of two groups with population G1 and G2
and total population G = G1 +G2 . Denote by gi the share of group i in the population (e.g., G1 /G). These
groups compete over a public prize. The prize, being non-excludable and non-rival, is not diminished by
group size, but the winner of the contest gets to choose the mix of public goods that their group prefers.
We assume the winner chooses a level that provides their own group with value R per person and the
other group with 0. The leader of each group i chooses total violence Vi given its per unit cost γ. The
                                                                                                                             Vi
probability of group i winning control over the public prize is given by the contest function                              V1 +V2 .   Each
group leader chooses Vi to maximize percapita payoffs. That is, each group i, taking as given the other’s
choices V−i , maximizes             Vi
                                  V1 +V2 R   − Vi Gγi .
                                                                                                                      
                                                                      V       V1 +V2                   V              R
       The Nash equilibrium level of conflict per capita,             G   =   G1 +G2 ,   is given by   G   = g1 g2    γ    . Thus, total
violence per capita in the district depends on the value of the public prize R, the costs of conflict γ and
a measure of diversity, g1 g2 , which is greatest when both groups are of equal size. For two groups, this
measure equals 0.5× a standard fractionalization measure.

Effects of Redistricting. Models of conflict over a public good implicitly assume that the boundaries of
the contest are fixed. In practice, though, the boundaries of local government are a policy choice. If the
primary source of conflict is over the control and distribution of local public resources, then changes in
the borders of the electorate should have ramifications for conflict. Here we trace out the implications of
changing borders on conflict under the assumption that splitting creates new, separate contests in parent
and child districts.19
       Under these assumptions, changes in conflict within the original district boundaries are directly
linked to changes in diversity. Conflict within each of the new districts will now be a function of the
diversity within each new area. Assume for now that winning the prize continues to yield R per person
within group and 0 otherwise and that the costs of conflict remain unchanged. Using P to denote the
parent and C the child district, the change in total violence per-capita at the original district level is:
                                                                                           
                                       ∆V           GP             GC                           R
                                          =            gP,1 gP,2 +    gC,1 gC,2 − g1 g2           ,                                    (1)
                                        G           G              G                            γ


19
     Consistent with this assumption, the conflict data detailed in Section 4.2 suggest very little cross-border violence before or
     after redistricting in our setting (< 0.1% of all events).


                                                                  9
where gi,j is the share of group j in new district i, and G = GP + GC . That is, the change in violence per
capita is explicitly a function of the difference in the population-weighted average of diversity within the
new units relative to the diversity in the original district pre-split. In the event that the groups separate
into perfectly homogeneous child and parent districts, all violence in the original district ceases.
       This simple model does not distinguish between ethnic fractionalization and polarization. As writ-
ten, it suggests using changes in fractionalization, which always decline with splitting (in population-
weighted terms). Yet, this is not the case for polarization. An original district with four equally different
groups could split into two districts, each with two similarly sized groups contesting power. In this case,
polarization increases. Esteban and Ray (2011a) show that this specific feature of diversity is relevant
to conflict over public goods, which can be tailored to the winning group’s preferences but not fully
excluded from losers. In practice, redistricting sometimes implies tradeoffs between changing fraction-
alization and polarization, and we will let the data speak by considering both measures.
       It is also interesting to consider changes within the new borders. This requires taking a stance on how
violence is initially distributed across parent and child. Letting α be the share of total violence falling in
the parent district, the change in conflict within the parent district is given by:
                                                                                     
                                               ∆VP                         G              R
                                                   =         gP,1 gP,2 − α    g1 g2         .                                       (2)
                                               GP                          GP             γ

                                                                                      GP
If violence is initially distributed according to population (α =                     G ),      the change in per-capita violence
within the eventual parent border is given by the difference in the diversity within that new unit and the
overall diversity in the original district.20 The same holds for child districts.
       The model also implies that changes in the value of the public prize (R) or the costs of violence (γ)
will change conflict. Redistricting is accompanied by an influx of government resources (R) as well
as reductions in the distance to the new capital, which could affect γ. If R/γ increases in the newer
units, then this will exacerbate ∆ conflict, particularly in newly diverse areas. Adapting the model to
incorporate these changes, we find a similar link between changes in diversity and changes in conflict
but one that puts greater than population-weight on diversity in the newer units. We opt not to take this
simple model too far. Rather, we pursue a reduced form empirical approach that focuses on changes
in ethnic divisions as a baseline while incorporating changes in proxies for R and γ for robustness. We
also examine differences between parent and child districts, as child districts experience relatively larger
changes in R and γ (see Appendix A).


4        Data: Measuring Changing Ethnic Divisions and Conflict
4.1       Border-Induced Changes in Diversity

Indonesia is the fourth most populous country in the world and among its most diverse. More than
1,000 self-identified ethnic groups speaking more than 400 languages span the archipelago. Indonesians

20
     We can test this assumption in the data using the pre-split distribution of violence across parent and child districts. In general,
     the population weighted share of incidents in the original district is a very good predictor of the actual number of incidents.
     Children have slightly less incidents than would be expected based on population shares, and consequently parents have
     slightly more, but these differences are not very large.


                                                                    10
are predominantly Muslim (87 percent) with minority Christian, Hindu, and Buddhist groups. From
a policy perspective, diversity manifests at different levels of governance but became especially salient
at the district level with decentralization. This section shows how redistricting fundamentally changes
which group divisions are politically relevant.
     We measure diversity using microdata from the universal 2000 Population Census. This data allow us
to link the initial subdistricts in 2000 to their final 2010 district boundaries, providing us with measures of
diversity at the original, parent, and child district levels. These are all based on the initial population in
2000 and hence not subject to concerns about endogenous sorting in response to redistricting. The 2000
Census was the first since 1930 to record ethnicity, allowing respondents to report a single affiliation. This
led to remarkable cultural distinction, capturing over 1,000 self-identified ethnic groups (Ananta et al.,
2015).21 The sub-ethnic variation within broader ethnic groups may be relevant for conflict (Desmet et al.,
2017). We also capture deeper interethnic cleavages using linguistic differences by mapping Indonesian
ethnic groups to languages in the Ethnologue data as in Esteban et al. (2012).
     We focus on two widely-used measures of ethnic diversity. Ethnic fractionalization in district d
measures the probability that two randomly chosen individuals belong to different groups: F =
PNe
 j=1 gj (1 − gj ), where Ne is the number of ethnic groups in the district, and gj is the population share
of group j. Given the large number of self-reported ethnic identities, fractionalization is quite high and
indeed above 0.5 in many districts we study. Adopting the Esteban and Ray (1994) metric, ethnic polar-
ization is given by P = N
                       P e PNe 2
                        j=1   k=1 gj gk ηjk , where ηjk is the distance between groups j and k.
     Polarization aims to capture the deeper cleavages in society and differs from fractionalization in two
key respects. First, the squaring of the own-group term emphasizes that stronger within-group iden-
tification coincides with greater out-group alienation, which together exacerbate intergroup tensions.
As such, polarization is maximized when there are two distinct, equally sized groups. Second, it for-
mally incorporates distances between groups while the standard measure of fractionalization (F ) does
not. We specify η using the same parametrization of linguistic distances as in Desmet et al. (2009, 2012)
and Esteban et al. (2012) (see Appendix E for details). Although less pervasive, religious divisions may
be important in some locations. In what follows, we focus our discussion around ethnic diversity but
nevertheless incorporate religious diversity in our empirical analysis.22

Changes in Diversity.           Prior to redistricting, these measures of diversity at the original district level
demarcated the boundaries of politically-relevant ethnic divisions. After redistricting, diversity within
the new parent and child district boundaries becomes salient. Motivated by our conceptual framework,
we propose simple but generalizable measures to capture these changes in ethnic divisions.
     We compute the difference between the population-weighted average diversity in the new units and
diversity in the original 2000 district. For example,
                                                     if original district
                                                                          O splits into parent P and child C,
                                                            GP           GC
the change in ethnic fractionalization, ∆F =                G FP     +   G FC   − FO , where the first term captures the
implied F within the new borders. This can be seen as a multi-group generalization of equation (1). By
definition, ∆F (weakly) declines. However, the sign of ∆P is less clear, and sometimes, the new borders
21
   In our average original district, there are 549 distinct ethnic groups with 21 having more than 0.1 percent of the population.
   Consolidating subgroups based on language reduces these numbers to 271 groups, 18 with more than 0.1 percent.
22
   We account for religious polarization, but lacking an obvious notion of distance, set ηjk = 1 ∀j 6= k. Given that most religious
   diversity implies one sizable non-Muslim group, polarization is nearly identical to fractionalization (rank correlation≈0.99).
   By comparison, ethnic polarization and fractionalization exhibit lower correlation (<0.2) and are statistically independent.


                                                                11
increase polarization.
      On average, ∆F = −0.059 (std. dev.= 0.083) while ∆P = −0.0002 (0.005). Figure 5 compares the
original district diversity to the implied diversity after redistricting with the distance to the 45 degree
line capturing the ∆. Importantly, there is variation in ∆diversity across districts with similar initial
diversity. Later, we link this variation to constraints imposed by redistricting regulations. Note also
that Indonesia’s remarkable diversity implies scope for differentiating between the two measures (the
correlation between ∆F and ∆P is 0.38).23 Moreover, these ∆P reflect sizable shifts in ethnic divisions.
      To make these numbers concrete, consider two examples of redistricting in our setting. First, some
areas, like the original district of Aceh Tenggara, were able to leverage the geographic distribution of
groups across subdistricts to split along ethnic lines, and create homogeneous governing bodies. Aceh
Tenggara split into one child with 93 percent ethnic Gayo while the parent comprised 47 percent Alas,
17 percent Batak, and 15 percent Gayo. This implied a significant reduction in diversity relative to the
original district, which had 39 percent Gayo, 33 percent Alas, and 12 percent Batak. These changes led
to ∆F = −0.180 and ∆P = −0.003 and can be seen in Figure 4(a), which plots the boundaries of villages
(colored by ethnic majority), subdistricts, and districts, with the latter shown pre- and post-redistricting.
      Other districts split in ways that thrust hitherto less salient divisions into the limelight. One interest-
ing example comes from Kotawaringin Timur, once the largest district in Central Kalimantan province
and a legacy of Dutch administration in the 1930s, which was comprised of six relatively large groups
spanning 26 subdistricts. It was not feasible to homogenize in the way that Aceh Tenggara did (see
Figure 4(b)). Instead, the original district split into two child districts and one parent. This reduced
fractionalization ∆F = −0.068 but increased polarization ∆P = 0.004 as the new districts comprised
similar or fewer groups in more equal proportions than the original district. Section 6.3 discusses at
length another interesting case from Bengkayang in West Kalimantan that further clarifies why these
border-induced changes in diversity matter politically.
      Together, these examples point to the institutional constraints on feasible redistricting schemes. With
multiple groups spanning the same subdistricts, creating completely homogenous new districts would
have been unworkable given the policy regulations on economic viability, which required sufficient
scale. Nevertheless, a menu of possible partitions was available in many districts, and in Section 5.4,
we examine whether the effects of redistricting on conflict depend on where the actual ∆diversity falls
within the set of feasible ∆diversity.


4.2     New Conflict Data

We estimate the effects of changes in ethnic divisions using new monthly data on conflict from the Na-
tional Violence Monitoring System, referred to hereafter by its Indonesian acronym, SNPK (Sistem Na-
sional Pemantauan Kekerasan). Coverage begins in 1998 for nine conflict-prone provinces and increases to
15 provinces plus greater Jakarta beginning in 2005.24 Crucially, conflict locations are recorded at admin-
istrative levels that allow us to link event locations to parent and child districts prior to redistricting.
23
   By comparison, the migration-induced measures of ∆F and ∆P in the less diverse South African context are correlated at
   0.94 (Amodio and Chiovelli, forthcoming).
24
   While the data is not representative of Indonesia, it spans all major island groups and covers a majority of the Indonesian
   population. We omit districts in Papua due to problems with the underlying administrative and census data. Data coverage
   is less reliable in the earliest years, and hence we exclude 1998 and 1999.


                                                             12
     Like other geospatial conflict databases such as the Armed Conflict Location & Event Data (ACLED),
media reports of violence are the key input to the SNPK. Over a four-year period, project architects col-
lected over 2 million images from the print archives of around 120 local newspapers, including multiple
outlets for each province and excluding those with clear biases or no fact-checking (see Barron et al.,
2009, 2014). Despite this rigor, as with all event-based conflict data, one may still worry about bias from
selective reporting. We systematically address these concerns in two ways. First, we flexibly control for
the number of papers available to coders for each province–month. Second, we use auxiliary Google
Trends data to rule out confounding media attention due to redistricting.
     Coders used a standard template to assign incidents to 10 mutually exclusive categories based on
the underlying trigger. They first code incidents as domestic violence, violent crime, violence during
law enforcement, or conflict. Within conflict, coders further categorize based on what is being violently
contested: elections and appointments, governance, resource, identity, popular justice, separatist, and
other (could not be classified). When reported, coders also indicate the number of injuries or deaths and
details on property damage. Further background can be found in Appendix B.1, which also highlights
important advantages of the SNPK relative to other violence data.

Outcome: Social Conflict Incidence. Our core outcome is the likelihood of any social conflict in a given
district–month. We define this measure as any incident excluding domestic violence and crime. From
2000 to 2014, these events occurred in around 63 (36) percent of district–months based on the original
district (parent/child) borders. Appendix B.3 demonstrates robustness to category misclassification,
and Appendix B.4 shows that our results are driven by events with injuries and property damage rather
than deaths per se. Such events are still costly and broadly reflect the sort of social instability that
concerns policymakers in many newly democratic countries. This is also consistent with our conceptual
framework, motivated by Esteban and Ray (2011a) who note that “social conflict need not manifest itself
in civil war alone, and there are various other measures . . . for instance, strikes, demonstrations, riots,
. . . .”
     Before proceeding to results, we offer a few illustrative examples of these types of conflict that char-
acterize our outcome measure. The following translated incident descriptions in Maluku Utara district
help fix ideas: “(July 13, 2010): In Galela Selatan, supporters of Djasa (a mayoral candidate) destroyed
the office of Galela subdistrict, 2 official cars, and billboards of other candidates.” “(August 18, 2011): Of-
fice of Morotai District Legislature was bombed; it is suspected as terrorism to prevent the inauguration
of the elected mayor.” SNPK records point to various forms of political violence—protests over voter
eligibility, clashes between supporters, direct targeting of candidates and government offices overseeing
elections—often related to local, mayoral elections (see Harish and Toha, 2017, for a rich accounting).
Such violence often involves building damage and injuries rather than deaths. Nevertheless, such inci-
dents can and do escalate.25 Moreover, violence is not limited to election periods. Many events capture
groups violently expressing grievances over policy and resource allocation issues.26
25
    Consider these incidents from the districts of Kota Subulussalam and Maluku Tenggara Barat: “(November 2, 2013): Demon-
   strations involving hundreds of supporters of candidates for mayor and vice mayor. The masses demanded an explanation
   from the Independent Election Commissioner. [7 injured].” and “(May 30, 2002): The chaos of the mayoral election of West
   Southeast Maluku district is bad. Supporters of Heri Kadubun who were riding in boats were attacked by supporters of the
   Taher Hanubun group [3 killed, 8 injured].”
26
   For example, “(April 14, 2008): Hundreds of villagers in Seram Bagian Barat district, demonstrated at the mayor’s office and


                                                              13
5     Results: The Effects of Political Boundaries on Diversity and Conflict
This section presents our main empirical results. We first provide motivating evidence that boundary-
induced changes in diversity are associated with conflict. We then estimate a rigorous, generalized
difference-in-difference (DiD) that recovers the causal effects of redistricting and links changes in eth-
nopolitical boundaries to violence. We show that despite policymakers’ goals, redistricting causes no
change in the average incidence of conflict. We argue that this somewhat surprising finding can be ex-
plained by heterogeneous changes in ethnic divisions. In areas able to create homogenous new districts,
conflict falls. However, conflict increases in areas where redistricting led to greater polarization among
the newly defined electorate.
      Our main analysis restricts to 52 original districts (d) in 2000 that split into 133 districts by 2014.
Among these, 29 original districts are observed from 2000–14 in the SNPK while 23 enter the data in 2005.
Nearly all redistricting occurs in the two years before and after the moratorium on splitting from 2004–
6.27 While our effective sample size is constrained, the Indonesian setting is arguably the richest available
to study the effects of changes in political boundaries. Granular data on diversity and conflict as well
as plausibly exogenous timing of redistricting are simply not available in other countries undergoing
similar decentralization reforms. Furthermore, we take several steps to address small-sample biases.


5.1     Simple Difference-in-Difference: Changes in Ethnic Divisions and Conflict

We begin with motivating evidence that changes in ethnic divisions are associated with changes in con-
flict incidence. We regress the change in the average monthly likelihood of social conflict after redistrict-
ing on the change in ethnic diversity implied by the new borders. Figure 6 presents results in graphical
form, normalizing ∆diversity and including regression lines with robust 95 percent confidence inter-
vals. In graph (a), a one standard deviation increase in ∆polarization (P ) is associated with a significant
6.8 percentage point (p.p.) increase in group conflict after redistricting. As a benchmark, consider two
districts with roughly one standard deviation difference in ∆P . In Kupang, ∆P = −0.001, and conflict
fell by 22.2 p.p., whereas in Kotawaringin Barat, ∆P = 0.002, and conflict increased by 12.4 p.p.28 Mean-
while, graph (b) shows that conflict is less responsive to border-induced changes in fractionalization,
despite the positive long-run correlation between initial fractionalization and conflict.
      The data in Figure 6 suggests a strong relationship between the political boundaries of ethnic po-
larization and conflict.29 Of course, there are many reasons why these simple DiD estimates might not
reflect causal relationships. The rest of the paper aims to rule out these concerns, to understand the

   local parliament. The action continued by blocking Trans-Seram Street until the next day. This action is the result of their
   demands for development.” See Appendix B for other examples.
27
   Only one area in our study splits again after 2008 (in January 2013), and for simplicity we drop observations in 2013 and
   2014 for this district. Results are unchanged under other treatments. Four other areas split for the first time in late 2012–13.
   However, we exclude these from the analysis in order to focus on areas that were credibly affected by the moratoria.
28
   Recall that these small changes in polarization often imply large changes in ethnic divisions. In Kupang, for example, ∆P =
   −0.001 captures the split of an original district with three fairly large groups (38 percent Atoni Metto, 32 percent Rote, and 18
   percent Sabu) into three homogenous new districts for each (parent with 63 percent Atoni Metto, one child with 93 percent
   Rote, and another child with 98 percent Sabu).
29
   These descriptive results exclude one extreme outlier with ∆P six standard deviations below the mean, are robust to con-
   trolling for all three ∆diversity regressors simultaneously, estimating robust Huber (1973) regressions rather than OLS, and
   conducting small-sample inference. Note, however, that our main generalized DiD estimates below retain the full sample of
   districts and are robust to small-sample inference and principled outlier removal procedures detailed in Appendix C.4.


                                                                14
dynamics of conflict after redistricting, and to offer a deeper interpretation of the underlying changes in
group divisions and social tensions.


5.2       Average Effects of Redistricting

We use a standard generalized DiD specification to identify the effects of redistricting on conflict:

                                    conf lictdt = ν + βpost-splitdt + θt + θd + θd × t + εdt ,                                        (3)

where post-splitdt is an indicator equal to one for all months after the original district’s first redistricting
was passed into law.30 The month fixed effects, θt , sweep out shocks to conflict incidence that are com-
mon across all districts. The district fixed effects, θd , take out time-invariant level differences in conflict
incidence across districts. Meanwhile, the district-specific time trends, θd × t, are important given differ-
ential regional trends in violence and are in line with fixed effects specifications in the conflict literature
(e.g., Dube et al., 2016; Dube and Vargas, 2013; Miguel et al., 2004). As noted earlier, we define conf lictdt
as a binary indicator for any reported incident of social conflict and show robustness to intensive margin
specifications. We estimate all specifications using linear probability models (LPM). The coefficient β
identifies the average post-redistricting deviation from district-specific conflict trends. We further esti-
mate versions of equation (3) that disaggregate the original districts d and identify separate β for parent
and child districts, allowing each to have its own fixed effect and trend.
       The monthly panel specification leverages the granularity of both the conflict data and the policy
changes (as split approvals vary at the month level). This allows us to capture episodic as well as re-
curring violence associated with discontent. This is especially useful for exploring political cycles of
violence in Section 6, which vary at a sub-annual frequency. In addition, it may offer power benefits
relative to a coarser annual frequency given the considerable within-year variation and relatively weak
autocorrelation of conflict (see McKenzie, 2012). We cluster standard errors at the original district level
and demonstrate robustness to a battery of alternative approaches to inference in Appendix C.4.

Identifying Assumptions.                Two key assumptions underlie the generalized DiD strategy: (i) the timing
of redistricting is orthogonal to conflict and its determinants, and (ii) districts would have exhibited par-
allel departures from their conflict trends in the post-split period absent splitting. We provide supportive
evidence here and present further robustness checks in Section 5.5.
       First, we show that the timing of redistricting is plausibly exogenous. Cross-sectional regressions in
Table 1 relate a normalized x variable to the timing of the initial split in original district d—measured
either as the number of months since January 2000 or an indicator for whether splitting occurred after
the moratorium. There are no statistically or economically significant effects of initial diversity within
the original district borders in 2000, the eventual parent/child district borders in 2010, or the border-
induced change, ∆diversity. Although diverse districts are more likely to split, they are no more likely
30
     Districts that split into three or more all at once pose no particular difficulty. Out of 52 original districts, 11 split at multiple
     points in time. Consider, for example, Manggarai district, which first created one child, Manggarai Barat in 2003, and then
     later the parent district was further subdivided to create Manggarai Timur in 2007. In our baseline, we code these using the
     first date of the split. Results are robust to dropping these multi-split areas or to assigning the date of the split to the month
     in which the most splits took place for the given original district. However, in all cases, ∆diversity is computed over the full
     period, taking the original district and final parent and child districts.


                                                                     15
to do so earlier. Moreover, as seen in the bottom panel, we find similarly insignificant timing effects for
a large set of 65 confounding variables considered in robustness checks. Our results are consistent with
Burgess et al. (2012) who present complementary evidence on exogenous timing.
      Second, we provide evidence of parallel pre-trends. One might worry about spikes or dips in conflict
prior to redistricting, particularly if such trends were differential with respect to (changes in) diver-
sity. Event study specifications discussed below rule out these concerns.31 Moreover, a standard hazard
model specification further shows no systematic relationship between changes in prior conflict and the
timing of redistricting.32 Overall, this evidence is consistent with the favorable environment for redis-
tricting and the arbitrariness of approval timing due to the moratorium and other factors.

Null Average Effects.          Estimation results for equation (3) can be found in Table 2, which shows that
redistricting does not change the local incidence of conflict. Column 1 shows a null effect of splitting
on the likelihood of conflict incidents at the original district level. The point estimate and standard
error are very small relative to the pre-split mean of around 57 percent of original district–months with
any incidents. Nor are the null effects explained by differential pre-trends or countervailing ups and
downs in conflict after redistricting. This can be seen in the event study specification in Appendix Figure
C.1.1(a). The average likelihood of conflict is relatively flat pre- and post-split.
      While informative about overall changes in violence, these original district level results may obscure
the different implications of redistricting for child and parent districts. Nevertheless, estimating at this
more granular level in column 2 leads to similarly null effects. Moreover, this is not due to differential,
offsetting effects in parent or child districts as seen in columns 3 and 4.


5.3     Differential Effects of Redistricting: New Ethnic Divisions Amplify Conflict

Next, we identify a much richer set of post-split conflict dynamics by explicitly considering how redis-
tricting transforms ethnic divisions. At the original district level, we therefore augment equation (3):


           conf lictdt = ν + βpost-splitdt + φ (post-splitdt × ∆ diversityd ) + θt + θd + θd × t + εdt .                        (4)

The φ coefficients identify whether areas that split into more homogeneous and less polarized units
experience a differential reduction in conflict. As outlined in Section 3.2, if original district diversity
shapes conflict pre-split while diversity within parent and child districts shapes conflict post-split, then
post-split changes in conflict incidence should be a function of ∆diversityd (φ > 0).
      Importantly, the fixed effects, θd , absorb the time-invariant effects of initial diversity on conflict. Un-
like the simpler DiD in Figure 6, equation (4) accounts for common shocks across districts, as well as
differences in district-specific conflict trends. Recall that the timing of redistricting is uncorrelated with
∆diversity, which also does not exhibit differential pre-trends in conflict (see Appendix Figure C.1.2).
31
    That redistricting is a largely peaceful process here is likely a consequence of the limited and often favorable fiscal and leg-
   islative consequences for the parent, combined with these obvious benefits for child districts. While there are cases of violence
   perpetrated for and against redistricting, such episodes are limited and do not explain the timing of splitting. Indeed, the
   leading conflict watchdog group in Indonesia highlights a case of violent pressure for splitting in a district of West Sulawesi
   but notes that “In most cases, this fragmentation [redistricting] has taken part without violence and indeed without much
   opposition” (International Crisis Group, 2005).
32
   In particular, we estimate a Cox (1972) proportional hazards model for time to split and cluster standard errors by original
   district. Doing so yields a small and insignificant hazard ratio of 1.18 with a p-value of 0.8.


                                                                16
Moreover, we take several steps in Section 5.4, including a Lasso-based “post-double-selection” pro-
cedure (Belloni et al., 2014), to show that ∆diversity is not simply proxying for other initial district
characteristics that amplify conflict after splitting.

Core Results.       Table 3 reports estimates of equation (4) at different administrative levels, normalizing
the ∆diversity measures. Column 1 demonstrates the conflict-enhancing effects of creating more polar-
ized districts. A one standard deviation increase in ∆P implies a 3.6 percentage point (p.p.) increase
in social conflict that is significant at the 5 percent level. This is smaller than the simple difference-in-
difference estimate (Figure 6) and implies a 6.3 percent increase in the likelihood of conflict relative to
the mean before redistricting.33 Furthermore, while ∆ religious polarization also enters positively, it is
less precisely estimated, perhaps due to the more limited range of districts with significant religious di-
visions. Meanwhile, ∆F has a weaker effect close to zero, albeit less precisely estimated and hence not
statistically different from ∆P (p-value=0.17).
     We note upfront a few important points of robustness, leaving further details to Section 5.5. First, our
findings are more striking after the principled removal of outliers, which leads to a large increase in the
effect size for ∆P in particular (see Appendix Figure C.4.1 and Table C.4.1). Second, the qualitative take-
aways are robust to alternative (randomization) inference procedures accounting for the small effective
sample size and spatial correlation in unobservables (see Appendix Tables C.4.2 and C.4.3). Third, the
point estimates are very similar when estimating equation (4) with each diversity measure on its own
(see Appendix Table C.6.4).
     We consider several benchmarks to shed deeper light on the causal component of the diversity–
conflict relationship that can be attributed to political borders. First, the estimated effects of ∆P and
∆F are smaller than the large positive correlations between conflict incidence and diversity across all
districts as discussed in Section 3. In other words, the causal component due to political boundaries is
slightly smaller for polarization and significantly smaller if not null for fractionalization. Second, the ef-
fect of ∆P on conflict is around one-half of the cross-country correlation between ethnic polarization lev-
els (P )—defined similarly based on Ethnologue definitions of ethnolinguistic groups—and low-intensity
civil conflict in Esteban et al. (2012).34 Third, the effect of border-induced ∆P in Indonesia is roughly
one-quarter as large as the effects of migration-induced ∆P within the black population of South Africa
(Amodio and Chiovelli, forthcoming).35 This large difference is plausibly due to the fact that changes in
local diversity due to migration capture additional conflict-relevant group divisions besides solely ethnic
ones, e.g., between native “sons of the soil” and immigrants (Fearon and Laitin, 2011; Weiner, 1978).
     The strong effects of ∆P in column 1 of Table 3 highlight a potentially important unintended con-
sequence of using redistricting to create homogenous political entities. In diverse settings with many
groups, while it is possible to reduce the number of groups and hence F , it may not be feasible to simul-
33
   Recall that unlike the simple DiD, the regression in column 1 is based on all districts including the extreme outlier in ∆P .
   Omitting that outlier here leads to a larger effect of 5.8 p.p. See Appendix C.4 for further robustness checks on outliers.
34
   This is based on re-estimating column 1 of Table 4 in their paper and comparing normalized effect sizes. We omit the
   Greenberg-Gini index of diversity to maintain a stricter comparison to our results, but the effect sizes are similar when in-
   cluding it. Their estimates are based on pooled OLS panel regressions at the five-year frequency, and the dependent variable
   equals one if the country experiences more than 25 conflict-related deaths with a mean of 0.28. By comparison, this same
   threshold and five-year frequency in our data implies a mean of 0.29. Interestingly, they too find weaker effects of ethnic
   fractionalization on conflict when using the full breadth of groups in Ethnologue.
35
   This is based on rescaling their estimate in column 5 of Table 3 by the standard deviation of ∆P , 0.09, in Table A.2.


                                                              17
taneously ensure that the new boundaries do not engender new polarizing divisions. The two districts
of Maluku Utara (MU) and Bolaang Mengondow (BW) illustrate the importance of ∆P . While both sig-
nificantly homogenized based on F (∆F M U = −0.125 and ∆F BW = −0.097), the new borders generated
new ethnic divisions and a larger increase in polarization in MU (∆P M U = 0.005 and ∆P BW = 0.002).
We observe a 36 p.p. increase in conflict in MU compared to a 7 p.p. decline in BW after redistricting.

Parent and Child District Results. To better understand the tradeoffs associated with redistricting, we
estimate equation (4) at the smaller, child and parent district boundaries. Changes in violence within
these smaller units should also be a function of ∆diversity, specified here as the difference in diversity
between the given child or parent district and the original district. As with specification (4), the goal is
to identify how changes in the salience of local diversity affect conflict.
     There are several advantages to running our specification at this lower geographic level. First, it
leverages greater variation in ∆diversity. Second, it allows us to analyze violence around post-split
elections, which occur at different times in the parent and child. Finally, it provides a natural way
to investigate whether the effects of changing ethnic divisions vary with the scale of changes in local
government. As documented in Appendix A, children experience larger increases in fiscal transfers and
a reduction in distance to the capital. In the framework of Section 3.2, this arguably implies a larger, post-
                     R
split increase in    γ   in children than parents. Consequently, we would expect the effects of ∆diversity to
be amplified in child districts.
     Columns 2–4 of Table 3 estimate these relationships within the given child and parent boundaries.
Together, these more granular results reveal similar effects as those at the aggregate original district level,
but also point to potential changes in the geography of violence. Pooling parent and child districts in col-
umn 2 yields effects that are statistically indistinguishable from those in column 1. Turning to columns 3
and 4, ∆P has similar effects when splitting the sample into parent and child districts, respectively. The
effect size is slightly larger for child districts, which also have relatively lower mean conflict before re-
districting. Although this difference is imprecise (p-value=0.23), it is consistent with the larger changes
     R
in   γ   for child districts. Looking at ∆F , we see similarly weak effects as in the original district specifica-
tion. However, the positive albeit noisy estimate in column 3 suggests that some of the conflict-inducing
changes in ethnic divisions may differentially load onto fractionalization in parent districts.

Discussion.        While recent models clarify how conflict responds to diversity in long-run equilibrium,
our results identify how political boundaries can shock that equilibrium by changing the salience of
different group cleavages in society. The estimates in Table 3 identify the magnitude of this shift over
a 5–10 year period. That redistricting can alter the effects of diversity so quickly is perhaps surprising.
In Section 6, we link the resulting conflict dynamics to the nature of politics and majoritarian elections.
While these effects may yet die out over time, the new ethnic divisions may also deepen, bringing us
closer to the long-run correlation between diversity and conflict (within stable boundaries).
     Our findings offer two policy-relevant, methodological innovations. First, prior work shows how
the colonial partitioning of ethnic groups across international borders contributes to modern conflict
(e.g., Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2016). Our strategy moves beyond static differences to show
how changes in political boundaries reshape the ethnic divisions underlying conflict. While infeasible to
study these dynamic changes in national boundaries, within-country boundary changes are pervasive

                                                         18
and informative about general mechanisms linking diversity to conflict. Second, by isolating the contri-
bution of political boundaries, we rule out a host of other confounding changes in local ethnic diversity
often associated with migration flows, which are of independent interest in the study of conflict.
      Our focus on boundary-induced changes in ethnic divisions further contributes to an ongoing debate
over which type of diversity matters for conflict. To the extent that redistricting changes the incidence
of local public goods, one expects greater heterogeneity in preferences among the governed population
to lead to greater conflict. Moreover, if private resources are changing more slowly than public ones,
one would expect changes in fractionalization to be less important than changes in polarization (Esteban
and Ray, 2011a).36 Further probing the differences between polarization and fractionalization shows that
border-induced changes in the deeper ethnic divisions—as reflected in linguistic distances (η) between
groups—are driving the changes in violence around redistricting. Additionally, the key results for ∆F
and ∆P hold up to inclusion of ∆G/N where G/N is the Greenberg-Gini diversity index scaled by
population as in the structural equation of Esteban and Ray (2011a) tested by Esteban et al. (2012).


5.4     Identification Checks: Isolating Policy-Induced Changes in Ethnic Divisions

This section addresses three key threats to our interpretation thus far: (i) that ∆diversity is a proxy
for other features of Indonesian districts correlated with future conflict, (ii) that changes in contestable
public resources confound the effects of ∆diversity, and (iii) that the identifying variation in ∆diversity
reflects endogenous boundary choices.

Accounting for Confounders.                We begin by ruling out omitted factors correlated with ∆diversity
and conflict. Specifically, we follow a standard approach in heterogeneous DiD specifications and aug-
ment equation (4) with interactions of post-split and an array of potential confounders. Our approach is
twofold. First, we separately consider groups of initial predetermined variables chosen based on intu-
ition and prior work (see, e.g., Fearon and Laitin, 2003; Esteban et al., 2012). These include, among others:
security presence; public goods access; remoteness, transportation infrastructure and access to markets;
population size and age distributions; natural resource intensity; educational and occupational distribu-
tions; and topography, soil quality, and water access. Many are indeed highly correlated with diversity.37
As shown in Appendix Tables C.2.1–C.2.4, some of these factors also mediate the effects of redistricting
on conflict. However, the key coefficients of interest on ∆P and ∆F remain mostly unchanged across
these different specifications. There are of course hundreds of potential confounding variables that one
could combine in various ways in this type of exercise. With limited degrees of freedom, this leaves the
door open to cherry-picking (Gelman and Loken, 2014).
      Therefore, we adopt a second strategy that leverages machine learning to take a more disciplined ap-
proach to ruling out omitted variable bias. We utilize the Belloni et al. (2014) double-selection post-Lasso

36
   This may also explain some of the differential effects of diversity in parent and child districts as noted above. The relative
   importance of ∆F (albeit noisy) for parent districts could be consistent with a many-group generalization of the conceptual
   framework that also allows R to reflect the ratio of public to private goods as in the original Esteban and Ray (2011a) model.
   While both goods may be growing over time with redistricting in parent and child districts, public goods grow more slowly
   in the former, leaving greater scope for per capita payoffs (to private goods) to shape conflict incentives. This would imply
   that changes in ethnic divisions reflected in ∆F amplify conflict relatively more than those in ∆P .
37
   In a cross-section of 310 Indonesian districts, the full set of 65 covariates used in the Lasso procedure below explain 80 (51)
   percent of the variance in fractionalization (polarization).


                                                               19
method to select a parsimonious set of influential controls from the large number of variables potentially
confounding the relationship between ∆diversity and conflict. In practice, we expand upon the broad
set of covariates noted above and use this approach to select additional interactions with post-split while
penalizing the tendency towards overfitting through a penalty parameter λ.38 Acknowledging the limits
of our natural policy experiment, we choose λ to ensure that the number of variables selected remain
sufficiently smaller than the effective degrees of freedom. We set λ = 3, 000 as a baseline and consider
alternative values in Appendix C.2.
     Panel A of Table 4 presents results based on this principled approach to variable selection. The main
qualitative and quantitative findings remain unchanged. The point estimates on ∆P with this rich set
of Lasso-selected controls are statistically indistinguishable from the baseline without controls except in
column 3 where the estimates here are larger. Note that the fixed λ selects a different number of highly
relevant controls across columns, which is due to variation in both the sample size as well as the relevant
confounders of ∆diversity. Overall, the conclusions remain unchanged for other reasonable values of λ.

Changes in the Local Public Resources.                 While the confounding effects of other initial district charac-
teristics is limited, it is also important to account for other factors associated with conflict that change
with redistricting. We consider here two significant changes motivated by the conceptual framework,
namely, changes in local government transfer revenue and proximity to government institutions in the
newly created child district capital. Panel B of Table 4 augments the baseline specification in Table 3 with
these two measures (detailed in Appendix A).
     We draw a few important takeaways from this exercise. First, the effects of ∆diversity remain similar,
with changes in polarization significantly amplifying conflict. Second, both ∆transf ers and ∆distance
enter as expected. Greater transfers (higher R) and greater proximity to the district capital (lower γ) are
associated with more conflict after redistricting, particularly in child districts where these changes are
much more pronounced. These findings are suggestive, but we do not push the interpretation too far
given concerns about endogeneity and limited degrees of freedom.39 Importantly, though, these results
further establish that border-induced changes in ethnic divisions matter per se.

Feasible Redistricting. Although initial diversity in 2000 is predetermined, the particular way in which
the borders are drawn, and hence ∆diversity, may be endogenous. One concern is that districts that
chose particularly unfavorable borders with high ∆P were the ones where future conflict would have
risen anyway, say because of bad governance. We show here that the effects of ∆diversity on conflict are
not explained by the particular way that districts chose to draw new borders but rather by institutional
constraints on redistricting and ethnic geography that did not allow for more homogenous new districts.
     To do so, we consider all the possible ways an original district could split along subdistrict lines into
k new districts, given that regulations require each new district has at least three contiguous subdistricts.
38
   Appendix E details the full set of 65 potential confounding variables, and Appendix C.2 details our application of this method,
   which is particularly effective at dealing with the problem of overfitting in a setting where one aims to learn about a particular
   causal effect of interest rather than simply develop a good prediction of the outcome. We discipline variable selection around
   ∆P and ∆F and include ∆Relig as a control. Interestingly, when disciplining on ∆P alone, ∆F is selected among the small
   number of included confounders.
39
   Further exogeneity may be possible using rules on transfers (Cassidy, 2017) and geographic determinants of capital locations
   (Campante et al., 2017). However, our main goal here is to rule out confounders of ∆diversity, and the OLS results should
   help assuage first-order concerns.


                                                                 20
This provides us with a distribution of feasible partitions, and associated ∆diversity, for each district.
Appendix C.3 provides full details on this NP-hard combinatorial problem.
      We use this set of feasible partitions to clarify that our identifying variation in ∆diversity comes
from cross-district variation in the set of feasible partitions, as opposed to similar districts choosing very
different ways of redrawing their borders. First, we re-estimate our baseline specifications from Table
3, replacing the realized changes in diversity with the mean, feasible ∆P , ∆F , and ∆Relig for each
district. Table 5 shows that this produces very similar results to our baseline, providing initial evidence
that strategic redistricting is unlikely to explain our core effects.
      To further clarify this point, we look not at the average but rather at random combinations of extreme
feasible ∆diversity. Specifically, we re-estimate our baseline specification randomly assigning ∆P (and
associated ∆F and ∆Relig) for each district to be either the maximum or minimum from the feasible
set.40 We repeat this randomized procedure 50,000 times at the original district level and plot the result-
ing estimates in Appendix Figure C.3.2. All the estimated effects of min or max feasible ∆P are greater
than zero and smoothly distributed around the baseline estimated effect size. This is consistent with the
fact that within-district variation in feasible splits is small relative to the between-district variation.41
      Together, these results suggest that unobserved heterogeneity in boundary choice does not explain
the effects of ∆diversity on conflict. This further highlights the importance of the preceding exercise
ruling out confounding interactions with post-split. More substantively, these results demonstrate the
importance of designing redistricting schemes that account for constraints on strategic border formation.


5.5     Additional Robustness Checks

This section describes additional robustness checks fully detailed in the Appendix. Overall, this series
of tests further bolsters our causal interpretation of the main findings.
      We address concerns about the effective sample size in Appendix C.4. We take the disciplined ap-
proach of Belsley et al. (2005) to rule out the influence of outliers in the baseline panel regressions in Table
3. Doing so systematically increases the overall effects of ∆P . Moreover, new conservative refinements
to inference due to Young (2016) suggest that outliers are not driving our qualitative takeaways.
      Next, in Appendix C.5, we address the concern that SNPK coverage might be changing systemati-
cally with redistricting. The main concern is that newspapers differentially report on events in locations
with greater changes in ethnic divisions, leading to overestimates of the actual effects. The comprehen-
sive coverage of SNPK from many different outlets provides some reassurance. We provide further sup-
portive evidence using auxiliary Google Trends data capturing the relative monthly frequency of search
for the original, parent and child district names. While imperfect, this proxy reflects the frequency of
general interest in the given location, some of which may be orthogonal to media reporting incentives.
To the extent that Google trends are less prone to differential underreporting than the SNPK data, con-
trolling for such trends should dampen the overall effects we estimate if reporting bias is substantial.
Nevertheless, doing so leaves our key results unchanged.
40
   That is, on any given draw, one district would receive its minimum ∆P while another district would receive its maximum
   ∆P , thereby shuffling randomly across all districts.
41
   Appendix Figure C.3.1 further illustrates this point by showing examples of how there is relatively little overlap in the dis-
   tributions of feasible ∆P across original districts. Indeed, original district fixed effects account for over 88 percent of the
   variation in feasible ∆P .


                                                               21
      In Appendix C.6, we address several other concerns about the baseline generalized DiD specification.
First, we consider the number of conflict events rather than a binary indicator, leaving the key takeaways
mostly unchanged, though introducing more noise. Second, we omit districts that enter the data in
2005, which is important given that these later entrants were selected on account of policy concerns
about recent violence. Third, we separately exclude the regions of Aceh and Maluku, which experienced
intense conflict in the late 1990s and early 2000s at the onset of decentralization. Fourth, we vary the
∆diversity vector. Fifth, we consider an alternative identification strategy that includes as additional
control areas those nearby districts that have not undergone redistricting. Sixth, we offer evidence on the
external validity of our findings across Indonesia by reweighting the sample of districts to account for the
likelihood of redistricting following the standard Horvitz and Thompson (1952) approach. Finally, recall
that Appendices B.3 and B.4 demonstrate robustness across alternative groupings of violence categories
and show that our effects are driven by events with injuries and property damage but not deaths per se.


6     Ethnic Reconfiguration and Political Cycles of Violence
Our core results show that changes in ethnic divisions—arising purely from a reshuffling of political
boundaries—can affect conflict within a matter of years. This suggests that the boundaries of political
contests fundamentally shape the way that diverse groups interact and compete with one another. This
section bolsters this interpretation by linking changes in violence to district politics and local elections.
District governments play a large role in the local polity with mayors in control of vast public resources.
Given the salience of ethnicity during mayoral elections, we investigate how border-induced changes
in ethnic divisions affect violence around these political contests. We show that violence surges around
new, closely contested mayoral elections, and that these political conflict cycles are amplified in high
∆diversity areas. Further, we provide evidence of ethnic favoritism in the allocation of public resources
as a potential mechanism for generating grievances and amplifying incentives for ethnic mobilization
around these majoritarian contests. We conclude by discussing a case of redistricting that nicely captures
our broad empirical findings and clarifies the way that political boundaries shape ethnic divisions.


6.1     Electoral Violence

The empirical evidence thus far suggests redistricting may create strong incentives for group mobiliza-
tion and violence. In settings with weak institutions, such violence may help shape the degree of control
that one’s group exerts over new institutions responsible for public goods or help influence resource al-
location after another group assumes control. Here, we provide empirical evidence of these mechanisms
in the context of mayoral elections.
      In Table 6, we augment the parent/child specifications in Table 3 with indicators for direct mayoral
election periods. Since these elections are specific to the new parent or child district, we focus on spec-
ifications at that administrative level. These quinquennial elections, which began in 2005, vary in their
timing (i) in parent districts, due to predetermined path dependence from Suharto-era election sched-
ules (see Martinez-Bravo et al., 2017; Skoufias et al., 2014), and (ii) in child districts, due to the timing




                                                     22
of redistricting (with elections typically occurring 1.5–2.5 years after the split).42 Following Harish and
Toha (2017) and others cited therein, we define the election period as a six month window centered on
the month of the election, but results are similar for other bandwidths. The coefficient on post-split×first
(second) election identifies whether the incidence of conflict during the first (second) election deviates
from the average incidence after redistricting. To see whether electoral violence cycles are more likely in
newly polarized areas, we further interact post-redistricting election periods with ∆diversity.
     Looking across columns of Table 6, the likelihood of social conflict after redistricting is generally
higher around the initial mayoral elections, particularly where redistricting sharply changed ethnic di-
visions. Column 1 shows this result pooling parent and child districts. Columns 2 and 3 show results
separately for parent and child districts, pointing to important differences between pre-existing and new
seats of government.
     Child districts with ∆P one standard deviation above the mean are nearly 70 percent more likely
to exhibit differentially more violence around the first election (comparing 0.027 to 0.041). This result
lines up with the fact that polarization is associated with closer elections (see Appendix Table D.1.1),
and violence is significantly more pronounced during those close elections (see Appendix Table D.2.1).
Moreover, the amplifying effect of ∆P on political violence persists and may even be larger during the
second election period 5–8 years after redistricting.
     Meanwhile, in parent districts, initial elections are generally less violent. Border-induced changes
in ethnic polarization seem less important than changes in fractionalization, which exerts a large albeit
noisy positive amplification effect.43 Second election periods appear differentially less violent in high
∆P areas, which is unexpected and helps explain the null ∆P in that bottom section of column 1.
     The differential effects of changing ethnic divisions on electoral violence in parent and child districts
admit several possible interpretations. The relatively stronger effects of changes in ethnic polarization in
child districts might be explained by the greater stakes of winning initial elections to control a completely
new local government as opposed to winning control of an existing one. Another explanation for these
diverging results could be differential institutional capacity. Parent districts may not only run more
effective and safer initial elections than child districts but also learn more quickly how to manage the
changing ethnopolitical divisions.
     Overall, the results in Table 6 suggest that ethnic mobilization around mayoral elections are an im-
portant feature of conflict dynamics after redistricting.44 As in the baseline, these results are robust to
controlling for confounding media attention using Google trends and to specifying the outcome as the
intensive margin number of conflict events.
     Furthermore, we show in Table 7 that the amplifying effects of ∆diversity on conflict around may-

42
   All direct elections in child districts follow splitting. Some original district have first direct elections that precede splitting,
   and hence we include a term for first direct elections in addition to the term post-split×first election. We observe a second
   quinquennial election for the three-quarters of new districts in existence long enough to hold a second round by 2014.
43
   This may be consistent with the stronger correlation of F and Relig than P with victory margins in parent districts (see
   Appendix Table D.1.1). And like child districts, more closely contested elections are associated with greater violence in
   parents (along the intensive margin, see Appendix Table D.2.1).
44
   This is consistent with Tanasaldy (2012, p. 263) who notes that in several areas of West Kalimantan (in our study), “Due to
   ethnic polarization introduced in previous elections, masses from each ethnic group tended to rally for candidates from their
   own ethnic group.” Indeed, we bear this out more generally using individual-level data from a 2014 survey, which shows
   that ∆diversity, and, in particular, ∆polarization is strongly correlated with the reported importance to voters of mayoral
   ethnicity and patronage (see Appendix D.1 for details).


                                                                  23
oral elections are a distinctive feature of high stakes majoritarian contests for political control. First,
in columns 1–3, we find that the effects of ∆diversity on conflict do not systematically differ during
the quinquennial parliamentary (and presidential) elections taking place in April 2004, 2009, and 2014.
Although violence is generally more likely during such periods, ∆diversity exerts no significant ampli-
fying effects as it does during the (staggered) mayoral elections. This difference is consistent with the
fact that proportional representation legislative elections impart very different group-based incentives
than the majoritarian mayoral elections (see Esteban and Ray, 2008b).45 As a further validation test in
columns 4–6, we show that there are no systematic differential effects of ∆diversity during the (lunar)
holy month of Ramadan when conflict is generally lower but not differential with respect to ∆diversity.
Across columns, ∆diversity exhibits small, insignificant heterogeneous effects that are statistically dif-
ferent from the amplifying effects of ∆diversity around mayoral elections.
      Finally, the changes in violence due to changing ethnic divisions are not merely a transitory phe-
nomenon around elections. Across all results in Tables 6 and 7, the coefficient on post-split × ∆P is sta-
tistically indistinguishable from that in Table 3, meaning that the post-split differences in the incidence
of social conflict extend beyond election periods. This is what one would expect if grievances among los-
ing group continued to manifest in violent acts protesting governance- and resource distribution-related
issues in the future. Next, we provide evidence for one potential reason for such grievances, namely
ethnic favoritism in the allocation of public resources.


6.2     Ethnic Favoritism

Given hotly contested mayoral elections and their interplay with ethnic divisions, one would expect po-
litical favoritism towards co-ethnics. Recent studies document favoritism in resource allocation towards
newly elected leaders’ ethnic homelands in sub-Saharan Africa (see, e.g., Burgess et al., 2015; Hodler
and Raschky, 2014). While a full accounting of this phenomenon in Indonesia is beyond the scope of
this study, we present here evidence consistent with ethnic favoritism as a potential factor contributing
to the patterns of discontent underlying the link between changes in ethnic divisions and conflict.
      Following prior literature, we use nighttime light intensity as a proxy for local economic develop-
ment and targeted public resources.46 Importantly, electricity cannot be provided solely by villages and
often requires support from higher levels of government. Mayors have been responsible for setting elec-
tricity policy within their districts since 2005 (Jayawardena, 2005). Moreover, mayors have significant
discretionary power in their choice of how to allocate resources across villages (Aspinall and Asad, 2015;
Pal and Wahhaj, 2016). Altogether, this suggests scope for rivalry across villages in access to this public
resource, and indeed, publicly-provided electricity is a factor underlying some of the violent incidents
reported in the SNPK data.47

45
   Fjelde and Höglund (2016) provide similar empirical evidence across electoral systems in sub-Saharan Africa.
46
   Olivia and Gibson (2015) validate a strong correlation of light intensity with district-level output and expenditure data. In the
   predominantly rural areas of our study, nighttime lights tend to disproportionately capture public street lights. Moreover, not
   unlike other areas of the developing world, electricity provision in Indonesia is almost exclusively concentrated in a single
   public utility company, which is often subject to the same sort of political manipulation identified in South Asia (see Baskaran
   et al., 2015; Min, 2015).
47
   For example, in Aceh Selatan district on 17 August 2007, “Hundreds of residents of Meukek subdistrict damaged PLN (Public
   Electricity Company) office and head of Subranting PLN’s house by throwing stones. Citizens were induced to action by
   irritation due to irregular schedules of power outages. Other examples are provided in Appendix B.1. More recent examples,


                                                                24
      We investigate ethnic favoritism by exploiting the fact that redistricting often changes either the iden-
tity or strength of the dominant group in the district. We examine changes in resources flowing to village
v after redistricting as a function of that village’s initial ethnic composition. Specifically, we ask whether
the new boundaries imply that the village’s initial population (N ) share of ethnics from the new dis-
trict’s largest group is (i) larger, (ii) smaller, or (iii) the same as the village’s initial share of ethnics from
                                                                                       NeO v        Nei v
the original district’s largest ethnic group. Formally, we compare                      Nv     to   Nv      where eO is the largest
ethnic group in original district O, and ei is the largest group in child or parent district i.48
      For example, appealing to Figure 4, those Gayo majority villages in the new parent district will fall
under (ii) since the Gayo are no longer the largest group. Meanwhile, the Gayo majority villages in the
new child district of Gayo Lues will fall under (iii) as the largest group has not changed with redistricting.
Note that, like most villages in category (iii), the size of their majority in Gayo Lues has increased,
consistent with the general reduction in fractionalization that comes with redistricting.
      In Table 8, we show how nighttime light intensity evolves across these three different types of villages
after redistricting. We consider interactions of post-split with indicators for the change in alignment
status, conditional on year and village fixed effects. Villages that lose their alignment with the largest
ethnic group (ii) exhibit differentially lower light intensity after redistricting compared to those that
either remain (iii) or become newly (i) aligned with the largest group. The results are consistent at both
the parent and child level albeit slightly larger and more precisely estimated for the latter. Column 1
suggests that villages that become newly (remain) aligned with the largest group have 1.1 p.p. (2.8 p.p.)
more village area with light coverage post-redistricting relative to those that lose their alignment. These
are large differences relative to the mean of 16.3 percent of village area covered with any lights.
      These results are suggestive of ethnic favoritism, which may be one vehicle for generating the sort
of grievances that lead to persistently higher violence in areas where new boundaries create fresh eth-
nic divisions, even outside of election periods. We turn now to a case study highlighting some of the
particular mechanisms underlying our empirical results.


6.3     Case Study

We discuss here an illustrative case study in West Kalimantan. This region has a significant history of
ethnic strife including Dayak violence against the Chinese, and repeated clashes between Dayak and
Madurese as well as Malay and Madurese. As in the rest of Indonesia, these large-scale open conflicts
largely subsided in the early 2000s, replaced by more sporadic violence that remains a serious concern
to policymakers (see Barron et al., 2016). We briefly present this interesting case below.
      We focus on the original district of Sambas, which split into three separate districts: Sambas,
Bengkayang (in 1999), and Kota Singkawang (from Bengkayang in 2001). Before splitting, Sambas was
comprised of 52 percent Malay ethnics, 15 percent Dayak, and 15 percent Chinese, with other smaller
groups including Javanese and Madurese. Redistricting significantly altered these group shares.


   not (yet) in SNPK, provide further insight into the politicization of electricity provision with demonstrations against both
   PLN and the mayor (KabarNias, 2015) or being led by village heads against PLN (ProKal, 2016).
48
   Note that if the largest group does not change with splitting, the village will fall under category (iii). Nearly 70 percent of
   these villages are in districts where the share of the largest group increased. There are 1,764 villages in 32 districts in category
   (i), 558 villages in 28 districts in category (ii), and 12,182 villages in 119 districts in category (iii).


                                                                  25
     After the fall of Suharto, demands for decentralization and local empowerment spread across In-
donesia, and West Kalimantan was no exception. As Tanasaldy (2012, p. 269) notes “In West Kalimantan
such [native empowerment] movements were initially led by Dayaks who demanded more top jobs in
the government and competed zealously against the Malays, for those political positions. Held in check
during the authoritarian New Order [Suharto era], political polarization between the two ethnic groups
was now unavoidable.”
     With these mounting tensions came a push for redistricting, motivated in part by a desire to reduce
ethnic divisions. Tanasaldy notes that “government officials thought that separating conflict-prone areas
and allowing the Dayaks to govern their own areas was a solution to chronic ethnic conflicts there.” After
the two splits, the now-parent district of Sambas was about 82 percent Malay, with the next largest group
being ethnic Chinese at 8 percent. Bengkayang became 54 percent Dayak, 19 percent Malay, and 6 percent
Chinese, while Singkawang was 37 percent Chinese, 20 percent Malay, 17 percent Dayak, and 10 percent
Jawa. This split is often depicted as having cleanly separate the three groups: “the Malays in Sambas,
the Chinese in Singkawang, and the Dayaks in Bengkayang” (Kobayashi, 2011, p. 374). However, as
evident from the group shares, Singkawang remains far more polarized than Benkayang.
     In Sambas and Bengkayang, the split was successful in reducing violence as the changing ethnic di-
visions translated into more amicable politics. Kobayashi nicely summarizes, noting that “district head
elections became less tense because the Dayaks and Malays understood each others’ rights to lead dis-
tricts where they were dominant,” and more generally that “interethnic strife to obtain political positions
has declined since 2000.” Government officials often argue that redistricting “contributed to prevention
of ethnic violence,” drawing connections, for example, between increased Dayak representation in the
civil service and the end of violent street demonstrations.
     Meanwhile, Singkawang presents an interesting contrast. Despite being a significant 40 percent plu-
rality, the Chinese had generally stayed out of politics, with the “sons of the soil” Malay typically dom-
inating. However, in 2007, the first direct mayoral election after redistricting brought their numeric
advantage to the fore amidst a growing “desire within the Chinese community to increase the number
of Chinese in the government and to elect a Chinese mayor” (Kobayashi, 2011, p. 295). In the 2007
election, much to the surprise of the Malay candidates, Hasan Karman, an ethnic Chinese beat the three
Malay candidates (whose votes were split). Once in power, though, Karman “fumbled the delicate is-
sue of ethnicity”, as he “irked Malays by building a [Chinese] dragon statue. . . in the heart of the city”
and “disparaged the Malay community. . . by [publicly] linking them to pirates” (Sukarsono, 2012).49 In
the 2012 election, tensions mounted amid Chinese accusations of intimidation and vote-tampering af-
ter the Malay candidate won. Violent clashes erupted between Malay security personnel and Chinese
protestors outside the election commission office.50
     Overall, West Kalimantan highlights both the promise and pitfalls of redistricting as a vehicle for re-
shaping ethnic divisions in society. Greater homogeneity in Sambas and Bengkayang may have helped
to resolve some of the longstanding interethnic grievances. However, the new district of Singkawang
49
   These violent incidents are reported in the SNPK data with event details such as “series of arson cases by unknown perpetra-
   tors believed to be related to ethnical issues” in May 2010, and “there was a clash in the parade of Singkawang Parliament,
   the village of Pasiran, the city of Singkawang. Clash involving two groups of the pro and contra period of the construction of
   a dragon statue that will be built at the crossroads (2 injured)” in July 2010.
50
   This event is reported in the SNPK data on October 1st, 2012 as “a clash between the masses and the police when the Mayoral
   Candidate campaign handed over evidence of more than 3,000 people being denied the vote. [2 injured]”


                                                               26
gave rise to fresh grievances and cycles of violence by invigorating hitherto less salient ethnic divisions.
These cases highlight the tradeoffs of redistricting in diverse societies where creating purely homoge-
nous political units is not feasible everywhere.


7   Discussion
This paper identified the casual effect of political boundaries on ethnic divisions. We showed how re-
drawing subnational boundaries can alter the salience of different ethnic cleavages in society, and, in
turn, affect conflict. By bringing the government closer to the governed, redistricting holds promise
for increasing social stability. However, this common policy reform is not without pitfalls. Our natu-
ral experiment showed in particular that fresh cycles of violence may erupt when new borders increase
ethnic polarization. We argued further that electoral democracy may amplify the underlying incentives
for group mobilization that often lead to violence. Overall, our findings provide novel evidence on the
interlinkages between ethnic and political divisions. These results help inform ongoing debates on the
causes of violence as well as policy efforts aimed at curbing it.
    Some of our findings suggest that border-induced changes in ethnic divisions may have persistent
effects on conflict. This persistence can be interpreted through the lens of models like Rohner et al.
(2013b), which feature vicious cycles of inter-group violence and erosion of trust. Political violence in
newly created districts may be particularly prone to such dynamics as seen, for example, in the case of
Singkawang. While over the long-run redistricting may foster new interethnic interactions, learning and
cooperation, it is important to understand and prepare for the scope for violence during the transition.
    Local government proliferation is a pervasive feature of decentralization today. Although our find-
ings may not fully generalize to other settings, the widespread prevalence of ethnic mobilization (Fearon,
2006) and favoritism (De Luca et al., 2017) suggest that similar conflict dynamics could play out in other
diverse countries. For example, Green (2010) discusses some of the same unintended consequences of
redistricting in Uganda that we identify empirically in Indonesia. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that
ours is only a partial analysis of the vast political and economic implications of redistricting.
    We see four important directions for future research on redistricting in Indonesia and elsewhere.
First, a small but growing literature highlights the importance of within-ethnolinguistic or -religious
group heterogeneity in culture (Desmet et al., 2017), genes (Arbatli et al., 2015), or income (Esteban and
Ray, 2008a; Mitra and Ray, 2014) in shaping conflict. This is an interesting question in the context of
decentralization and one that can be explored using heterogeneity in responses to household survey
questions on preferences, variation in vote shares for different parties of the same religion, and within-
group educational or occupational inequality.
    A second question is whether redistricting can be a vehicle for a central government to constrain
secessionist tendencies. Coming on the heels of East Timor’s independence and concerns about break-
away regions in Aceh and Papua, Indonesian policymakers in the late 1990s strategically chose districts
rather than provinces as the primary administrative units allowed to proliferate. According to observers
like Booth (2011), their goal, among others, was to fracture the strength of broader regional identities. It
would be interesting to explore whether this policy of “breaking up to stay together” stifles secessionist
sentiments and ultimately shifts violence from higher to lower levels.


                                                     27
   Third and relatedly, redistricting has the potential to activate more granular cultural distinctions. Al-
though many areas created ethnically homogenous districts, sub-ethnic distinctions may have emerged
over time as groups sought new vehicles for political mobilization. Redistricting may have contributed
to the dramatic growth in the number of self-reported ethnic identities from 1,087 in the 2000 Census
round to 1,331 in the 2010 round. As recounted in Fearon (2006), Horowitz (1985, p. 66) provides a telling
example of this burgeoning of local identity in the Indian context of state proliferation in the 1950s: In
Madras state, “. . . with large Tamil and Telugu populations, cleavages within the Telugu group were
not very important. As soon as a separate Telugu-speaking state was carved out of Madras, however,
Telugu subgroups—caste, regional, and religious—quickly formed the bases of political action.” In the
Indonesian context, one could explore empirically how political boundaries lead to new forms of identity
related not only to sub-ethnic distinctions but also to shared national identity (Bazzi et al., 2018).
   Finally, there are several open questions about the public goods and welfare consequences of redis-
tricting. Recent studies identify environmental externalities (Burgess et al., 2012; Lipscomb and Mo-
barak, forthcoming). There are other interesting implications of reduced government scale and changes
in the network of administrative responsibilities; not to mention increased proximity to service providers
in the new district capitals. A full account of the welfare implications of redistricting clearly extends be-
yond the effects of changing ethnic divisions.




                                                     28
References
Alesina, A. and E. Zhuravskaya, “Segregation and the Quality of Government in a Cross Section of
  Countries,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (5), 1872–1911.
  , R. Baqir, and W. Easterly, “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999,
  114 (4), 1243–1284.
  , W. Easterly, and J. Matuszeski, “Artificial states,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2011,
  9 (2), 246–277.
Allen, N. W., “From patronage machine to partisan melee: Subnational corruption and the evolution of
  the Indonesian party system,” Pacific Affairs, 2014, 87 (2), 221–245.
Amodio, F. and G. Chiovelli, “Ethnicity and Violence During Democratic Transitions: Evidence from
  South Africa,” Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.
Ananta, A., E. N. Arifin, M. S. Hasbullah, N. B. Handayani, and A. Pramono, Demography of Indonesia’s
  ethnicity, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2015.
Arbatli, C. E., Q. H. Ashraf, and O. Galor, “The Nature of Conflict,”, NBER Working Paper No. 21079
  2015.
Aspinall, E., “Democratization and Ethnic Politics in Indonesia: Nine Theses,” Journal of East Asian
  Studies, 2011, 11 (2), 289–319.
  , “A nation in fragments: Patronage and neoliberalism in contemporary Indonesia,” Critical Asian
  Studies, 2013, 45 (1), 27–54.
   and M. Sukmajati, eds, Electoral Dynamics in Indonesia: Money Politics, Patronage and Clientelism at the
  Grassroots, NUS Press, 2016.
   and M. U. Asad, “The Patronage Patchwork,” Bijdragen tot de taal-, land-en volkenkunde/Journal of the
  Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia, 2015, 171 (2-3), 165–195.
   and , “Understanding family politics: Successes and failures of political dynasties in regional In-
  donesia,” South East Asia Research, 2016, 24 (3), 420–435.
BAPPENAS, Evaluasi Pemekaran Daerah, Bappenas, 2007.
Barron, P., A. Engvall, and A. Morel, “Understanding Violence In Southeast Asia: The Contribution of
  Violent Incidents Monitoring Systems,” The Asia Foundation Working Paper, 2016.
  , S. Jaffrey, and A. Varshney, “Understanding violent conflict in Indonesia: a mixed methods ap-
  proach,”, World Bank Social Development Working Papers No. 117 2009.
  , , and , “How Large Conflicts Subside: Evidence From Indonesia,”, World Bank Indonesia Social
  Development Paper 18 2014.
Baskaran, T., B. Min, and Y. Uppal, “Election cycles and electricity provision: Evidence from a quasi-
  experiment with Indian special elections,” Journal of Public Economics, 2015, 126, 64–73.
Bazzi, S., A. Gaduh, A. Rothenberg, and M. Wong, “Skill Transferability, Migration, and Development:
  Evidence from Population Resettlement in Indonesia,” American Economic Review, September 2016, 106
  (9), 2658–98.
  , , , and , “Unity in Diversity? How Intergroup Contact Can Foster Nation Building,” CEPR
  Discussion Paper No. 12377, 2018.
   and C. Blattman, “Economic shocks and conflict: Evidence from commodity prices,” American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2014, 6 (4), 1–38.
Belloni, A., V. Chernozhukov, and C. Hansen, “Inference on treatment effects after selection among
  high-dimensional controls,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (2), 608–650.
Belsley, David A, Edwin Kuh, and Roy E Welsch, Regression diagnostics: Identifying influential data and
  sources of collinearity, Vol. 571, John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
Berge, L. I. O., K. Bjorvatn, S. Galle, E. Miguel, D. N. Posner, B. Tungodden, and K. Zhang, “How
  Strong are Ethnic Preferences?,”, NBER Working Paper No. 21715 2015.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan, “How much should we trust differences-in-differences
  estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (1), 249–275.

                                                    29
Blouin, A. and S. Mukand, “Erasing Ethnicity? Nation Building, (Mis)Trust and the Salience of Identity
  in Rwanda,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Bollen, K. A. and R. W. Jackman, “Regression diagnostics: An expository treatment of outliers and
  influential cases,” Modern methods of data analysis, 1990, pp. 257–291.
Booth, A., “Splitting, splitting and splitting again: a brief history of the development of regional gov-
  ernment in Indonesia since independence,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-en Volkenkunde, 2011, pp. 31–59.
Burbidge, J. B., L. Magee, and A. L. Robb, “Alternative transformations to handle extreme values of the
  dependent variable,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1988, 83 (401), 123–127.
Burgess, R., M. Hansen, B. A. Olken, P. Potapov, and S. Sieber, “The Political Economy of Deforestation
  in the Tropics,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (4), 1707–1754.
  , R. Jedwab, E. Miguel, A. Morjaria, and G. Padró i Miquel, “The Value of Democracy: Evidence
  from Road Building in Kenya,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (6), 1817–1851.
Butcher, C. and B. E. Goldsmith, “Elections, Ethnicity, and Political Instability,” Comparative Political
  Studies, 2017, 50 (10), 1390–1419.
Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller, “Bootstrap-based improvements for inference with
  clustered errors,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (3), 414–427.
  , , and , “Robust inference with multiway clustering,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics,
  2011, 29 (2), 238–249.
Campante, F., Q.A. Do, and B. Guimaraes, “Capital Cities, Conflict, and Misgovernance,” Working
  Paper, Harvard Kennedy School 2017.
Caselli, F. and W. J. Coleman, “On the theory of ethnic conflict,” Journal of the European Economic Associ-
  ation, 2013, 11 (s1), 161–192.
  , M. Morelli, and D. Rohner, “The Geography of Interstate Resource Wars,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2015, 130 (1), 267–315.
Cassidy, T., “Local Government Responses to Permanent vs. Transitory Grant Revenue: Evidence from
  Indonesia,” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Michigan 2017.
Charras, M., “The reshaping of the Indonesian archipelago after 50 years of regional imbalance,” in
  M. Erb, C. Faucher, and P. Sulistiyanto, eds., Regionalism in Post-Suharto Indonesia, Vol. 4, Routledge,
  2005, pp. 91–114.
Conley, T. G., “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence,” Journal of Econometrics, 1999, 92 (1),
  1–45.
Cox, D. R., “Regression Models and Life-Tables,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Method-
  ological), 1972, 34 (2), 87–22.
Cribb, R., Historical atlas of Indonesia, Routledge, 2013.
Dercon, S. and R. Gutiérrez-Romero, “Triggers and characteristics of the 2007 Kenyan electoral vio-
  lence,” World Development, 2012, 40 (4), 731–744.
Desmet, K., I. Ortuño-Ortı́n, and R. Wacziarg, “The political economy of linguistic cleavages,” Journal
  of Development Economics, 2012, 97 (2), 322–338.
  , , and , “Culture, ethnicity, and diversity,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (9), 2479–2513.
Desmet, K, I. Ortuño-Ortı́n, and S. Weber, “Linguistic Diversity and Redistribution,” Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 2009, 7 (6), 1291–1318.
Desmet, K., J. F. Gomes, and I. Ortuño-Ortı́n, “The geography of linguistic diversity and the provision
  of public goods,” Technical Report, CESifo Working Paper Series 6238 2016.
Diprose, R., “Decentralization, horizontal inequalities and conflict management in Indonesia,” Ethnopo-
  litics, 2009, 8 (1), 107–134.
Dower, P. C., V. Ginsburgh, and S. Weber, “Colonial legacy, polarization and linguistic disenfranchise-
  ment: The case of the Sri Lankan War,” Journal of Development Economics, 2017, 127, 440–448.
Dube, O. and J. F. Vargas, “Commodity price shocks and civil conflict: Evidence from Colombia,” The
  Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 80 (4), 1384–1421.


                                                    30
  , O. Garcı́a-Ponce, and K. Thom, “From maize to haze: Agricultural shocks and the growth of the
  mexican drug sector,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2016, 14 (5), 1181–1224.
Eifert, B., E. Miguel, and D. N. Posner, “Political competition and ethnic identification in Africa,” Amer-
  ican Journal of Political Science, 2010, 54 (2), 494–510.
Esteban, J. and D. Ray, “On the salience of ethnic conflict,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5),
  2185–2202.
   and , “Polarization, Fractionalization and Conflict,” Journal of Peace Research, 2008, 45 (2), 163–182.
   and , “Linking conflict to inequality and polarization,” American Economic Review, 2011a, 101 (4),
  1345–1374.
   and , “A model of ethnic conflict,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2011b, 9 (3), 496–521.
  , L. Mayoral, and D. Ray, “Ethnicity and conflict: An empirical Study,” American Economic Review,
  2012, 102 (4), 1310–1342.
Esteban, J.M. and D. Ray, “On the measurement of polarization,” Econometrica, 1994, pp. 819–851.
Fearon, J. and A. Hoeffler, “Benefits and Costs of the Conflict and Violence Targets for the Post-2015
  Development Agenda,” Conflict and violence assessment paper, Copenhagen Consensus Center, 2014.
Fearon, J. D., “Ethnic mobilization and ethnic violence,” The Oxford Handbook of Political Economy, 2006,
  pp. 852–868.
   and D. D. Laitin, “Ethnicity, insurgency, and civil war,” American Political Science Review, 2003, 97 (01),
  75–90.
   and , “Sons of the soil, migrants, and civil war,” World Development, 2011, 39 (2), 199–211.
Fitrani, F., B. Hofman, and K. Kaiser, “Unity in diversity? The creation of new local governments in a
  decentralising Indonesia,” Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies, 2005, 41 (1), 57–79.
Fjelde, H. and K. Höglund, “Electoral institutions and electoral violence in Sub-Saharan Africa,” British
  Journal of Political Science, 2016, 46 (2), 297–320.
Fox, C. and J. Menchik, “The Politics of Identity in Indonesia: Results from Campaign Advertisements,”
  APSA 2011 Annual Meeting Paper, 2011.
Gelman, A. and E. Loken, “The Statistical Crisis in Science Data-dependent analysis—a “garden of
  forking paths”—explains why many statistically significant comparisons don’t hold up.,” American
  Scientist, 2014, 102 (6), 460.
Gershman, B. and D. Rivera, “Subnational Diversity in Sub-Saharan Africa: Insights from a New
  Dataset,” Journal of Development Economics, 2016, 133, 231–263.
Green, E., “Patronage, district creation, and reform in Uganda,” Studies in Comparative International De-
  velopment, 2010, 45 (1), 83–103.
Green, E. D., “Decentralisation and conflict in Uganda,” Conflict, Security & Development, 2008, 8 (4),
  427–450.
Grossman, G. and J. Lewis, “Administrative Unit Proliferation,” American Political Science Review, 2014,
  108 (01), 196–217.
  , J. H. Pierskalla, and E. B. Dean, “Government fragmentation and public goods provision,” The
  Journal of Politics, 2017, 79 (3), 823–840.
Habyarimana, J., M. Humphreys, D. N. Posner, and J. M. Weinstein, “Why does ethnic diversity un-
  dermine public goods provision?,” American Political Science Review, 2007, 101 (04), 709–725.
Harish, S. P. and R. Toha, “A New Typology of Electoral Violence: Insights from Indonesia,” Terrorism
  and Political Violence, 2017, pp. 1–25.
Henderson, J. V., A. Storeygard, and D. N. Weil, “Measuring Economic Growth from Outer Space,”
  American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (2), 994–1028.
Hillman, B., “Ethnic politics and local political parties in Indonesia,” Asian Ethnicity, 2012, 13 (4), 419–
  440.
Hjort, J., “Ethnic divisions and production in firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (4), 1899–
  1946.


                                                     31
Hodler, R. and P. A. Raschky, “Regional Favoritism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (2), 995–
   1033.
Horowitz, D. L., Ethnic groups in conflict, University of California Press, 1985.
Horvitz, D. G. and D. J. Thompson, “A generalization of sampling without replacement from a finite
   universe,” Journal of the American statistical Association, 1952, 47 (260), 663–685.
Huber, P. J., “Robust Regression: Asymptotics, Conjectures and Monte Carlo,” The Annals of Statistics,
   1973, 1 (5), 799–821.
International Crisis Group, “Decentralisation and Conflict in Indonesia: The Mamasa Case,” Asia Brief-
   ing No. 37, 2005.
Jayawardena, M., “Electricity for all: options for increasing access in Indonesia,” Working Paper, Asia
   Sustainable and Alternative Energy Program, The World Bank 2005.
Jr., R. G. Fryer and R. Holden, “Measuring the Compactness of Political Districting Plans,” Journal of
   Law and Economics, 2011, 54 (3), 493–535.
KabarNias, “Rekening Listrik Melonjak, Masyarakat Demo PLN,” http://kabarnias.com/
   kabar-dari-nias/nias/rekening-listrik-melonjak-masyarakat-demo-pln-1979
   2015. Accessed: 2017-11-30.
Kobayashi, H., “Civic Associations, Local Governance and Conflict Prevention in Indonesia.” PhD dis-
   sertation, University of Southern California 2011.
Lewis, B., “Political Fragmentation in Indonesia: Pork Barrel Spending, Service Delivery, and Corrup-
   tion,” Working Paper, Crawford School of Public Policy Australian National University 2017.
Lewis, B. D., “Does local government proliferation improve public service delivery? Evidence from
   Indonesia,” Journal of Urban Affairs, 2017, 39 (8), 1047–1065.
Lipscomb, M. and A. M. Mobarak, “Decentralization and the Political Economy of Water Pollution:
   Evidence from the Re-drawing of County Borders in Brazil,” Review of Economics Studies, forthcoming.
Lowes, S., N. Nunn, J. A. Robinson, and J. Weigel, “Understanding Ethnic Identity in Africa: Evidence
   from the Implicit Association Test (IAT),” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (5), 340–345.
Luca, Giacomo De, Roland Hodler, Paul A Raschky, and Michele Valsecchi, “Ethnic Favoritism: An
   Axiom of Politics?,” Journal of Development Economics, 2017, 132, 115–129.
Martinez-Bravo, M., P. Mukherjee, and A. Stegmann, “An Empirical Investigation of the Legacies of
   Non-Democratic Regimes: The Case of Soeharto’s Mayors in Indonesia,” Econometrica, 2017, 85 (6),
   1991–2010.
Martinez-Bravo, Monica, “The role of local officials in new democracies: Evidence from Indonesia,”
   American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (4), 1244–87.
Mavridis, D., “Ethnic diversity and social capital in Indonesia,” World Development, 2015, 67, 376–395.
McKenzie, David, “Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments,” Journal of
   Development Economics, 2012, 99 (2), 210–221.
Michalopoulos, S. and E. Papaioannou, “National institutions and subnational development in Africa,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 129 (1), 151–213.
    and , “The Long-Run Effects of the Scramble for Africa,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (7),
   1802–48.
    and , “Spatial Patterns of Development: A Meso Approach,” Annual Review of Economics, 2017.
Mietzner, M., “Indonesia’s decentralization: the rise of local identities and the survival of the nation
   state,” Regional Dynamics in a Decentralized Indonesia, 2014, pp. 45–67.
Miguel, E., S. Satyanath, and E. Sergenti, “Economic shocks and civil conflict: An instrumental vari-
   ables approach,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (4), 725–753.
Min, B., Power and the Vote: Elections and Electricity in the Developing World, Cambridge University Press,
   2015.
Mitra, A. and D. Ray, “Implications of an Economic Theory of Conflict: Hindu-Muslim Violence in
   India,” Journal of Political Economy, 2014, 122 (4), 719–765.


                                                    32
Montalvo, J. G. and M. Reynal-Querol, “Ethnic Polarization, Potential Conflict, and Civil Wars,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 2005, 95 (3), 796–816.
   and , “Ethnic diversity and growth: Revisiting the evidence,” Unpublished Manuscript, Universitat
  Pompeu Fabra 2017.
Nolan, C., S. Jones, and Solahudin, “The Political Impact of Carving Up Papua,” in H. Hill, ed., Regional
  dynamics in a decentralized Indonesia, Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2014, chapter 17,
  pp. 409–433.
Olivia, S. and J. Gibson, “Value Added from Space? Empirical Evidence from Indonesia,” Unpublished
  Manuscript, University of Waikato 2015.
Pal, S. and Z. Wahhaj, “Fiscal decentralisation, local institutions and public good provision: evidence
  from Indonesia,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 2016.
Pierskalla, J. H., “The Proliferation of Decentralized Governing Units,” Unpublished Manuscript, Ohio
  State University 2016.
  , “Splitting the Difference? The Politics of District Creation in Indonesia,” Comparative Politics, 2016, 48
  (2), 249–268.
Posner, D. N., “The political salience of cultural difference: Why Chewas and Tumbukas are allies in
  Zambia and adversaries in Malawi,” American Political Science Review, 2004, 98 (04), 529–545.
  , “When and why do some social cleavages become politically salient rather than others?,” Ethnic and
  Racial Studies, 2017, 40 (12), 2001–2019.
ProKal, “Kepala Desa se Kabupaten Tanah Bumbu Demo PLN,” http://kalsel.prokal.co/read/
  news/1911-kepala-desa-se-kabupaten-tanah-bumbu-demo-pln 2016. Accessed: 2017-11-
  30.
Ray, D. and J. Esteban, “Development and Conflict,” Annual Review of Economics, 2016, 8 (1).
Rohner, D., M. Thoenig, and F. Zilibotti, “Seeds of distrust: Conflict in Uganda,” Journal of Economic
  Growth, 2013, 18 (3), 217–252.
  , , and , “War signals: A theory of trade, trust, and conflict,” Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 80
  (3), 1114–1147.
Skoufias, E, A. Narayan, B. Dasgupta, and K. Kaiser, “Electoral Accountability and Local Government
  Spending in Indonesia,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6782, 2014.
Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg, “War and Relatedness,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2016, 98 (5).
Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg, “The Political Economy of Heterogeneity and Conflict,” Tech-
  nical Report, NBER Working Paper No. 23278 2017.
Sukarsono, A., “Showing True Colours:                    Identity Politics in Indonesia’s Local Elec-
  tions,”                   https://www.crisisgroup.org/asia/south-east-asia/indonesia/
  showing-true-colours-identity-politics-indonesias-local-elections                                        2012.
  Accessed: 2017-09-30.
Sundberg, R. and E. Melander, “Introducing the UCDP georeferenced event dataset,” Journal of Peace
  Research, 2013, 50 (4), 523–532.
Tadjoeddin, M. Z., “Electoral conflict and the maturity of local democracy in Indonesia: testing the
  modernisation hypothesis,” Journal of the Asia Pacific Economy, 2012, 17 (3), 476–497.
Tanasaldy, T., Regime change and ethnic politics in Indonesia; Dayak politics of West Kalimantan, Brill, 2012.
Weiner, M., Sons of the soil: Migration and ethnic conflict in India, Princeton University Press, 1978.
Wilson, I. D., The politics of protection rackets in post-New Order Indonesia: Coercive capital, authority and
  street politics, Vol. 47, Routledge, 2015.
Yanagizawa-Drott, D., “Propaganda and conflict: Evidence from the Rwandan genocide,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (4), 1947–1994.
Young, A., “Improved, nearly exact, statistical inference with robust and clustered covariance matri-
  ces using effective degrees of freedom corrections,” Unpublished Manuscript, London School of Eco-
  nomics 2016.


                                                      33
Figures


                        Figure 1: Indonesia’s Remarkable Wave of Redistricting




 Notes: This figure captures the evolution of new districts across Indonesia from 1980–2014 based on the month each district
 was passed into law.




                                 Figure 2: Redistricting across the Country




      Notes: This map plots the original and new district borders based on district-level shapefiles for 2000 and 2010.




                                                             34
                Figure 3: Example of Redistricting into Parent and Child Districts




Notes: This figure provides an example of the redistricting process and our nomenclature for the different administrative
divisions.




                                                           35
                           Figure 4: Examples of Border-Induced ∆ Diversity

                              (a) Homogenizing Case: Aceh Tenggara District




                        (b) Newly Salient Divisions: Kotawaringin Timur District




Notes: This figure provides two examples of the types of redistricting patterns that we see in our data in terms of changes
in policy-relevant ethnic diversity. Figure (a) shows the original district of Aceh Tenggara as in Figure 3, and Figure (b)
shows the original district of Kotawaringin Timur, which splits into two child districts, Seruyan on the left and Katingan
on the right with the parent district in the middle. In both figures, we color code the villages based on the majority ethnic
group in the village in the 2000 Population Census with red indicating the largest group in the original district as a whole,
aqua the second largest, and so on, with a few villages in white with missing data or inability to match with shapefiles.


                                                             36
                                                                               Figure 5: Diversity Before and After Redistricting

                                                                       (a) fractionalization                                                                                                                    (b) polarization
                                                1                                                                                                                             .025
 ethnic fractionalization, post-redistricting




                                                                                                                                    ethnic polarization, post-redistricting
                                                .8                                                                                                                             .02
                                                                                                            Kotawaringin Timur
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Kotawaringin Timur
                                                .6                                                                                                                            .015
                                                                                                        Aceh Tenggara
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Aceh Tenggara
                                                .4                                                                                                                             .01



                                                .2                                                                                                                            .005



                                                0                                                                                                                                   0
                                                      0      .2              .4              .6              .8           1                                                             0        .005            .01            .015            .02   .025
                                                             ethnic fractionalization, pre-redistricting (2000)                                                                                     ethnic polarization, pre-redistricting (2000)



                 Notes: These figures plot diversity at the original district level baseline boundaries in 2000 (x-axis) against the 2010 bound-
                 aries after redistricting (y-axis). The latter measure is the population-weighted average of diversity in the new parent and
                 child districts, but again based on the population residing in those areas at baseline in 2000. The dashed 45 degree line
                 indicates the locus of points along which the new borders imply no change in diversity, and the vertical distance between
                 each point and the line captures our ∆diversity measure. For presentational purposes, we omit the top 4 districts with
                 baseline polarization >0.025, though they are of course included in all regression analysis. In both graphs, we identify the
                 two example districts seen in Figure 4.




                                                           Figure 6: Simple Difference-in-Difference: ∆ Conflict against ∆ Diversity

                                                                        (a) fractionalization                                                                                                                  (b) polarization
                                                .4                                                                                                                            .4




                                                .2                                                                                                                            .2
∆social conflict




                                                                                                                                   ∆social conflict




                                                 0                                                                                                                             0




                                                -.2                                                                                                                           -.2




                                                -.4                                                                                                                           -.4
                                                      -4     -3              -2              -1              0            1                                                                 -2       -1             0             1            2      3
                                                                   ∆ethnic fractionalization, normalized                                                                                                  ∆ethnic polarization, normalized


                 Notes: This figure presents a simple difference-in-difference regression relating ∆diversity to changes in social conflict
                 captured by the difference in the mean monthly likelihood of any violence before versus after redistricting. The results are
                 restricted to those 38 original districts with conflict data pre- and post-redistricting. Graph (a) shows results for fraction-
                 alization and (b) for polarization. The thick dashed lines are robust 95 percent confidence intervals. The point estimate
                 in (a) is 0.002 (0.050) and in (b) is 0.068 (0.029)** with robust standard and the HC3 degrees-of-freedom adjustment. We
                 omit one extreme outlier (with ∆P six standard deviations below the mean) based on standard outlier detection methods.
                 All districts, including this outlier, are retained in the main generalized DiD estimates in the paper, and Appendix C.4
                 presents a battery of small-sample robustness and inference procedures.




                                                                                                                              37
Tables

                            Table 1: Plausibly Exogenous Timing of Redistricting
                                                                                         Dependent Variable:
                                                                            no. months until split 1(post-moratorium split)
                                                                                 mean: 53                 mean: 0.31

 Panel A: Diversity                                                                       Standardized Coefficient

 original district ethnic fractionalization                                           2.183                        0.011
                                                                                     (4.267)                      (0.071)
 original district ∆ ethnic fractionalization                                         2.328                        0.033
                                                                                     (3.417)                      (0.061)
 child district ethnic fractionalization                                              2.641                        0.009
                                                                                     (3.984)                      (0.069)
 parent district ethnic fractionalization                                             4.416                        0.051
                                                                                     (3.962)                      (0.066)

 original district ethnic polarization                                               -1.829                       -0.006
                                                                                     (2.882)                      (0.048)
 original district ∆ ethnic polarization                                              2.168                        0.039
                                                                                     (1.880)                      (0.026)
 child district ethnic polarization                                                  -1.545                       -0.002
                                                                                     (3.122)                      (0.045)
 parent district ethnic polarization                                                  1.412                        0.045
                                                                                     (4.002)                      (0.071)

 original district religious polarization                                             1.530                       -0.024
                                                                                     (3.343)                      (0.060)
 original district ∆ religious polarization                                          -1.461                        0.022
                                                                                     (2.276)                      (0.033)
 child district religious polarization                                               -1.107                       -0.063
                                                                                     (3.821)                      (0.060)
 parent district religious polarization                                               2.653                        0.013
                                                                                     (3.749)                      (0.063)

 Panel B: 65 Potential Confounders (see Appendix C.2)

 mean standardized coefficient                                                        0.096                        -0.005
 actual number of significant predictors at 5% level                                    4                             3
 expected number of significant predictors at 5% level by chance                       3.3                           3.3


 Notes: Each cell is a different bivariate OLS regression of the timing of the first split on initial district characteristics, each
 of which is measured in 2000 before the onset of redistricting. The dependent variable in column (1) counts the number
 of months between January 2000 and the month in which each original district split, and in column (2) is an indicator for
 whether the split happened after the moratorium from 2004–6. Coefficients are based on standardized variables. Panel A
 looks at ethnolinguistic and religious diversity, including the ∆ measure capturing differences between parent/child and
 original district diversity levels. Panel B looks at the 65 controls capturing a broad array of confounders associated with
 proximity to security forces, economic development, public goods, demographics, natural resource intensity, political
 factors, economic structure, geography/topography, and remoteness. See Appendix C.2 for a discussion of the variables
 and Appendix E for further details. The mean effect size is the average standardized coefficient. The sample size is the
 52 original districts in our main analysis, and all regressions include an indicator if the district entered the SNPK data in
 2005. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.




                                                                 38
                       Table 2: Average Effects of Redistricting on Social Conflict
                     Administrative Unit:                   Original      Parent        Parent          Child
                                                            District      & Child
                                                              (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)

                     post-split                              -0.008           0.001      0.002        0.001
                                                             (0.026)         (0.022)    (0.028)      (0.025)

                     Number of District-Months                7,956          20,220      7,956          12,264
                     Number of Districts                        52            133          52             81
                     Dep. Var. Mean, Pre-Split                 0.57           0.33        0.47           0.25
Notes: The dependent variable in all columns is an indicator equal to one if there is any social conflict in that district–
month. post-split is an indicator equal to one for all months after which the original or parent district experiences its first
redistricting and a child district is officially passed into law. Columns 1–4 are estimated at the respective administrative
unit level listed at the top of the column. There are 52 original districts in column 1, 133 parent/child districts in column 2,
52 parent districts in column 3, and 81 child districts in column 4. All specifications include month FE, district FE, district-
specific time trends, and dummies for the number of papers used by coders for the given province–month. Standard
errors are clustered by original district. Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.




                   Table 3: Redistricting, Changing Ethnic Divisions, and Conflict
              Administrative Unit                                 Original       Parent          Parent        Child
                                                                  District       & Child
                                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)

              post-split                                             -0.012      -0.003        0.001           -0.005
                                                                     (0.025)     (0.021)      (0.026)          (0.025)
              post-split×∆ ethnic polarization                       0.036**      0.032       0.027**          0.043*
                                                                     (0.018)     (0.019)      (0.013)          (0.025)
              post-split×∆ ethnic fractionalization                  -0.003       0.000        0.035           -0.011
                                                                     (0.019)     (0.012)      (0.026)          (0.019)
              post-split×∆ religious diversity                        0.014      -0.009       -0.031           -0.005
                                                                     (0.013)     (0.011)      (0.021)          (0.014)

              Number of District-Months                              7,956       20,220          7,956         12,264
              Number of Districts                                      52         133              52            81
              Dep. Var. Mean, Pre-Split                               0.57        0.33            0.47          0.25
Notes: The dependent variable in all columns is an indicator equal to one if there was any social conflict in that district–
month. post-split is an indicator equal to one for all months after which the original or parent district experiences its first
redistricting and the child district is officially passed into law. ∆diversity measures are normalized to mean zero, standard
deviation one. Columns 1–4 are estimated at the respective administrative unit level listed at the top of the column. ∆
of the given diversity measure captures the difference in diversity between pre-redistricting (2000) and post-redistricting
(2010) boundaries, based on the initial population in 2000. For the original district, this is a weighted average of the parent
and child districts. For the parent and child districts, this is a simple difference of their diversity and the original district’s
diversity. All specifications include month FE, district FE, district-specific time trends, and dummies for the number of
papers used by coders for the given province–month. Standard errors are clustered by original district. See the notes to
Table 2. Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.




                                                                39
              Table 4: Further Isolating the Effects of Changes in Ethnic Divisions (I)
           Administrative Unit                                     Original      Parent       Parent        Child
                                                                   District      & Child
                                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)

                                                                       Panel A: Other Controls×Post-Split
                                                                      Selected via Double Lasso (λ = 3, 000)

           post-split                                                -0.013       -0.001        -0.017     -0.003
                                                                    (0.026)      (0.017)       (0.024)     (0.022)
           post-split×∆ ethnic polarization                         0.028**      0.032**      0.079***      0.040
                                                                    (0.013)      (0.016)       (0.016)     (0.026)
           post-split×∆ ethnic fractionalization                    -0.024        -0.003        0.017       0.016
                                                                    (0.020)      (0.012)       (0.040)     (0.019)
           post-split×∆ religious diversity                          0.019        -0.005        -0.026     -0.010
                                                                    (0.013)      (0.012)       (0.022)     (0.016)

           number of post-split × Lasso-selected controls              6            19          14           12
           Number of District-Months                                 7,956        20,220       7,956       12,264
           Number of Districts                                        52           133          52           81
           Dep. Var. Mean, Pre-Split                                 0.57          0.33        0.47         0.25

                                                                      Panel B: Accounting for Changes in
                                                                   Local Public Resources After Redistricting

           post-split                                                -0.006       -0.001       0.002       -0.002
                                                                    (0.027)      (0.021)      (0.027)      (0.024)
           post-split×∆ ethnic polarization                         0.038**      0.032*        0.023       0.034*
                                                                    (0.014)      (0.017)      (0.015)      (0.020)
           post-split×∆ ethnic fractionalization                    -0.006        0.006        0.035        0.005
                                                                    (0.022)      (0.012)      (0.027)      (0.017)
           post-split×∆ religious diversity                           0.013       -0.013       -0.031      -0.014
                                                                    (0.013)      (0.012)      (0.021)      (0.016)
           post-split×∆ transfer revenue                              0.037      0.027**       -0.004     0.038***
                                                                    (0.028)      (0.012)      (0.021)      (0.012)
           post-split×∆ distance to district capital                 -0.002       -0.012       0.010       -0.033
                                                                    (0.019)      (0.013)      (0.016)      (0.020)

           Number of District-Months                                 7,836        19,980       7,836       12,144
           Number of Districts                                        51           131          51           80
           Dep. Var. Mean, Pre-Split                                 0.57          0.33        0.47         0.25

Notes: This table presents two robustness checks on the main results in Table 3. Panel A introduces additional interactions
of post-split and initial district characteristics. We rely on the Belloni et al. (2014) double-selection post-Lasso approach
to select a parsimonious set of influential confounders from the large set of potential covariates we marshal from various
data (see Appendix C.2 for details). Subject to a penalty parameter, λ, that helps control overfitting, each column includes
a given set of additional post-split interactions with the number varying with the specification. Alternative values of λ are
explored in Appendix C.2. Panel B augments the baseline specification in Table 3 with two measures capturing changes
in public resources and proximity to government institutions due to redistricting. ∆ transfer revenue is the difference in
log average annual transfer revenue post-split and average annual transfer revenue pre-split under the assumptions of
allocations proportional to population pre-split in the parent and child district specifications. ∆ distance to district capital
is the population-weighted average village-level difference in log reported travel distance to the district capital in 2011
(post-split) and 2000 (pre-split) as reported by village officials. All variables are normalized to mean zero and standard
deviation one. These regressions omit one original district in Jakarta on account of it being in the national capital and not
receiving the same stream of general district transfer revenue. The dependent variable in all columns is an indicator equal
to one if there was any social conflict in that district–month. All specifications include month FE, district FE, district-
specific time trends, and dummies for the number of papers used by coders for the given province–month. Standard
errors are clustered by original district. Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.

                                                              40
             Table 5: Further Isolating the Effects of Changes in Ethnic Divisions (II)
               Mean Feasible ∆ Diversity Based on Potential Redistricting Schemes
 Administrative Unit                                                   Original       Parent         Parent        Child
                                                                       District       & Child
                                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)

 post-split                                                             -0.015         -0.010        -0.005        -0.011
                                                                        (0.027)       (0.022)        (0.027)      (0.026)
 post-split× mean feasible ∆ ethnic polarization                        0.053**       0.032**       0.046***      0.031**
                                                                        (0.023)       (0.014)        (0.017)      (0.014)
 post-split× mean feasible ∆ ethnic fractionalization                    -0.021        -0.009         0.016        -0.019
                                                                        (0.017)       (0.011)        (0.021)      (0.016)
 post-split× mean feasible ∆ religious diversity                         0.009         -0.009        -0.012        -0.001
                                                                        (0.022)       (0.013)        (0.026)      (0.014)

 Number of District-Months                                               7,680         18,540         7,680       10,860
 Number of Districts                                                       50           121             50          71
 Dep. Var. Mean, Pre-Split                                                0.57          0.34           0.47        0.25

Notes: This table presents robustness checks on the main results in Table 3. Instead of actual ∆diversity, this table uses the
mean of feasible ∆diversity based on the simulation of potential legal redistricting schemes (see Section 5.5 and Appendix
C.3, which also considers other moments besides the mean). ∆diversity measures are normalized to mean zero, standard
deviation one. These regressions omit two original districts for which a large number of feasible partitions (over which to
compute reliable moments) was computationally intractable. The dependent variable in all columns is an indicator equal
to one if there was any social conflict in that district–month. All specifications include month FE, district FE, district-
specific time trends, and dummies for the number of papers used by coders for the given province–month. Standard
errors are clustered by original district. Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.




                                                             41
               Table 6: Changes in Ethnic Divisions, Mayoral Elections and Conflict
   Administrative Unit                                                                 Parent         Parent         Child
                                                                                       & Child
                                                                                         (1)             (2)           (3)

   post-split                                                                           -0.003        -0.002        -0.008
                                                                                        (0.022)       (0.027)       (0.025)
   post-split×∆ ethnic polarization                                                      0.030        0.025*          0.042
                                                                                        (0.019)       (0.014)       (0.025)
   post-split ×∆ ethnic fractionalization                                                -0.000        0.034         -0.011
                                                                                        (0.012)       (0.027)       (0.019)
   post-split×∆ religious diversity                                                      -0.007        -0.033        -0.002
                                                                                        (0.012)       (0.022)       (0.015)

   post-split× first election period                                                     0.044        -0.006        0.041*
                                                                                        (0.044)       (0.051)       (0.021)
   post-split× first election period ×∆ ethnic polarization                             0.026**        0.014       0.027***
                                                                                        (0.011)       (0.022)       (0.010)
   post-split× first election period ×∆ ethnic fractionalization                        -0.004         0.043        -0.010
                                                                                        (0.018)       (0.034)       (0.018)
   post-split× first election period ×∆ religious diversity                             -0.009         0.016        -0.017
                                                                                        (0.016)       (0.035)       (0.021)

   post-split× second election period                                                   0.049**        0.042        0.055*
                                                                                        (0.022)       (0.027)       (0.032)
   post-split× second election period ×∆ ethnic polarization                             0.009       -0.039***      0.056**
                                                                                        (0.010)       (0.014)       (0.022)
   post-split× second election period ×∆ ethnic fractionalization                        0.001         0.026        -0.012
                                                                                        (0.018)       (0.030)       (0.019)
   post-split× second election period ×∆ religious diversity                             0.025        0.052**        0.015
                                                                                        (0.027)       (0.024)       (0.031)

   Number of District-Months                                                            19,980         7,836        12,144
   Num Dist                                                                              131             51           80
   Pre-Split Mean                                                                       0.325          0.467        0.245
Notes: The dependent variable in all columns is an indicator equal to one if there was any social conflict in that parent or
child district–month (see the notes to Table 2). post-split is an indicator equal to one for all months after which the child
district is passed into law. ∆diversity measures are normalized to mean zero, standard deviation one. Since post-split
mayoral elections are specific to the new parent or child district, we focus here on specifications at that administrative
level rather than the original district level. The first election period is an indicator capturing the 6 month window around
the district-specific date of the first direct election for the district head after splitting into child and parent districts. The
parent district elections occur based on the predetermined schedule inherited from the Suharto era while the child district
elections typically occur around 1.5–2 years after redistricting. Hence, parent and child district elections occur at different
times. The second election period is defined similarly and occurs five years after the initial election. These second election
coefficients are only identified for the three-quarters of districts observed for long enough to hold that second round
during our study period. We also include controls for the pre-split election periods, which take place in 10 of the original
districts. Hence, the reference period in all columns is the pre-redistricting, non-election period. See Appendix E for
details. All specifications include month FE, district FE, district-specific time trends, and dummies for the number of
papers used by coders for the given province–month. Standard errors are clustered by original district. Significance
levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.




                                                               42
  Table 7: Political Mechanisms: Mayoral versus Parliamentary Elections versus Ramadan
Administrative Unit                                                    Parent     Parent     Child     Parent      Parent     Child
                                                                       & Child                         & Child

                                                                       event: Parliamentary Election           event: Ramadan
                                                                         (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)     (6)

post-split                                                             -0.008      -0.009    -0.010     0.007       0.003     0.005
                                                                       (0.021)    (0.027)    (0.025)   (0.022)     (0.028)   (0.026)
post-split×∆ ethnic polarization                                        0.031     0.027**     0.041     0.031      0.029**    0.040
                                                                       (0.019)    (0.013)    (0.026)   (0.019)     (0.014)   (0.024)
post-split ×∆ ethnic fractionalization                                  -0.000      0.034    -0.011     -0.000      0.035     -0.012
                                                                       (0.012)    (0.027)    (0.019)   (0.013)     (0.027)   (0.020)
post-split×∆ religious diversity                                        -0.011    -0.038*    -0.005     -0.011     -0.038*    -0.005
                                                                       (0.012)    (0.021)    (0.015)   (0.012)     (0.021)   (0.015)

post-split× mayoral election period                                     0.065      0.053    0.046***    0.059       0.046    0.046***
                                                                       (0.043)    (0.046)    (0.017)   (0.043)     (0.046)    (0.017)
post-split× mayoral election period ×∆ ethnic polarization             0.016**     -0.010   0.039***   0.017**      -0.009   0.040***
                                                                       (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.010)   (0.007)     (0.007)    (0.011)
post-split× mayoral election period ×∆ ethnic fractionalization         0.001     0.037**    -0.008     0.000      0.036**    -0.010
                                                                       (0.013)    (0.016)    (0.014)   (0.013)     (0.017)    (0.014)
post-split× mayoral election period ×∆ religious diversity              0.007     0.041**     -0.003    0.007      0.040**     -0.004
                                                                       (0.016)    (0.016)    (0.018)   (0.016)     (0.016)    (0.017)

post-split× event period                                               0.154**   0.266***     0.091    -0.068**    -0.038    -0.079*
                                                                       (0.066)    (0.077)    (0.085)    (0.029)    (0.038)   (0.041)
post-split× event period ×∆ ethnic polarization                         -0.013     0.002      -0.020     -0.001    -0.008     0.003
                                                                       (0.010)    (0.029)    (0.016)    (0.006)    (0.009)   (0.008)
post-split× event period ×∆ ethnic fractionalization                    0.008      0.025      0.012       0.003    -0.002     0.007
                                                                       (0.017)    (0.040)    (0.018)    (0.010)    (0.012)   (0.014)
post-split× event period ×∆ religious diversity                         0.019    0.063**      0.007       0.011     0.021     0.006
                                                                       (0.011)    (0.029)    (0.013)    (0.009)    (0.016)   (0.011)

Number of District-Months                                              19,980      7,836     12,144    19,980       7,836    12,144
Number of Districts                                                     131          51        80        131          51       80
Pre-Split Mean                                                          0.33        0.47      0.25      0.33         0.47     0.25
∆ polarization × election = ∆ polarization× event, p-value             0.005       0.654     0.004      0.001       0.915    0.011
∆ fractionalization × election = ∆ fractionalization× event, p-value   0.689       0.788     0.324      0.883       0.101    0.433

 Notes: This table allows the effects of ∆diversity to vary with mayoral election periods and parliamentary election pe-
 riods in columns 1–3 and holy month of Ramadan periods in columns 4–6. Mayoral election periods pool the first and
 second election windows considered separately in Table 6. Parliamentary election periods comprise the 6 month windows
 centered on the month of April in 2004, 2009, and 2014 when such elections take place simultaneously around the country.
 Ramadan periods include all Gregorian calendar months during which any of the lunar holy month falls. The own post-
 split×∆diversity terms therefore capture the differential effects of diversity in all other months outside the given periods
 of interest. The dependent variable in all columns is an indicator equal to one if there was any social conflict in that parent
 or child district–month (see the notes to Table 2). post-split is an indicator equal to one for all months after which the child
 district is passed into law. ∆diversity measures are normalized to mean zero, standard deviation one. All specifications
 include month FE, district FE, district-specific time trends, and dummies for the number of papers used by coders for the
 given province–month. Standard errors are clustered by original district. Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.




                                                                  43
Table 8: Light Intensity and Changes in Village-Level Alignment with the Largest Ethnic
Group in the New Versus Original District
                                                                                          Parent      Parent       Child
                                                                                          Child
                                                                                           (1)          (2)         (3)

  post-split                                                                              -0.020      -0.006     -0.033**
                                                                                          (0.012)     (0.022)     (0.013)
  post-split × ∆ share of village in largest ethnic group in district > 0                 0.011*       0.012      0.021*
                                                                                          (0.006)     (0.009)     (0.011)
  post-split × ∆ share of village in largest ethnic group in district = 0                 0.028**      0.017      0.040**
                                                                                          (0.013)     (0.017)     (0.018)

  Number of Village–Years                                                                 164,594     85,401      79,193
  Dep. Var. Mean, Pre-Split                                                                0.163      0.229       0.114

Notes: The dependent variable is share of village area covered with any nighttime lights. The village-level panel spans
2000–2013. The regressions also control for village and year fixed effects. The regressor in row 2 (3) equals one if the
share of the given village belonging to the largest ethnic group in the district increased (remained the same) as a result of
redistricting. The ethnic shares are, as throughout the paper, defined based on the population in 2000. Standard errors are
clustered at the original district level. Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.




                                                             44
