NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNCERTAINTY AND HYPERINFLATION:
EUROPEAN INFLATION DYNAMICS AFTER WORLD WAR I
Jose A. Lopez
Kris James Mitchener
Working Paper 24624
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24624

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018

The views expressed here are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Regis Barnichon, Vasco Cúrdia, Sylvain
Leduc, Zheng Liu, Òscar Jordà, and conference participants at the 2018 SITE Conference on the
Macroeconomics of Uncertainty and Volatility, 2017 CEPR Economic History Symposium, the
Eighth World Congress of Cliometrics, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, and the
University of California, Riverside for helpful comments. We especially thank Regis Barnichon
for sharing his smoothed local projection code with us. Tesia Chuderewicz, Neil Gerstein,
William Hedberg, Erin Klein, Kevin Pearson, and Javier Quintero provided invaluable research
assistance.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jose A. Lopez and Kris James Mitchener. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Uncertainty and Hyperinflation: European Inflation Dynamics after World War I
Jose A. Lopez and Kris James Mitchener
NBER Working Paper No. 24624
May 2018
JEL No. E3,E31,E4,E52,E62,N14
ABSTRACT
Fiscal deficits, elevated debt-to-GDP ratios, and high inflation rates suggest hyperinflation could
have potentially emerged in many European countries after World War I. We demonstrate that
economic policy uncertainty was instrumental in pushing a subset of European countries into
hyperinflation shortly after the end of the war. Germany, Austria, Poland, and Hungary (GAPH)
suffered from frequent uncertainty shocks – and correspondingly high levels of uncertainty –
caused by protracted political negotiations over reparations payments, the apportionment of the
Austro-Hungarian debt, and border disputes. In contrast, other European countries exhibited
lower levels of measured uncertainty between 1919 and 1925, allowing them more capacity with
which to implement credible commitments to their fiscal and monetary policies. Impulse response
functions show that increased uncertainty caused a rise in inflation contemporaneously and for a
few months afterward in GAPH, but this effect was absent or much more limited for the other
European countries in our sample. Our results suggest that elevated economic uncertainty directly
affected inflation dynamics and the incidence of hyperinflation during the interwar period.

Jose A. Lopez
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Economic Research Department
jose.a.lopez@sf.frb.org
Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu

I. Introduction
Why do hyperinflations begin? In a mechanical sense, economists have known the
answer to this question at least since the monetarist revolution: money is printed in response to
unsustainable fiscal policy. But ex ante, how does one identify factors that trigger
hyperinflation in one country but not another, when macroeconomic indicators look broadly
similar across them? For example, as a consequence of World War I, many European
economies abandoned their commitments to fixed exchange rates and ran up large public debts,
predisposing them to high inflation, if not hyperinflation. Belgium, Britain, France, the
Netherlands, and Italy had debt-to-GDP ratios in excess of 100% and saw their price level
double from 1913 (Table 1).1 Per capita direct costs associated with the war were high for both
Allied and Central Power countries, and the destruction of human capital was broadly similar
in countries such as France and Germany. All of these outcomes suggest a grim fiscal and
monetary situation prevailed throughout Europe after the Great War, and unfavorable
macroeconomic preconditions existed as much for victors as the vanquished.2
In this paper, we examine inflation dynamics in European countries immediately after
the end of World War I. In particular, we analyze how pronounced economic uncertainty in
certain countries contributed to their descent into hyperinflation shortly after the end of the
war. The recent literature on the effects of uncertainty on macroeconomic dynamics has
proposed several uncertainty measures, although a consensus on methods has not yet been
established, even if the underlying premise of such a relationship is clear.3 We use a new
empirical methodology for analyzing how measured uncertainty affected inflation dynamics
and the incidence of hyperinflation across the ten countries in our sample. Our approach is
specific as it is responsive to country-specific events and institutional strucures as well as
general in that we use a common modeling framework across countries.

1
Note that direct taxation to pay for increased expenditure due to the war was fairly low across Europe; e.g.,
14% for Germany and 18% for Great Britain (Balderston, 1989).
2
For example, using data from Bogart (1920), Broadberry and Harrison (2005) estimate per capita net direct
war costs equal to $766 for Great Britain, $613 for France, $343 for Italy, $557 for Germany, and $352 for
Austro-Hungary. Using war deaths as a percentage of the population, the same authors estimate that relative to
prewar stocks, human capital declined by 7.2% in France and 6.3% in Germany.
3
Jurado et al. (2015) make a distinction between different types and measures of uncertainty; namely, measures
reflecting financial market uncertainty – such as Bloom (2009) and our proposed measure – and measures
reflecting broader macroeconomic uncertainty. Questions of how these different measures influence
macroeconomic dynamics remain a topic of debate; see Ludvigson et al. (2018) and Carriero et al. (2018) for
opposing empirical conclusions.
1

In particular, we construct a measure of uncertainty using a new inter-war dataset of
daily exchange rates for ten European countries. From these high-frequency data, we develop
country-specific measures of uncertainty based on monthly, realized volatility (RV). Although
these RV measures were elevated across Europe after World War I, we show that they were
pronounced in Germany, Austria, Poland, and Hungary (GAPH) prior to their hyperinflations.
In particular, the RV measures for GAPH were many times larger than that of the Netherlands,
which was neutral during the war and which we use as a benchmark for comparison. A detailed
examination of contemporary news sources suggests high RV months are associated with
events that contributed to policy uncertainty, and GAPH experienced such events with greater
frequency and magnitude. We show that the high degree of measured uncertainty in GAPH
was associated with weak fiscal positions, protracted political negotiations over reparations
payments, and unresolved disputes regarding national borders and the apportionment of the
Austro-Hungarian imperial debt. In contrast, the other European countries experienced some
spikes in RV that can be associated with events that increased economic policy uncertainty,
but they were considerably smaller in magnitude and less persistent.
The RV measure of uncertainty appears related to the inability of policymakers in
GAPH to formulate and commit to credible fiscal policies, and thus suggests a causal link
between uncertainty and inflation dynamics – a point alluded to, but not formally tested, in
Sargent (1982).4 To test for causality more formally, we embed our measure of uncertainty
within a reduced-form macroeconomic model that includes changes in inflation, industrial
production, and notes outstanding at a monthly frequency. Using results based on smoothed
local projections (SLP), a recent innovation by Barrichon and Brownlees (2017) that permits
inference on the effects of shocks in small samples, we assess the effects of uncertainty on
macroeconomic conditions prior to the start of hyperinflation for each GAPH country as well
as for six other countries that did not tip into hyperinflation.
For GAPH, the SLP results show that increased uncertainty causes a contemporaneous
rise in inflation as well as for the few months immediately following the shock. For example,
in Germany, the results suggest that a one-standard-deviation increase in policy uncertainty
leads to a contemporaneous increase in inflation of about 8 percentage points and another 3
percentage points in the subsequent month. We find similar patterns and larger magnitudes for
4

In particular, Sargent (1982, pg. 75) state that “[f]rom the viewpoint that the value of a state’s currency and
other debt depends intimately on the fiscal policy it intends to run, the uncertainty about the reparations owed by
the German government necessarily cast a long shadow over its prospects for a stable currency.”
2

the three other countries that experienced hyperinflation. Moreover, in the months just prior to
when hyperinflation broke out in GAPH, monthly shocks to RV were some of the largest
observed across the whole sample period. By contrast, for the other European countries with
lower RV measures, the effect of increased uncertainty on inflation is absent or near zero in
magnitude. For example, our results for France show that a one-standard-deviation increase in
uncertainty has no effect on its inflation rate.
These findings demonstrate the utility of our methodology as it permits comparisons
between countries, such as Germany and France, for example, which were on opposite sides of
the reparations imbroglio as a payer and recipient, respectively. The empirical results thus
elucidate how greater economic policy uncertainty contributed to accelerated inflation in
Germany, but not in France. Further, our methodology allows one to incorporate many countryspecific policy narratives emphasized by historians of post-WWI Europe. For example, it helps
us understand how uncertainty around issues such as the size and settlement of reparations in
Germany could have contributed to driving inflation expectations further into a negative spiral
(Webb 1986).
Our paper also contributes to several strands of the literature in economics. First, it
complements recent research initiated by Bloom (2009) that examines the relationship between
uncertainty and macroeconomic outcomes. Our research extends the work by Bloom et al.
(2015) and subsequent related papers by focusing on uncertainty’s effects on inflation, a
macroeconomic outcome that has received comparatively less attention than investment and
output. 5 Our conjecture – that policy uncertainty is critical for understanding interwar
European inflation dynamics – also builds on research describing how the hyperinflations of
the early 1920s resulted from unbalanced fiscal and monetary policy (Cagan 1956, Sargent
1982, and Dornbusch 1982). Our analysis focuses on the period prior to the start of
hyperinflation in order to better understand the role of measured uncertainty as a driver of
inflation dynamics. We extend these earlier treatments by providing a quantitative modeling
framework that can account for the differential inflation dynamics across Europe and that helps
explain why GAPH, in particular, experienced hyperinflation.

5

For example, Leduc and Liu (2016) found that for post-war U.S. data, an increase in uncertainty leads to an
increase in unemployment and a decline in inflation; see also Caggiano et al. (2014) and Gilchrist et al. (2014).
Vavra (2014) provides a model and empirical results linking uncertainty shocks to inflation and output growth.
Bianchi and Melosi (2017) show that economic uncertainty linked to fiscal policy contributed to inflation
dynamics during the Great Recession in the U.S.
3

Our research also relates to the extensive literature on central bank independence. In
particular, Bordo and Siklos (2015) show that central bank governance and effectiveness (i.e.,
fewer policy errors) play important roles in preventing a loss of credibility and control over
inflation dynamics. 6 As we describe, polities were fractured as a result of World War I,
destroying the old fiscal and monetary order that had existed under the classical gold standard.
The efforts of all nations to reorganize and establish new operating norms for their economies
was reflected in higher levels of measured uncertainty, although importantly to varying
degrees. The success and failure of these efforts are tracked by measured uncertainty and are
shown to affect inflation in GAPH in our econometric analysis.
Finally, our analysis relates to recent studies on fiscal policy shocks. One strand seeks
to quantify how uncertainty around the timing, magnitude, and composition of fiscal policies
fundamentally influence medium-term macroeconomic projections and thus policy actions
designed in reaction to a given perceived economic situation (Paredes et al., 2015). Another
shows that unexpected changes in fiscal volatility shocks had a sizable adverse effect on U.S.
economic activity in the late twentieth century (Fernández-Villaverde et al., 2015). The
interwar period provides a clear parallel to the important avenues of how fiscal policy
uncertainty influences the broader macroeconomy as examined in these papers. In many parts
of post-WWI Europe, uncertainty over reparation payments, border disputes, and legacy debt
obligations conspired with limited tax bases and political events to weaken policymakers’
abilities to provide direction over the future path of tax and spending policies that might have
helped to stabilize inflation rates in GAPH.

II. Economic Policy Uncertainty in Europe after World War I
World War I has been described as a watershed moment in European economic history.
The war destroyed property and killed large numbers of soldiers and civilians. Old imperial
powers were dissolved and new nation states were formed. Ethnic groups were involuntarily
separated across new borders, and armed conflicts and border disputes continued even after
treaties were drawn. The Great War left a legacy of fractured states grappling with high
unemployment, industrial dislocation, and high national debts. Existing trade flows were
disrupted and then reorganized, often in patterns that did not resemble the old ones. As a result,
policymakers across the continent struggled to find their footing, often attempting to replicate

6

See also Bordo and Siklos (2014) and Bordo and MacDonald (2002).
4

institutions of the past, such as the gold standard, even though fundamental political and
economic change had occurred.
Table 1 shows the fiscal burden that resulted from the war. Debt-to-GDP ratios (for
countries that existed pre- and post-WWI) rose significantly, suggesting that, in the absence of
rapid economic growth, new taxes and controls on spending would be necessary in the 1920s
to return to prewar ratios. Because much of the spending on the war was monetized, prices
across Europe rose considerably, as shown in the last column of Table 1. 7 Given such
widespread economic dislocation in the wake of the Great War, it is not obvious ex ante which
countries in Europe might subsequently experience hyperinflation. For example, in addition to
the situation shown in the table, France ran budget deficits and financed them through money
creation and increased national debt in the early 1920s (Fraser and Taylor, 1990).
How does one identify the likelihood of a particular country experiencing
hyperinflation given macroeconomic indicators at war’s end that look broadly similar across
Europe? Being on the winning or losing side of a war appears insufficient for determining
which countries subsequently experienced hyperinflation. The Central Powers of Bulgaria and
Turkey, the successor state to the Ottoman Empire, experienced very substantial increases in
prices between 1914-25 (more than 3000%), but prices never increased by more than double
in any given year. Czechoslovakia – a newly formed state carved out of a losing Central Power–
saw its prices rise by roughly 1600% between 1914 and 1921, but prices stabilized thereafter.
Sargent (1982) emphasized that this new country, in contrast to another new one like Poland,
succeeded in reducing uncertainty over its budget prospects and did not experience
hyperinflation.8 On the other hand, Russia, initially part of the victorious Triple Entente (until
it withdrew from the war following the Bolshevik Russian), did experience hyperinflation.9
We hypothesize that pronounced macroeconomic policy uncertainty in particular
European countries was an important driver tipping countries into hyperinflation. We consider
policy uncertainty to include direct policy actions, such as budget expenditures, as well as
indirect activities, such as negotiations over war reparations and border disputes. Our focus on
uncertainty follows a recent strand of the literature, beginning with Bloom (2009), which shows
how uncertainty can influence macroeconomic outcomes.
7

Sargent (1982), Eichengreen (1995), Ferguson (1975).
Similarly, Japan, Italy, and Germany, all losers in World War II, did not subsequently experience
hyperinflation.
9
Limitations in monthly macroeconomic data for Russia prevent us from including this country in our empirical
analysis.
5
8

Several unresolved political issues cast a pall over all of postwar Europe and proved
counterproductive for generating credible fiscal policy. The most widely known of these was
the intractable debate over reparations payments. As laid out in the Treaty of Versailles, the
Allies paradoxically acknowledged that Germany lacked the resources to pay, but also insisted
on payment:
“The Allied and Associated Governments recognize that the resources of Germany
are not adequate… to make complete reparation for all such loss and damage. The
Allied and Associated Governments, however, require, and Germany undertakes, that
she will make compensation for all damage done to the civilian population of the
Allied and Associated Powers.” (Articles 231-2, Treaty of Versailles)
The individual treaties struck with other belligerents – namely, the Treaties of Saint-Germainen-Laye (1919) and of Trianon (1920) that established Austria and Hungary, respectively, as
independent states – similarly specified that reparations were to be paid.
Notably, all three treaties did not specify the total amount or number of years over
which payments would have to be made. Instead of providing precise terms for payment of
damages, a political entity, known as the Reparations Commission (RC), was charged with
working out the details. The RC met repeatedly after the treaties were concluded – in San Remo
(April 1920), Bath, Hyde, Spa (July 1920), and Brussels – but the gap between what the Allies
sought and what Germany and others were willing to pay remained large. In January 1921,
France demanded 226 billion gold marks ($94 billion). Germany’s counter proposal was just
50 billion gold marks ($21 billion) (Boemke, 1998, p. 410). Meanwhile, the U.S. Congress
failed to ratify the Versailles treaty and was thus reduced to “observer status” as the
negotiations dragged on, leaving the conversation among only Europeans who often found
themselves at loggerheads. On May 5, 1921, four days after the deadline initially imposed on
the RC for reaching an agreement and nearly two years after the treaty was signed, a deal was
finally struck with Germany whereby it would pay 123 billion gold marks ($51.25 billion).
In Germany, reparations began taking their toll even before a final agreement was
reached.10 The Versailles Treaty had specified that 20 billion gold marks ($4.76 billion) would
be paid immediately to provision occupying armies and for a variety of deliveries including
ships, financial securities, natural resources (e.g., coal and timber), livestock, and agricultural
products. Between 1920 and 1922, the young Weimar Republic ran a budget deficit as

10

The constitution creating it was signed on August 11, 1919.
6

reparations payments replaced armaments as the single biggest item in the budget – absorbing
48% of it between April 1920 and March 1923 (Young, 1925). Sargent (1982, p.73) argues
that, if reparations payments were excluded, Germany’s budget deficit was not unsustainable
until 1923. The final agreement reached on reparations also proved quite costly from a political
standpoint. Adolf Hitler denounced the London payments schedule and began to attract large
crowds that were unhappy with the treaty’s terms. Walter Rathenau – founder of the German
Democratic party, foreign minister of the republic, and advocate of fulfilling Germany’s
obligations as specified in the treaty – was assassinated on June 24, 1922 by right-wing
extremists. In that same year, the RC declared Germany to be in default for its failure to deliver
a shipment of timber.
The issues were similar in Hungary and Austria. The amount of Austrian reparations
was not fixed in the Treaty of Saint Germain, and the country’s financial situation remained
murky until the RC determined its obligations. Austria’s constitutional courts made the claim
that since the country was new as of 1918 and was therefore not obligated to pay obligations
that arose out of the war, but the signing of the international treaty suggested this legal
argument would not satisfy foreign expectations (Dumberry, 2007, p. 102). Food and raw
material shortages plagued the economy after the War and placed pressing financial burdens
on the new government. It responded by providing both food relief and unemployment benefits.
Its expenditures outpaced revenue growth, and the budget deficit expanded rapidly between
1919 and 1921. Austria could not resolve its budget problems and went bankrupt before
reparation payments began.
Hungary’s total reparations payment was also not fixed in the Treaty of Trianon, but
was finally set in 1924 at 200 million gold crowns. In the intervening period, budget gridlock
ensued. In 1920, the minister of finance, Lorant Hegedus, drafted a financial program that
reduced budget expenditures, sought tax reform, and strove for deflation, but the program was
met with opposition because of internal disagreement regarding payments to the Allies. As
Sargent (1982) noted, “[t]his circumstance alone created serious obstacles in terms of achieving
a stable value for Hungary’s currency and other debts, since the unclear reparations obligations
made uncertain the nature of the resources to back those debts.” The budget situation was
further complicated by the fact that the successor states to Hungary were supposed to

7

compensate it for the biencedes (Hungary’s former property), but this amount was never fixed,
and the issue remained unsettled through the 1920s.11
The victors of World War I also faced fiscal uncertainty as a result of the failure to
resolve the reparations question (Young, 1925, p.8). Physical damage from the war was
concentrated in northeastern France and Belgium, and reconstruction of the war-ravaged areas
required revenue. At best, Allied soldiers who were fortunate enough to return from the
battlefield faced diminished employment opportunities (overcapacity in steel, coal, and
agricultural production), and at worst, destroyed communities. Adding to these domestic
problems were the large international debts that Great Britain and France had accumulated
during the war. Both countries had liquidated foreign assets to finance part of the war and then
had turned to external finance to cover their growing needs as the war dragged on. Making
post-WWI repayment more complicated was France’s insistence that it would only service
debts to the U.S. (its largest creditor) if they were fully securitized by future German
reparations. This position made it difficult for France to obtain new credit from U.S. sources
(Ritschl and Straumann, 2010). Creditors, such as those in the U.S., had no incentive to forgive
the debts, which only intensified pressure to seek fiscal solutions by demanding large
reparation sums from the former Central Powers.
Uncertainty over borders was a second important issue that increased uncertainty over
policy decision-making in post-WWI Europe, making it difficult to forecast expenditures (e.g.,
securing and policing borders) and derive revenues from disputed areas. Border disputes also
contributed to continued high military expenditure in many European countries even after the
war ended, adding significantly to treasury obligations and budget deficits (Young, 1925, p.8),
and creating uncertain future fiscal obligations so long as disputes remained unresolved. For
example, the German Republic accepted its new western borders, but still faced uncertainty
over territorial integrity in this direction since France and Belgium were using the threat of
invasion as a “stick” in negotiations over reparations payments. Germany’s fears were
eventually realized in 1923, when the two countries jointly occupied the Ruhr. To the east,
Germany failed to fully accept the borders demarcating the newly-formed states of Poland and
Czechoslovakia. Territorial uncertainty was exacerbated by France’s attempt to impose a
cordon sanitaire to hem in the “diseased nation” of Germany through its mutual-assistance
alliances with these two new nations.

11

The debt was canceled in 1930.
8

Austria suffered immediate financial troubles as a result of having no natural borders
defined by ethnicity or production, and the dismembering of the Austro-Hungarian empire led
to serious economic dislocation as new boundaries dissected railroad lines (regardless of their
system) as well as production (e.g., separation of iron and coal mines from steel mills and the
spindling of cotton from the looms and finishing plants) (Prochnik, 1922). The newly-formed
nation of Poland was weighed down by four border disputes (two with Czechoslovakia, and
one each with Germany and Lithuania) and a war with Soviet Russia, creating uncertainty as
to whether the country would even last. In order to secure its borders, the Polish government
committed large sums to the military; defense expenditure accounted for 53% of the budget
deficit and one third of the nation’s budget in the early 1920s (Durand, 1922). The region of
Upper Silesia was only forcibly removed from Germany and incorporated into Poland in June
1922 by the League of Nations, after a plebiscite mandated by the Versailles Treaty failed.
Poland’s border disputes and war with the Soviet Russia were slowly and fitfully resolved,
dragging on from 1919 to 1921. The League of Nations attempt to resolve the dispute with
Lithuania simply by imposing a border failed to resolve the dispute before Poland tipped into
hyperinflation.
Finally, uncertainty over economic policy resulted from unresolved issues regarding
the formation of new states out of the former Austro-Hungarian Empire – namely, Austria,
Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and the Kingdom of Slovenes, Croats, and Serbs. Internal
political developments – most prominently, the rapid rise of communism in postwar Europe –
further threatened the durability of these policies and governments. The successor states to the
Austro-Hungarian Empire struggled with diminished or non-existent state capacity. Hungary
was reduced to 33% of its former size and was left with few raw materials for inputs into
industrial production, a reduced internal market, and no access to the sea, which diminished its
capacity for international trade (Jonas, 2016). Upon dissolution, political chaos ensued. Bela
Kun’s communist regime and the Romanian occupation of Budapest (August-November 1919)
delayed state formation and the ability to collect revenue. Further, the assignment of the
existing debt of the Austrian Monarchy needed to be settled. Interest payments were suspended
in 1919, and it was not until the Innsbruck Protocol of 1925 was signed that the existing
unsecured debt was formally apportioned as follows: 41.7% to Czechoslovakia; 36.8% to
Austria; 13.7% to Poland; 4.1% to Italy; 2% to Yugoslavia; and 1.6% to Romania.

9

The rise of communist movements further contributed to uncertainty in many
European countries after WWI. For example, although socialists were instrumental in forcing
Kaiser Wilhelm II to abdicate and establishing the Weimar Republic in Germany, more
radical left-wing factions, including the Sparticus League (led by Karl Liebknecht and Rosa
Luxemburg), committed to organized violence in an attempt to establish a Soviet-style
communist government. The fledgling German government was forced to commit troops and
resources to suppress these violent rebellions in regions such as Bavaria, even after the
Republic had been declared. Industrial councils in both Germany and Austria were
introduced in 1919 and 1920 in order to appease organized labor and reduce the threat of
communist uprisings. Austria went one step further in using social programs to diffuse the
growth of communism, introducing unemployment insurance; however, as noted above, its
generous provision of social programs were leading to massive increases in expenditure
without concomitant increases in revenue. And in Poland, the threat of communism came
first and foremost from the East, via the border war with the Soviet Russia.

III. Measuring Uncertainty
As Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983) show, since households take into account future
inflation when determining how much money to hold today, multiple equilibria for the path of
inflation can arise. Inflation could simply depend on the growth rate of money over the growth
rate of output, as in a monetarist model, or it could depend on other factors, including the
intertemporal government budget constraint, as emphasized in models of the fiscal theory of
the price level. For example, Woodford (1995) examines how a government’s decision on how
to finance its budget is crucial to the path of inflation. Further, news that causes agents to
believe that expected primary surpluses will be smaller in the future can result in unanticipated
inflation in the present – even before it shows up in a country’s budget balance (Davig and
Leeper, 2011).
Our approach to understanding how economic uncertainty translates into inflation
dynamics allows for the possibility that policy news – whether fiscal, monetary, and even
geopolitical – may influence the path of inflation today and in the future, regardless of whether
the price-level path veers away from the path of the money stock as would be the case in a
model of the “pure” fiscal theory of the price level (McCallum and Nelson, 2005). Specific to
our analysis, Sargent (1982) argues “that the European inter-war hyperinflations grew out of
10

persistently active fiscal policies that forced monetary authorities to adjust the money stock
passively to meet higher average levels of government deficits.”12
As we have discussed, in Europe, unresolved political issues and weak state capacity
contributed to uncertainty over borders, the size of national debts and other fiscal obligations
as well as an inability to generate revenues to support them. However, since fiscal policy
uncertainty was pervasive, our empirical strategy for testing its influence on inflation dynamics
needs to permit for the possibility that hyperinflation could have occurred in any European
country. We thus develop country-specific measures of uncertainty so that we can make withincountry comparisons (i.e., to assess whether uncertainty is a driver of inflation and of
experiencing hyperinflation) and cross-country comparisons (i.e., to determine whether
countries that experienced hyperinflation had more pronounced measures of uncertainty
relative to that existing in other parts of Europe).
To do so, we follow the methodology introduced in Bloom (2009) and extended by
subsequent research that measures uncertainty and examines the properties of these measures
on their own and in relation to the macroeconomy. In particular, we focus on the volatility of
financial market variables as our measure of economic uncertainty. Bloom (2009) created an
uncertainty index based on the volatility of daily U.S. stock returns, and Baker and Bloom
(2013) show that bond yields, exchange rates, and GDP-forecast volatility are additional
suitable proxies for uncertainty. Similar proxies, such as the option-based VIX index of stock
market volatility, have been used as uncertainty measures in more recent papers. For example,
Baker et al. (2016) find a high correlation between the VIX index and other uncertainty
measures. Gilchrist et al. (2014) measure uncertainty using variations in corporate bond spreads
and find that uncertainty measured in this way has a strong effect on business investment.
Other measures have been created; for example, Bloom et al. (2015) construct a
measure of U.S. “economic policy uncertainty” (EPU) based on newspaper coverage
frequency. They found that their EPU measure influences aggregate investment, consumption,
and employment. Jurado et al. (2015) generate an uncertainty index from the residual of factorbased macroeconomic model and show that this measure identifies fewer periods of elevated
uncertainty as compared to uncertainty measures relying on financial market data.

12

As pointed out in Leeper (1991), one can also consider the possibility that shocks to real debt can generate
current or future money creation.
11

Based on our desire to maximize country coverage in the 1920s and to use a wellestablished measure of uncertainty, we hand collected daily exchange-rate data from issues of
the Commercial and Financial Chronicle over the years 1919 to 1925.13 Using these data, we
compute the monthly, realized volatility (RV) based on daily, logged first differences of the
countries’ foreign exchange spot prices in the New York trading market.14 Exchange rates are
a particularly useful asset price for measuring uncertainty since they capture both real-time
economic and political “news” specific to a country as well as information about a country’s
price dynamics during periods of economic instability.15 Such RV measures have been shown
to be reasonable and consistent proxies for the true, but unobservable, variance in financial
time series (Andersen et al. 2003).
Accordingly, our FX-based approach provides a country-specific, high-frequency
measure of economic policy uncertainty based on public data from the currency markets. An
important feature of the underlying data is that they are based on exchange-rate trading in New
York City, a foreign exchange market whose institutional features and market microstructure
were not affected by events on the ground in Europe. In addition, previous research on the
interwar period supports the notion that foreign-exchange markets were well functioning. For
example, Frankel (1977) provides empirical evidence that the exchange market for German
Reichsmark operating in London was efficient.16 As such, RV should accurately reflect how
economic and political news affected a country’s policy affairs without being polluted by
distortions due to country-specific marketplace characteristics.
We compute RV as follows. For a given month, we calculate the average of the squared
daily, demeaned log first differences of an exchange rate as a consistent estimate of the true,
but unobservable, variance of monthly changes in the exchange rate; i.e.,
(1)

13

RVkt 

1 N t 1
2
 x ki1   kt  ,

N t  1 i 1

As noted by Gilchrist et al. (2014), there is no single objective mesure of economic uncetainty used in the
literature. Accordingly, we focus on a measure that has been used previously and that war-time events did not
disturb its functioning. This structure should ensure that our measure provides clear signals on “news” in the
sample countries.
14
Baillie et al. (1993) examine weekly exchange-rate volatility during this period based on data from Einzig
(1937), which was sourced from the Commerical and Financial Chronicle. Peel and Spira (2015) examine the
consistency of these two data sources.
15
In his description of interwar hyperinflations, Sargent (1982) provides examples of purchases of foreign assets
and capital controls, which suggest how important exchange rates were to the economic environment of the
time. For further discussion of the German hyperinflation and exchange rates, see Frankel (1977, 1980), Salemi
(1980), and Webb (1986).
16
See also the follow-up discussion in a comment by Salemi (1980) and a response by Frankel (1980).
12

where k is a country index; Nt is the number of trading days in month t; Δxki+1 is the change in
the logged foreign currency exchange rate for country k from day i to i+1 in month t; and μkt
is the average value of these changes in month t. Since these are measures of scale deviations,
we can readily compare them in relative terms, to describe the series themselves and provide
insight into their cross-sectional and time-series behavior. As displayed in Table 2, realized
volatility has a reasonable degree of cross-sectional and time-series variation. Notably, the
GAPH countries shown in the first four columns generally have higher RV values and exhibit
upswings leading into their observed hyperinflation periods. These characteristics are
especially pronounced for Germany in 1923. The average RV values for the non-hyperinflation
countries are clearly lower, although they do exhibit some interesting spikes earlier in the
sample.
Variation in RV can be examined in more detail in time-series plots of individual
countries. Figures 1-4 display realized volatility from July 1919 to December 1925 relative to
the initial RV value for the Netherlands RV series; this country’s initial was selected as a
benchmark for comparison since it was neutral during the war and it has exchange rate data for
the entire sample period. Figure 1 compares the relative RV measures for the UK and for the
Netherlands (relative to its initial value). These two exhibit the lowest RV measures across our
sample of countries. Netherland’s RV measure in January 1920 is much higher relative to its
normalizing observation in July 1919. As we discuss in greater detail in the next sub-section,
changes in month-to-month RV can be triggered by “news” of various types. For example,
Netherland’s RV measure spikes to 3.0 in January 1920, which can likely be attributed to the
Netherland’s decision to join the League of Nations and its refusal to hand over Kaiser Wilhelm
as a war criminal under the Treaty of Versailles. After the peak in early 1920, the Dutch RV
series declines steadily and reaches a low of 0.1 by the end of the sample in December 1925.
The UK measure follows a similar pattern, although it exhibits much more volatility in early
1920. These patterns suggest that uncertainty in the Dutch and UK economies and political
environments, while relatively elevated shortly after the end of the war with the November
1918 armistice, declined steadily over the sample period.
Figure 2 shows the RV measures for four other European countries that, ex post, did
not experience hyperinflation. Belgium, Czechoslovakia, France, and Italy clearly exhibit
much higher peaks and are more volatile relative to the Dutch and UK benchmarks, reaching
levels that are ten to twenty times larger than the Dutch benchmark value. In fact, the Belgian
13

series (in red) was about forty times the benchmark on two occasions.17 This degree of variation
in the uncertainty measures speaks to the wide variation in economic conditions and fiscal
policy making environments across post-war Europe. For example, France felt justified in
running large budget deficits, believing Germany would eventually pay reparations for the
reconstruction of territories destroyed or damaged during WWI. The French finance minister
Poincare more or less proclaimed this in his famous quip “le Boche paiera tout,” or roughly,
the Germans will pay for everything. And, in order to enforce their claim to reparations and
secure borders shared with Germany, France maintained significantly higher budget shares of
military spending into the early 1920s. Note that the RV measures for France and Belgium
spike to nearly ten before and during the occupation of Germany’s Ruhr Valley in January
1923.
Figures 3 and 4 show the RV dynamics for GAPH, countries that eventually
experienced hyperinflation. Figure 3 depicts the RV measure only for Germany since it
experienced the most dramatic hyperinflation of the countries in our sample. The magnitude of
the economic uncertainty reflected in the series is immense. In October 1923, after the
hyperinflationary dynamics had started and the new Rentenmark was being introduced to
replace the Reichsmark, it is nearly 4,500 times larger than the Dutch benchmark,. The series
declines to near zero in early 1924 due to a decline in trading in the currency.18 Figure 4 also
depicts the German RV series, but truncates the series at 250 times the Dutch benchmark in
order to allow comparison with Austria, Hungary, and Poland. While less volatile than the
German RV measure, these three countries display much higher RV values than those observed
for the non-hyperinflationary countries. Their RV values are commonly fifty to 100 times the
Dutch benchmark. The elevated levels suggest that the movements of these countries’
exchange rates were larger and more affected by the arrival of news, suggesting that that this
news contained more information on the current and future success of these countries’ policy
decisions. Finally, Czechoslovakia provides an interesting comparison to GAPH. As shown in
Table 2, Czechoslovakia, a new country carved out of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, had an
annual average RV in 1920 that was comparable to Germany and Hungary. However, as shown

17

The first spike in March 1921 appears related to Belgium’s stated commitment to enforce German reparations
by sending additional troops to the Rhineland. The second in April 1924 occurred when the Premier announced
that Belgium’s budget would no longer state a reliance on German reparations and that budget neutrality would
have to be achieved through domestic tax revenues.
18
According to the foreign exchange tables in the Commercial and Financial Chronicle, New York quotation of
the Reichsmark continued through October 1924 when Rentenmark trading began to be reported.
14

in Figure 2, Czechoslovakia’s RV measure declined notably after August 1922. As we describe
below, and in contrast to the GAPH countries, Czechoslovakia’s policy environment improved
considerably in the early 1920s, reducing measured economic policy uncertainty.

IV. Realized Volatility and Policy Uncertainty
We now examine how closely realized volatility is associated with country-specific
news related to policy uncertainty. Following our discussion in Section IIA, we utilize
historical newspapers, secondary sources, and archival collections of the League of Nations to
code events and governmental actions that would directly or indirectly influence economic
policymaking as well any significant news unrelated to policy uncertainty (weather shocks,
crop disasters, etc.). Table 3 displays news in the ten months with the largest RV values prior
to the start of the hyperinflations in the GAPH countries.19 The table demonstrates several
interesting aspects of the post-WWI economic environment. First, in nearly all of the highest
RV months across our sample, countries experience events that could likely affect economic
policy. 20 Second, the highest RV months capture both one-time news events, such as
assassinations, protests, and invasions, as well as events that unfold over weeks or even months,
such as border disputes, reparations and debt negotiations, and declining state capacity. The
latter appear in the data as sequential months with high RV.
In the sub-sections that follow, we document these two features of the relationship
between the highest RV months and news for the GAPH countries, which are characterized by
persistently high levels of uncertainty throughout their sample periods. Recent scholarship
suggests that high-volatility regimes are particularly relevant for capturing uncertainty’s
impact on macroeconomic outcomes. For example, Danielsson et al. (2016) find that large
deviations from standard conditions of financial market volatility, both positive and negative,
contribute to the incidence of banking and financial crises in the near future. Jurado et al.
(2015), using a broader measure of macroeconomic uncertainty, find that large positive
innovations due to uncertainty led to sizable declines in real activity in post-WWII U.S. data;
notably, macroeconomic uncertainty shocks accounted for ten times more of their 12-monthahead forecast error variance than policy rate shocks and twice as much as stock market
19

Appendix Table 1 displays the five months with the largest realized volatility for non-hyperinflationary
countries in our sample.
20
Although we cannot rule out that we missed market-moving news, a corollary is that non-policy news does
not appear to be correlated with high RV months; i.e., the majority of months with high RV values have
corresponding news items with economic policy implications.
15

volatility. Accordingly, we show in this section that our RV series based on exchange-rate
volatility provide reasonable proxies for national economic uncertainty, and thus can be used
in our subsequent analysis of inflation and macroeconomic dynamics during the interwar
period.

IVA. Austria
The Treaty of Saint Germain was signed in September 1919 and established the first
Austrian republic. 21 As noted earlier, the treaty reduced the size of Austria, handing over
former parts of the empire to existing and newly-formed states; obligated Austria to pay
reparations while not specifying the amount or payment schedule; and prohibited Austria from
re-uniting with either Germany or Hungary. The new Austrian republic struggled to formulate
a stable government, first relying on the temporary government of the Social Democrat Karl
Renner, and then inviting the former emperor to return to create a constitution. On December
25, 1919, Karl IV was crowned Archduke of Austria, but food and raw material shortages
continued into the winter, fueling labor unrest and putting pressure on the government to
provide relief. During the winter of that year, the Allies pushed Austria to disarm, but it refused
to do so, given the uncertainty over its borders. As a consequence, military spending remained
elevated. In January 1920, news reports cited continued economic dislocation in the country:
Vienna had run out of coal and was shutting down its electric tram system.
The fledgling government was unable to formulate a budget plan in 1920. Each
successive draft of the budget (the 4th of the year in May) showed a growing deficit. In May,
protests erupted over a proposed tax on capital erupted. By January 1921, the government
declared itself insolvent and turned its finances over to the Reparations Commission. Revenue
could not keep pace with expenditure, and the deficit had expanded from $2.7 million paper
crowns for fiscal year 1919-20 to $41.1 million paper crowns for fiscal year 1920-21.
Two border crises also boiled over in 1920 creating additional uncertainty and
additional budgetary demands. First, Tyrol and Salzburg held plebiscites in May, voting to
breakaway and join Germany; this provoked strong responses from Italy and France,
complicating Austria’s ability to get them to release reparation liens. Second, Hungary seized
Burgenland in September 1920, a region promised to Austria in the Treaty of St. Germain. An

21

New York trading in the Austrian currency began in July 1919, as reported in the Commercial & Financial
Chronicle.
16

armed struggle continued through December 1921 when a plebiscite, organized with Italian
diplomatic assistance, resulted in placing most of the region within Austria.
In the first half of 1921, Austria sought a loan to stabilize its financial situation,
pledging revenues from customs, the state railway, and salt and tobacco monopolies. The idea
was eventually endorsed in July by the League of Nations. However, the loan could only be
offered if other countries were willing to remove their liens on the Austrian assets that were
pledged as part of the reparations agreement, which they refused to do. In August 1922, Lloyd
George stated that the Allied governments were unable to extend further financial assistance
to Austria unless guarantees of reconstruction were made by the League of Nations. In October
1922, under the auspices of the League of Nations, protocols signed with foreign powers for
an economic reconstruction were signed by Austria.

IVB. Germany
As displayed in Figures 3 and 4, the RV series for Germany is quite elevated and
reached extraordinary levels, reflecting the frequent and severe political and economic crises
that roiled the country in the wake of World War I. Problems arose immediately following
Germany’s decision to accept the Versailles Treaty in January 1920. On March 13, a general
strike was called in Berlin to protest Germany’s decision to abide by the terms of the treaty, in
particular the payment of reparations. On that same day, monarchists staged the Kapp Putsch
and drove Gustav Bauer’s republican government from the nation’s capital, forcing it to flee
to Stuttgart. A day later, amidst the chaos in the capital, communists seized the demilitarized
regions of the Ruhr, initially in response to the Kapp Putsch, but also with designs to gain
control of the republic. Roughly 300 policemen were killed. Both uprisings were quashed by
the end of the month, but not without considerable bloodshed, especially in the Ruhr, as well
as the fall of the government, with Bauer’s resignation on March 27th.
Meanwhile, operating under the new constitution of August 1919, the government
redirected control of state finances away from local and regional governments by passing a law
that prohibited these jurisdictions from imposing any taxes that were similar in origin to those
of the federal government. A federal tax administration was established by the end of that year
as were sources of taxation, including a turnover tax and a special levy on capital, the

Reichsnotopfer (Graham, 1930, pp.36-7, 940). Although the London Ultimatum of May 1921
(which guaranteed payments of 132 billion gold marks) appeared to resolve the question of
17

how much Germany would owe, after making only one payment, the new government, headed
by Chancellor Joseph Wirth, requested a moratorium on reparations payments in December.
This decision cast doubt over the future path of the nation’s budget. In that same month,
Germany’s efforts to secure an international private bank loan to help finance its expenditures
were rebuffed.
Germany requested a further delay in paying reparations after Foreign Minister
Rathenau’s assassination by extremists in June 1922, using the threat of default to exact a
concession. In response, the Reparations Commission agreed to a six-month moratorium on
payments, in part because the politically delicate transfer of Upper Silesia to Poland was taking
place simultaneously. With the Reichstag protesting new taxes to fund reparations payments,
by August 1922, new French Prime Minister Raymond Poincare was demanding payment of
reparations and threatening “coercive measures,” presumably occupation of the Ruhr, if they
were not paid. By October, Wirth had requested a full moratorium on debt payments, but the
French position had hardened such that it refused to pay its Allied war debts until it received
reparations from Germany. The German request for a moratorium was not met. Chancellor
Wirth was compelled to resign in November 1922 after the Social Democrats resisted his
attempt to broaden the ruling coalition to include the German People’s Party. At the same time,
capital flight was worsening, and Germany responded by imposing exchanged controls. A
second London conference aimed at resolving the reparations impasse ended in December 1922
with no new agreement, and the Reparations Committee warned Germany it was in default
over its failure to deliver timber to France.
When Germany missed its reparations-related delivery of coal in January 1923, the RC
declared the country in technical default. In response, Belgium and France invaded the Ruhr
Valley with more than 60,000 troops, an event which came to dominate the German domestic
political dialogue. Germany responded by ordering government employees to disobey the
occupying French. German banks closed in Dusseldorf in response to occupation, and a broad
strike in the mines led to the French arrest of the German heads of these operations. Toward
the end of the month and into the next, France tightened its control over the Ruhr and barred
exports from the region to non-occupied Germany. The Ruhr dispute continued throughout the
spring, with the German government financing “passive resistance” to French occupation,
further straining its budget. In June 1923, France and Belgium called for an end of German
passive resistance in the Ruhr as a quid pro quo for a new reparations conference; they occupied
18

Dortmund, leaving only one railway line out of the Ruhr. By November, Chancellor
Stresemann had resigned after a vote of non-confidence, and the hyperinflation reached its
peak. The new central bank – the Rentenbank – and its gold-indexed rentenmark were
introduced in October.

IVC. Hungary
Hungary began its postwar existence as a weakened state with limited capacity. It
eventually repelled the Czechoslovak and Romanian incursions of 1919 and signed a peace
treaty in June 1920. It withstood a five-month period with communist leadership, but emerged
from this turbulent period behind the authoritarian leadership of Admiral Miklos Horthy, who
was appointed by the assembly as the kingdom’s regent (the Allies were unwilling to allow a
monarch to govern Hungary) and who turned his immediate attention to lynching the
supporters of a Soviet Hungary (“the white terror”). In the second half of the 1920, the
appointed Prime Minister Teleki had to form two consecutive governments to maintain power,
put down wayward military units in Budapest, and convince a reluctant National Assembly to
ratify the Treaty of Trianon, which it finally did in November. Rumors of a coup by former
emperor Charles IV threatened the government’s existence in early 1921 as did a continuing
territorial dispute with Austria over the Burgenland region. The coup by Charles IV finally
materialized in March; however, without military support, he was forced to retreat to western
Hungary.
By September, the border dispute with Austria intensified, when Hungary sent troops
into the region to protect its access to railway lines. The Allies warned Hungary to withdraw.
Meanwhile, Finance Minister Lorant Hegedus resigned in September 1921 as the budget
situation worsened. Political instability continued to plague the young republic in the second
half of the year, with Charles IV attempting another coup and the National Assembly
responding to his attempt by passing the Dethronement Act of the House of Habsburg in
November. In December, the city of Sopron, a German-speaking area within Burgenland, held
a plebiscite and voted to remain with Hungary despite Austria’s treaty-based territorial claim.
At the end of 1921, the country appointed yet another minister of finance (Tibor
Kallay); the government continued to operate under a provisional budget since it had failed to
pass a budget bill for the fiscal year. Finance minister Hegedus claimed the budget deficit
amounted to $6 billion kronen (paper crowns), but the situation was clearly much worse. By
19

January 1922, the government announced a deficit double its previous estimate, and used the
provisional budget to authorize the payment of both the capital and interest on the public debt
using bond finance. For fiscal year 1922-23, the deficit reached $40.7 billion.22 Hungary’s
continued aggression toward the newly-formed central European states, prompted
Czechoslovakia, Romania and the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovene (Yugoslavia) to form
the Little Entente – treaties negotiated in 1922 and finalized in August, which recognized each
other’s independence and promised mutual defense against Hungary. In September, with the
budget and capital flight worsening, Hungary implemented foreign exchange controls and
requested admittance to the League of Nations in the hopes of obtaining a loan to stabilize the
economic situation.

IVD. Poland
Facing five territorial disputes (two with Czechoslovakia, and one each with Germany,
Lithuania, and Russia), Poland’s postwar existence was highly uncertain. Its RV measure often
changed in response to events associated with these disputes and the war with Russia. After its
surrender, Germany withdrew its armies from the Eastern front, leaving a power vacuum that
was quickly filled by the Russians and Poles, both of whom laid claim to the area spanning
parts of present-day Latvia and the area in present-day Ukraine between Kieve and Lviv. The
territorial dispute escalated into warfare, with both countries claiming historical precedent to
these areas. While each side in the conflict had seen some success in their offensives in the first
half of 1920, Russia was forced to sue for peace in November and negotiations began the
following month; however, labor strikes arose in Polish occupied parts of former Russian
territory. At the same time, Polish relations with Lithuania rapidly deteriorated when general
Zeligowski set up a permanent occupation force in Vilnius over strong objections from
Lithuania. An attempt by Belgium to settle the dispute between Lithuania and Poland failed in
December.
Facing budget pressures from these disputes, Treasury Minister Grabsky resigned.
Negotiations with Russia dragged on into early 1921, and food and clothing shortages
worsened in the big cities of Poland. Multiple uprisings among the Polish population in Upper
Silesia occurred in 1921, with hostilities spiking in August, and the Supreme Council of the
Allies ordered a cessation to fighting as they worked to resolve this territorial dispute. The

22

The Statesman’s Year-book: Statistical and Historical Annual of the World for the Year 1925 (1925, p.686).
20

budget minister of Poland requested strict supervision of all expenditures by the Diet, including
military spending, as the fiscal position of the country eroded further.
The League of Nations resolved the German border dispute over Silesia in October
1921, with Poland receiving most of the industrial areas but only about one-third of the
contested land. However, it made no headway on Poland’s dispute with Lithuania. In February
1923, the League relented and simply divided the neutral zone – setting a demarcation line as
the official border, but one which Lithuania refused to recognize. The dispute thus remained
unresolved during our sample period.
In June 1923, the Sikorski government was overthrown, and a new Cabinet led by Witos
of the Piast (Peasant) party took charge. He kept Grabsky on as minister of treasury, who
intended to introduce currency reform (zloty), balance the budget, and lower inflation.
However, Witos then decided not to support these reforms, and Grabsky resigned in protest the
following month. Witos and Linde, his new finance minister, attempted to secure a foreign loan
of $100 million loan from Hallgarten & Co. as well as a $150 million loan from J.P. Morgan
to finance budget deficits, but both attempts failed. Poland was given official notice of the
creation of USSR in that same month.

V. Estimating the Role of Uncertainty on Macroeconomic Outcomes in the 1920s
The preceding sections summarize how Europe found itself in a highly uncertain
environment after World War I, and that economic policy uncertainty – as measured by the
realized volatility in exchange rates – was particularly pronounced in countries that ultimately
experienced hyperinflations. The detailed examination of GAPH in Section 4 (and the other
countries in Appendix Table 1) further suggests that RV months are associated with events or
news that could influence the course and direction of fiscal policy. We now consider whether
the RV measure provides insight into inflation dynamics.
As shown in Table 4, there are several constraints that define our sample period and
coverage. First, we are limited by data availability for the ten European countries in the sample.
For example, the earliest month for which we have sufficient data to conduct our multivariate
analysis discussed below is July 1919, when the daily exchange rate series are first reported
for the UK, the Netherlands, and Italy. Another constraint concerns the availability of monthly
inflation figures, which are available in the early 1920s for GAPH as well as for Belgium,

21

Czechoslovakia, and the Netherlands. The last column of Table 4 lists the number of monthly
observations available for each country.
In terms of measuring the relationship between uncertainty and inflation, one necessary
modeling assumption is deciding on when hyperinflation began for the countries that
experienced it. Our intuition is that when a country crosses over into a state of hyperinflation,
the stability of the macroeconomic relationships that we would hope to capture with a model
break down sufficiently as to prevent reasonable inference and would quite likely provide
spurious inference. Because there is no standard definition of hyperinflation, we use the simple
rule of a 100% change in monthly prices within a month (i.e., a doubling of the level of prices)
to define the onset of hyperinflation within a country. Thus, as shown in the top panel of Table
4, our sample period for Germany ends in June 1923, with a monthly inflation rate of about
86%, since the inflation rate in the following month was 136%.23 Similarly, our end date for
Poland is September 1923, when the monthly inflation rate was 32%, since inflation reached
132% in the following month.
Due to external intervention, the start of hyperinflation for Austria and Hungary are
defined somewhat differently. For the Austrian sample, the monthly inflation rate reaches a
maximum of only 83% in August 1922. In the following month, the League of Nations
extended the country a significant loan and assumed control of certain monetary functions. As
this represented a regime shift and effectively ended trading in the kronen (i.e., no reported
price fluctuations in New York trading), our RV measure of uncertainty could not be calculated
beyond September 1922. For Hungary, monthly inflation rates were certainly elevated,
reaching 68% in July 1923 and 52% in February 1924, but never exceeded 100%. However,
Sargent (1982) describes Hungary as experiencing hyperinflation by noting that its price index
increased by a factor of 263 between January 1922 and April 1924. Accordingly, we also use
regime change to mark the sample’s endpoint at June 1924 – when the Hungarian National
Bank was formed and the krone effectively stopped trading before the forint was introduced in
August 1924.

23

The hyperinflation reached a peak of a monthly inflation rate of 569% in October 1923 before the reichsmark
was decommissioned and replaced in December 1923; see Webb (1986). Salemi (1980) chose the same endpoint
of June 1923 for his study based on judgment; i.e., he stated that “a regression attempting to explain [German
inflation] between February 1921 and August 1923 might do well by explaining [German inflation] for only the
last few months.”
22

Before describing our econometric approach, Table 5 presents simple summary
statistics on the correlations between the monthly changes in countries’ inflation rates (denoted
as Δπk,t) with lagged values of the changes in their RV values; i.e.,
(2)

ρ(Δπkt, ΔRVkt-j), j ⋳ [0,6].

These correlations provide a simple view into how changes in uncertainty influence future
changes in inflation. The top panel presents the correlations for GAPH. The first point to notice
is that, with the exception of Poland, there is a fairly large contemporaneous correlation
between changes in GAPH uncertainty and inflation, ranging from 0.25 to 0.38; i.e., inflation
and uncertainty tended to move together in these countries. Although the correlations are
calculated over the relatively short sample periods available, we still observe that these values
are positive, relatively large, and statistically significant at the 15% level. The second point to
notice is that the one-lag correlations remain positive and significant for all GAPH countries
except Austria, whose second-lag correlation fits this pattern. These correlation patterns
provide intuitive support for the hypothesis that economic uncertainty is an important driver of
inflation in countries experiencing hyperinflation.
The correlations shown in the bottom panel of Table 5 suggest a different result for the
other countries in the sample. Britain, Czechoslovakia, and France show barely any correlation
at any lag between these two variables. The contemporaneous correlations for Belgium, the
Netherlands, and Italy are similar to those of the GAPH countries in magnitude and
significance, but their subsequent lagged correlations oscillate in a pattern that likely negates
the initial contemporaneous correlations. Overall, these correlation patterns provide
preliminary support for the hypothesis that uncertainty, as reflected in our RV measures, was
not likely pronounced enough in these countries to influence their inflation dynamics and
certainly not to induce hyperinflation.24
To estimate more fully the effects that uncertainty had on the economic dynamics of
European economies after World War I, and inflation in particular, we frame our analysis in
terms of a, reduced-form macroeconomic model that is similar to a vector autoregression
(VAR). That is, for each country in our sample, we introduce our RV series into a small
modeling system that includes changes in inflation (Δπ), industrial production (ΔIP), and notes
24

The results of formal Granger-causality testing of the bivariate relationship between the countries’ uncertainty
and inflation series are available upon request.
23

(or money) in circulation (ΔNotes) at a monthly frequency. The latter variable has been
highlighted as a way of gauging fiscal policy regimes (Frankel, 1980; Sargent, 1982; and
Webb, 1986). As government expenditures fluctuated due to volatile tax revenues, reparations
negotiations, and military actions, different countries were, to varying degrees, financing
deficits through the issuance of debt obligations or by monetizing them. The latter is clearly a
precursor to rising inflation and loss of currency value. Thus, the growth of notes in circulation,
particularly for the GAPH countries, is an important variable in our empirical framework.25
As per Leduc and Liu (2015), the model places contemporaneous and lagged values of the RV
series first in order, such that uncertainty does not respond to macroeconomic shocks in the
current period, while the other series can change based on an uncertainty shock. The
macroeconomic data were hand collected from government documents and League of Nations
publications as described in the Appendix.
While VAR models are standard tools for assessing macroeconomic dynamics, they are
subject to certain general challenges as well as some specific challenges. As summarized in
recent work by Barnichon and Brownlees (2017), VARs provide meaningful dynamic structure
and shock identification to the system of variables under analysis, which translates into
efficient parameter estimation and generation of multipliers of interest, such as impulse
response functions (IRFs). However, inference drawn from VARs is highly dependent on the
chosen model specification and is not robust to model misspecification. In response to this
shortcoming, Jòrda (2005) proposed computing IRFs based on local projections (LP), which
are a sequence of predictive regressions of a variable of interest on a structural shock over
different horizons. Using the LP approach, to generate an IRF over the period from T to T+j,
one would run J regressions with the same explanatory variables and a dependent variable
whose time index increments from T to T+j. The IRF is then simply the sequence of regression
coefficients on the structural shock parameter. The same logic holds for the estimated
confidence bands. This technique is more robust to possible misspecification and does not
suffer from the curse of parameter dimensionality inherent to VARs. These properties are of
particular value in our study, which has limited sample size and thus requires as much
estimation parsimony as possible.

25

Our macroeconomic series are constructed from various relevant historical references; see the Appendix for
details.
24

The LP methodology nevertheless still requires a large number of estimated parameters
and has been found to be excessively noisy under certain circumstances (Ramey, 2016). In a
recent paper, Barnichon and Brownlees (2017) propose an LP estimator that improves on both
of these considerations by imposing the restriction that an IRF be a smooth function across the
horizon of interest. This restriction, as well as the shrinkage estimation technique employed,
reduces the number of estimated parameters, and provides clearer inference between variables
across the horizon of interest. Given that our sample contains between 20 and 66 monthly
observations, depending on the particular country, this smooth local projection (SLP) estimator
provides overwhelming benefits in terms of parameter estimation, IRF generation, and
meaningful inference relative to other estimators. Correspondingly, the results from our SLP
regressions form the basis of our empirical analysis. The SLP regressions we estimate are:

(3)

Δπkt+j = αkj + β1kjΔRVkt + β2kjΔRVkt-1 + β3kjΔπkt-1 + β4kjΔIPkt-1 + β2kjΔNoteskt-1 + εkt+j,

where Δ represents the log first difference of the series.
Figure 5 presents SLP-generated IRFs for GAPH, for the effect of a unit (or onestandard deviation) increase in uncertainty on the monthly inflation rate.26 The IRFs exhibit a
common downward trend from above zero at the start of the projection horizon to below zero
by the sixth month. This general pattern supports the hypothesis that an increase in uncertainty
corresponds to an increase in inflation in the contemporaneous month and the month
immediately following, although the effect declines to zero by the third month and either
remains there or reverses in subsequent months. Importantly, the SLP-generated confidence
bands (plotted at the 95% level) show that these positive relationships are statistically
significant in GAPH for the contemporaneous month and the first month of the projection.
Thus, our empirical results support the view that uncertainty shocks lead to an immediate, if
relatively short-lived, increase in inflation. Of course, for some countries in our sample, such
shocks occur with high frequency, so uncertainty may cumulate to have a large effect on the
inflation rate.
The magnitudes of the effects of uncertainty on contemporaneous inflation are
summarized in Table 6. As shown in the first row, the standard deviation of log changes in the
monthly German RV measure is 1.21, which is equivalent to an increase of 235% in RV value.

26

Tables of the estimated, country-level SLP coefficients are available upon request.
25

The model-implied response of the monthly log growth rate of inflation for Germany is 0.139,
which is an increase of 0.17 standard deviations or, equivalently, a 7.9% inflation increase.
Table 7 shows the effect for the first month of the project horizon. As shown in the first row, a
one-standard-deviation increase in Germany’s RV measure in month t leads to an increase in
the inflation rate in month t+1 of 0.03 standard deviations, which corresponds to an increase
of 3.3% in value. As shown in Figure 5, after two months, the cumulative effect was zero.
Thus, a one-standard-deviation increase in uncertainty translates into a cumulative 11.2
percentage-point increase in Germany’s monthly inflation rate.
As shown in Figure 5, the SLP impulse response functions for Austria, Poland, and
Hungary exhibit similar patterns of positive and significant responses early in the projection
horizon, and then decline to nearly zero by the third month. As Table 6 shows, the estimated
contemporaneous coefficient for Austria means that a one-standard-deviation shock to
uncertainty leads to an increase in the monthly inflation rate of 17 percentage points. If we then
add the one-month-lagged effect, recorded in Table 7 as a 9.7 percentage point increase, the
empirical results suggest that Austrian inflation would rise by 26.7 percentage points after a
one-standard-deviation increase in uncertainty.
The contemporaneous effects for one-standard-deviation increases in uncertainty for
Poland and Hungary result in inflation rates that are roughly 8 and 15 percentage points higher,
respectively. Incorporating the one-month lagged response, results in monthly inflation rates
that are 12.8 and 30.3 percentage points higher, respectively. These results strongly suggest
that uncertainty played an important role in determining inflation dynamics during the interwar
period for countries that subsequently experienced hyperinflations.
In contrast, Figure 6 shows the more limited role that uncertainty played in the inflation
dynamics of the other European countries; i.e., the IRFs are essentially flat at or oscillating
slightly near zero. The estimated responses are not statistically significantly different from zero
at the 10% level in almost all cases The magnitudes of these estimated responses are also
notably smaller, ranging between -0.01 and +0.01 at the contemporaneous and one-month
horizons. As shown in Tables 6 and 7, the marginal effects of an increase of one-standarddeviation change in the RV measure on the inflation rate are quite small for the nonhyperinflation countries, with effects less than a 1% change in absolute value. For example, in
the cases of Britain and the Netherlands, the cumulative two-month effect of a one standard-

26

deviation in the logged change in the national RV measure on monthly inflation are -0.5 and
+1.2 percentage points, which are an order of magnitude smaller than for GAPH.
Czechoslovakia’s SLP results are particularly interesting to compare to GAPH. As
Figure 6 shows, inflation in Czechoslovakia initially responds to increased uncertainty by
declining. The contemporaneous and one-period-ahead projections shown in Tables 6 and 7
are negative, though not both statistically significant, and cumulate to a decline of nearly 2
percentage points. So why are the effects of uncertainty for Czechoslovakia’s inflation rate
different in sign and size from GAPH when its RV was roughly equal to Germany’s and
Hungary’s in 1920? After all, it too had border disputes, imperial legacy debts, and new
institutions – all conditions that more than likely contributed to another newly-created
country’s (i.e., Poland’s) high measured uncertainty and eventual experience with
hyperinflation.
The likely reason appears in 1922, and as shown in Figure 2; that is, Czechoslovakia’s
policy uncertainty declined dramatically. Under the leadership of finance minister Alois Rasin,
the country first committed to obtaining a stable currency in 1919, shortly after it gained its
independence (Sargent, 1982). Czechoslovakia then eventually adopted a fixed exchange rate
by going onto the gold standard. As emphasized by Kydland and Prescott (1977), a hard peg,
like Czechoslovakia adopted, tied the hands of the monetary and fiscal authorities and
committed the policymakers to following rules. This decision no doubt helped to reduce
uncertainty about the future path of policy. Czechoslovakia’s policy making was then
consistent with its hard peg: it implemented a capital levy to move the budget toward balance,
as Germany did, but it was able to do so without the additional uncertainty over reparations
payments that saddled Germany. Finally, it faced border disputes, just as Poland did, but it did
not engage in a drawn out war, as Poland did with Russia. Rather, it was able to neutralize its
most serious external threat, Hungary, by entering into the Little Entente in August 1922 – a
date consistent with when we see the Czechoslovakia’s RV begin to decline (Figure 2).

VI. Conclusion
The physical and political destruction wrought by the First World War traumatized
Europe and had economic reverberations long after the official peace treaties were signed.
Both the victors and the vanquished faced massive costs of reconstruction, uncertainty
regarding political borders and tax revenues, and extended negotiations over war reparations.
27

Europe thus faced an environment of heightened uncertainty that deeply affected economic
expectations and outcomes.
We develop a methodology that utilizes country-specific events to show how
uncertainty was a key driver of the inflation dynamics for Germany, Austria, Poland, and
Hungary, but not for other European countries after World War I. It allows us to show how
uncertainty over reparations increased policy uncertainty in both France (as a receiver) and
Germany (as a payer). However, the effects of this uncertainty were significantly greater for
Germany and likely drove inflation expectations in that country into a negative spiral, as
detailed by historians (Webb, 1986). More generally, our methodology provides insight into
why hyperinflation emerges in some countries but not others. In the context of World War I,
pronounced economic policy uncertainty took the form of uncertainty over country borders,
legacy debts, and reparation payments. Adopting nominal anchors (such as the gold standard)
becomes more difficult to implement in highly uncertain environments such as these since
policymakers are challenged in convincing households, business, and financial markets that
there policies are credible.
For our analysis, we examine the relationship between uncertainty and inflation
dynamics within an economy. Our results show that in a period of heightened general
uncertainty, such as the interwar period, higher relative levels of uncertainty were significant
drivers of inflation dynamics for the countries that subsequently experienced hyperinflation.
In contrast, lower relative levels of uncertainty in other European countries did not influence
their inflation dynamics. These joint empirical results align well with recent work by Vavra
(2014), who shows how heightened economic uncertainty differentially influences the price
setting mechanism, monetary policy, and output growth. The results are also in line with the
finding by Danielsson et al. (2016)’ i.e., periods of unusually high and low uncertainty are
more meaningful indicators of financial stability (i.e., banking crises in their work) than just
the level value of uncertainty itself. Our results support the view that heightened economic
uncertainty – both in relative terms within a country and across countries – contributed to the
macroeconomic and price dynamics that led to rising levels of inflation in the countries that
tipped into hyperinflation.
Finally, our findings relate to the work of Cole and Kehoe (1996, 2000) who show
that financial crises that threaten a country’s ability to repay its debt may quickly become
self-fulfilling, and lead to a debt crisis. The parallel to fiscal policy and inflation expectations
28

in the interwar period is clear. If economic agents believed that GAPH debts could not be
repaid as long as budget discipline was non-existent, then tipping into hyperinflation becomes
self-fulfilling. Further analysis of the fiscal conditions of these countries at the monthly level
and their relationships with our uncertainty measure should be a fruitful direction for future
work.

29

REFERENCES
Andersen, T., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F.X., and Labys, P., 2003. “Modeling and Forecasting
Realized Volatility,” Econometrica, 71, 579-625.
Baker, S.R. and Bloom, N., 2013. “Does Uncertainty Reduce Growth? Using Disasters as
Natural Experiments.” NBER Working Paper 19475.
Baker, S.R., Bloom, N., and Davis, S.J., 2016. “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 1593-1636.
Balderston, T., 1989. “War Finance and Inflation in Britain and Germany, 1914-1918,”
Economic History Review 42(2): 222–44.
Baillie, R., Bollerslev, T. and Redfrearn, M.R., 1993. “Bear Squeezes, Volatility Spillovers
and Speculative Attacks in the Hyperinflation 1920's Foreign Exchange, Journal of
International Money and Finance, 12, 511-521.
Barnichon, R. and Brownlees, C., 2017. “Impulse Response Estimation by Smooth Local
Projections,” Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Bianchi, F. and Melosi, L., 2017. “Escaping the Great Recession,” American Economic
Review, 107, 1030-1058.
Bloom, N., 2009. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, 77, 623-685.
Boemeke, Manfred F., Gerald D. Feldman, Gerald D. and Elisabeth Glaser (editors). 1998.
Versailles: A Reassessment after 75 Years. Cambridge University Press.
Bogart, E.L. .1920. Direct and Indirect Costs of the Great World War. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Bordo, M.D. and MacDonald, R., 2003. “The Interwar Gold Exchange Standard: Credibility
and Monetary Independence,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 22, 1-32.
Bordo, M.D. and Siklos, P.L., 2014. “Central Bank Credibility, Reputation and Inflation
Targeting in Historical Perspective,” NBER Working Paper #20693.
Bordo, M.D. and Siklos, P.L., 2015. “Central Bank Credibility: An Historical and Quantitative
Exploration,” NBER Working Paper #20824.
Broadberry, S. and Harrison, M., 2005. “Introduction,” The Economics of World War.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 3-40.
Cagan, P., 1956. “The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation” in Friedman, M. (ed.), Studies
in the Quantity Theory of Money. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

30

Caggiano, G., Castelnuovo, E. and Groshenny, N., 2014. “Uncertainty Shocks and
Unemployment Dynamics in U.S. Recessions,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 6778-92.
Carriero, A., Clark, T.E., and Marcellino, M., 2018. “Endogenous Uncertainty,” Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper #2018-05
Cole, H.L. and Kehoe, T.J., 1996. “A Self-Fulfilling Model of Mexico’s 1994-1995 Debt
Crisis,” Journal of International Economics, 41, 309-330.
Cole, H.L. and Kehoe, T.J., 2000. “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises,” Review of Economic Studies,
67, 91-116.

Commercial and Financial Chronicle (various years).
Danielsson, J., Valenzuela, M. and Zer, I., 2018. “Learning from History: Volatility and
Financial Crises,” Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Davig, T. and Leeper, E.M., 2011. “Monetary-Fiscal Policy Interactions and Fiscal
Stimulus.” European Economic Review, 55, 211–27.
Dornbusch, R., 1982. “Monetary Problems of Post-Communism: Lessons from the End of
the Austro-Hungarian Empire,” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 128, 391–424.
Dumberry, P., 2007. State Succession to International Responsibility. Brill Publishing.
Durand, E D., 1922. “Public Finance of Poland.” United States Department of Commerce,
Supplement to Commerce Reports, Trade Information Bulletin No.32, Washington,
D.C.
Eichengreen, B., 1992. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, New
York: Oxford University Press.
Einzig, P., 1937. The Theory of Forward Exchange. London: MacMillan.
Ferguson, Adam. 1975. When Money Dies: the Nightmare of the Weimar Collapse. London:
William Kimber.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., Guerrón-Quintana, P., Kuester, K., and Rubio-Ramírez, J., 2015.
“Fiscal Volatility Shocks and Economic Activity,” American Economic Review, 105,
3352-3384.
Frankel, J.A., 1977. “The Forward Exchange Rate, Expectations, and the Demand for
Money: The German Hyperinflation,” American Economic Review, 67, 653-670.
Frankel, J.A., 1980. “The Forward Exchange Rate, Expectations, and the Demand for
Money: The German Hyperinflation: Reply,” American Economic Review, 70, 771775.
31

Fraser, and Mark P. Taylor. 1990. “Modeling Risk in the Interwar Foreign Exchange
Market,” Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 37(3), 241-58.
Gilchrist, S., Sim, J.W., and Zakrajšek, E., 2014. “Uncertainty, Financial Frictions, and
Investment Dynamics,” NBER Working Paper #20038.
Graham, Frank D. 1930. Exchange, Pries, and Production in Hyperinflation: Germany,
1920-23. New York: Russell and Russell.
Jonas, Paul. 2016. “The Economic Consequences of Trianon,” Hungarianhistory.com
http://www.hungarianhistory.com/lib/tria/tria40.htm
Jurado, K., Ludvigson, S.C., and Ng, S., 2015. “Measuring Uncertainty,” American
Economic Review, 105, 1177-1216.
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott. 1977.“Rules Rather than Discretion: The
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans.” Journal of Political Economy 85(3): 473–92.
League of Nations. 1937. Monetary Review, Money and Banking 1936/37, Volume 1,
Geneva: League of Nations.
League of Nations. Monthly Bulletin of Statistics. Geneva: League of Nations.
League of Nations. 1938. Report on Exchange Control. Geneva: League of Nations.
League of Nations. various years. Yearbook. Geneva: League of Nations.
Leduc, S. and Liu, Z., 2016. “Uncertainty Shocks are Aggregate Demand Shocks,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 55, 1113-1128.
Leeper, E.M., 2005. “Equilibria under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary and Fiscal Policies.”
Journal of Monetary Economics 27: 129-47.
Ludvigson, S., Ma, S., and Ng., S., 2018. “Uncertainty and Business Cycles: Exogenous
Impulse or Endogenous Response?” Manuscript, Columbia University.
McCallum, Bennett T. and Edward Nelson. 2005. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 21(4),
Fiscal Policy (Winter), 565-583.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay Shambaugh and Alan M. Taylor. 2004. “Monetary Sovereignty,
Exchange Rates and Capital Controls: The Trilemma in the Interwar Period,” IMF
Staff Papers 51 (special issue).
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Rogoff, Kenneth. 1983. “Speculative hyperinflations in maximizing
models: Can we rule them out? Journal of Political Economy 91 (August): 675-87.

32

Paredes, J., Pérez, J.J., and Perez-Quiros, G. 2015. “Fiscal Targets: A Guide to Forecasters?”
European Central Bank Working Paper #1834.
Peel, D.A. and Spiru, A.M., 2015. “Consistency of Two Major Data Sources for Exchange
Rates in the Interwar Period and Evidence on the Behavior of Exchange Rates during
Hyperinflation: The Case of Germany,” Manuscript, Lancaster University
Management School.
Prochnik, Edgar L.G. 1922. “Possibilities of the Economic and Financial Reconstruction of
Austria,” The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 102
(July), 20-26.
Ramey, Valarie. 2016. “Macroeconomic Shocks and their Propagation,” Handbook of
Macroeconomics, Volume 2A, 71-162.
Reinhart, Carmen M and Kenneth Rogoff. 2009. This Time is Different. Princeton University
Press.
Ritschl, Albrecht and Tobias Straumann. 2010. “Business cycles and economic policy, 1914–
1945.” In Stephen Broadberry and Kevin H. O’Rourke The Cambridge Economic
History of Modern Europe, Volume 2, 1870 to the Present, pp.156-80.
Salemi, M.K. 1980. “The Forward Exchange Rate, Expectations, and the Demand for
Money: The German Hyperinflation: Comment,” American Economic Review, 70,
763-770.
Sargent, Thomas. 1982. “The Ends of Four Big Inflations” in Hall, R.E., ed. Inflation:
Causes and Effects. Chicago: NBER, 41-98.

Statistiches Handbuch der Weltwirtschaft. various years. Verlag für Sozialpolitik, Wirtschaft
und Statistik Paul Schmidt, Berlin.
Vavra, J., 2014. “Inflation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an S-s
Interpretation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 215-258.
Webb, S.B. 1986. “Fiscal News and Inflationary Expectations in Germany after World War
I,” Journal of Economic History, 46, 769-794.
Woodford, M., 1995. “Price Level Determinacy without Control of a Monetary Aggregate,”
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 43, 1-46.
Young, J.P, 1925. European Currency and Finance: Commission of the Gold and Silver
Inquiry, United States Senate (Volumes 1 and 2). Washington, D.C., Government
Printing Office.

33

Figure 1. Realized volatility measures for the Netherlands and the UK
7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0
Jul‐19

Dec‐19

Jun‐20

Dec‐20

May‐21

Nov‐21

May‐22

Nov‐22

Netherlands

May‐23

Oct‐23

Apr‐24

Oct‐24

Mar‐25

Sep‐25

UK

Note: Values are relative to the RV measure for the Netherlands in July 1919.

Figure 2. Realized volatility for the non-hyperinflationary European countries
40.0

35.0

30.0

25.0

20.0

15.0

10.0

5.0

0.0
Jul-19

Dec-19

Jun-20

Dec-20

Jun-21

Nov-21
Belgium

May-22

Nov-22

France

May-23
Italy

Oct-23

Apr-24

Oct-24

Apr-25

Sep-25

Czech.

Note: Values for all countries are expressed relative to the RV measure for the Netherlands in July 1919.
34

Figure 3. Realized Volatility for Germany
4,500

4,000

3,500

3,000

2,500

2,000

1,500

1,000

500

0
Jul-19

Dec-19

Jun-20

Dec-20

May-21

Nov-21

May-22

Nov-22

May-23

Oct-23

Apr-24

Oct-24

Mar-25

Sep-25

Germany

Note: Values for Germany are expressed relative to the RV measure for the Netherlands in July 1919.

Figure 4. Realized Volatility for Germany, Austria, Poland, and Hungary
250

200

150

100

50

0
Jul-19

Nov-19

Mar-20

Aug-20

Dec-20

May-21

Sep-21

Jan-22

Germany

Jun-22

Oct-22

Austria

Mar-23
Poland

Jul-23

Dec-23

Apr-24

Sep-24

Jan-25

May-25

Oct-25

Hungary

Note: Values for all countries are expressed relative to the RV measure for the Netherlands in July 1919.
35

Figure 5. The Responsiveness of Inflation to Uncertainty – Hyperinflation Sample
(Impulse Response Functions)
Germany

Austria

Poland

Hungary

The graphs show the impulse response functions of a one-standard-deviation change in ΔRVkt on Δπkt+j based on
smoothed local projections (SLP), and as described in the text. The grey lines represent the 95% confidence
intervals around the SLP regression coefficients.

36

Figure 6. The Responsiveness of Inflation to Uncertainty – Other European Countries
(Impulse Response Functions)
Britain

Belgium

Czechoslovakia

France

The Netherlands

Italy

The graphs show the impulse response functions of a one-standard-deviation change in ΔRVkt on Δπkt+j based on
smoothed local projections (SLP), and as described in the text. The grey lines represent the 95% confidence
intervals around the SLP regression coefficients.

37

Table 1. Debt and Inflation in Post- WWI Europe

Austria
Belgium
France
Germany
Holland
Hungary
Italy
UK
Poland

Debt-to-GDP ratio
1913
1920
63.3%
-49.5%
102.7%
66.3%
185.5%
42.1%
-61.6%
59.6%
--69.2%
142.3%
25.8%
130.7%
---

Annual
inflation
(1914-1918)
13.5%
25.2%
30.0%
17.9%
33.1%
53.7%
36.3%
20.6%
66.4%

Note: Debt-to-GDP ratios are from Reinhart and Rogoff (2008). Hungary and Poland were
not distinct countries in 1913. The annual inflation rates are calculated by the authors based
on data from Statistiches Handbuch der Weltwirtschaft.

Table 2. Uncertainty in Europe after World War I
(Average annual realized volatility)

1919
1920
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925

Austria
56.07
51.07
55.42
46.41
----0.01

Germany
31.00
33.51
29.35
65.54
1,217.26
2.35
---

Hungary Poland Belgium Britian Czech.
----4.31
1.15
--35.07
53.26
4.77
1.49
29.27
37.80
63.46
5.49
0.40
8.44
32.53
16.65
1.71
0.14
7.86
59.78
162.98
3.73
0.08
0.34
29.77
10.50
7.57
0.13
0.29
0.38
12.24
0.58
0.01
0.00

France Netherlands
5.72
0.58
6.53
0.89
2.70
0.41
1.76
0.10
2.46
0.07
6.08
0.08
1.36
0.00

Note: Monthly realized volatility (RV) is computed using daily exchange rate data. Annual
averages are simple means of the monthly values for a given year. All figures are expressed
relative to the Netherlands value for July 1919, as described in the text.

38

Italy
3.43
8.17
3.64
2.40
0.96
0.45
1.42

Table 3. News in Germany, Austria, Poland and Hungary for Highest RV Months
Panel A.
Germany
Month
Sep-19
Jan-20
Mar-20
Dec-21

Rank
18
19
16
12

Aug-22

10

Sep-22

17

Oct-22

14

Nov-22

11

Dec-22
Jan-23
Feb-23

15
5
8

Apr-23

13

Jun-23
Jul-23

7
6

Aug-23
Sep-23

4
2

Oct-23

1

Nov-23

3

Dec-23
Oct-24

9
20

Constitution of August 1919 gave control over taxation to federal authorities
Versailles Treaty comes into force
Kapp Putsch. Ruhr uprising by Communists.
Chancellor Wirth requests payment moratorium just 6 months after the first
payment under the London Ultimatum
The Allied Reparations Commission unanimously decided to grant a 6month moratorium on reparations payments
The Reichsbank was closed by police following a bank run by employers
looking to meet overdue payrolls
Chancellor Wirth submitted a question to the cabinet council as to whether
to declare bankruptcy
Chancellor Wirth's complete moratorium efforts failed, and he is forced to
resign on Nov.14
New German proposal of a 5-year moratorium on reparations payments
France occupied the Ruhr to ensure payment of war reparations in kind
Striking railway workers in the Ruhr began returning to their jobs as
German resistance faltered
Dr. Cuno’s government was spending more than 7x the amount received as
revenue
Germany asked for a new reparations conference
France notified Britain that it would not accept an international conference
to discuss the German reparations problems
Dr. Cuno left office
The German government declared a state of emergency under Article 48 of
the Weimar Constitution
The cabinet of Chancellor Stresemann resigned due to Social Democrats
joining the Communists in call for lifting martial law
Chancellor Stresemann resignws after a vote of no confidence from
members of the government
A new Cabinet is formed under Dr. Wilhelm Marx
An international loan is granted to Germany to help the reconstruction of
Germany's economy and industry

39

Panel B.
Austria
Month
Sep-19
Oct-19
Nov-19
Dec-19

Rank
13
12
9
6

Jan-20
Feb-20
Mar-20
May-20

3
15
20
2

Jun-20
Jan-21
Mar-21

18
4
14

May-21
Jul-21
Sep-21
Oct-21

7
16
10
8

Nov-21

19

Dec-21
Jun-22

17
5

Jul-22
Aug-22

11
1

The Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye was signed
The treaty was ratified by parliament
Emperor Karl returned to Vienna to lead a constitutional committee
Minister of Labor Hanusch introduces the Eight-Hour Act in order to limit
the work day
Vienna runs out of coal, shutting down electric tramcars
New tax revenues pre-paid collected, but half sent to reparations
Austria and South Tirol are formally reunited
200,000 person street march and protest against a proposed tax on capital on
May 11
The government of State Chancellor Karl Renner ends
Austrian government declares itself insolvent
Reparations Commission holds conference with Austria on budget situation
and financial relief
Threat of secession crisis in May and June at several Austrian provinces
League of Nations recommended a loan, authorized if liens removed.
Regular Hungarian troops reoccupied Burgenland
Bauer introduced the Social Democratic Financial Plan, increasing taxes /
decreasing government expenditures
Finance minister announced budget with deficit 3 times larger than
estimated in July
Plebiscite to determine fate of Burgenland; Austria received most of it
Finance Minister Dr. Guertler is forced to retire after protest against the new
customs tariff
--Allied Powers ask League of Nations to intervene as Austria had exhausted
all foreign borrowing possibilities

40

Panel C.
Poland
Month
Mar-20
Apr-20
Nov-20
Dec-20

Rank
18
19
5
9

Jan-21
Jul-21
Aug-21
Sep-21
Oct-21
Nov-21

14
10
20
12
11
3

Jul-22
Jan-23

16
17

Feb-23
Jun-23
Jul-23
Oct-23
Nov-23

15
6
7
2
1

Dec-23

4

Jan-24

13

Dec-25

8

Polish currencies and administration were unified
Polish Kiev Offensive with the Soviet Red Army are not successful
Soviets sued for peace, and the war ended with a ceasefire
Belgian diplomats tried to resolve the Lithuanian-Polish dispute on behalf of
the League of Nations
Newspapers reported widespread shortages of food and clothing
--------League of Nations divided Silesia, with Poland receiving most of the
industrial areas, but about 1/3rd of the contested land
Poland and Germany concluded a bilateral treaty concerning upper Silesia
Lithuania seized the Klaipeda Region; the League of Nations viewed as
adequate compensation for reparations
Formal transfer of the Klaipeda Region to Lithuania
Chancellor Sikorski overthrown; new cabinet led by Witos installed
Witos failed to secure $100m loan from Hallgarten & Co. (US firm)
Witos government resigns; worker protests widespread
Decision to use foreign exchange reserves to arrest exchange rate
depreciation
Parliament passed a taxation adjustment based on a unit with a fixed value
(the reference zloty)
Prime Minister asked to use the remaining FX reserves to support the
currency
Negotiated treaty of mutual assistance with France in the event of an attack
by Germany

41

Panel D.
Hungary
Date
Nov-20
Jan-21

Rank
8
17

Mar-21
Apr-21
Jun-21

7
18
19

Sep-21
Nov-21
Dec-21
Jan-22

13
10
4
6

Jul-22
Aug-22
Sep-22
Mar-23
Jun-23
Jul-23
Aug-23
Jan-24
Mar-24

12
2
15
14
11
1
16
9
5

May-24
Jun-24

3
20

National Assembly reluctantly ratified the Treaty of Trianon
Hungary requested help for mediation of western border conflict with
Austria
Charles I, the former king, first coup attempt began on March 26
Prime Minister Teleki was forced to resign after the failed coup
Establishment a government-run note institution with limitations on
issuance and prohibitions on lending to the government
Border dispute heightened with Austria
Charles I's second coup attempt
Plebiscite to determine fate of Burgenland; Austria received most of it
Prime Minister Kallay announced budget deficit nearly double what was
expected
--Cabinet met in an extraordinary session to consider the "Austrian" problem
Admitted to League of Nations; necessary step for obtaining loans.
Representatives visited the Bank of England for financial help
Presentation to the Reparations Commission on inability to pay
Negotiations for loan from League of Nations in progress
League reviewing Hungary's financial situation.
Ratified terms of a League loan
Final negotiations of League loan, including borders and reparations
schedule
Arrangements for League loan made
League loan floated

Note: Data are displayed chronologically for the 20 months with the highest realized
volatility for each country. Column 2 shows the country-specific RV rank for a given month.

42

Table 4. Model Estimation Sample Periods
Country Start date

Reason

End date

Reason

# months

Austria

1921-Jan

Monthly CPI starts

1922-Sep

Month before League of
Nations loan and control

21

Germany

1920-Apr

Monthly WPI starts

1923-Jun

Month before defined
hyperinflation

39

Hungary

1922-Nov

Monthly WPI starts

New central bank
1924-Jun commences operations;
realized volatility near

Poland

1920-Sep

Monthly WPI starts

1923-Sep

Britain

1919-July

Monthly RV starts

1924-Dec Monthly notes data ends

66

Belgium

1921-Jan

Monthly WPI starts

1925-Apr Monthly notes data ends

52

Czech.

1921-Feb

Monthly WPI starts

1925-Apr Monthly notes data ends

51

France

1919-Jul

Monthly RV starts

1924-Dec Monthly notes data ends

66

Holland

1920-Jan

Monthly WPI starts

1925-Apr Monthly notes data ends

64

Italy

1919-Jul

Monthly RV starts

1924-Nov Monthly notes data ends

66

Month before defined
hyperinflation

Notes: The “Reason” columns explain the binding date availability restrictions.

43

20

37

Table 5. The Correlation between Changes in Inflation and Lagged Changes in
Realized Volatility
Lag value j
Country
Austria
Germany
Hungary
Poland
Britain
Belgium
Czech.
France
Holland
Italy

0
0.27*
0.2
0.38*
0.14
0.25*
0.21
0.06
0.16
-0.06
0.12
0.20*
0.13
-0.01
0.14
0.07
0.12
0.23*
0.12
0.23*
0.12

1
0.11
0.22
0.24*
0.15
0.51*
0.17
0.25*
0.16
0.03
0.13
-0.23*
0.15
-0.09
0.14
0.01
0.12
-0.22*
0.13
-0.31*
0.14

2
0.23*
0.22
0.01
0.16
0.09
0.23
0.09
0.17
0.06
0.13
-0.05
0.14
-0.27*
0.15
0.13
0.12
0.21*
0.12
0.18*
0.12

3
0.26
0.22
-0.08
0.17
-0.16
0.25
-0.07
0.17
-0.04
0.13
0.11
0.14
-0.02
0.14
-0.06
0.13
-0.25*
0.14
-0.09
0.13

4
-0.36*
0.27
0.15
0.17
0.04
0.25
-0.08
0.18
-0.08
0.13
-0.03
0.14
0.07
0.15
0.15*
0.13
0.21*
0.12
-0.01
0.13

5
-0.22
0.26
0.17*
0.17
-0.21
0.27
-0.20*
0.18
-0.03
0.13
-0.18*
0.15
0.07
0.15
-0.02
0.13
0.07
0.13
0.03
0.13

6
-0.17
0.26
0.13
0.17
-0.27
0.29
0
0.18
0.02
0.13
0.22*
0.14
0.04
0.15
-0.08
0.13
-0.22*
0.14
0.13
0.13

Note: Correlations are for    kt ,  RVkt  j  as described in the text. Asterisks denote
statistical significance at the 10% level.

44

Table 6. The Contemporaneous Effect of an Uncertainty Shock on Inflation

RV
std.dev

RV
change

Country
Germany

(ln delta)
1.21

(%)
235.3

Austria

1.32

Hungary

Coefficient
0.139

Effect
(ln
delta)
0.168

Inflation change
# inflation
std
0.65

(%)
7.90

272.7

0.107

0.140

0.61

17.10

1.72

455.8

0.096

0.165

0.91

15.28

Poland

1.21

235.3

0.031

0.037

0.18

8.04

Britain

1.17

223.4

0.001

0.001

0.05

-0.50

Belgium

1.25

248.6

0.007

0.008

0.13

0.85

Czech.

1.88

556.5

-0.005

-0.010

-0.25

-0.80

France

1.07

190.8

0.000

0.000

0.01

0.00

Netherland

1.15

214.7

0.005

0.005

0.06

1.13

Italy

1.01

174.6

-0.003

-0.003

-0.04

1.08

Note: Estimates are based on smoothed local projections as described in the text.
The table presents the authors’ calculations of the effect of an uncertainty shock in country k
(i.e., an innovation to Δln(RVkt) on the contemporaneous change in its inflation rate Δln(πkt)
using the smoothed local projections model of Equation (2). The first column presents the
magnitude of a one standard deviation change in Δln(RVkt) based on each country’s RV
series over the sample periods defined in Table 4. The second column translates that increase
into a percentage increase in the level of the RVkt series. The third column reports the SLP
estimation coefficients of the contemporaneous change in Δln(RVkt) on Δln(πkt). The fourth
column is the product of the first and third columns, which is the numerical effect of a one
standard deviation increase of the contemporaneous change in Δln(RVkt) on Δln(πkt). The
fifth column transforms the numerical effect into standard deviations of Δln(πkt). The last
column presents the transformation of the model-implied effect on Δln(πkt) into a percentage
increase in the level of the πkt series.

45

Table 7. The Effect of an Uncertainty Shock on Inflation One Month Forward

RV std.dev

RV %

Country
Germany

(ln delta)
1.21

(%)
235.3

Austria

1.32

Hungary

Inflation
change

Coefficient
0.064

Effect
(ln
delta)
0.078

# inflation
std
0.30

(%)
3.32

272.7

0.006

0.007

0.03

9.65

1.72

455.8

0.071

0.122

0.67

15.12

Poland

1.21

235.3

0.053

0.064

0.31

4.71

Britain

1.17

223.4

0.003

0.004

0.00

0.00

Belgium

1.25

248.6

-0.006

-0.008

-0.12

-0.40

Czech.

1.88

556.5

-0.002

-0.003

-0.08

-1.10

France

1.07

190.8

0.002

0.002

0.05

0.00

Netherland

1.15

214.7

-0.008

-0.009

-0.10

0.04

Italy

1.01

174.6

-0.020

-0.020

-0.33

-0.97

Note: Estimates are based on smoothed local projections as described in the text.
The table presents the authors’ calculations of the effect of a one-month-lagged uncertainty
shock in country k (i.e., an innovation to Δln(RVkt) on the change in its inflation rate
Δln(πkt+1) using the smoothed local projections model of Equation (2). The first column
presents the magnitude of a one standard deviation change in Δln(RVkt) based on each
country’s RV series over the sample periods defined in Table 4. The second column
translates that increase into a percentage increase in the level of the RVkt series. The third
column reports the SLP estimation coefficients of the lagged change in Δln(RVkt) on
Δln(πkt+1). The fourth column is the product of the first and third columns, which is the
numerical effect of a one standard deviation increase of the lagged change in Δln(RVkt) on
Δln(πkt+1). The fifth column transforms the numerical effect into standard deviations of
Δln(πkt+1). The last column presents the transformation of the model-implied effect on
Δln(πkt+1) into a percentage increase in the level of the πkt series.

46

Appendix Table 1. News in Other European Countries for Highest RV Months
Panel A.
Belgium
Month
Dec-19
Mar-21
Feb-24
Mar-24
Apr-24

Rank
4
2
5
3
1

Panel B.
Britain
Month
Jul-19

Rank
4

Dec-19

2

Feb-20
Mar-20

1
3

Aug-20

5

Panel C.
Czechoslovakia
Rank
Month
Mar-20
2
May-20
4
Nov-20
1
May-21
Jul-22

Panel D.
France
Month
Dec-19
Jan-20
May-20
Mar-24
May-24

3
5

Rank
2
3
4
1
5

Neutrality ended; credit extended to other nations
Sent troops into the Ruhr
Cabinet resigns due to trade and exchange rate issues
Ended budget calculations based on German reparations
Rumors of foreign loan needed to stabilize the currency

Negotiations with coal miners; concerns on FX rate and humanitarian aid to
Europe
The Cunliffe Committee recommends an early return to an effective gold
standard
Chancellor Chamberlain clarified British financial relief to Central Europe
The Egyptian legislative assembly passed a resolution demanding
independence
---

Masaryk presidency-for-life proposed
Masaryk presidency formalized by Parliament
Cabinet set to resign; rumored Polish invasion
Coal cut off due to fighting in Upper Silesia; Salzburg votes to join
Germany
---

Military council remains in place after Treaty lapse
French and Belgium military and economic alliance deepens
Strike negotiations; rebuilding efforts
Reported "bear interest" trade in the franc
French communists to fight the Dawes plan

47

Panel E.
The Netherlands
Month
Rank
Jul-19
5
Dec-19
4
Jan-20
Aug-20

1
2

Sep-20

3

Panel F.
Italy
Month
Nov-19
Feb-20
Apr-20
May-20
Nov-20

Rank
4
2
1
5
3

Dutch ships commandeered by the US Shipping Board are returned
Dutch objections raised regarding the Entente's administration of the
Rhine
Holland refused to extradite Kaiser Wilhelm to the Allies
Political negotiations between France and Belgium, with Dutch interests,
fail
Dutch increase armed forces in light of European uncertainty

Nitti elected Prime Minister
PM Nitti suggested not accepting Fiume seaport in Croatia
New taxes enacted; civil service strike
Prime Minister Nitti resigns, but remains in government forming
cabinets
Fiume independence agreed upon, but its leader still moved troops

Note: Data are displayed chronologically for the 5 months with highest realized volatility for
each country. Column 2 shows the country-specific RV rank for a given month.

48

Appendix Table 2. Data Sources

Austria

Germany

Hungary

Poland

Britain

Belgium

Czech.

France

Holland

Italy

Exchange rates

Price level

IP
Monthly Bulletin
(Lignite)

Notes circulating

C&FC

Young (1925) (Retail)

(1919-1925)

(vol. 2, pg. 293)

(various)

(vol. 2, pg. 292)

C&FC

Young (1925)
(Wholesale)

Monthly Bulletin
(Various)

Young (1925)

(1919-1925)

(vol. 2, pg. 530)

(various)

(vol. 2, pg. 526-7)

C&FC

Young (1925)
(Wholesale)

Monthly Bulletin
(Lignite)

Young (1925)

(1919-1925)

(vol. 2, pg. 322)

(various)

(vol. 2, pg. 321)

C&FC

Young (1925)
(Wholesale)

Monthly Bulletin (Steel)

Young (1925)

(1919-1925)

(vol. 2, pg. 349)

(various)

(vol. 2, pg. 347-8)

C&FC

Young (1925)
(Wholesale)

Monthly Bulletin
(Various)

Young (1925)

(1919-1925)

(vol. 2, pg. 449-50)

(various)

(vol. 2, pg. 446-8)

C&FC

Young (1925)
(Wholesale)

Monthly Bulletin
(Various)

Young (1925)

(1919-1925)

(vol. 2, pg. 299)

(various)

(vol. 2, pg. 298)

C&FC

Young (1925)
(Wholesale)

Monthly Bulletin
(Lignite)

Young (1925)

(1919-1925)

(vol. 2, pg. 307)

(various)

(vol. 2, pg. 305-6)

C&FC

Young (1925)
(Wholesale)

Monthly Bulletin
(Various)

Young (1925)

(1919-1925)

(vol. 2, pg. 474)

(various)

(vol. 2, pg. 470-2)

C&FC

Young (1925)
(Wholesale)

Monthly Bulletin
(Various)

Young (1925)

(1919-1925)

(vol. 2, pg. 330)

(various)

(vol. 2, pg. 327-9)

C&FC

Young (1925)
(Wholesale)

NA

Young (1925)

(1919-1925)

(vol. 2, pg. 504)

Young (1925)

(vol. 2, pg. 494-5)

Note: Exchange rates were sourced from the monthly tables reported in the Commercial and
Financial Chronicle. National price levels, whether retail or wholesale, were sourced from
Young (1925), as where national notes in circulation. National industrial production (IP) was
sourced from the League of Nations’ Monthly Bulletin of Statistics. Since no single series was
available, the IP growth series are a weighted average of available production series for coal,
lignite, pig iron, and steel (unless only a single series is available as noted).
49

