NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERTEMPORAL LABOR SUPPLY SUBSTITUTION? EVIDENCE FROM THE
SWISS INCOME TAX HOLIDAYS
Isabel Z. Martinez
Emmanuel Saez
Michael Siegenthaler
Working Paper 24634
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24634

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018
We thank Marius Brulhart, David Card, Raj Chetty, Reto Foellmi, Daniel Hamermesh, Boris
Kaiser, Daniel Kaufmann, Henrik Kleven, Daniel Kopp, Camille Landais, Stefan Legge, Thomas
Lemieux, Emi Nakamura, Tobias Renkin, Samad Sarferaz, Benjamin Schoefer, Josef Sigurdsson,
Daphne Skandalis, Michael Smart, Ivan Werning, Josef Zweimueller, three anonymous referees,
and numerous conference and seminar participants for helpful discussions and comments. We
acknowledge financial support from the Center for Equitable Growth at UC Berkeley and NSF
grant SES-1559014. We thank Claudia Berlin and the Swiss Federal Statistical Office for
providing census data and for the support which made the Swiss National Cohort and this study
possible. The record linkage was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation. The
members of the Swiss National Cohort Study Group are Matthias Egger, Adrian Spoerri and
Marcel Zwahlen, Milo Puhan, Matthias Bopp, Martin Roosli, Murielle Bochud and Michel Oris.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24634.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Isabel Z. Martinez, Emmanuel Saez, and Michael Siegenthaler. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Intertemporal Labor Supply Substitution? Evidence from the Swiss Income Tax Holidays
Isabel Z. Martinez, Emmanuel Saez, and Michael Siegenthaler
NBER Working Paper No. 24634
May 2018, Revised July 2020
JEL No. H31
ABSTRACT
This paper estimates intertemporal labor supply responses to two-year long income tax holidays
staggered across Swiss cantons. Cantons shifted from an income tax system based on the previous
two years' income to a standard annual pay as you earn system, leaving two years of income
untaxed. We find significant but quantitatively very small responses of wage earnings with an
inter-temporal elasticity of .025 overall. High wage income earners and especially the selfemployed display larger responses with elasticities around .1 and .25 respectively, most likely
driven by tax avoidance. We find no effects along the extensive margin at all.

Isabel Z. Martinez
Universität St. Gallen
SIAW-HSG
Bodanstrasse 8
CH-9000 St. Gallen
Switzerland
and LISER
martinez@kof.ethz.ch
Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu

Michael Siegenthaler
KOF Swiss Economic Institute
ETH Zurich
Leonhardstrasse 21
CH–8092 Zürich, Switzerland
Switzerland
siegenthaler@kof.ethz.ch

The intertemporal labor supply elasticity of substitution—traditionally called the
Frisch elasticity—measures how much more people are willing to work when their wage
increases temporarily. This elasticity plays a key role in amplifying the effects of technological shocks on labor supply and economic activity in calibrated macro real business
cycle models. The intuition is the following. Suppose there is a temporary negative
technological shock which reduces productivity (relative to trend). This shock reduces
wages temporarily. If the Frisch elasticity is large, relatively modest technological shocks
can translate into large labor supply responses and hence explain why downturns are
accompanied by large falls in employment. Indeed, most calibrated macro real business
cycle models require a very large Frisch elasticity in excess of one to generate realistic
quantitative predictions (see e.g., King and Rebelo, 1999).
However, identifying the Frisch elasticity is empirically challenging as it requires exogenous time variation in net wage rates unrelated to labor supply or human capital
accumulation decisions. As a result, recent studies have often used specific occupations—
such as taxi drivers—where exogenous variation in wages is more plausible (see Reichling
and Whalen, 2012; Chetty et al., 2013, for surveys and discussions). Using tax variation has long been a traditional source of exogenous variation to estimate static labor
supply elasticities (see e.g., Keane, 2011, for a survey). However, tax variation typically
does not provide temporary variation needed to estimate the Frisch elasticity.1 In this
paper, we break new ground on this important issue by exploiting an unusual tax policy
reform in Switzerland that generated large, salient, and well-advertised one- or two-year
long income tax holidays staggered across the 26 Swiss cantons, which are the member
states of the Swiss Confederation. The tax holiday, which exempts earnings from income
taxation temporarily for everybody in the local economy (the cantonal level), is close to
being the ideal experiment to estimate the Frisch elasticity. This has three additional
advantages relative to previous work. First, our estimates are representative of the total
population and do not focus on very specific—and potentially more elastic—occupations
(such as taxi drivers). Second, we can identify the Frisch on an annual frequency, which
is the relevant time frame for business cycle analyses (occupation-specific studies use
much higher—often daily—frequencies). Third, while various frictions, such as jobs with
fixed hours or high fixed costs of starting to work, may dampen the response relative to
the standard frictionless model of labor supply, such frictions are also present when the
economy responds to a temporary technology shock. Therefore, the “frictional Frisch”
elasticity we estimate is also the relevant reduced form parameter to evaluate the role of
1

Important exceptions are Bianchi et al. (2001); Sigurdsson (2018); Stefansson (2019) who use a one
year income tax holiday in Iceland. We discuss the link between these studies and ours in detail below.

1

intertemporal labor supply in macro business cycle modeling.2
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Switzerland switched from an income tax system
where current taxes were based on the previous two years’ income to a standard annual
pay as you earn system. For example, in the old system, income taxes due in years 1997
and 1998 were both based on the average income over the two preceding years 1995 and
1996. This system of owing taxes based on prior year incomes was common in income tax
systems before pay as you earn tax systems were put in place.3 In the new system, taxes
on income earned in year t are collected during year t with a tax return filed in year t + 1
and an adjustment made through a tax refund or an extra tax payment if taxes already
collected are not exactly equal to taxes owed.4 This is the system used in all advanced
economies today.
Swiss cantons transitioned in three waves in 1999, 2001, and 2003. Two cantons transitioned early in 1999, most cantons transitioned in 2001, and three cantons transitioned
late in 2003. The transition happened for federal, cantonal, and municipal income taxes
simultaneously in each canton. To illustrate the mechanism, take the example of the
canton of Thurgau as depicted on Figure 1.A, which transitioned in 1999. In 1997 and
1998, income taxes (at the federal, cantonal, and municipal levels) were paid based on the
average of 1995 and 1996 incomes. In 1999, income taxes (at the federal, cantonal, and
municipal levels) were based solely on 1999 incomes. In 2000, income taxes were based
solely on 2000 incomes, etc. To avoid double payment of taxes in 1999 and 2000, no tax
was ever assessed on 1997 and 1998 incomes (which would have been paid in 1999 and
2000 under the old system). Therefore, this transition created a two-year long income
tax holiday for incomes earned in years 1997 and 1998. Hence, cantons transitioning
in 1999 had a tax holiday for years 1997–1998; cantons transitioning in 2001 had a tax
holiday for years 1999–2000; and cantons transitioning in 2003 had a tax holiday for years
2001-2002. An extra source of variation comes from the fact that some cantons used an
annual system of assessment (instead of biennial) for the cantonal and municipal taxes.
For these cantons, the transition generates only a one-year long tax holiday for local
taxes.5
2

Naturally, estimating separately the pure frictionless Frisch elasticity from the dampening effects of
frictions could also be useful for other applications (see e.g., Chetty et al., 2013).
3
The US transitioned in 1943, the UK transitioned in 1944. France, the last holdout, just transitioned
in 2019. The Swiss system was further particular in that it used an average of two years to compute
base income (instead of using a standard annual income base).
4
In both the old and the new system, Switzerland does not use withholding at source and individuals
are typically required to pay estimated taxes in quarterly installments (as is done in the US for income
not subject to tax withholding such as self-employment income).
5
Take the example of Zurich which transitioned in 1999. In 1998, local taxes were based on 1997
incomes. In 1999, local taxes were based on 1999 incomes, so that the tax holiday for local taxes was just
for 1998. Local income taxes (defined as cantonal plus municipal) make up over 80 percent of income

2

The tax holiday increased the net of tax rate (defined as one minus the marginal tax
rate) by about 25–30 percent on average. Hence for example, with a Frisch elasticity
of one, which is toward the low end of estimates used in macro-calibrations, we should
expect a 25–30 percent increase in earnings. The tax holiday timing was discussed at
length in the press well before the transition took place, making it salient to the public,
particularly for the last 2 waves of transitioning cantons. Various press articles discussed
how working and earning more during the tax holiday (relative to later years) was fiscally
advantageous.
To carry out our study, we use population-wide social security longitudinal earnings
records from 1990 to 2010 matched to decennial Census data. These data allow us to
obtain precise estimates exploiting fine geographical variation. Our strategy relies on a
simple difference-in-differences method where we compare earnings outcomes over time
and across localities that transitioned at different times. Because we have large data,
we obtain smooth and precise time series for a number of earnings outcomes even when
restricting the data to specific earnings or demographic groups. We find that series for
different cantons move in a very similar way over time pre- and post-reform giving us
confidence that the parallel trend identification assumption holds. The graphical time
series evidence shows clearly that bumps in earnings arise during the tax holidays for
some sub-groups, and can then be confidently interpreted as the causal effect of the tax
holiday. We supplement the time series analysis by a longitudinal regression based microlevel approach to tease out tax holiday effects on earnings systematically. Our analysis is
limited to labor income because we do not have data on capital income (as the cantonal
tax administrations did not systematically collect data on incomes earned during the tax
holidays). Our main analysis focuses on prime age individuals aged 20 to 60.6
We obtain five main results. First, we do not find any evidence of a response along
the employment margin (extensive margin). This implies that the Frisch elasticity is
very small along the extensive margin. Second, there is a small aggregate response of
wage earnings with an implied Frisch elasticity of .025 for aggregate wage earnings. The
responses are larger higher up in the wage earnings distribution, with Frisch elasticities
of .1 for the highest-earners. We do not find responses along the hours of work margin.
Third, there is a larger response of self-employment earnings that is present at different
earnings levels (and not just the top). Overall, the Frisch elasticity for self-employment
earnings is around .2. Fourth, effects are actually larger for men than for women, in
contrast to the standard findings in the labor supply literature. The exception is married
taxes in Switzerland in aggregate.
6
For the elderly, tax incentives interact with retirement decisions and the incentives created by the
retirement system.

3

couples with children, where the elasticities are similar. Fifth, most of these responses are
concentrated in the last wave of transitioning cantons with tax holidays in 2001–2002.
Responses for earlier transitions such as 1997–1998 or 1999–2000 appear to be more
muted. This latter effect might be due to learning as it might take time for the public
to understand tax holidays and how to respond to them. Overall, our evidence suggests
that responses are driven primarily by tax avoidance rather than real labor supply. As a
result, our paper shows that the Frisch real labor supply channel due to labor market-wide
temporary changes in net-wage-rates is quantitatively very modest and particularly so
along the extensive employment margin. This casts doubt on quantitative calibrations of
macro models that use very large Frisch elasticities to account for the large employment
fluctuations over the business cycle.
Closest to our study, Bianchi et al. (2001), Sigurdsson (2018), and Stefansson (2019)
exploit the one-year tax holiday in Iceland produced by a transition from an income tax
based on prior year income to a pay as you earn income tax in 1987. Using a small
survey dataset, Bianchi et al. (2001) report large effects with an implied Frisch elasticity
of .42 along the extensive margin. But it is difficult to disentangle the tax effects from
the business cycle effect in this study as the tax holiday corresponded to the peak year
of the business cycle in Iceland (see their Figures 1 and 2, p. 1565). Sigurdsson (2018)
builds a population wide earnings dataset to study the same reform. Using labor supply
participation patterns by age, he finds a much smaller extensive-margin Frisch elasticity
.1. Exploiting variation in tax rates across income groups, he finds an intensive marginal
Frisch elasticity of .4. Stefansson (2019) using a similar identification strategy, finds a
smaller Frisch intensive elasticity of .07 and discusses the sensitivity of estimates with
respect to the exact empirical specification. The key advantage of our analysis is that
tax holidays in Switzerland happen at different times in different cantons.
This paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the reform and the variation we
exploit. Section II describes the data we use. Section III describes our empirical results.
Section IV concludes. The appendix includes more details on the data we use as well as
a number of robustness checks that we only mention briefly in the main text.

I
I.A

The Tax Holiday Reform
The Swiss Income Tax System

Individual income taxes in Switzerland are quantitatively large and represent about 1/3
of total tax revenue or about 9 percent of the Swiss GDP. Income taxes in Switzerland are
residence-based and levied at the federal, cantonal, and municipality level. The federal
4

income tax is set by federal law, is uniform across cantons, and represents about 1/6 of
total income tax revenue. Local taxes which include cantonal and municipal taxes are
very large and represent about 5/6 of income tax revenue.7 Cantonal taxes are set by
cantonal law and municipalities simply apply a multiplier to the cantonal tax to determine
municipal taxes. The cantons set their income tax schedule freely and municipalities
choose their multiplier freely.8 The federal tax is more progressive with very low tax
rates on low and middle-income taxpayers while local taxes often impose significant tax
burdens through most of the income distribution. The top marginal tax rate combining
all income taxes is typically in the 30-40 percent range (although it can go as low as the
low 20s and go as high as the mid-40s in some municipalities).9
Married couples file together and are taxed based on total family income so that
secondary earners face significant tax burdens, particularly if the income of the primary
earner is high. The income tax base includes both labor and capital income although this
study will solely focus on labor income (including wage earnings and self-employment
earnings) due to data availability constraints (incomes made in tax holiday years did not
have to be reported to the tax administration). The cantonal tax administrations are
responsible for the collection of the taxes at all three levels and taxpayers only file one
tax return for all three taxes.
Old tax system. Prior to the tax reform we are exploiting in this paper, Switzerland
applied a biennial retrospective income tax system. For example, taxes paid in years 1997
and 1998 were based on average income in 1995 and 1996. In 1997, a tax return would
be filed reporting incomes in 1995 and 1996. From this tax return, tax liability would
be determined for both year 1997 and year 1998 (and was identical in 1997 and 1998)
so that taxpayers only had to file a tax return every second year. Tax payments were
typically made in quarterly installments each year. The drawback of this system is that if
the economic situation of the taxpayer changes (due to marriage, divorce, job loss, etc.),
7

These statistics are taken from OECD (2016) and refer to year 1996 which is the year just before
the reforms we study take place. Because the federal tax is more progressive, the relative share of federal
income tax in total income taxes grows with income and can be as high as 50 percent for high income
earners.
8
The Swiss federation comes perhaps closest to the ideal Tiebout model of local public finance with
many studies analyzing tax competition and tax induced mobility across municipalities and cantons.
Liebig et al. (2007); Schmidheiny (2006); Brülhart et al. (2016); Martinez (2016) study mobility across
Swiss Cantons in response to local income or wealth taxes. Kirchgassner and Pommerehne (1996);
Eugster and Parchet (2019); Parchet (2018); Brülhart and Parchet (2014) study tax competition in the
setting of tax rates by municipalities and cantons.
9
Appendix Figure A1 depicts the average income tax rate (summing across federal and local income
taxes) by municipality for a single taxpayer with an annual income of 100,000 Swiss Francs (CHF). This
is about the 90th percentile of the labor earnings distribution among workers as of 1999. 1 CHF is
approximately equal to one US dollar.

5

the tax due might not correspond well with current income. A few cantons, including
the large canton of Zurich, were actually using an annual period of assessment (instead
of biennial) for the cantonal and municipal taxes. In these cantons, incomes earned in
year t were taxed in year t + 1 and returns had to be filed every year. The federal tax
was still biennial in these cantons.10
New tax system. In the new system, Switzerland uses a standard pay as you earn
annual income tax system whereby incomes earned in year t are taxed in year t through
estimated payments. Individuals pay estimated taxes typically in quarterly installments.
In contrast to other countries, Switzerland has not adopted tax withholding at source
under the new system. This makes income taxes quite salient as individuals pay installments directly to the government. After the end of year t, an income tax return is filed
in year t + 1 which lists all income sources and computes the exact tax. Any difference
between the exact tax owed and the taxes already paid during year t generates a tax
refund or an extra tax payment.

I.B

Description of the Tax Holiday Transition

Discussions about switching to a modern pay as you earn annual income tax system had
taken place since the 1980s. In December 1990, two federal laws were passed encouraging
(but not forcing) cantons to make the transition from the old system to the new system
by 2001 and allowing the federal income tax to change alongside with cantonal taxes.11
However, the cantons were free to adopt the new system whenever they wanted. Two
cantons, Zurich and Thurgau decided to switch early in 1999 while most cantons waited
until 2001. Three cantons were not yet ready by 2001 and hence postponed the transition
to 2003.12 Importantly, when a canton decided to transition in a given year, the transition
applied to all taxes at the federal, cantonal, and municipal levels.13
How does the transition generate tax holidays? Suppose a canton wants to transition
in 1999. This specific example is illustrated on Figure 1.A. In 1997 and 1998, income
taxes under the old system are based on the average income for years 1995 and 1996. In
10

One canton, Basel-Stadt, had always had a standard pay as you earn income tax system for its local
taxes and hence did not need to transition except for the federal tax.
11
The two laws were the cantonal tax harmonization law (StHG) which was scheduled to become
effective on January 1st, 1993 and the new federal tax law (DBG) scheduled to become effective on
January 1st, 1995.
12
Due to the biennial structure of the old system, the change could only take place in an odd year
such as 1999, 2001, 2003. No canton was ready to consider switching in 1995 or 1997.
13
Hence, the federal tax was not uniform across cantons during the transition as cantons transitioned
during different years. This departure from uniformity was allowed by the new federal tax law (DBG)
enacted to encourage the transition.

6

1999, income taxes have to be based on 1999 incomes. This means that incomes earned
in 1997 and 1998 are never taxed, hereby creating a two-year long tax holiday. Taxpayers
do pay taxes every year during the transition but no tax is ever paid on the incomes
earned in the two years before the transition.
As mentioned above, a few cantons (including Zurich) used an annual assessment
period (instead of biennial) for their cantonal and municipal taxes. For such cantons,
there is a single tax holiday year for local taxes and two tax holiday years for the federal
tax. Let us illustrate this with the case of Zurich that transitioned in 1999. In 1997, local
taxes in Zurich are based on 1996 incomes while federal taxes are based on the average of
1995 and 1996 incomes. In 1998, local taxes are due based on 1997 incomes while federal
taxes are again based on the average of 1995 and 1996 incomes. In 1999, both local and
federal taxes are based on 1999 incomes. Hence, 1997 and 1998 are tax holiday years for
federal taxes but only 1998 is a tax holiday for local taxes. Hence, the tax holiday for
local taxes in Zurich is reduced to a single year. Four of the 20 cantons transitioning in
2001 are also in this situation and have a tax holiday for local taxes for only year 2000
(and 1999–2000 for federal taxes).
Figure 1.B depicts a map of the cantons in Switzerland and summarizes the timing
of the transition across cantons. For the federal income tax, the tax holiday was either
1997/1998 (cantons in blue with horizontal stripes), 1999/2000 (cantons in green with
diagonal stripes), or 2001/2002 (cantons in brown with vertical stripes). Generally, the
tax holiday for the local (cantonal and municipal) income tax was the same as for the
federal tax. However, for cantons which were using annual assessment periods (instead
of biennial), the tax holiday for local taxes is only one year. These cantons are depicted
in darker blue and darker green with higher frequency stripes. One canton (Nidwalden
in very dark green) had no local tax holiday at all due to a different form of transition.
One canton (Basel-Stadt in black) always had a pay as you earn local tax system and
transitioned to the annual pay as you earn system for the federal tax in 1995.14 We will
use this color-coding in all our subsequent analysis.

I.C

Tax Constraints on Responses to Tax Holidays

Extraordinary incomes. All transitioning cantons specified that extraordinary incomes earned during the holiday would remain taxable. Extraordinary income included
one-time lump-sum payments, irregular capital incomes, lottery winnings, and extraordi14

For this transition, the federal tax in 1995 was based on the maximum tax liability under the old
and the new system. Therefore, this transition did not generate a clean tax holiday for the federal tax.
As such, our analysis will not try to estimate the effects of this early transition in Basel-Stadt.

7

nary business incomes due to accounting changes. Importantly, for labor earnings, income
increases due to promotions, job changes, or more hours worked were not considered extraordinary income. Bonuses and shared profits were not considered extraordinary profits
if they were specified in the contract and had also been paid in prior or later years. In
sum, any real labor supply response (and corresponding compensation) was not extraordinary income and hence was fully exempt during the tax holiday. Tax avoidance through
income shifting remained possible as it was difficult for the tax administration to assess
whether income earned during the tax holiday was “extraordinary” especially in the case
of the self-employed. Cantons differed in the reporting requirements for incomes earned
in tax holiday years. Some cantons only collected information on extraordinary incomes
(and did not require reporting of tax exempt ordinary income). As a result, income tax
data cannot be used to study the reform. This is why we cannot study capital income.
Self-employment reporting. Self-employment earnings were reported to the social
security administration through the income tax system. Therefore, in the old system, selfemployment earnings are reported on a biennial basis as well (in most cantons) but with
an additional delay of 1 year. The social security administration transitioned to the new
pay as you earn system uniformly across all cantons in 2001 for self-employment earnings.
Starting in 2001, self-employment earnings are reported on an annual pay as you earn
basis in all cantons. Self-employment earnings for 1999 and 2000 were never registered in
the social security system and hence benefitted as well from a social security contribution
holiday but we cannot observe and hence analyze them. This timing corresponded to the
tax holiday in 20 cantons (cantons in green in Figure 1.B). Cantons with earlier or later
tax holidays had to collect self-employment earnings information during their tax holidays
specifically (in the same way they collected information on extraordinary incomes). For
these cantons, we therefore observe self-employment earnings during their income tax
holiday and we study them specifically (see appendix A.1 for complete details).
In contrast, wage earnings were always reported in real time to the social security administration independently of the income tax system. Because of such different reporting,
we separate the analysis of wage earnings from the analysis of self-employment earnings.
Betwixt assessments. Under the old system, large changes in economic circumstances
such as permanent entry or exit (typically defined as lasting 2 or more years), a permanently large change in income, or migration to another canton, would trigger temporary
pay as you earn taxation (called betwixt assessments) until the end of the tax period. This
temporary pay as you earn taxation would be based on the new (annualized) income. The
rationale for betwixt assessments was to accommodate large changes in economic circum8

stances, and especially alleviate the hardship of having to pay retrospective taxes after
a large fall in income.15 Betwixt assessments disappear under the new system but could
still happen during the tax holidays. We discuss in detail in appendix A.1 how this betwixt assessment system works and we summarize here how this system interacts with
the tax holidays.
Extensive margin. Permanent entry in the labor force in the old system and during the
tax holiday generates a betwixt assessment. Entry earnings during the tax holiday are
taxed only once during the tax holiday while in the old system, such entry earnings
would have been taxed a second time during the following tax period (as regular taxes
were retrospective). Hence, entry earnings during the tax holiday also benefit from a
tax cut: one time taxation instead of double taxation. But this double tax alleviation is
likely not as salient. Therefore, the tax holiday might have a muted effect on accelerating
entry of young workers. However and most important, a temporary entry (lasting less
than 2 years) would not trigger a betwixt assessment. Hence, as long as an extensive
margin response to the tax holiday was temporary, which is the expected response to a
temporary tax change, then the tax holiday applied.16
A permanent exit from the labor force, such as retirement, triggers a betwixt assessment during the tax holiday so there is no change in the tax treatment of pre-retirement
earnings during the tax holiday. There are however complex effects on the treatment of
pension income. As we do not have pension income data, we focus on prime workers
aged 20–60 to exclude retirement from our analysis (the legal retirement ages were 62 for
women and 65 for men at that time).
Migration. Migration to another canton also triggered a betwixt assessment under the
old system and during the tax holiday. Upon moving, retrospective tax liability in the
canton of origin stopped and was replaced by pay as you earn on a annualized basis in
the new canton of residence. As a result, taxpayers could not benefit from moving to
tax holiday cantons and moving away from a tax holiday canton would terminate the
tax holiday, hereby reducing incentives to move during a tax holiday. Our data show no
statistically significant evidence of reduced migration into tax holiday cantons, but the
point estimates on migration among top earners are indeed negative (appendix Table A3).
Intensive margin. Large changes in earnings could also trigger betwixt assessments in
15

The vast majority of betwixt assessments were for decreases in income rather than increases in
income. Over the tax periods 1979/80–1997/98, incomes under betwixt, pay as you earn assessments
were on average 16 percent lower than those under regular assessment, i.e., those based on past income.
16
If a taxpayer expects the entry to be temporary, no betwixt assessment is made. If however the
entry is then extended, the tax administration would charge betwixt assessment taxes retrospectively.
This is why, in the old system, that tax administration encouraged new workers to declare their new
situation and start paying taxes immediately (to avoid having to pay back later).

9

the old system and during the tax holidays. However, such changes had to be both
permanent (2 year or more) and significant (change in occupation or a quantitatively
very large change in earnings or hours).17 Any temporary change in earnings (lasting less
than 2 years) to take advantage of the tax holiday would not trigger a betwixt assessment.
Most permanent changes in earnings (such as a promotion or job change within the same
industry; taking a secondary job) would not trigger a betwixt assessment as long as they
were not very large.

I.D

Salience of the Reform

Behavioral responses to the tax holiday can happen only if the public is well informed
about the reform and understands that it generates a tax holiday. Hence, it is important
to provide evidence on how salient the tax holiday was.
The federal laws passed in the early 1990s had established that all cantons would
eventually transition. Each canton could freely decide when to transition and the exact
form that the transition would take. The decision was taken by cantonal legislatures.
In 14 cantons, such as Zurich, the new tax laws were put to a popular referendum—
either by default, by wish of the cantonal legislature, or because a party or group of
individuals forced a referendum by collecting a pre-determined number of signatures. In
the cases where a referendum was held, by default the resident population in a canton
received voting documentation by mail. We have gathered this documentation for each
canton. The voting documentation included information on the transition in an easy
to understand language and in many cases the incidence of the tax holiday was further
explained by a graphical illustration (see appendix Figure A2.B for an example). In about
half of all cases, the votes took place during the first tax holiday year (see appendix Figure
A3). In all cases, the vote was always strongly in favor. Turnout ranged between 26 and
60 percent (see appendix Table A1 for complete details on the vote timing and turnout
by cantons). However, the actual referendum or legislative vote was the last step in a
longer process. Typically, the transition was in the public debate for many months before
the decision was officially taken through the referenda or legislature votes. The public
was generally officially informed in the middle of the first tax holiday year although the
public debate often started before the first tax holiday year. In sum, we expect more
information and hence larger behavioral responses for the second year of the tax holiday.
Let us describe in more detail the transition process in each of the three waves of
cantons depicted on Figure 1.B.
17

For hours, the change typically had to be of more than 20 hours per week (e.g., going from full-time
to less than half-time).

10

Early transitions. Two cantons, Zurich and Thurgau transitioned early in 1999.
Zurich held a popular referendum on transitioning in 1999 on June 8, 1997. As Zurich
has a single 1998 tax holiday year for cantonal taxes, the public was officially informed
about the 1998 tax holiday more than 6 months before the start of 1998, leaving time to
anticipate and prepare for the reform. Thurgau decided its transition in 1999 on June
30, 1997. This means that Thurgau residents knew for sure by the middle of 1997 that
1997 and 1998 would be tax holiday years. Hence, we should expect a larger behavioral
response for 1998 than for 1997 in Thurgau.
2001 transitions. Most cantons were expected to transition in 2001. These decisions
were typically made during calendar year 1999, with votes held into calendar year 2000.
This implies that in many cases the information was made official during the first tax
holiday year of 1999 and before the start of 2000, the second tax holiday year. Most of
the referenda held in 2000 were mandatory referenda, and the large share of yes votes
show that the new tax laws were uncontested. Taxpayers could therefore expect the new
system to be put in place. Hence, we should expect a larger response in the second tax
holiday year. As Zurich and Thurgau had already transitioned with tax holidays, we
expect that the public was even better informed for this large group of cantons.
2003 transitions. The three cantons VD, VS, and TI which transitioned late in 2003
decided to transition at this date typically in 2000 or 2001. The reason these cantons
transitioned late was mostly that their information technology systems were not yet
ready. Legally, these cantons claimed that they needed to make some changes in their
cantonal laws to incorporate the new requirements and that due to some of the changes
the transition period was extended until January 1 2003. As most cantons had already
transitioned, the nature of the transition and the tax holidays it creates is likely to have
been even more salient for these cantons.
Press coverage. Another way to assess salience is to examine press coverage of the
transition and in particular how often tax holidays were mentioned. There were many
press articles discussing the tax reform and the tax holiday it creates (see appendix
Figure A2.A for an example with a salient graphical illustration).
Figure 2 depicts the number of press articles mentioning the word “Bemessungslücke”
(blank year) and the French term “brèche fiscale”, or other expressions used to refer to
the reform in German and French by year and most major newspapers.18 The figure
18

We constructed these graphs by scraping the newspaper archive “Swissdox”, which contains a full
text archive of most newspapers in Switzerland. The sample is restricted to large daily newspapers

11

displays four series: (1) the series in blue circles for two Zurich based newspapers, (2)
the series in light green triangles for three Bern and Lucerne based newspapers, (3) the
series in dark green triangles for two Geneva and a Solothurn based newspapers, (4) the
series in brown squares for three Vaud and Valais based newspapers. The tax holiday
for Zurich is depicted in blue, the tax holiday for Bern and Lucerne is depicted in light
green, the tax holiday for Geneva and Solothurn is depicted in dark green, and the tax
holiday for Valais and Vaud is depicted in light brown (in the series, the symbols for the
tax holiday years are also blanked out). The figure shows that press interest in the tax
holiday peaked during the years when the actual tax holidays happened. Interestingly,
the figure shows that these peaks corresponded to the regions where the blank year was
in place. This suggests that at least for the second blank year and especially for the
second wave of the reform (1999/2000), salience can be assumed to have been large.
It is important to recognize that the fact that the transitions were formally passed by
the cantonal legislatures and discussed in the press does not automatically insure that all
taxpayers were perfectly informed. Many people do not follow local legislative activity
nor read the press systematically. Indeed, empirical work has shown that taxpayers often
have imperfect information about tax systems even when tax systems have been fairly
stable (see e.g., Fujii and Hawley (1988)). However, the tax holiday was a simple concept
to understand: earnings during the tax holiday are free of all income taxes. This does
not require understanding the intricacies of the income tax code nor the marginal tax
rate schedule. Nevertheless, it remains possible that taxpayers, while informed of the tax
holiday, do not infer that increasing labor supply is advantageous, or may view such a
behavior as gaming the system.

II

Data

We use two main data sources for our empirical analysis.19
Matched SSER-Census Data. Our main dataset merges the 1990, 2000, and 2010
population censuses of Switzerland with longitudinal social security annual earnings

whose archive covers the relevant time period (i.e. starts in 1998 or earlier). The following Germanand French-speaking newspapers fulfill these sample restrictions and are based in the regions shown in
the graph: 24 Heures (since 1997), Berner Zeitung (since 1998), Der Bund (since 1994), Le Matin (since
1997), Le Temps (since 1998), Neue Luzerner Zeitung (since 1998), Neue Zürcher Zeitung (since 1993),
Solothurner Zeitung (since 1996), Tages-Anzeiger (since 1995), and Tribune de Genève (since 1997).
19
The online appendix provides a more complete description and also presents additional analysis
based on the Swiss labor force survey (SLFS), the equivalent of the US Current Population Survey.

12

records (SSER) covering the period 1981–2010. The main match is done in 2010 using social security numbers. The 1990 and 2000 censuses do not contain social security
numbers and were matched with the 2010 census using probabilistic methods based on
sex, day of birth, marital status, nationality, religion, place of residence and other variables. About 8 percent of our 2010 matched data cannot be matched to the earlier
censuses, for instance because multiple possible matches.20
Both datasets cover the full population. In the SSER data, employed or self-employed
individuals generate one record per job per year that details the starting and ending month
of an employment relationship along with the total earnings over that time period. Labor
earnings are uncapped, and include variable pay components such as bonuses and stock
options. We match these records to census data because the social security data do not
contain geographical information which is key for our empirical design. Panel A in Table
1 presents descriptive statistics of the matched data pooling all years from 1990 to 2010.
Because virtually everybody generates a record at some point in his or her life, our
matched data set contains 98 percent of the resident population aged 20–60 in 2010. As we
move back in time, the sample coverage of persons aged 20–60 gets slightly smaller because
certain individuals that lived in Switzerland in these earlier years died or emigrated and
hence are not present in the 2010 census. Figure A6 in appendix shows that we could
match SSER and the census 2010 for 93 percent of all individuals aged 20–60 living
in Switzerland in 2000, the time around which the reforms we analyze took place.21
For 86 percent of individuals, we additionally have information from the census 2000.
The census contains relevant personal characteristics such as educational background,
learned and current occupation, individuals’ marital status, the presence of children, and
a household identifier that allows calculating household income. With the exception of
household income and marital status that we impute for individuals we cannot match (see
Appendix A.2), analyses using these characteristics are thus based on a slightly smaller
sample.
Our matched dataset has an important drawback that should be noted: the earnings
records in 1998 are incomplete due to recording failures in some of the local social security
offices. The share of wage earners for which records are missing is about 5–6 percent. The
problem of missing records is not equally distributed across cantons. In the longitudinal
20

This relies on the “Swiss National Cohort” project presented in detail in Spoerri et al. (2010). See
appendix A.2 and Figures A5, A9, A10, A11 for details.
21
In appendix Figure A7, we compare the employment rate of 20 to 64 year-old Swiss men and women
in our data with the employment rate of these groups according to the labor force survey described below.
The employment rates are slightly higher in our data than they are in the labor force survey. This is
likely due to the fact that people with very low but positive earnings in a given year have social security
income in that year but may not be recorded as participating in the labor force in the labor force survey,
which measures the fraction of individuals employed in the second quarter of the year.

13

micro-level analyses below, we thus have to discard data from 1998. We impute the
missing data in the graphical macro-level analyses (see below).
Employer Survey (LSE). The Swiss wage structure surveys (Lohnstrukturerhebung
LSE) have been conducted every two years by the Swiss federal Statistical Office (FSO)
since 1994. They are a large stratified random sample of private and public firms with
at least three full-time-equivalent workers from the manufacturing and service sectors in
Switzerland.22 They cover between one sixth (1996) and one half (2010) of total employment in Switzerland. The mandatory surveys contain extensive information on the
individual characteristics of workers and provide reliable (employer-reported) information
on hours worked per worker. They contain detailed salary information broken down into
pay components, including bonus payments per worker. The main drawbacks of these
data are that (1) they cannot be used to study the extensive labor supply margin; (2)
they only provide the geographical location of the work location (and not the residence
location) which creates measurement error for individuals who do not live in the same
canton they work; (3) they are bi-annual and hence do not cover every single year (although the even years are always the second year of the tax holiday and hence the ones
where the information is best and the expected response largest). We address the second
problem by excluding zip codes where more than 25 percent workers live in another canton group. Approximately 10 percent of all observations in the surveys are dropped due
to this restriction. The commuting patterns by zip code are computed from the census in
2000. We use the wage structure surveys to examine how the tax holiday affected wage
rates and variable pay components. Panel B in Table 1 presents descriptive statistics of
the employer survey data pooling all years from 1994 to 2010.

III

Empirical Results

In this section, we present our empirical results. We divide cantons into various groups
as depicted in our earlier Figure 1.B: (1a) 1 canton (Thurgau) which transitioned early
in 1999 with tax holiday in 1997–98, (1b) 1 canton (Zurich) which transitioned early
in 1999 with tax holiday in 1998 only for local taxes (and 1997–98 for the federal tax),
(2a) 16 cantons which transitioned in 2001 with a tax holiday in 1999–2000 for both
the federal and local income taxes, (2b) 4 cantons which transitioned in 2001 with a tax
holiday in for 2000 only for local income taxes (and 1999–2000 for the federal tax), (3) 3
22

The data exclude the agricultural sector. We exclude public administration, public education, and
the public health sectors from the analysis since they are not fully covered in the early waves.

14

cantons which transitioned late in 2003 with tax holiday in 2001-02. We always use the
same colors and shaped symbols to depict each group: (1a) light blue circles, (1b), dark
blue circles, (2a) light green triangles, (2b) dark green triangles, (3) brown squares. We
sometimes group together groups (1a) and (1b) into a single group (1) and groups (2a)
and (2b) into a single group (2).
First, we examine the levels of tax rates to establish the magnitude of the first stage
generated by the tax holidays. Second, we analyze aggregate effects on employment and
earnings using basic time series. Third, we present an event study longitudinal microeconometric framework to quantitatively estimate the elasticities. Fourth, we examine
additional outcomes such as hours of work, wage rates, and bonuses using the wage
structure surveys.

III.A

First Stage Effect and Parallel Trend Identification

First stage effect on tax rates. First, we examine the levels of average and marginal
tax rates so that we can establish the size of the first stage in terms of tax rate reductions.
Figure 3 displays the average income tax rate (Panel A) and marginal income tax rate
(Panel B) averaged across workers in our sample by year and groups of cantons from 1990
to 2010. Tax rates were compiled by Parchet (2018) and include federal, cantonal, and
municipal income taxes. The average tax rate is the total income tax divided by gross
income.23 We treat married individuals and singles separately. We use tax rates for singles
without children in case a person is single. For married individuals, we match spouses
exploiting the household identifier in the census 2000 and then use the sum of earnings
across both spouses using the social security data to compute household income and the
corresponding income tax. We impute household income for married individuals that
could not be matched to the census.24 We then compute tax rates based on household
income using tax rates for married individuals with two children for married persons.
If the couple has no children below age 20 according to census data, we use tax rates
for married individuals without children.25 Averages across municipalities and cantons
are employment weighted. The cantons are divided in five groups based on when the
tax holiday took place as described above following Figure 1.B. In the series, the dots
corresponding to tax holidays are bigger and are blanked out (as tax holidays are called
23

See appendix section A.2.4 for more information on the tax data used in the analysis.
We impute spousal income based on an out-of-sample prediction. To this end, we regress spousal
income on a set of predictors of spousal income using the sample of individuals with non-missing household identifier in 2000. The predictors are a full set of interactions between age, gender and a categorical
variable of an individual’s own labor income, as well as nationality, canton effects and year effects.
25
These imputations might have a small impact on the precision of our estimates.
24

15

“blank years” in French and German). This graphical representation will be used in all
subsequent reduced form graphs. For each of the groups, we represent the corresponding
tax holiday periods using the vertical shading and the same color code.
Tax rates are naturally zero during tax holidays. Cantons with a single year tax
holiday (groups 1b and 2b) also have a federal tax holiday the preceding year explaining
the lower tax rate. Yet, the effect is small as federal income tax revenue is less than 20
percent of total income tax revenue. Substantively, two points are worth noting. First,
tax rates and especially marginal tax rates are fairly high on average. Average tax rates
are around 10–13 percent while marginal tax rates are around 20–25 percent. Obviously,
the change in average and especially marginal tax rates are even larger for groups with
above-average household incomes (such as men or married women). Second, the graph
shows that, over the period 1990–2010, the variation in tax rates (either average or
marginal) due to the tax holidays dwarves other variations due to tax reforms.
Therefore, the tax holiday generates large intertemporal substitution wage effects as
income earned during the tax holiday escapes the income tax. On an annual basis, there
is no direct income effect as income taxes are due every year. Indeed, the reason for
the tax holiday is precisely to avoid double taxation during the transition. Aggregate
annual income tax collections do not display any discontinuity during the tax holiday
and transition years (see appendix Figure A4). Therefore, the tax reform comes very
close to a pure intertemporal substitution effect that could generate large labor supply
responses along both the intensive and extensive margin. Naturally, various frictions
on the labor market might dampen the responses, which is why we often refer to our
estimates as “frictional Frisch” elasticities. The reform could also generate tax avoidance
responses such as shifting income into tax holiday years. Such avoidance might be easier
for the self-employed.
Parallel trends across groups of cantons. Our key identification assumption is that,
absent the tax holidays, the various canton groups would have evolved similarly in terms
of employment and earnings. Below, we present evidence of parallel trends in the labor
supply outcomes that we study in this paper. Here, we provide evidence that cantons
also follow similar business cycles. Figure 4 displays the official Swiss unemployment
rates by year and groups of cantons from 1990 to 2010. The yearly unemployment rate is
defined as the average of monthly unemployment rates. The official unemployment rate
is the ratio of individuals registered at the Swiss public employment service (registered
unemployment) to workers plus registered unemployed. The Swiss wide unemployment

16

rate is also depicted in thick red line.26 Two points are worth noting on Figure 4.
First, the unemployment rates differ across canton groups in level but not in trend.
Levels are higher in the late transitioning canton group (3) in brown squares and lower
in the cantons groups (1a) and (2a) in light blue circles and light green triangles. However, all canton groups follow exactly the same business cycle so that the parallel trend
assumption holds almost perfectly. The first tax holiday of 1997–1998 (in blue circles)
happens at the very end of the mid-1990s recession when the economy starts to recover.
The second tax holiday of 1999–2000 (in green triangles) happens during an economic
boom when unemployment rate is falling fast. The last tax holiday of 2001–2002 (in
brown squares) happens when the unemployment rate starts to tick up again. Second,
the figure shows that nothing visible happens to the unemployment rate during the tax
holidays in the treated cantons. This is consistent with our subsequent findings of no
response along the extensive margin.

III.B

Aggregate Difference-in-Difference Analysis

We start by plotting basic employment and earnings statistics by year and by groups
of cantons focusing on the sample of working age individuals aged 20–60 in the relevant
year. Hence, these statistics are repeated cross-sectional statistics. In all these graphs,
the tax holiday years are denoted by the vertical shaded bars and we use the same color
coding as in Figure 3 on tax rates.27 Unlike wage earnings, self-employment earnings are
not observed for all years during the transitions (see above). Therefore, we start with
wage earnings only and defer the analysis of self-employment to the end of this section.
Wage employment rates. Figure 5.A displays the wage employment rates from 1990
to 2010 in the five groups of cantons. The sample in each year is defined as all individuals
aged 20–60 in the year (and who are still alive and Swiss residents in 2010, when we match
to the 2010 census). The wage employment rate is computed as the fraction of individuals
in the sample with positive wage earnings during the year. Two findings are worth noting.

26

As is well known, the unemployment rate in Switzerland is low (it ranges from 1 percent to 5
percent) because in recessions immigrant workers who become unemployed leave the country. As being
counted as unemployed requires official registration, it is possible also that some resident unemployed
are not registered, especially for short unemployment spells.
27
As mentioned above, about 5 percent of wage records are missing in 1998 (due to some local offices
failing to transmit their data correctly to the central office). To correct for this, we re-estimate series by
year and group in a refined sample that excludes the local offices affected by the 1998 missing data. We
then impute 1998 values in the full data assuming that the 1998 value relative to the average of 1997
and 1999 is the same in the refined sample and in the full sample. See appendix A.2 and Figure A8 for
details. We have checked using other years that this method delivers accurate results.

17

First, all groups of cantons follow fairly parallel trends over the full period. The parallelism is not exactly perfect, especially in the very long run. For example, employment
rate grows about 3 points less in group (2b) in dashed dark green triangles than in other
groups. However, the trends are close to parallel in the medium run around the tax
holidays. This implies that for each group of cantons, the other groups constitute decent
control groups.28 In the micro-level longitudinal regression framework below, we control
for these longer term differences in earnings trends by controlling for linear time trends
per canton.
Second, there is no evidence of any relative increase in employment rates during the
tax holidays represented by the blanked out symbols in the shaded areas.29 This implies
that the temporary tax holidays did not affect labor supply along the extensive margin.
To put these findings in perspective, because the cut in the average tax rate is around
12 percent (Figure 3.A), a Frisch elasticity of one along the extensive margin (a low end
value of the estimates commonly used in macro calibrations) should generate an increase
in employment rate of 11 percent, i.e. around 8 points. This would create an enormous
spike in the empirical series of Figure 5.A. Therefore, our very simple aggregate time
series evidence can clearly rule out such large Frisch elasticities empirically.
Quantitatively, Table 2, column (1) shows estimates derived from a basic OLS regression based on the aggregate time series by group depicted on Figure 5.A. We regress
the time series for the 5 groups of cantons on year dummies, group dummies, and an
indicator called “blank year” that is equal to 1 during the tax holiday years: for 2 years
in cantons that have two-year long tax holidays for cantonal and municipal taxes, and for
1 year for cantons whose cantonal tax holiday only lasted one year. This analysis is very
transparent and provides conservative standard errors. The first row is the first stage effect on the net of tax rate. The second row is the reduced form on the wage employment
rate, expressed as a percent effect relative to the average employment rate during the tax
holiday. The third row estimates the Frisch elasticity by taking the ratio of row 2 to row
1 and computing the standard error using the delta method. There is no significant effect
on wage employment rates (-.07 percent effect) and the resulting elasticity is extremely
small and precisely estimated: -.005 (.021).30
28

Appendix Figure A12 depicts employment rates separately for males and females and show that
differential trends are driven entirely by women with almost perfect parallelism for men.
29
The only exception is group (1a) in light blue circles, the sole canton of Thurgau, that displays a
very slight bump in 1998 but this bump is not particularly significant as bumps of similar magnitude
appear in 2000 and 2002 as well for this canton. Appendix Figure A12 shows that such bumps are driven
by women with no bumps at all for men.
30
Appendix Figures A12 and A13 display the employment rates separately for men, women, and
married women by year and groups of cantons from 1990 to 2010. None show visible effects during the
tax holidays. Appendix Table A2 displays the corresponding OLS estimates. They are insignificant and

18

We have done two robustness checks. First, we have redefined employment as annual
earnings above some modest positive threshold of 10,000 CHF instead of any positive
earnings (1 CHF is approximately equal to one US dollar). It is conceivable that some
individuals who intend to temporarily enter (or not to leave) the labor force during the
tax holidays might not be able to target exactly the calendar year. Therefore, using a
higher threshold for employment can help capture these effects as well. The absence of
any response carries over unchanged when using the higher 10,000 CHF threshold (see
appendix Figure A14 comparing Panels A and B). Second, we have repeated the analysis
using the Swiss Labor Force Survey (SLFS), the equivalent of the US Current Population
Survey (see appendix section A.2.3 for a description of the data source). Appendix
Figure A15.A displays the employment rate using the SLFS. The figure is noisier due to
smaller sample size but it does not display any tax holiday effects on the employment
rate consistent with our results using Social Security data.
We show in appendix Table A3 that the tax holiday did not generate any significant
responses along various other dimension of extensive labor supply: number of jobs and
number of months employed. The effect on months employed is marginally significant
but very small in magnitude (.02 months or .15 percent extra months).
Wage earnings. Figure 5.B displays the average wage earnings from 1990 to 2010 in
the five groups of cantons. The sample is the same as in Panel A and includes zeros. We
thus capture both extensive and intensive margin responses. Earnings are expressed in
1000s of 2010 CHF (adjusted for inflation). Two points are worth noting.
First, overall, the trends are close to parallel in all three groups, with a much higher
level in the Zurich (canton group (1b) in dashed dark blue circles). Note that there is
a very slight catching up trend in wage earnings for late transitioning cantons (group
3, brown squares). This implies that the identification strategy of comparing cantons
around the tax holidays is a defensible one.
Second, there are small bumps in earnings in 1998 for early transitioning cantons (blue
series in circles) and for late transitioning cantons with tax holidays in 2001-02 (brown
series in squares). These bumps are consistent with a behavioral response to the tax
change. However, the magnitude of the bumps is fairly modest, maybe around 1 point of
average earnings at most for a marginal tax rate cut of over 20 percent (Figure 3.B), which
would translate into Frisch elasticities of .05 at most. Furthermore, the series in green
triangles with tax holiday years in 1999 and 2000 (that include 19 out of the 24 cantons
we analyze) do not display visible bumps. Conversely, the canton of Zurich (group (1b)
very close to zero, even among married women with children, the group expected to be the most elastic.

19

in dashed dark blue circle) does display a false bump in 2001, that is likely driven by
high profits and compensation in the finance industry that year. Quantitatively, Table 2,
column (2), shows that the corresponding elasticity estimate combining all 5 series are
modest .026 (.017) and not even significant, clearly ruling out an elasticity estimate above
.06 along the intensive margin.31
Responsive groups: high wage earners and the self-employed. We consider next
two groups likely to display larger responses: high wage earners and the self-employed.
High wage earners. Figure 6.A zooms in on high wage income earners. The sample
is further restricted to individuals with annual labor earnings above 100,000 CHF on
average in 1994-1996, a couple years before the reform started. The figure shows a clear
and significantly larger response of wage earnings for this group than in the full population
(Figure 5.B). The tax holiday bumps in the early and late transitioning cantons are larger
and even middle transitioning groups (2a) and (2b) in green triangles display a visible
bump in 2000. The bump is largest for the late transitioning cantons of around 5 percent
excess earnings during the 2001-02 tax holidays. Table 2, column (3), shows that the
corresponding elasticity estimate combining all 5 series is highly significant 043 (.016).32
Self-employment earnings. Figure 6.B displays average self-employment earnings by year
and groups of cantons from 1990 to 2010 among the self-employed (defined as individuals with positive self-employment earnings in a given year). As discussed earlier, selfemployment earnings are measured on a biennial basis before 2001 and self-employment
earnings in 1999 and 2000 are subject to a social security tax holiday and hence unobserved in the data. As a result, we do not observe self-employment earnings during
the tax holidays for the middle-transitioning cantons in green triangles. There are clear
spikes in self-employment earnings during the tax holiday both in the early transitioning
cantons (1997–1998) and in the late transitioning cantons (2001–2002). Trends are fairly
(albeit not perfectly) parallel so that the tax holiday spikes stand-out. In particular,
self-employment earnings in the late transitioning cantons (group 3) which experience
the largest tax holiday spikes do not fully revert back after the tax holiday relative to
groups (1) and (2a). However, group (3) and group (2b) remain fully parallel throughout
the full period (except for the tax holiday spikes).
Table 2, column (4), shows that the elasticity estimate combining all series is sizable
and significant .29 (.12). Therefore, the evidence shows that self-employment earnings
31

Appendix Table A2 presents results by demographic subgroups. The elasticity of male wage earnings
is marginally significant .037 (.019) but the female wage earnings elasticity is not .018 (.020) even when
the sample is restricted to married women for children .027 (.032).
32
Complete results by income groups based on the time series are presented in Appendix Table A4
and show an elasticity .085 (.030) in the top earnings group above 200,000 CHF.

20

respond much more than wage earnings, likely because they have more flexibility to adjust
their labor supply or through tax avoidance, in line with the previous literature.

III.C

Individual-level Longitudinal Analysis

While our simple repeated cross-section analysis shows transparent evidence of noresponse along the extensive margin and some response along the intensive margin, particularly for high wage earners and the self-employed, it is useful to develop a simple
individual-level micro-econometric framework to estimate the size of the corresponding
behavioral elasticities. We estimate two complementary regression models. To quantify
the Frisch elasticity implied by the tax holidays effects, we use a regression of labor supply
outcomes on the individual log net of tax rate, instrumenting the net of tax rate with
an indicator of the tax holiday in the respective canton. We study the validity of this
instrumental variable (IV) approach and the timing of the response by estimating the
reduced-form effect of the tax holiday on labor supply using an event study.
There are four key advantages of these micro-level analyses. First, they allow us to
focus on a panel of individuals (instead of comparing repeated cross sections as we did
so far) and include controls such as individual fixed effects, canton specific linear time
trends, and life-cycle effects. Second, they allow us to analyze the precise time pattern
of the reduced-form response to tax holidays: inter-temporal labor or income shifting
might produce a deficit in earnings in years surrounding the tax holidays. Such effects in
adjacent years are difficult to see in the repeated cross-section graphs as the tax holidays
in an adjacent year for one group is the tax holiday year for another. Third, they deliver
more precise and direct quantitative estimates of the frictional Frisch elasticity parameters
than the crude estimates coming out of the time series graphs. Fourth, they tie the labor
supply response of individuals directly to the individual-level change in tax burden.
IV design. The IV approach is based on the following regression model:
Yit = αi + αt + δ · log(1 − τit ) + Xit β + it ,

(1)

where Yit is an outcome for individual i in year t, αi and αt represent person and year fixed
effects, respectively. Controls Xit include age and gender controls (age and age squared
by gender) and linear time trends by canton of residence. Following the standard in the
literature, the linear time trends exclude the tax holiday years and hence capture the
canton specific trend outside of the tax reform (as the time series graphs showed, some
groups of cantons do have slightly different time trends). τit represents the tax rate of

21

individual i in year t, computed as explained in section III.A. The tax rate is the average
tax rate when we study extensive margin labor supply responses and the marginal tax
rate when we study intensive margin responses. δ represents the semi-elasticity of the
outcome with respect to the net of tax rate and can be rescaled to recover the Frisch
elasticity. To provide a causal effect of the net of tax rate on labor supply, we instrument
log(1 − τit ) with a dummy equal to one if the canton of residence of individual i has a
cantonal tax holiday.
Event study. To provide a transparent illustration of the timing of the reduced-form
effect in the IV model, we estimate individual-level event study regressions that show the
reduced-form effect of the tax holiday on the outcome in the years around the cantonal
tax holiday. We consider the following specification:
Yit = αi + αt +

4
X

δk · T Hctk + Xit β + it

(2)

k=−4

where Yit , αi , αt , and Xit are defined as in equation (1) above. The important covariates
are T Hctk for k = −4, .., 4, which represent a sequence of event study dummies that
are k years away from the first year of the federal tax holiday in canton c. Formally,
T Hctk = 1(t = t∗c + k) where t∗c is the first year of the tax holiday in canton c. The
coefficients of interest are the dummies δk for k = −4, .., 4 that capture the deviation in
the outcome k years away from the first tax holiday year for the specific individual. Since
we exclude the dummy for 2 years before the tax holiday, k = −2 serves as the reference
period. k = 0 is the first year of the tax holiday and k = 1 is the second year of the tax
holiday. For cantons with a single local tax holiday year (groups 1b and 2b), the local
tax holiday year is set at k = 1 (there is no local tax holidays in k = 0 for this group
but there is a federal tax holiday). Setting the reference period equal to k = −2 allows
us to test for possible income shifting from the year before into the first year of the tax
holiday (k = −1). To absorb the effects outside of the estimation window of the event
study, we additionally control for two dummies for k ≤ −5 and k ≥ 5.
Identification and sample Our specification with time and individual dummies is
identified because different cantons experience tax holidays at different times. The key
identification assumption of this micro-level estimation framework is that treated and
untreated cantons would have followed parallel outcome trends (in terms of employment
and earnings) if the tax holiday had not taken place once we control for individual fixed
effects, life-cycle effects, and linear time trends by canton of residence. Importantly, the
22

plausibility of this identifying assumption can be tested with the event study design by
checking whether the dummy coefficients well before the reform k = −4, −3 and well
after the reform k = 3, 4 are equal to zero. The event study also reveals whether earnings
in the years adjacent to the tax holiday are depressed (k = −1 and k = 2), e.g. due to
retiming of income. We do not generally find evidence that this is the case, which means
that the results are very similar in our IV design if we control for tax holiday effects in
the years adjacent to the tax holidays.
We estimate both models based on a sample that covers the years 1994–2006 (approximately 4 years around the tax holiday years) and excludes 1998 (as a fraction of
the data are missing in a non-random way). As a result, we also exclude the two early
transitioning cantons which had tax holidays in 1998.33 We focus on workers aged 22–55
in 1996 that we follow longitudinally. We drop workers older than 62 in later years to
avoid interactions with retirement behavior. Individuals are assigned to cantons based
on where they lived in 1996 over the total sample period to avoid picking up the effects
of strategic relocation decisions of individuals as a response to the tax holiday.34
First stage. To illustrate the timing of the first stage, we first estimate the event study
model (equation (2)) using net of tax rates as outcome variables. In these regression, Yit is
the log of one minus the average income tax rate (log(1 − AT Rit )) for extensive responses
and the log of one minus the marginal income tax rate (log(1 − M T Rit )) for intensive
responses. Figure 7.A depicts estimates of the effects of the tax holiday on these outcomes
from 4 years to before the tax holidays (k = −4, −3, −2, −1 with k = −2 set at zero by
normalization), into the tax holiday (k = 0, 1) and after the tax holiday (k = 2, 3, 4).
The vertical bars represent 95 percent cluster-robust confidence intervals clustered at the
level of the 106 commuting zones in Switzerland.
Two points are worth noting. First, there are clear large first stage effects during the
tax holidays as we expect. The first stage effect for the net of marginal tax rate is about
22 percent while the first stage effect for the net of average tax rate is about 11 percent,
consistent with our earlier aggregate time series in Figure 3. Second, the coefficients are
very close to zero outside of the tax holidays. This confirms that the tax holidays created
a very large first stage effect on net of tax rates.

33

We have experimented trying to incorporate 1998 in the event study regressions. In the end, short
of dummying out 1998 entirely, which is equivalent to excluding 1998 as we do, we were not able to
obtain stable pre-trends due to the highly specific and non-random way the data are missing in 1998.
34
However, as shown in the last column of appendix Table A3, the evidence that individuals deferred
moving across cantons because of the tax holiday is limited.

23

Effects on wage earnings. Figure 7.B depicts reduced-form event study estimates
of the effects of the tax holiday on the extensive and intensive margin of labor supply.
The dependent variable Yit in the model “extensive margin” is an indicator equal to 1 if
a person has positive wage earnings in a given year. The dependent variable Yit in the
model “intensive margin” is annual wage earnings of employees (excluding individuals
with no wage earnings in a given year) expressed in 2010 CHF. This effect is scaled postestimation by mean wage earnings in the estimation sample so as to express the effects
in percent. The graph depicts 95 percent cluster-robust confidence intervals.
The results confirm our earlier impressions from the time series. There is no effect
along the extensive margin and there is a small effect along the intensive margin, of about
1 percent and significant. Combining this reduced form effect with the first stage effect of
a bit more than 20 log points leads to a Frisch elasticity of about .04 along the intensive
margin, a quantitatively small estimate consistent with our earlier time series analysis
but more precisely estimated.35
Heterogeneity. An intriguing question is why are the Frisch elasticity estimates so
small. To cast light on this, it is valuable to explore heterogeneity.
Figure 8 uses the reduced-form event study to illustrate heterogeneity in the intensive
margin response across gender, education, and level of earnings. Panel A depicts estimates
for males and females separately. Effects appear to be quite larger for males than for
females consistent with our time series analysis. Panel B breaks down the sample by
education: workers with a tertiary (i.e., university) degree vs. workers without a tertiary
degree. The effect are about twice as large for workers with tertiary degrees. Panel C
breaks down the sample by wage earnings levels measured as average total labor income
in the 1994–1996 period: we consider two groups: high earners with over 100K CHF on
average and low earners with less than 100K CHF. The effect appears much larger for the
high earners. For this group, estimates suggest that earnings are lower just after the tax
holiday, consistent with retiming of income into the tax holiday with depressed earnings
afterwards although the estimates are fairly imprecise (and not significantly negative).
Table 3 presents the estimates and corresponding Frisch elasticities based on the
IV regression (equation (1)). The table displays the effect of the tax holiday on wage
employment and wage earnings for male and female separately in 4 columns. Panel A
displays detailed results for the full sample. The first row depicts the semi-elasticity of
outcomes: the effect of the log-net of tax rate on the level of the outcome of interest.
The second row depicts the first stage effect of the tax holiday dummy on the log net of
35

Appendix Figure A16 shows that excluding controls generates similar but considerably noisier estimated event study series.

24

tax rate. The third row reports the corresponding (frictional) Frisch elasticity estimates.
The extensive elasticity is very close to zero (-.01 for men and -.02 for women) consistent
with Figure 7. The intensive elasticity is positive and small. It is significant and larger
for men (.04) than for women (.01) consistent with the event study in Figure 8.
Panels B and C consider the sub-groups of married individuals with children and
married individuals without children respectively. The extensive elasticities are always
very close to zero (and never positive). Interestingly on the intensive margin, the elasticity
for married women with children is higher (.05) than without children (.01) while the
elasticities for married men are similar with and without children, and also similar to
the overall sample of men in Panel A. In all cases, the estimated intensive elasticities
are quantitatively very small (never above .05). Panels D and E split the sample by
education: those with a tertiary degree vs. not. Again, the extensive elasticities are
always very close to zero. On the intensive margin, the elasticities are actually the same
for those with tertiary degree both for men and women but still always quite small (.04
for men and .01 for women). The larger effect for the highly educated found on Figure 8.C
can be explained by a first stage that is twice as larger for the highly educated due to
the progressivity of the tax system.
Table 4 uses the IV model to present the estimates and corresponding elasticities
dividing the sample by five labor income groups (by panel) based on average income
in 1994-1996. As in Table 3, it presents the estimates of the tax holiday effect and
corresponding elasticities on wage employment and wage earnings for male and female
separately in 4 columns. None of the elasticities along the extensive margin are significantly positive. Estimates are very close to zero and generally with a negative sign.
This implies that there is no evidence of a positive extensive margin response for any
income group. For the intensive margin, the table shows that elasticities are growing
with earnings. They are zero at the bottom for the group with annual earnings in the
1-25K CHF range. For males, they grow to .03 and significant in the next two groups
(25-50K and 50-100K), .04 for the group 100-200K, and .08 (.015) for the top group with
earnings above 200K. For females, the elasticity estimates are very small (.02 of less) for
all groups except the top group that has an elasticity of .09 (.046). Therefore, the table
confirms our previous findings that responses are larger at the top of the wage earnings
distribution. Conceivably, higher earners have more flexibility to retime their compensation perhaps through bonuses as we show below. Even at the top though, the elasticities
remain quantitatively small at or slightly below .1.
Figure 9 explores the heterogeneity in the size of the Frisch elasticity estimates by
occupation, and how the elasticity is related to average earnings in the occupation (Panel

25

A) and share of workers with overtime in the occupation (Panel B). We divide individuals
using a two-digit classification of occupations used by the Swiss administration. Within
each occupation, we estimate the Frisch elasticity using equation (1). We focus on the
overall (extensive plus intensive margin) Frisch elasticity by including non-workers with
labor earnings of zero. The occupation for each person is defined as of 2000 when the
social security data are matched to the census in 2000. Non-employed individuals are
assigned to occupations based on the reported learned occupation. Each dot on the panels
represents an occupation. The size of the dot is scaled to the number of workers in the
corresponding occupation. Three results are worth noting.
First, we find that Frisch elasticities differ significantly across industries from slightly
negative values (around -.03) to small positive values (around .07). Most occupations
have small and positive elasticities (in the range 0-.02). Some high skill occupations
such as engineers, entrepreneurs, legal professions, or professors have among the highest
elasticities (around .06-.07). In all cases though, elasticities are modest in size and always
below .1. Second and consistent with our previous results in Table 4, Figure 9.A shows
that there is a clear positive relationship between average earnings in the occupation
and the size of the estimated Frisch elasticity. Quantitatively, the plotted regression
line shows that each extra 1000 CHF is associated with an increase the Frisch elasticity
by .001. Third, Figure 9.B shows that occupations where a larger share of workers do
overtime also have higher estimated Frisch elasticities. Quantitatively, a 10 percentage
point increase in the share of workers with overtime is associated with a .013 increase in
the Frisch elasticity. This suggests that workers in occupations where overtime work is
more common have more flexibility to adjust upward their labor supply during the tax
holiday. This also suggests that part of the response we obtain may reflect real labor
supply responses.36
Effects on self-employment earnings. Figure 10 depicts the reduced-form effects
on self-employment earnings using the event study model (equation (2)). We focus on
workers aged 20-55 in 1996 who are self-employed at least once during the estimation
period. The dependent variable is annual self-employment income per person (including
0 if there is no self-employment earnings in a given year). The effect is scaled postestimation by mean self-employment earnings in the estimation sample.37
36

Following Sigurdsson (2018), we have also explored whether responses are larger in industries with
a higher variation in effective weekly working times perhaps because workers have more flexibility of
adjust their hours of work in such industries. However, we did not find any significant relationship.
37
Because self-employment earnings are observed an a bi-annual basis before the transition, each preevent period represents 2 years (instead of one). Furthermore, because self-employment is not observed
in 1999 and 2000, we skip these years in the event study. Cantons with tax holidays in 1999/2000 do not

26

Panel A depicts two series: the full sample of self-employed and self-employed with
average labor income over 100K CHF in the 1994–1996 period. The effects on selfemployment earnings are much larger than for wage earnings: there is excess selfemployment of about 7 percent during the tax holiday years, and larger in the second year
of the tax holiday. For high self-employment earners, the effects are even larger about 10
percent. Panel B compares men and women. It shows striking heterogeneity by gender:
effects for men are more than twice as high as for women (around 10 percent for males
vs. about 5 percent for females). The conventional wisdom is that female labor supply is
more elastic than male labor supply. Therefore, a possible explanation for our findings is
that they reflect tax avoidance rather than genuine labor supply responses. Consistent
with this tax avoidance scenario, we also observe a slight dip after and especially before
the tax holiday that could be explained by retiming of income. Note however that the
dips are small relative to the overall size of the response during the tax holiday.
Table 5 summarizes the effect of the tax holiday on self-employment earnings. It
shows estimated semi-elasticities and corresponding Frisch elasticities derived from IV
regressions. For the main sample of self-employed in Panel A, the estimated elasticity
is .21 and very significant. The elasticity is much larger for men (.24) than for women
(.07). The elasticity for high earners is almost the same (.23) as in the full sample (.21).
Therefore, the larger response for high earners from Figure 10 corresponds primarily to
a larger first stage for high earners: high earners get a bigger marginal tax rate break
due to the progressivity of the income tax schedule. Panel B shows that married selfemployed have slightly higher elasticities than overall but married women do not display
however larger elasticities than women in general, consistent again with a tax avoidance
scenario. Panel C and D show that elasticities are larger for the self-employed with
tertiary education than for those with no tertiary education. Strikingly, women with
no tertiary education display a zero elasticity (the point estimate is negative -.05 but
insignificant) while tertiary educated women have an elasticity of .17.
Overall, the elasticity for the self-employed (.21) is much larger than for wage earnings
(less than .05). The elasticities for the self-employed are also spread throughout income
groups (while elasticities for wage earners increase sharply with earnings). Consistent
with wage earners, we also find higher elasticities for men than women for self-employment
earnings.

have a tax holiday and hence are always pure controls in the event study. For cantons with tax holidays
in 2001/2002, the event period just before the tax holiday (k = −1) is 1997/1998. For cantons with tax
holidays in 1997/1998, the first event period after the tax holiday (k = 2) is 2001 (Figure 6B depicts the
data availability situation).

27

Robustness. Appendix Table A5 shows that the baseline elasticity estimates for wage
earnings (along the extensive and intensive margin) and for self-employment earnings
based on the IV estimation are robust along a number of dimensions: (1) excluding the
control variables included in the baseline, (2) adding control variables absorbing effects
of the tax holiday in the the year before and after the tax holiday, thus accounting for
possible effects of the tax holidays on income shifting, (3) controlling further for the cantonal unemployment rate, (4) discarding observations with imputed place of residence,
(5) identifying the effect only from the response in the second cantonal blank year (controlling for the effect in the first), (6) identifying the effect only from the response in
late-coming cantons with tax holidays in 2001 and 2002, (7) using fully uncapped earnings (instead of capping annual earnings at 2.5 million CHF). In all cases, the estimates
are similar to the baseline estimates discussed above. A noteworthy exception is that the
Frisch elasticity for the self-employed becomes somewhat larger (.36) if we identify the
effect only from the second tax holiday year. In general, however, the table shows that
the IV estimates for the main outcomes are robust to various alternative specifications.

III.D

Additional Results

Decomposing earnings: hours of work and wage rates. In the standard model
of labor supply and demand, the tax holiday creates a positive labor supply response
in the form of increased hours of work. This positive labor supply effect might in turn
reduce the wage rate if labor demand is not perfectly elastic. This will dampen the effect
on total earnings. Therefore, it is important to examine separately the effects on hours
of work and wage rates. Hours of work and wage rates are not measured in the social
security data but are measured in the labor force survey and the wage structure survey.
Here, we present evidence from the wage structure surveys.38 Because the wage structure
surveys are repeated cross sections with no panel dimension, we cannot replicate the
longitudinal analyses used in the last section. Instead, we present simple times series
patterns following the strategy of section III.B.
Figure 11 depicts hours of work (Panel A) and hourly wage rates (Panel B) by year and
group of cantons using the wage structure surveys 1994–2010 carried out bi-annually.39
Hours of work and hourly wages are based on the month of October in each year. Hours
worked refer to contractual (i.e. normal) hours worked for workers with monthly salaries
38

The labor force survey is much smaller and hence produces noisier series. These series are presented
in appendix Figure A15 and show results that are consistent with the larger wage structure survey, in
particular no detectable effect on hours of work.
39
We show in appendix Figure A17 that total monthly earnings in the wage structure survey display
some evidence of response to the tax holiday consistent with our findings from the social security data.

28

and to actual hours worked (and hence including overtime) for workers paid by the hour.
Wage rates incorporate regular pay but exclude overtime and variable pay components
(e.g. bonuses). In both panels, the sample in each year is limited to workers aged 20–60,
excluding public sector employees (not systematically covered in the survey) and foreign
workers that do not pay regular taxes in Switzerland. We group cantons into three groups
depending on the tax holiday timing (with no distinction between 1 vs. 2 year long tax
holidays as the wage survey is bi-annual). Geographical information in the wage structure
survey is based on place of work while tax treatment is based on residence. To reduce the
number of cases where a person works in one group of cantons but resides in another one,
we exclude zip codes in which more than 25 percent of workers live and work in different
groups of cantons according to the census in 2000 (see section II).
Both panels display fairly stable parallel trends before and after the reform. Panel A
does not show any visible response of hours of work to the tax holiday. Hours of work
do not seem to spike at all during the tax holidays in treated cantons relative to other
groups of cantons. Panel B shows some evidence of an impact of the tax holiday on wage
rates. There is no visible bump in wage rates for the two groups of cantons transitioning
early (series in blue circles and green triangles) but there is a bump in hourly wage rates
at the time of the tax holiday for the cantons transitioning late in 2001–2002 (series
in brown squares). This positive effect is the reverse of a labor demand effect driving
wages down during the tax holiday. It suggests instead that workers might be able to
manipulate their wage rate to drive up their earnings and take advantage of the tax
holiday.40 Quantitatively, regression analysis presented in appendix Table A6 based on
the depicted series shows that the tax holiday increases hours of work by .1 percent (not
significant) and hourly wage rates by .5 percent (not significant either).41
Overall, the decomposition of earnings into wages and hours of work shows that labor
demand cannot explain the small earnings effects. In contrast to the labor demand
channel story, we have found that wage rates respond if anything positively to the tax
holiday. Therefore, the change in net of tax wage rates due to the tax holiday is not
dampened through a labor demand reduction in wage rates. The lack of effects on hours
of work we have found confirms that the Frisch labor supply elasticity is very small.

40

To test this hypothesis, we show in appendix Figure A18 that the hourly wage response is stronger
and clearer in all three groups of cantons when the sample is restricted to workers more likely to be well
informed about the tax holiday (workers in occupations “examining, advising, attesting”.
41
Quantitative effects on hours of work are marginally significant for workers in occupations “examining, advising, attesting” although modest in size (.7 percent). Effects on wage rates are larger and very
significant for this group (4.3 percent) (appendix Table A6).

29

Effects on bonuses. Finally, we look at bonuses, which is an earnings component that
is more flexible than regular wages and salaries and hence might be used to shift earnings
toward the tax holiday years. Bonus data are available in the wage structure survey.
Figure 11.C displays the fraction of employees with bonuses above 5,000 CHF (among
all employees including those with no bonus) by year and groups of cantons from 1996
to 2010 using the same sample as in Panels A and B. It shows mild evidence of a bonus
bump during the tax holidays in each of the three groups, most visible in the cantons that
transitioned late in 2001-02. Quantitatively, regression analysis based on the depicted
series shows that the likelihood of receiving a bonus increases by almost 10 percent during
the tax holiday and this effect is marginally significant (appendix Table A6, Panel A, col.
(4)).
Therefore, this evidence suggests that workers are able to shift bonuses to take advantage of the tax holiday. The absence of hours of work effects along with some positive
effects on wage rates and bonuses suggests that the response might be from tax avoidance
rather than actual labor supply behavior.

IV

Conclusion

Our paper has estimated the intertemporal labor supply (Frisch) elasticity of substitution
exploiting temporary income tax holidays in Switzerland. Importantly, our estimate
captures the macro-level Frisch elasticity taking as given all existing frictions on labor
supply adjustments. This is the relevant parameter to assess the employment effects of
real business cycles but it could differ from a micro-level and frictionless Frisch elasticity.
Overall, we can draw the following conclusions. First, there is no evidence at all
of responses along the extensive margin, even for sub-groups likely to be more elastic
such as women. Second, there is a small aggregate response of wage earnings which is
largest at the top of the wage earnings distribution. The overall Frisch elasticity for wage
earners is .025 overall and comes close to .1 for high wage earners. Third, there is a larger
response of self-employment earnings that is present at all earnings level (and not just
the top) with a Frisch elasticity around .25. Fourth, effects are concentrated among men
with smaller effects for women in contrast to the standard findings in the labor supply
literature. Fifth, most of these responses are visible for the last wave of transitioning
cantons with tax holidays in 2001–2002. Responses for earlier transitions such as 1997–
1998 or 1999–2000 appear to be more muted. This latter effect might be due to learning
as it might take time for the public to understand tax holidays and how to respond to
them.

30

Our results are consistent with a large body of work in public economics showing that
real labor supply to taxation are generally modest but that whenever taxpayers have easily
accessible tax avoidance opportunities, they tend to exploit them (see e.g., Saez et al.
(2012) for a survey of this literature). In the specific case of tax avoidance through intertemporal substitution, the literature has uncovered a number of cases of strong timing
responses before anticipated increases in tax rates, such as the realization of capital gains
(Auerbach and Poterba, 1988; Saez, 2017) or stock-option exercises (Goolsbee, 2000).
Closest to our application, Best and Kleven (2017) study a tax holiday for a 1 percent
tax on real estate transaction in Britain and find a very large 20 percent increase in
transactions in part due to retiming. Importantly, large responses happen when frictions
are very small, i.e., taxpayers can freely decide to time the transaction. For wage earners
in Switzerland, frictions in labor supply adjustments are likely large enough to prevent any
sizable response, except perhaps among high wage earners who may have more ability
to retime their earnings (through bonuses for example). The self-employed can more
easily retime their earnings through the tax avoidance channel. It is also possible that a
response to a tax increase (instead of decrease) would have generated larger elasticities:
labor supply might be easier to adjust downward than upward (employees can always
decide to quit unilaterally for example); perhaps the loss resulting from a tax increase
looms larger than the gains from a tax decrease through behavioral loss aversion effects.
Intriguingly, some studies have found larger real labor supply responses to tax cuts in
specific related contexts. The Iceland tax holiday generated larger effects than the Swiss
tax holiday (Bianchi et al., 2001; Sigurdsson, 2018). Tazhitdinova (2017) finds a large
response to taking small second jobs after they became tax-free in Germany in 2003. The
Swiss labor market is very flexible according the Global Competitive Index created by the
World Economic Forum. Therefore, an intriguing possible explanation is that both the
Iceland and German tax breaks were presented by the government and hence perceived
by the public as an encouragement and opportunity to work more, hereby reducing the
informational and social frictions to labor supply adjustment.42 In contrast, the Swiss
tax holiday was presented as a modernization of the tax system and gaming the reform
was discouraged (with taxation of extraordinary incomes for example).

42

In the US context, Kleven (2019) shows that the very salient welfare reform of the 1990s had a
very large impact on labor supply of single mothers while the less salient but economically large Earned
Income Tax Credit expansions did not.

31

References
Auerbach, Alan J and James Poterba, “Capital gains taxation in the United States:
Realizations, revenue, and rhetoric,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988, 2, 595–
631.
Beer, Kurt Hermann, Die Zwischenvarnlagung bei Aufnahme, resp. Aufgabe der Erwerbstätigkeit sowie bei Berufswechsel, Zürich: Juris-Verlag, 1979.
Best, Michael Carlos and Henrik Jacobsen Kleven, “Housing market responses to transaction taxes: Evidence from notches and stimulus in the UK,” The Review of Economic
Studies, 2017, 85 (1), 157–193.
Bianchi, Marco, Björn R. Gudmundsson, and Gylfi Zoega, “Iceland’s Natural Experiment in Supply-Side Economics,” The American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (5), 1564–1579.
Brülhart, Marius and Raphaël Parchet, “Alleged Tax Competition: The Mysterious Death
of Inheritance Taxes in Switzerland,” Journal of Public Economics, 2014, 111, 63–78.
, Jonathan Gruber, Matthias Krapf, and Kurt Schmidheiny, “Taxing Wealth: Evidence from Switzerland,” NBER Working Paper No. 22376, June 2016.
Bütler, Monika and Alma Ramsden, “How taxes impact the choice between an annuity
and the lump sum at retirement,” Economics Working Paper Series 1701, University of St.
Gallen, School of Economics and Political Science January 2017.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Dayanand S. Manoli, and Andrea Weber, “Does Indivisible
Labor Explain the Difference between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of
Extensive Margin Elasticities,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2013, 27 (1), 1–56.
Eugster, Beatrix and Raphael Parchet, “Culture and Taxes,” Journal of Political Economy, 2019, 127 (1), 296–337.
Fujii, Edwin T. and Clifford B. Hawley, “On the Accuracy of Tax Perceptions,” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 1988, pp. 344–347.
Goolsbee, Austan, “What happens when you tax the rich? Evidence from executive compensation,” Journal of Political Economy, 2000, 108 (2), 352–378.
Känzig, Ernst, Die Eidgenössische Wehrsteuer, Basel: Verlag für Recht und Gesellschaft AG,
1982.
Keane, Michael P., “Labor Supply and Taxes: A Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature,
2011, 49 (4), 961–1075.
King, Robert G. and Sergio T. Rebelo, “Resuscitating Real Business Cycles,” in John B.
Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1, Elsevier, 1999,
chapter 14, pp. 927–1007.
Kirchgassner, Gebhard and Werner Pommerehne, “Tax Harmonization and Tax Competition in the European Union: Lessons from Switzerland,” Journal of Public Economics,
1996, 60 (3), 351–371.

32

Kleven, Henrik, “The EITC and the Extensive Margin: A Reappraisal,” NBER Working
Paper No. 26405, October 2019.
Liebig, Thomas, Patrick Puhani, and Alfonso Sousa-Poza, “Taxation and Internal
Migration, Evidence from the Swiss Census Using Community-Level Variation in Income
Tax Rates,” Journal of Regional Science, 2007, 47 (4), 807–836.
Martinez, Isabel, “Beggar-Thy-Neighbor Tax Cuts: Mobility after a Local Income and Wealth
Tax Reform in Switzerland,” Department of Economics Discussion Paper No. 2016-08, University of St. Gallen 2016.
OECD, Revenue Statistics: 1965-2015, Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development, 2016.
Parchet, Raphaël, “Are Local Tax Rates Strategic Complements or Strategic Substitutes?,”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2018, 11 (2), 189–224.
Reichling, Felix and Charles Whalen, Review of Estimates of the Frisch Elasticity of Labor
Supply, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Budget Office, 2012.
Saez, Emmanuel, “Taxing the rich more: Preliminary evidence from the 2013 Tax Increase,”
Tax Policy and the Economy, 2017, 31 (1), 71–120.
, Joel Slemrod, and Seth H Giertz, “The elasticity of taxable income with respect to
marginal tax rates: A critical review,” Journal of economic literature, 2012, 50 (1), 3–50.
Schmidheiny, Kurt, “Income Segregation and Local Progressive Taxation: Empirical Evidence from Switzerland,” Journal of Public Economics, 2006, 90 (3), 429–458.
Sigurdsson, Jósef, “Labor Supply Responses and Adjustment Frictions: A Tax-Free Year in
Iceland,” Working Paper 2018.
Spoerri, Adrian, Marcel Zwahlen, Matthias Egger, and Matthias Bopp, “The Swiss
National Cohort: a unique database for national and international researchers,” International
Journal of Public Health, 2010, 55 (4), 239–242.
Stefansson, Arnaldur, “Labor Supply Response To a Tax Holiday: The Take-Home From a
Large and Salient Shock,” Uppsala PhD Dissertation, Chapter 1 2019.
Tazhitdinova, Alisa, “Increasing Hours Worked: Moonlighting Responses to a Large Tax
Reform,” 2017.

33

untaxed incomes!

Year X

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Tax base for

Incomes realized in Incomes realized in Incomes realized in
assessment period X 1991 + 1992 (avg.) 1993 + 1994 (avg.) 1995 + 1996 (avg.)
Payment of tax liability owed for year X

During 1993 and
1994

During 1995 and
1996

During 1997 and
1998

1999

2000

Income realized Income realized
in 1999
in 2000
Provisional
installments
1999, final
assessment in
2000

Provisional
installments
2000 final
assessment in
2001

(A) Example: transition from old to new system

Federal and cantonal tax holidays
No blank years (BS)
1997/98 (TG)
1997/98, canton only 1998 (ZH)
1999/00

1999/00, canton only 1999
1999/00, canton never (NW)
2001/02

(B) Timing of the transition across regions

Figure 1: Transition from Old to New System Across Swiss Cantons
Notes: Panel A depicts an example of a transition from the old system of biennial retrospective taxation
to the new system of annual pay as you earn taxation in 1999 (as in the canton of Thurgau TG). Under
the old system, in 1997 and 1998, taxes are based on the average income across years 1995 and 1996. In
1999, taxes are due on current 1999 incomes. Hence, because of the transition, incomes earned in 1997
and 1998 are never taxed, creating a two-year tax holiday. Panel B depicts the timing of the transition
across the 26 Swiss cantons. For the federal income tax, the tax holiday was either 1997/98 (2 cantons
in blue horizontal stripes, Thurgau TG and Zurich ZH), 1999/00 (20 cantons in green diagonal stripes),
or 2001/02 (3 cantons in brown vertical stripes). Generally, the tax holiday for the local (cantonal and
municipal) income tax was the same as for the federal tax. However, for cantons that were using annual
assessment periods (instead of biennial), the tax holiday for local taxes is only one year. These cantons
are depicted with more stripes and darker colors: darker blue (1 canton Zurich ZH) and darker green
(4 cantons). One canton (Nidwalden NW in very dark green with very many stripes) had no local tax
holiday at all because it chose a different transition tax. One canton (Basel-Stadt BS in solid black)
transitioned much earlier and hence had no tax holiday. Nidwalden and Basel-Stadt are excluded from
our subsequent analysis leaving 24 cantons divided in 5 groups (light blue 1 canton, dark blue 1 canton,
light green 15 cantons, dark green 4 cantons, brown 3 cantons).

34

Articles per newspaper

60

40

20

08
20

07

06

20

20

04

05
20

20

02

03
20

20

01

00

20

20

99
19

98
19

97
19

96
19

19

95

0

Tax holiday in...
1998 (NZZ, Tages-Anzeiger)
1999-00 (Der Bund, BZ, Neue Luzerner Zeitung)
2000 (Solothurner Zeitung, Tribune de Genève)
2001-02 (24 Heures, Le Matin, Le Temps)

Figure 2: Press Articles Referring to the Tax Holidays
Notes: This figure depicts the number of press articles mentioning the word “Bemessungslücke” (blank
year) and the French term “brèche fiscale”, or other expressions used to refer to the reform in German
and French (Gegenwartsbesteuerung, Gegenwartsbemessung, postnumerando, praenumerando, brèche de
calcul, trou de taxation, taxation biannuelle, taxation annuelle) by year and most major newspapers.
The figure displays four series: (1) the series in blue circles is for two Zurich based newspapers, (2) the
series in light green triangles for three Bern and Lucerne based newspapers, (3) the dashed series in dark
green triangles for two Geneva and a Solothurn based newspapers, (4) the series in brown squares for
three Vaud and Valais based newspapers. In the series, the dots corresponding to tax holidays are bigger
and are blanked out (as tax holidays are called blank years in French and German). The tax holiday
periods are also depicted in shaded colors. Local press interest in the tax holiday typically peaked during
the years when the actual tax holidays happened locally.

35

Average tax rate in %

25
20
15
10
5

10
20

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

19

90

0

Tax Holiday in...

1997-98
1998

1999-00
2000

2001-02

(A) Effect on Average Tax Rates

Marginal tax rate in %

25
20
15
10
5

10
20

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

19

90

0

Tax Holiday in...

1997-98
1998

1999-00
2000

2001-02

(B) Effect on Marginal Tax Rates

Figure 3: First Stage Effect of Tax Holidays on Tax Rates
Notes: This figure displays the average income tax rate (Panel A) and average marginal income tax rate
(Panel B) for employed persons in our sample by year and groups of cantons from 1990 to 2010. Tax rates
include federal, cantonal, and municipal income taxes. Years denote the year in which the corresponding
income is earned (not when the tax is paid). The average tax rate is the total income tax divided by gross
income. Averages across municipalities and cantons are employment weighted. The cantons are divided
in five groups based on when the cantonal tax holiday took place. (1a) light blue circles: tax holiday
in 1997-98 (1 canton), (1b) dashed dark blue circles: tax holiday in 1998 (1 canton), (2a) light green
triangles: tax holiday in 1999–2000 (15 cantons), (2b) dashed dark green triangles: tax holiday in 2000
(4 cantons), (3) brown squares: tax holiday in 2001-02 (3 cantons). In the series, the dots corresponding
to tax holidays are bigger and are blanked out (as tax holidays are called blank years in French and
German). For each of the groups, we represent the corresponding tax holiday periods using the vertical
shading and the same color code. Tax rates are naturally zero during tax holidays. Cantons with a single
year tax holiday (groups 1b and 2b) also have a federal tax holiday the preceding year explaining the
lower tax rate but it is a small effect as federal income tax revenue is only 1/6 of total income tax revenue.

36

Unemployment rate

.08

.06

.04

.02

1997-98

1998

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00
Switzerland

2000

10
20

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

19

90

0

2001-02

Figure 4: Parallel Trends in Unemployment Rates across Cantons
Notes: This figure displays the official unemployment rate by year and groups of cantons from 1990 to
2010. The cantons are divided in five groups based on when the cantonal tax holiday took place. (1a)
light blue circles series: tax holiday in 1997-98 (1 canton), (1b) dark blue dashed circles: tax holiday
in 1998 (1 canton), (2a) light green triangles: tax holiday in 1999–2000 (16 cantons), (2b) dark green
triangles: tax holiday in 2000 (4 cantons), (3) brown squares: tax holiday in 2001-02 (3 cantons). The
Swiss wide unemployment rate is also depicted in thick red line. The yearly unemployment rate is
the average of monthly official unemployment rates. The official unemployment rate counts individuals
registered at the Swiss public employment service (registered unemployment).

37

85

75

65

1997-98
1998

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00
2000

0
20
1

8
20
0

6
20
0

4
20
0

2
20
0

0
20
0

8
19
9

6
19
9

4
19
9

19
9

19
9

2

55
0

Wage employees/population (in %)

95

2001-02

70
60
50
40
30
20
10

1997-98
1998

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00
2000

20
10

20
08

20
06

20
04

20
02

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

0
19
90

Wage earnings per person (in 1k CHF)

(A) Effect on wage employment

2001-02

(B) Effect on wage earnings

Figure 5: Effects of Tax Holidays on Wage Employment and Earnings
Notes: This figure displays the employment rate of wage earners (Panel A) and average wage earnings
(Panel B) by year and groups of cantons from 1990 to 2010. The sample in a given year t is all individuals
aged 20–60 in year t who are still alive and Swiss residents by 2010 (i.e., present in the 2010 Census).
The wage employment rate is computed as the fraction of individuals in the sample with positive wage
earnings during the year. Average wage earnings in Panel B include non-workers and are expressed in
1000s of 2010 CHF (adjusted for inflation). The cantons are divided in five groups based on when the
cantonal tax holiday took place. (1a) light blue circles: 1 canton with tax holiday for cantonal taxes in
1997-98 (1 canton), (1b) dashed dark blue circles: 1 canton with tax holiday for cantonal taxes in 1998 (1
canton), (2a) light green triangles: 15 cantons with cantonal tax holiday in 1999–2000, (2b) dashed dark
green triangles: 4 cantons with cantonal tax holiday in 2000, (3) brown squares: 3 cantons with cantonal
tax holiday in 2001-02. For each of the groups, we represent the corresponding tax holiday periods using
the vertical shading and the same color code. In the series, the dots corresponding to tax holidays are
bigger and are blanked out (as tax holidays are called blank years in French and German).

38

175

150

125

1997-98
1998

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00
2000

10
20

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

19

19

92

100
90

Wage earnings per person (in 1k CHF)

200

2001-02

100
80
60
40
20

10
20

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

90

0
19

Self-employment earnings (in 1k CHF)

(A) Effect on high wage earners

Tax Holiday in...

1997-98
1998

1999-00
2000

2001-02

(B) Effect on self employment earnings

Figure 6: Effects of Tax Holidays on High Wage Earners and Self Employment Earnings
Notes: This figure displays average wage earnings for high earners (Panel A) and average self-employment
earnings for the self-employed (Panel B) by year and groups of cantons from 1990 to 2010. Panel A is for
all wage earners with average annual labor earnings above 100,000 CHF in 1994-1996. Panel B is for all
self-employed (individuals with positive self-employment earnings in a given year). Earnings are expressed
in 1000s of 2010 CHF (adjusted for inflation). Self-employment earnings are observed biennially before
1999 (1998 on the figure is the average of 1997 and 1998 self-employment earnings, etc.) and annually
after 2000. Self-employment earnings in 1999 and 2000 are subject to a social security tax holiday and
hence unobserved in the data. The cantons are divided into groups based on when the cantonal tax
holiday took place. For each of the groups, we represent the corresponding tax holiday periods using the
vertical shading and the same color code. In the series, the dots corresponding to tax holidays are bigger
and blanked out (as tax holidays are called blank years in French and German).

39

.25

.15
.1
.05
0
-.05

4
k=

3
k=

TH
2n
d

tT

H

-1

1s

k=

-2
k=

-3
k=

k=

-4

-.1

2

log(1 - average tax rate)
log(1 - marginal tax rate)
k=

Effect of tax holiday

.2

Years from tax holiday start

(A) First stage effect on average and marginal tax rates

.025

0

-.025

4
k=

3
k=

2
k=

H
tT
1s

-1
k=

-2
k=

-3
k=

-4
k=

TH

Employment (Extensive Margin)
Earnings (Intensive Margin)

-.05

2n
d

Effect of tax holiday

.05

Years from tax holiday start

(B) Effect on wage employment and earnings

Figure 7: Event Study Estimates of the Effect on Wage Earners
Notes: Panel A shows estimates of the effects of the tax holidays on the log net of tax rate (first stage).
Panel B shows estimates of the effects on employment and wage earnings per employee (reduced form
effect). The figure is based on the event study model (equation 2). The estimation sample covers the
years 1994–2006 (±4 years around the tax holiday years), excludes 1998, and comprises 19 cantons which
transitioned in 2001 and 3 cantons which transitioned in 2003. We focus on workers aged 22–55 in 1996
and drop workers older than 62 in later years. Tax holiday years are shaded and denoted by 1st TH and
2nd TH on the x-axis. The dependent variables in Panel A are log(1 − τ ), where τ represents the average
and the marginal tax rate, respectively. The latter estimation is restricted to individuals with positive
wage earnings in a given year. In Panel B, the dependent variable in the model “extensive margin” is
an indicator equal to 1 if a person has positive wage income in a given year. The dependent variable
in the model “intensive margin” is real wage earnings (excluding non-workers). The effect is scaled
post-estimation by mean outcome in the estimation sample so that effects can be interpreted as percent
change. Individuals are assigned to cantons based on where they lived in 1996. In panel B, we control
for age and age squared by gender and for linear time trends by canton of residence in 1996 (the linear
time trends omit the treatment years). The vertical bars represent cluster-robust 95 percent confidence
intervals.

40

.025

0

-.025

3
k=

2
k=

TH
d
2n

tT
H

-1

1s

k=

-2
k=

-3
k=

-4
k=

4

Male
Female

-.05

k=

Effect of tax holiday

.05

Years from tax holiday start

.05

.025

.025

-.025

k=
4

k=
3

TH
d

1s

tT

H

1
k=
-

2
k=
-

4
k=
-

Years from tax holiday start

k=
2

100k and more CHF in 1994/96
1k-100k CHF in 1994/96

-.05

k=
4

k=
3

k=
2

d

tT

H

1
1s

k=
-

2
k=
-

3
k=
-

k=
-

4

-.05

TH

Tertiary degree
Primary or Secondary degree

3

-.025

0

k=
-

0

2n

Effect of tax holiday

.05

2n

Effect of tax holiday

(A) Effects by gender

Years from tax holiday start

(B) Effect on Earnings by Education Level

(C) Effects by earnings level

Figure 8: Heterogeneity of Wage Earnings Responses
Notes: This figure shows estimates of the effects of the tax holidays on wage earnings per employee for
different subpopulations following the same longitudinal event study regression strategy as in Figure 7.B.
Effects are expressed as a fraction of mean wage earnings. Tax holiday years are shaded and denoted
by 1st TH and 2nd TH on the x-axis. Panel A compares males and females. Panel B compares workers
depending on their highest educational attainment in 2000 (tertiary degree is higher education degree).
Panel C compares individuals depending on their average annual labor earnings over the period 1994–
1996. Individuals are assigned to cantons based on where they lived in 1996. In each case, we control
for age and age squared by gender and for linear time trends by canton of residence in 1996 (the linear
time trends omit the treatment years). The vertical bars represent cluster-robust 95 percent confidence
intervals.

41

Entrepreneurs & senior civil servants
Sciences & humanities
Legal

.06
.04

Engineering
Agriculture Trade & sales

.02

Commercial & administrative

0

Transportation & traffic

-.02

F

0
14

12

0
10

0

η = -0.027 + 0.001 (0.0001) earnings + ε
80

Cleaning & hygiene

60

-.04

Health

40

Estimated intensive margin Frisch elasticity

.08

Average wage earnings (in 1000 CHF)

.08
Entrepreneurs & senior civil servants
Sciences & humanities
Legal

.06
.04

Engineering
Trade & sales

.02

Agriculture

Commercial & administrative

0

Transportation & traffic

-.02

Health
F

.5

.4

.3

η = -0.012 + 0.132 (0.0496) overtime + ε

.2

Cleaning & hygiene

-.04
.1

Estimated intensive margin Frisch elasticity

(A) Elasticities by average earnings within occupation

Share of workers working overtime

(B) Elasticities by share of workers working overtime within occupation

Figure 9: Frisch Elasticities for Wage Earners by Occupation Characteristics
Notes: This figure shows estimates of the Frisch elasticity for wage earners by occupation. Individuals
are assigned to two-digit occupations using the Swiss classification of occupations. Occupation labels
refer to the circles highlighted in red. In Panel A, elasticities are plotted against the average annual
wage earnings in the specific occupation in 2000. In Panel B, elasticities are plotted against the share
of workers working overtime in the specific occupation (defined as the share of workers usually working
at least 45 weekly hours in the census 2000). Occupation is defined as of 2000 when the social security
data are matched to the census in 2000. Non-employed individuals are assigned to occupations based
on learned occupation. The Frisch elasticities are derived from occupation-specific individual-level IV
regressions of annual wage earnings per person (including non-workers) on person and year fixed effects
and log(1 − τit ), where τ is the marginal tax rate (equation 1). log(1 − τit ) is instrumented with an
indicator variable which is 1 in the year in which municipal and cantonal taxes are zero due to the tax
holiday. We control for age and age squared by gender and canton-specific linear time trends. The size
of the dot reflects the sample size of each estimation. In both panels the regression line of the elasticity
estimates on the x-axis variable is depicted and the coefficient is reported.

42

.2

All self-employed
>100k CHF in 1994/96

Effect of tax holiday

.15
.1
.05
0
-.05

k=
4

k=
3

k=
2

H

TH
2n
d

tT
1s

-1
k=

-2
k=

-3
k=

k=

-4

-.1

Time from tax holiday start

(A) Effect on self-employment earnings by earnings level
.2

Male
Female

Effect of tax holiday

.15
.1
.05
0
-.05

k=
4

k=
3

k=
2

TH
2n
d

H
tT
1s

-1
k=

-2
k=

-3
k=

k=

-4

-.1

Time from tax holiday start

(B) Effect on self-employment earnings by gender

Figure 10: Event Study Estimates of the Effect on Self-Employment Earnings
Notes: This figure shows estimates of the effects of the tax holidays on self-employment earnings per
person for different subpopulations following the same longitudinal event study regression strategy as in
Figure 7, panel B). The estimation sample covers the years 1990–2010 in the data (including 1998 but
excluding 1999–2000 when self-employment is not observed) and comprises one canton that transitioned
in 1999, two groups of cantons which transitioned in 2001, and 3 cantons which transitioned in 2003. We
focus on workers aged 20–55 in 1996 that are self-employed at least once in the estimation period. We
exclude workers older than 62 in later years. Tax holiday years are shaded and denoted by 1st TH and
2nd TH on the x-axis. On the x-axis, k represents tax periods. The periods were bi-annual before the
tax holiday (when self-employment was reported and taxed in two year periods) and are annual after
the tax holiday. The dependent variable is annual self-employment income per person (including zeros
if there is no self-employment earnings in a given year). The effect is scaled post-estimation by mean
self-employment earnings in the estimation sample. Panel A compares the effect for the full sample vs.
individuals with an average annual labor income that exceeds 100K in the 1994–1996 period. Panel B
compares men and women. The vertical bars represent cluster-robust 95 percent confidence intervals.

43

Hourly wage (in CHF)

42

170
165
160
155

38
36
34

2001-02

10
20

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00

98

20

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00 or 2000

1998

(A) Effect on hours worked

2001-02

(B) Effect on hourly wage rates

.2
.15
.1
.05

1998

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00 or 2000

10
20

08

06
20

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

19

19

96

0
94

Fraction with bonus above 5K

19

96
19

94
19

10
20

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00 or 2000

20

1998

20

98
19

19

19

40

32
96

150
94

Hours worked per worker

175

2001-02

(C) Effect on bonuses

Figure 11: Effects on Hours, Wage Rates, and Bonuses from the Employer Survey
Notes: This figure uses the wage structure surveys (LSE) carried out bi-annually to depict hours of work
(Panel A), hourly wage rates (Panel B), and likelihood of having a bonus above 5,000 in 2010 CHF (Panel
C) by year and group of cantons. Hours of work and hourly wages are based on the month of October
in each year. Hours worked refer to contractual (i.e. normal) hours worked for workers with monthly
salaries and to actual hours worked for workers paid by the hour. Wage rates incorporate regular pay
but exclude overtime and variable pay components (e.g. bonuses). In both panels, the sample in each
year is limited to workers aged 20–60 excluding public sector employees and foreign workers who do not
pay regular taxes in Switzerland. We consider 3 groups of cantons: (1) 2 cantons which transitioned in
1999 with a tax holiday for 1998 or 1997–1998 (in blue circles). (2) 19 cantons which transitioned in 2001
with a tax holiday for 2000 or 1999–2000 (in green triangles). (3) 3 cantons which transitioned in 2003
with tax holiday in 2001–02 (in brown squares). (Former groups (1a) and (1b) and groups (2a) and (2b)
have been pooled together given sample size in the survey data.) The dots corresponding to tax holidays
are blanked out (as tax holidays are called blank years in French and German).

44

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Mean
(1)

sd
(2)

p1
(3)

p99
(4)

N
(5)

85.3
8.5
46835.5
4747.7
11.3
21.1

35.4
27.8
54287.3
30827.8
6.0
9.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

100
100
208602
110500
27
40

70494024
70494024
70494024
70494024
58508349
58508349

Individual characteristics in 2000
Age
Female
Married
Children aged 0–5
Children aged 6–15
Swiss national
Tertiary education
Secondary education

39.85
0.50
0.60
0.23
0.43
0.87
0.23
0.60

11.087
0.500
0.490
0.553
0.801
0.332
0.421
0.491

20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

60
1
1
2
3
1
1
1

3380599
3380599
3380599
3117109
3117109
3380599
3039550
3039550

Panel B: Employer Survey (LSE)
Earnings in October (in CHF)
Hourly wage in October (in CHF)
Hours worked in October
Share of workers with bonus > 5k (in %)

6426.3
37.8
159.1
11.3

3670.3
16.3
43.0
31.7

372.2
17.1
13.3
0.0

21135.3
102.7
199.3
100.0

5901025
5901023
5901025
5901025

Panel A: Matched SSER-Census
Share employed (in %)
Share self-employed (in %)
Annual wage earnings (in CHF)
Annual self-employment earnings (in CHF)
Average tax rate (in %)
Marginal tax rate (in %)

Notes: The table presents mean, standard deviation (sd), and the 1st (p1) and 99th (p99) percentile of
the main variables used in the empirical analysis. We focus on individuals aged 20–60 in every year,
excluding foreign workers who do not pay regular taxes in Switzerland. All cantons in Switzerland are
included. Panel A is based on the matched social security and census data (SSES-Census). The sample
in the upper half covers all person-year observations between 1990 and 2010 from individuals who are
still alive and Swiss residents by 2010. The lower half of Panel A shows descriptives of individual
characteristics in 2000. “Share employed” (“share self-employed”) is the fraction of individuals in the
sample with positive earnings (self-employment earnings) during the year. The average and the marginal
tax rate are computed for employed persons only. Tax rates include federal, cantonal, and municipal
income taxes. Panel B is based on the Employer Survey (Wage Structure Survey, LSE ) and thus focuses
on employed persons only. The sample covers all worker-year observations from all surveys between 1994
and 2010 (the survey is carried out every 2 years). Public sector employees are excluded. “Monthly
earnings” refer to the month of October in each year and include regular salaries and overtime and other
variable pay components (e.g. bonuses). Hourly wages refer to month of October and incorporate regular
pay but exclude overtime and variable pay components (e.g. bonuses). Hours of work are based on the
month of October and refer to contractual (i.e. normal) hours worked for workers with monthly wages
and to actual hours worked for workers paid by the hour. See section A.2 in the online appendix for
more information on these data and variables.

45

Table 2: Regression Analysis of Tax Holiday Effects on Labor Supply: Macro Estimates
Variables
Sample

%∆[1 − τ ]
%∆y
Frisch elasticity η F

Observations
Canton group FE
Period FE

Wage employees/
population (in percent)
All
(1)

Wage earnings
per person
All
(2)

Wage earnings
per person
High earners
(3)

Self-employment
earnings
Self-employed
(4)

12.9
-0.07
(0.27)
-0.005
(0.021)

27.0
0.71
(0.47)
0.026
(0.017)

46.1
2.00
(0.75)
0.043
(0.016)

26.5
7.70
(3.28)
0.291
(0.124)

105
Yes
Yes

105
Yes
Yes

105
Yes
Yes

80
Yes
Yes

Notes: The table presents estimates of the labor supply effects of the tax holiday based on regressions
of the aggregate time series of the 5 groups of cantons (shown in Figures 5 and 6) on year dummies,
canton group dummies, and an indicator which is 1 in the year in which municipal and cantonal taxes
are zero. OLS standard errors are reported. The estimation sample covers the years 1990–2010 in
columns (1)–(3) and 1987–2010 in column (4). The outcome in column (1) is the share of wage earners
in the population of adults aged 20–60 (in percent). The outcome in columns (2) and (3) is the average
annual wage per person, including non-workers. The outcome in column (4) is average self-employment
earnings (self-employment earnings of all individuals with positive self-employment earnings in a given
year). Columns (1) and (2) are estimated using the full sample of adults aged 20–60. Column (3) focuses
on wage earners with average annual labor earnings above 100,000 CHF in 1994-1996. Column (4) is
based on all individuals that have positive self-employment earnings. %∆[1 − τ ] is the percent change
in the net of tax rate due to the tax holiday. Column (1) considers the average tax rate (relevant for
the extensive margin) while columns (2)-(4) consider the marginal tax rate (relevant for the intensive
margin). For each individual, %∆[1 − τ ] is computed based on hypothetical marginal or average tax
rates on the actual income earned during the tax-free years in the tax system in place prior to the tax
holidays. %∆y indicates the implied percent change in the outcome by dividing the estimated effect—the
coefficient of the indicator of the tax holiday—by the average level of the outcome variable in the year of
the tax holiday. The Frisch elasticity η F is estimated by dividing %∆y by the estimated percent change
in net of tax rates (%∆[1 − τ ]) created by the tax holiday for the respective group.

46

Table 3: Effects of Tax Holiday on Participation and Earnings of Employees
Variables
Sample

Panel A : Entire sample
log(1 − τit )
Effect of TH on log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Observations
Panel B : Married with children
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel C : Married no children
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel D : Tertiary education
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel E : Non-tertiary education
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F

Employee
0/1
Men
(1)

Average wage
earnings
Men
(2)

Employee
0/1
Women
(3)

Average wage
earnings
Women
(4)

-0.008
(0.005)
0.115
(0.002)
-0.01 (0.005)

3,792
(606)
0.248
(0.004)
0.04 (0.006)

-0.015
(0.007)
0.106
(0.002)
-0.02 (0.009)

323
(251)
0.238
(0.004)
0.01 (0.005)

12,905,961

10,878,290

13,241,977

9,470,890

-0.000
(0.005)
0.00 (0.005)

4,275
(743)
0.04 (0.007)

0.000
(0.011)
0.00 (0.015)

1,824
(275)
0.05 (0.008)

-0.028
(0.005)
-0.03 (0.006)

3,603
(554)
0.03 (0.005)

-0.006
(0.004)
-0.01 (0.006)

301
(160)
0.01 (0.003)

-0.004
(0.007)
0.00 (0.007)

6,295
(808)
0.05 (0.006)

-0.016
(0.007)
-0.02 (0.008)

809
(387)
0.01 (0.005)

-0.017
(0.005)
-0.02 (0.006)

2,681
(376)
0.04 (0.004)

-0.015
(0.008)
-0.02 (0.010)

264
(191)
0.01 (0.004)

Notes: The table presents the effect of the tax holiday on the labor supply of employees. It shows estimated semi-elasticities and corresponding Frisch elasticities derived from individual-level IV regressions
of labor supply outcomes on person and year fixed effects and log(1 − τit ), where τ is the average tax rate
in column (1) and the marginal tax rate in the other columns (equation 1). log(1 − τit ) is instrumented
with an indicator variable which is 1 in the year in which municipal and cantonal taxes are zero due to
the tax holiday. Additional controls include age and age squared by gender and canton-specific linear
time trends (the linear time trends omit the treatment years). The effect of the tax holidays (TH) on
log(1 − τit ) (the first stage) is reported for the full sample in panel A. The estimation sample covers
the years 1994–2006 (excluding 1998) and comprises all cantons which transitioned in 2001 or 2003. We
focus on workers aged 20–55 in 1996 and drop workers older than 62 in later years. The dependent
variable in columns (1) and (3) is an indicator whether a person has positive wage earnings in a given
year. The dependent variable in columns (2) and (4) is average wage earnings of persons with positive
wage earnings in a given year. Columns (1) and (2) focus on men, columns (3) and (4) on women. Panel
A reports effects for all men and women. Panels B and C report effects for married individuals with or
without at least one child aged 15 or less. Panels C and D report effects depending on individuals highest
educational attainment in 2000 (as reported in the census 2000). Individuals are assigned to cantons
based on where they lived in 1996. Standard errors are clustered on the level of commuting zones.

47

Table 4: Labor Supply Effects by Pre-Holiday Labor Income Groups
Variables
Sample

Panel A : 1–25k CHF
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel B : 25–50k CHF
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel C : 50–100k CHF
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel D : 100–200k CHF
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel E : More than 200k CHF
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F

Employee
0/1
Men
(1)

Average wage
earnings
Men
(2)

Employee
0/1
Women
(3)

Average wage
earnings
Women
(4)

-0.005
(0.018)
-0.01 (0.025)

-444
(1,239)
-0.01 (0.025)

-0.031
(0.010)
-0.04 (0.012)

-835
(490)
-0.03 (0.018)

-0.006
(0.008)
-0.01 (0.010)

1,670
(481)
0.03 (0.008)

-0.006
(0.005)
-0.01 (0.006)

867
(207)
0.02 (0.004)

-0.015
(0.004)
-0.02 (0.004)

2,243
(408)
0.03 (0.004)

-0.009
(0.006)
-0.01 (0.006)

495
(323)
0.01 (0.003)

-0.015
(0.007)
-0.02 (0.007)

7,159
(994)
0.04 (0.006)

-0.011
(0.015)
-0.01 (0.015)

2,522
(1,576)
0.02 (0.010)

-0.003
(0.008)
0.00 (0.010)

31,469
(5,814)
0.08 (0.015)

-0.061
(0.044)
-0.09 (0.062)

30,519
(15,173)
0.09 (0.046)

Notes: The table presents the effect of the tax holiday on the labor supply of employees. It shows estimated semi-elasticities and corresponding Frisch elasticities derived from individual-level IV regressions
of labor supply outcomes on person and year fixed effects and log(1 − τit ), where τ is the average tax rate
in column (1) and the marginal tax rate in the other columns (equation 1). log(1 − τit ) is instrumented
with an indicator variable which is 1 in the year in which municipal and cantonal taxes are zero due
to the tax holiday. Additional controls include age and age squared by gender and linear time trends
by canton (the linear time trends omit the treatment years). The estimation sample covers the years
1994–2006 (excluding 1998) and comprises all cantons which transitioned in 2001 or 2003. We focus on
workers aged 22–55 in 1996 and drop workers older than 62 in later years. The dependent variable in
columns (1) and (3) is an indicator whether a person has positive wage earnings in a given year. The
dependent variable in columns (2) and (4) is average wage earnings of persons with positive wage earnings in a given year. Columns (1) and (2) focus on men, columns (3) and (4) on women. Individuals are
assigned to Panels A–E based on their average annual labor income in the 1994–1996 period. Individuals
are assigned to cantons based on where they lived in 1996. Standard errors are clustered on the level of
commuting zones.

48

Table 5: Effects of Tax Holiday on Self-Employment Earnings
Variables
Sample

Panel A : Entire sample
log(1 − τit )
Effect of TH on log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Observations
Panel B : Married
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel C : Tertiary education
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel D : Non-tertiary education
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F

Earnings per
self-employed
All
(1)

Earnings per
self-employed
Men
(2)

Earnings per
self-employed
Women
(3)

Earnings per
self-employed
High earners
(4)

7,452
(1,784)
0.222
(0.004)
0.21 (0.052)

10,804
(2,421)
0.225
(0.003)
0.24 (0.054)

1,096
(870)
0.217
(0.004)
0.07 (0.054)

30,322
(4,709)
0.352
(0.003)
0.23 (0.035)

8,805,304

5,794,110

3,011,194

953,023

9,948
(2,048)
0.25 (0.051)

14,690
(2,895)
0.28 (0.056)

767
(781)
0.05 (0.051)

31,079
(5,334)
0.23 (0.038)

15,491
(2,387)
0.25 (0.039)

19,371
(3,356)
0.26 (0.045)

5,335
(1,230)
0.17 (0.039)

30,772
(5,529)
0.20 (0.035)

3,978
(1,712)
0.17 (0.073)

6,833
(2,372)
0.22 (0.076)

-625
(995)
-0.05 (0.088)

29,880
(6,983)
0.34 (0.079)

Notes: The table presents the effect of the tax holiday on earnings of self-employed. It shows estimated
semi-elasticities and corresponding Frisch elasticities derived from individual-level IV regressions of labor
supply outcomes on person and year fixed effects and log(1 − τit ), where τ is the marginal tax rate.
log(1 − τit ) is instrumented with an indicator variable which is 1 in the year in which municipal and
cantonal taxes are zero due to the tax holiday (equation 1). Additional controls include age and age
squared by gender and linear time trends by canton (the linear time trends omit the treatment years).
The effect of the tax holidays (TH) on log(1 − τit ) (the first stage) is reported for the full sample in panel
A. The estimation sample covers the years 1990–2010 (excluding 2001 and 2002 when self-employment
earnings is not measured). We focus on workers aged 22–55 in 1996 that are self-employed at least once in
the estimation period. We exclude workers older than 62 in later years. The dependent variable is annual
self-employment income per person with with positive self-employment income in a given year. Column
(1) uses the full sample, (2) focuses on men, (3) on women and (4) on high-income self-employed, defined
as individuals with an average total labor income of at least 100k in the 1994–1996 period. Panel A
reports effects for all men, women, and high-income individuals, respectively. Panel B reports effects for
individuals married in 1996. Panels C and D report effects depending on individuals highest educational
attainment in 2000 (as reported in the census 2000). Individuals are assigned to cantons based on where
they lived in 1996. Standard errors are clustered on the level of commuting zones.

49

Online Appendix of
Intertemporal Labor Supply Substitution?
Evidence from the Swiss Income Tax Holidays
By Isabel Martı́nez, Emmanuel Saez, and Michael Siegenthaler
A.1

Betwixt Assessments

In this section, we describe betwixt assessments carried out to deal with large changes in economic
situation under the old system and how they interact with the transition. Betwixt assessments were
done only when changes were permanent, which is defined as a change in work status lasting at least 2
years. Starting to work for a short period (less than 2 years) or stopping work temporarily (less than 2
years) would not trigger a betwixt assessment. As such, temporary extensive margin responses carried
out during the tax holiday are not affected by betwixt assessments.

Incentives created by betwixt assessments. Under the old system and during the tax
holidays, when a person had a permanent change in employment situation, or moved permanently to a
different canton during a tax period, the system adopted a temporary pay as you earn taxation (betwixt
assessment) until the end of the period. Let us examine in detail how this affects incentives for permanent
entry, permanent exit, or migration.
Permanent entry. Suppose the tax period is 1995/1996 and a person had not worked in 1993/1994 and
started working on July 1st, 1996 for 2000 CHF/month. In this case, there is no taxation in 1995 and
the first half of 1996 (as the reference period 1993/1994 has zero earnings). In the second half of 1996,
there is a betwixt assessment where the person is taxed based on her current new earnings, annualized to
2000×12=24,000 CHF. This assessment lasts for 6 months only (so that half of an annual tax on 24,000
CHF is due). In 1997/1998, the person is taxed based on her annualized income of 24,000 CHF from
1996 (i.e., the reference earnings for the 1995/1996 are taken to be the annualized earnings when the
person was working). Earnings from 1997/1998 will then be taxed in 1999/2000, etc. Therefore, in the
old system, new entry earnings were doubled taxed, first as pay as you earn and then during the regular
next period of taxation.
Entering during the tax holiday triggers a betwixt assessment exactly as in the old system but, in
contrast to the old system, there would be no double taxation during the next period. Hence, the tax
holiday also reduces the tax burden on the entry margin but it is less salient as only the second and
future layer of taxation is removed. Empirical analysis (not reported) shows that the tax holiday has no
significant impact on entry decisions.
Permanent exit. Symmetric incentives are created along the exit dimension.43 Let us consider the most
common case of retirement. Suppose a person earns 2000 CHF/month up to July 1, 1996 and then
retires with a pension of 1000 CHF/month. In 1995 and the first half of 1996, the tax is based on
average earnings of 1993 and 1994. In the second half of 1996, the person is taxed pay as you earn
43

Under the old system, death extinguishes tax liability so that income made during one’s last tax
period is never taxed (and income earned during the tax period preceding death is only partly taxed
while the person is still alive in her last tax period). We do not study this aspect as most people stop
working well before death and death while still working is typically an unexpected event.

1

based on annualized pension income of 12×1000=12000 CHF. In 1997/1998 the tax will also be based
on 12,000 CHF of annual pension income from the second half of 1996. Hence, initial pension income
is also double taxed. This implies that the earnings while working made in 1995 and the first half of
1996 are never taxed in the old system (and the earnings for 1993/1994 are only taxed for 1.5 years out
of 2, hence bear only 75 percent of the normal tax burden). Effectively, the old system created a tax
holiday for earnings made in the tax period when leaving the labor force (and a partial tax holiday for
the period before leaving the labor force). Therefore, the best strategy is to have high earnings (e.g. earn
overtime or get bonuses) just before retirement.44 Empirical analysis (not reported) of earnings prior
to retirement suggests that retirees had indeed high earnings in their last tax period in the old system
(using the new system as a control group).
Exiting during the tax holiday triggers a betwixt assessment exactly as in the old system. Therefore,
pre-retirement earnings are taxed exactly the same in the old system and during the tax holiday transition. The only difference is about the treatment of pension income. In the old system, pension income
in the first period of retirement is taxed twice while it is taxed only once during the tax holiday. We do
not have access to pension income data to analyze responses of pension benefits.45
Migration to another canton. Migration to another canton also triggered a betwixt assessment under
the old system. I.e., tax liability in the canton of origin stopped and was replaced by pay as you earn
on a annualized basis in the new canton of residence. This means that earnings in the canton of origin
was partially tax exempt while initial earnings in the new canton of residence would be doubled taxed.
Moving during the tax holiday also triggered a betwixt assessment. As a result, riding the tax holiday
waves by moving from canton to canton to follow the blank years was not a winning strategy. After the
first move, the taxpayer would be assessed on her current income and hence would not benefit from the
tax holiday anymore. Therefore, the tax holiday actually reduces incentives to move during a tax holiday.
Our data are consistent with a reduction in migration during the tax holiday as expected from the tax
incentives we have described but these effects are quantitatively small and not significant econometrically.
Intensive responses. A large and permanent change in earnings (conditional on working) could also
trigger a betwixt assessment if specific restrictive conditions were met (see below). In such cases, the
new earnings were taxed twice under the old system (pay as you earn during the betwixt assessment and
retrospectively in the next tax period) and only once during the tax holiday. However, this reduction in
the tax burden might not have been very salient to taxpayers.

How did betwixt assessments work in practice? Next, we provide details on how such
betwixt assessments worked and were administered and how this impacts our analysis.
Origins. The betwixt assessment was added to the tax code in the 1950s, about 10 years after the
introduction of the federal income tax law in 1940. The goal was to adjust taxes downward faster when
income fell (as the tax adjustment had a two year lag in the system). Therefore, the betwixt system
44

The timing of exit along the extensive margin is actually neutral. Exiting early in the period implies
that the previous tax period earnings are almost fully exempt. Exiting late in the period implies that
the current tax period earnings are exempt. Empirically, we find no effect on the timing of retirement
during the tax period in the old system. The old system also encouraged people to have initially low
retirement benefits.
45
There is relatively little scope for individuals to control the level of their defined benefits pensions.
However, there is more flexibility in how individuals choose to receive their defined contributions benefits
from their individual pension fund accounts: they can choose the pre-defined annuity, which is taxed
as income, or cash-out the capital, which is taxed with a separate one-time tax at payout. Bütler and
Ramsden (2017) study the role of taxation in individual annuitization decisions.

2

is geared toward decreases in income rather than increases and is generally initiated at the request of
taxpayers as the tax administration does not receive real time information on income changes (recall
there is no withholding at source nor third party reporting for earnings in Switzerland). The view was
that betwixt adjustments should remain the exception. The list of causes, which allowed for a betwixt
assessment, was defined and the provision was to be applied restrictively.
Triggers causing a betwixt assessment. A mere reduction or increase in income alone was not a sufficient
condition for a betwixt assessment. The betwixt assessment was applied when the underlying structure
of the income changed. Acceptable reasons listed in Art. 45 DBG were: a) divorce or permanent
separation, b) permanent and substantial changes of the underlying basis of livelihood as a result of
taking or giving up work or change of occupation, and c) inheritance. The federal and cantonal courts
specified Art. 45 b) further in many verdicts. The occupational change needed to be substantial and
of “far-reaching structural” nature (e.g., BGE 115 Ib 11, 1989; Entscheid Steuerrekurskommission des
Kantons Basel-Landschaft Nr. 99/1996). Examples include change of occupation into a completely
different field, where the knowledge and skills from the former job are no longer of substantial value, or
if the income is determined by substantially different criteria (e.g., going from a fixed salary to a piece
rate or a revenue participation) and evolves differently (BGE 115 Ib 11, 1989). This included the change
of the main activity (see below) between employment and self-employment. In this case, the magnitude
of the income change was of no importance, since the change was structural in nature (BGE 115 Ib 11,
1989; BGE 101 Ib 398 ff., 1975). In any case, the change needed to be permanent in addition to meeting
one of the conditions laid out above. The fact that cumulative requirements had to be met for a betwixt
assessment means that during the tax holidays especially intensive margin responses would typically not
trigger a betwixt assessment.
Provisions with respect to the magnitude of the change in income. Since the objective of betwixt assessments was to reduce hardship, legal practice evolved further mainly around cases of income reductions.
To keep the number of betwixt assessments low, over time courts added minimal criteria, by which the
income had to change in order to qualify for a betwixt assessment. For the federal tax and the majority
of cantons, income needed to fall by at least 20 percent (33 percent in Wallis, 25 percent in Bern and
Basel-Landschaft). Most cantons required in addition that the change exceeded some nominal threshold
(3000 to 20,000 CHF; Facts, Nr.6/1998 “So sparen Sie bei Ihren Steuern”, p. 56 ff.). This implies that
increases in income of up to 20 percent (and much more, as is laid out below) were possible during the
tax holidays without triggering a betwixt assessment. Furthermore, as Känzig, the leading scholar in the
field noted in his reference handbook (Känzig, 1982, p. 799), such income limits were not to be taken for
sufficient conditions in cases of increases in income. The wish of the legislator had been to ease hardship
by the means of betwixt assessments. In the case of an increase in income, which is what we study, there
was no hardship to be eased.
What did permanent mean? Betwixt assessments were only done if the income change was permanent.
Juridical practice could vary, such that depending on the canton a change was deemed permanent if it
lasted more than typically 24 months. In the canton of Aargau even a case where someone took up
or gave up the main employment for up to five years was not seen as permanent change (Beer, 1979,
p.58). In a case related to unemployment, the canton of Basel-Landschaft adhered to 24 months for a
change to be permanent, a ruling which was confirmed by the federal court in 1996 (in: Gerichts- und
Verwaltungspraxis des Kantons Zug 1997/98, p. 15). If it was unclear whether a change in employment
would be permanent or not, tax authorities reverted to what was usual in that case. Irregular or
non-permanent jobs like assistant teacher, temporary help or replacements for someone were seen as
non-permanent activities in nature (Känzig, 1982, p. 778). It was therefore possible to take up several,

3

small short-term jobs during the tax holiday to exploit the tax-free years. If ex-ante it could not always
be determined with certainty whether a new employment would be of permanent nature, there was no
urge for the tax authorities to answer this question right away. It was always possible to do a betwixt
assessment if ex-post a change turned out to be permanent and substantial.
No betwixt assessments for professional mobility. Professional changes within the same field such as
promotions, up- and downward professional mobility, expansion of professional activities, taking or giving
up some professional activities (e.g., running a second restaurant, sitting on the board of a company,
becoming a partner of a private company), or a simple change of job from one employer to another were
not deemed as changing the structure of the income generating process (BGE 115 Ib 11, 1989; (Känzig,
1982, p. 790)). Related changes in income averaged out over time and they were taken into account
under the regular, past-based tax system–albeit with a delay of several years. Examples include an
employee who founded his own incorporated company where he was the sole employee. The canton of
Basel-Landschaft did not deem this change as qualifying for a betwixt assessment, as the taxpayer was
technically still an employee and he had not changed profession or the field of work (BStPra 4/1998,
198-205).
No betwixt assessments for changes in secondary employment. Taking or giving up a secondary employment or secondary professional activity (“Nebenerwerb”, “Nebenserwerbstä tigkeit”, “activité lucrative
accessoire”, “activité annexe”) did not qualify for a betwixt assessment, even if this change was permanent (BGE 110 Ib 313, 1984). Examples include an employee in hospitality who sporadically also
earned money in real-estate trade. The latter was deemed a secondary activity and when he gave up
this activity, the tax authorities did not grant him a betwixt assessment, because his main activity in
hospitality had not changed (Entscheid der Steuerrekurskommission des Kantons Basel-Landschaft Nr.
6/1996). Similarly, taking or giving up a seat in a company board did not qualify for a betwixt assessment, even though the change in income from such activities could be substantial and was permanent.
The distinction between main and secondary occupation was not primarily drawn according to the relative income these activities generated, but according to the time dedicated to them (Beer, 1979, p. 57 ff.
with specific examples for Bern and Aargau). Therefore, the main activity of a full-time employee who
ran her own business on the side, was her employment, even if the business generated higher income.
This distinction between main and secondary activity allowed taxpayers, who already had a job, to start
up their own business or take up a second job on the side and fully exploit the tax holiday.
Betwixt assessments only for substantial changes in the level of the main employment. In some instances,
cantons did apply betwixt taxation in response to changes in employment with the same job, usually
only the main job. This was the case if changes in the level of employment were substantial, such as
going from part-time to full-time employment. Relevant again was not the change in income, but the
percentage change in employment. For instance, the canton Basel-Landschaft saw a change from 80
percent employment (approx. 34 hours/week) to 50 percent (21 hours/week) as not substantial enough
for a betwixt assessment. The relative change in employment had to be at least 40 percent (and not
37.5 percent as in this case; Entscheid der Steuerrekurskommission des Kantons Basel-Landschaft Nr.
99/1996). In the canton of Bern, betwixt taxation was done if the absolute change in employment percent
was at least 50 percentage points. Doubling employment from 40 percent to 80 percent was therefore
possible without triggering a betwixt assessment (Berner Zeitung, 18.11.1999, “Rat in der BZ”, p. 32.).
Especially for those already in the labor market it was therefore possible to have substantial increases in
income through increases in labor supply during the tax holiday, without being taxed.
The case of secondary earners. For secondary earners, changes in labor supply at the intensive margin
were not usually cause for a betwixt assessment. In line with the considerations above, what mattered

4

were the hours supplied and not the change in income. The case was more complicated for secondary
earners who had been permanently out of the labor force and took up a job. Occasional, irregular
jobs were not a cause for a betwixt assessment (Berner Zeitung; 30.09.1999, p. 29, “Rat in der BZ”).
Examples would include working three months as substitute teacher, helping out in a nearby restaurant
one summer etc. Also, incidental help in the spouse’s business was not a cause for a betwixt assessment
(Känzig, 1982, p. 779). Taking up a sideline but regular and permanent job–even with a limited amount
of hours–was cause for a betwixt assessment in most cantons (e.g., Bern, Schaffhausen, Basel-Landschaft)
but not in all (e.g., Aargau; Beer, 1979; BGE 102 Ia 352). Taking up a main job was cause for a betwixt
assessment (Känzig, 1982, p. 779). Therefore, extensive margin responses of second earners were only
possible to some limited degree if the new job was permanent (lasting typically 2 of more years).
How and when was a betwixt assessment done? A betwixt assessment was done (i) automatically, when
the tax authorities knew that the conditions for a betwixt assessment were met (e.g., when registering
as self-employed or as a new wage earner, when retiring and applying for the public pension, or when
moving between cantons with a prae-numerando system). In some cantons taxpayers were requested to
inform the tax authorities about changes in employment during the tax period. Tax authorities also
systematically ran information campaigns for labor market entrants in vocational schools about the
importance of informing the tax administration when taking up the first job, in order to avoid large tax
bills due two or three years later. (ii) the taxpayer requested a betwixt assessment (e.g., when becoming
unemployed, respectively after being unemployed for an extended period of time of at least 12 months
and claiming a substantial, permanent change in her income). (iii) ex-post, after filing the tax return.
In the latter case, the tax liability was corrected ex-post. This was for example the case when a formerly
non-working spouse permanently entered the labor force. Note that tax administrations have no access
to the social security earnings data. They could therefore not check income or the number of employers
in the social security data, in case someone took up a second job, for example.
What income was subject to a betwixt assessment? It was always only the new income stream causing a
betwixt assessment, which was taxed pay as you earn. In case of the spouse entering the labor force, only
his or her income was affected; the spouse’s and any other incomes were still facing standard retrospective
taxation. Following the same logic, if a single taxpayer had several income sources (e.g., labor and capital
incomes), only the income stream which met the conditions for betwixt taxation was taxed pay as you
earn.
How did tax administrations know whether to do a betwixt assessment during the reform? The reform
caused blank years, and for these no regular tax return was collected. However, all cantons required to fill
out a special, shortened tax return (sometimes together with a brief questionnaire) in the first year under
the new system, i.e., right after the tax holiday had ended. The purpose was to detect extraordinary
incomes earned during the tax holidays, such as lottery gains or extraordinary compensation like bonuses
or gratification payments not foreseen in the contract and not usually paid out in prior and/ or future
years (on the treatment of bonuses, also see court ruling StGE BL Nr. 69/2002, September 13 2002).
How were extraordinary incomes during the tax holiday and betwixt assessments different? Extraordinary
incomes were subject to a separate tax during the tax holiday. This was done mainly to avoid tax
avoidance through income shifting. In contrast to a betwixt assessment, however, only the part exceeding
ordinary income was taxed. For example, a self-employed who had some extraordinary income from selfemployment, e.g. a windfall gain, only paid the annual tax on the extraordinary part, but not on her
whole income from self-employment. This means that if taxpayers tried to increase their income in
response to the tax holiday, it was always only the part deemed as extraordinary which was taxed expost, ordinary income remained taxed. Betwixt taxation on the other hand affected the whole income

5

stream, e.g., all income from self-employment when changing from employee to self-employed.

Measurement of self-employment income. Employees pay social security contributions
pay as you earn with direct withholding at source. Therefore, the reporting of wage earnings to social
security has always been done fully independently of the income tax system and hence is not affected by
the tax holiday reforms we are studying. In contrast, for self-employment income, contributions to social
security were and are based on self-employment income as reported in the federal income tax return. Tax
authorities must communicate the self-employment income information to the cantonal social security
agencies. Due to the biennial nature of the old income tax system, self-employment incomes in the social
security records appear as constants over two years for most self-employment income (exceptions were
cases of betwixt assessments, see below). What follows applies only to self-employment income.
Old system. Like the income tax system, the social security system was of retrospective character for
self-employment income in the old system. As a result, assessment period and contribution period were
not identical. In addition, in order to leave enough time for reporting from the tax authority to the social
security administration, social security contributions were assessed with a one year lag compared to the
federal income tax liability. Therefore, self-employment income earned in 1995/1996 would be reported
for tax purposes in 1997/1998, and in the social security system for years 1998/1999.
This resulted in a lag of three years between actually earning income from self-employment and
the year for which social security contributions were due. The social security register data records selfemployment income not in the year it was actually earned, but in the year the corresponding contributions
were due. This means that the entries we observe in year 1998/1999 reflect average self-employment
income earned in 1995/1996.
As the assessment of social security contributions for self-employment income was based on tax
returns, whenever tax authorities applied a betwixt assessment, i.e., a temporary pay as you earn assessment, this carried over to the assessment of social security contributions. The social security office, did
not apply their own betwixt assessment of social security compensations, but simply used the income
information from the betwixt income tax assessment as the base. For the social security office, it was of
no importance whether reported income came from a betwixt or regular tax assessment.
New system. Following the changes in the income tax system, the social security system changed to a
pay as you earn system also for self-employment earnings. In contrast to the income tax system, the
change in the social security system, which is organized at the national level, took place at the same
time in all cantons in 2001. Starting in 2001 contributions for self-employment income are due for the
year the income was earned. Since self-employment income can often not be determined on a monthly
basis, the self-employed make quarterly installments of their social security contributions and get a final
assessment in the upcoming year(s), as soon as the definitive assessment of the federal income tax is
available. Importantly, since 2001 self-employment income in the social security registers always refers
to the year it was earned, not the years it was assessed.
Social security contribution holiday in 1999 and 2000 for self-employment income. The change in 2001 in
turn created a social security contribution holiday for self-employment income in 1999 and 2000: incomes
earned in 1999 and 2000 were never the base for any social security calculations on self-employment
income. This social security holiday would otherwise have taken place in the year prior to retirement:
upon entering retirement, contributions end, hence self-employment earnings during the two years prior
to retirement were never the base for any social security contributions.
The social security holiday for self-employed overlapped with the tax holiday of 20 cantons. Therefore, for these 20 cantons, we do not have the actual self-employment income during the tax holidays

6

(unless, they got a betwixt assessment, which, however, we cannot identify from the data). In the three
cantons that changed late, with tax holidays in 2001 and 2002, tax authorities had to separately collect
information on self-employment income during the tax holiday to report these incomes to the social security administration (AHI-Praxis 3/2000, p.107 ff.; Art. 218 Abs. 6 DBG and Art. 69 Abs. 6 StHG). For
these cantons, we do therefore have the actual self-employment income earned during the tax holidays. In
the three cantons that adopted the annual pay as you earn tax system prior to 2001, tax administrations
also had to collect information on earnings from self-employment during the tax holiday ex post and
report it to the social security offices (AHI-Praxis 3/2000, p. 108). Using this information, the social
security offices emulated the biennial retrospective system to ensure equal treatment of social security
contributions across cantons. This is why we still observe the strong biennial pattern in self-employment
incomes in all cantons until 2000. Because social security earnings records for self-employment income
had a lag of two to three years, we can analyze the response of these incomes to the tax holiday in the
canton of Zurich and Thurgau, despite the missing records for 1998. For self-employment incomes, what
is missing, are the actual incomes of 1995.

A.2

Data Description

We are using several data sources for our empirical analysis.

A.2.1

Matched SSER-Census Data

We use a novel, matched data set in our main empirical analyses. The dataset combines the Swiss
population censuses with social security data that tracks the entire labor market history of the population
of Switzerland. More specifically, our data set is based on a merge between the register-based population
census of Switzerland as of December 2010 (via a social security number) and 100 percent of the social
security earnings records (SSER) from the Old-Age and Survivors’ Insurance (OASI, AHV in German),
covering the period 1981–2012. We further match data from the population censuses in 1990 and 2000.
These older population censuses did not contain a social security number. They can thus not be merged
directly to the SSER. However, the censuses were matched with the register-based census in 2010 using
probabilistic methods based on sex, date of birth, marital status, nationality, religion, place of residence
and other variables in the course of the “Swiss National Cohort” project.46
Figure A5 illustrates our dataset. The underlying sample is everyone that ever generated an entry in
the SSER between 1981 and 2010 and that still lives in Switzerland in 2010. Because almost everybody
generates a record at some point in his or her life because contributing to the old age insurance is
mandatory from age 18 onward, our data set contains 98 percent of the permanent population age 18 or
older in 2010 (6.29 million of 6.42 million permanent residents in 2010). The merged dataset also contains
information from the census 2000 for 5.18 million individuals (83 percent of the sample) and from the
census 1990 for 4.34 million individuals (69.1 percent). As is illustrated by the figure, our dataset does
not contain information on individuals that lived in Switzerland in 1990 or 2000 and that emigrated or
died before 2010. We also do not have the census 2000 information in our linked dataset for 7.9 percent
of individuals that participated in the census 2000 and in principle still live in Switzerland in 2010. The
reason is that for certain individuals participating in the census 2000, there was no unique probabilistic
match between the census 2000 and the census 2010 (see Spoerri et al., 2010, for a discussion of the
reasons).
46

Spoerri et al. (2010) contains an extensive discussion of this data linkage.

7

Figure A6 shows the share of individuals aged 20–60 present in our SSER-census data relative to
the actual population aged 20–60 in a given year. The latter data are taken from the official population
statistics of the Federal Statistical Office. Our data covers 98 percent of all individuals aged 20–60 in
2010. As we move back in time, the sample coverage of persons aged 20–60 gets slightly smaller because
certain individuals that lived in Switzerland in these earlier years died or emigrated and hence are not in
the 2010 census. The figure shows that our matched data set contains 92 percent of all individuals aged
20–60 living in Switzerland in 2000. For 92 percent of these individuals, we have data from the census
2000.
In the SSER data, employed and self-employed individuals generate one record per job per year that
details the starting and ending month of an employment relationship along with the total earnings over
that time period. For example, a person with two different employers and also some self-employment
income would generate three records.47 Finally, the register also contains contributions of non-employed
individuals (e.g. students) because contributions to the old-age scheme are mandatory from age 20
onward until reaching the statutory retirement age. The statutory retirement age was 65 for men
throughout our sample period. For women, it was increased from 62 to 63 in 2001 and to 64 in 2005
as part of the 10th OASI reform implemented in 1997. Besides the retirement age, the reform increased
compulsory coverage of non-employed married and widowed women below retirement age, who had been
exempt from annual contributions towards the OASI before.
In Figure A7, we compare the employment rate of 20 to 64 year-old Swiss men and women in our
data with the employment rate of these groups according to the SLFS (Swiss labor force survey). We
observe that the employment rates are slightly higher in our data than they are in the SLFS. The likely
reason is that the employment rate in the SLFS refers to the second quarter of each year, while we define
a person as employed in a given year if she or he has positive earnings in at least one month of the year.
While the data cover the near universe of the population of Switzerland, the matched data set has
some disadvantages, too. First, the earnings records in 1998 are incomplete. The share of wage earners
for which records are missing is about 5 percent because of data failure in some local social security
offices (see the discussion below). Second, the register-based census 2010 does not contain information
on some variables of interest normally available in census data such as schooling/education, occupation,
or number of children. Such information are only available for individuals for which we could match the
censuses in 1990 or 2000. For the relatively small number of individuals that we were unable to match to
the census data in 2000, we only observe the characteristics of individuals as of 2010. This is a concern for
characteristics that can change over time, especially an individual’s place of residence, marital status and
immigrant status or citizenship. The census provides information on how these characteristics changed
in the past, allowing us to reconstruct the information for years prior to 2010. Nevertheless, we have to
impute some of the data points making a set of assumptions. We discuss how we exploited the various
variables in the census datasets in order to construct the three variables below.

Missing records in 1998. The earnings records in the year 1998 are incomplete. About 5
percent of all records are missing. Figure A8 illustrates this. The reasons for the missing observations
are not entirely clear. According to statisticians of the compensation office, the missing records most
likely arise because one of the IT pools, which are responsible for delivering the earnings records of
several equalization funds (Ausgleichskassen) to the federal equalization fund collecting the data, had
IT problems at the time. As one IT pool handles several equalization funds, several equalization funds
47

Moreover, the data contain individual records for unemployment benefits and disability pensions as
well as income compensation allowances in the event of military service or maternity.

8

have missing records in 1998. The problem is that some cantons are more heavily affected by the missing
data problem than others. For example, descriptive analyses suggest that the cantonal equalization
funds of the cantons of St. Gallen and Fribourg were strongly affected. The problem with the missing
records remained unnoticed at the time because statistics that are based on the earnings records were
only published in odd years. Inquiries revealed that it would be impossible to try to recover the missing
records as of today. The reason is that many affected workers are retired by now. The equalizations funds
discard the data for retired workers. In the event study micro-approach, we thus discard observations
from 1998 to ensure that our analysis is not affected by this data problem. For aggregate time series,
we re-estimate each series by year and group in a refined sample that excludes all compensation offices
affected by the 1998 missing data. We then impute 1998 values in the full data assuming that the 1998
value relative to the average of 1997 and 1999 is the same in the refined sample as in the full sample.

Missing records in certain compensation offices in certain years. In a few cases,
there are also compensation offices in which the records for a year other than 1998 are missing. These
are usually smaller compensation offices with a small number of affiliated workers. We identified these
cases by looking at detailed time series of employment rates by canton and subgroups of the population.
They always lead to a large drop in the aggregate employment rate of a specific subgroup in just one
year within employment rate series that are usually very smooth. In total, we identified 14 cases of
missing data. Each of these cases is somewhat different. For instance, the missing data may only affect
self-employment spells or only affect individuals from certain cantons within the same compensation
office. In order to keep as many individuals in the sample as possible, we thus treated each of these
cases separately. In general, we identified the subgroup of individuals that is likely to be affected by the
problem, and then discard all spells from these individuals altogether. Due to this data cleaning, we
drop 3 percent of all individuals from the analysis sample.
Dropping these individuals does not affect any of the aggregate results presented in the paper. In a
few cases, it slightly increases the precision of the estimates.

Place of residence. The different censuses provide various pieces of information on an individual’s
place of residence in a given year:
• Register-based census in 2010
– Municipality of residence in 2010
– Year a person moved to the municipality in 2010
– Municipality of residence in 2009, 2008 and 2005 (incomplete)
– Municipality of residence before the one in 2010
• Census 2000
– Municipality of residence in 2000
– Municipality of residence in 1995
• Census 1990
– Municipality of residence in 1990
– Municipality of residence in 1985

9

We exploit all of these variables in order to assign individuals to the places they live in a given year.
In case the information is inconsistent, we always prefer the information from a newer census wave. The
list of variables makes clear that we know individual’s place of residence for a large share of the population
in certain benchmark years (i.e. 2010, 2009, 2008, 2005, 2000, and so on). Figure A9.A illustrates this.
In 2000, for instance, the place of residence is known for 93 percent of individuals in our sample. The
first assumption when imputing locations is to assume that individuals stayed in the municipality of
residence throughout the entire period if the municipality of residence does not change between in two
consecutive benchmark years (e.g., 2000 and 2005). As shown in Figure A9.A, this assumption reduces
the share of missing information on place of residence substantially. The next step is to assign (random)
moving years if our data shows that a person moved between two consecutive benchmark years from one
place to another. The final step in the imputation is to assign individuals to the last known place of
residence for all years where the data is missing.48
We evaluated the accuracy of our imputation exploiting the fact that the SSER data contain identifiers of cantonal unemployment agencies if an individual receives unemployment benefits. Since the
unemployed are assigned to cantonal agencies based on their canton of residence, we can compare the
imputed canton of residence of registered unemployed with the canton of their unemployment agency.
Figure A9.B provides a summary of the results of this accuracy test. It shows the share of correctly
assigned cantons of residence for individuals for which we actually know the canton of residence due to
the information in the censuses is around 98 percent throughout period. Most importantly, when we
consider our full sample that also includes individuals for which we imputed places of residence, the
accuracy remains high, around 90-95 percent over the period.

Immigrant status. Information on the residency status of immigrants is important in our analysis
because immigrants only pay taxes in Switzerland if they either have a residency permit C or obtained
the Swiss citizenship. The different census datasets contain several variables that allow us reconstructing
whether a person pays taxes in Switzerland in a given year.
• Register-based census in 2010
– Nationality in 2010
– Year of immigration to Switzerland (in case a person is foreign born)
– Residency permit in 2010
• Census 2000
– Nationality in 2000
– Year of naturalization
– Residency permit in 2000
• Census 1990
– Nationality in 1990
48

Two comments on this assumption are in order. First, the problem of missing information on
the place of residence is smaller for older individuals, as individuals usually become more settled, the
older they get. Second, the assumption is not as strong for the imputation of canton (rather than
the municipality) of residence, because only 26 percent of the observed moves in our data occur across
cantons.

10

– Residency permit in 1990
All individuals that are Swiss nationals and that are born in Switzerland are considered to be Swiss
nationals in all years. Similarly, for a large share of the foreign born in the sample, we can reconstruct
with certainty whether they were Swiss or not in a given year using the information on the year of
naturalization from the census 2000.49 The main question to answer is then whether a foreigner had
a residency permit C in a given year. We first consider a foreigner to have a C permit throughout
the sample period if he or she has a C permit in 1990 and/or in 2000. For the remaining individuals,
we impute the missing information on the immigrant status in the years before 2010 using the year of
arrival in Switzerland (reported in the 2010 census). In particular, we assume that an immigrant has a
permit C or gained the Swiss passport if he or she lived in Switzerland for at least 10 years. Figure A10
provides the motivation for this approach using data from the 2010 census. Ten years after immigration
86 percent of all foreign born have a C permit or a Swiss passport. Moreover, we know the residence
status in 2010. We can thus reassign individuals that are thought to be either Swiss citizen or C permit
holders in 2010 which in fact are not.

Marital status. Marital status is an important variable as it affects both the potential labor supply
response and the tax rate faced by individuals due to joint filing. The census datasets provide the
following information on marital status:
• Register-based census in 2010
– Marital status in 2010
– Year when the marital status changed
– Year of separation (if applicable)
• Census 2000
– Marital status in 2000
– Year when the marital status changed
• Census 1990
– Marital status in 1990
Figure A11 illustrates how we imputed the marital status based on the variables listed above. The
figure focuses on the population aged 20–60 in a given year. Line (1) shows the number of individuals
for which the marital status is known with certainty. The figure shows that the share of individuals
with known marital status is 91 percent in 2000 and 100 percent in 2010. The share is smaller for years
that are further away from the next census year. Line (2) builds on the census information but imputes
missing data between these benchmark years. The main assumptions are the following. First, we assume
no change in the marital status for the years in-between the census years if the status is unchanged
between two census years. Second, if a person is single, widowed, or divorced in 1990 (2000) and married
in 2000 (2010), we assume that the marital status did not change until the year of marriage as observed
in the census 2000 (2010). Vice versa, if a person is married in 1990 (2000) and widowed, separated,
or divorced in 2000 (2010), we assume that they were married until last date of change in the marital
49

We also consider someone as Swiss throughout our sample period if the year of naturalization is
missing but a person is Swiss according to the censuses in 1990 and/or 2000.

11

status in 2000 (2010). Third, for individuals with no information from the census 1990, we assume that
everyone that married between 1990 and 2000 was single before, and that every divorce or widowhood
between 1990 and 2000 was preceded by a marriage which started at the average marriage age (men: 30,
women: 29).
For the remaining observations—those with no data from the censuses 1990/2000—, it is only possible
to reconstruct the history of the marital status up to the last change as observed in the census 2010.
Prior to that event, we impute the status assuming that the change in civil status recorded in the data
is the only one that ever took place.50 In our scenario, everyone was single before getting married and
every divorce or widowhood was preceded by a marriage which started at the average marriage age (men:
30, women: 29). Before that age, individuals who are divorced in 2010 are assumed to have been single.
For dissolved same-sex partnerships we assume that they started no earlier than the average marriage
age but always later than 2006, and that before that, the person was always single. These assumptions
allow assigning a marital status to almost everyone in the sample throughout the entire period 1990–2010
(i.e. close 100 percent of the sample aged 20 to 60, see Figure A11). We drop the very few individuals
for which the marital status is unknown from our analysis sample.

A.2.2

Wage Structure Surveys (LSE)

The Swiss Federal Statistical Office (FSO) has conducted the Swiss wage structure surveys (Lohnstrukturerhebung LSE) every two years since 1994. They are a stratified random sample of private and
public firms with at least three full-time-equivalent workers from the manufacturing and service sectors
in Switzerland. Excluded are (i) public sector employees in municipalities (until 2006), (ii) agricultural
workers, and (iii) apprentices and interns. The surveys cover between 16.6 percent (1996) and 50 percent
(2010) of total employment in Switzerland. Participation is mandatory. The surveys contain extensive
information on the individual characteristics of workers and provide reliable (employer-reported) information on hours worked per worker. Moreover, they provide detailed information on the wage components
of each worker, providing, among others, detailed information on bonus payments per worker.
We focus on Swiss nationals and foreign nationals with residency permit C aged 20–60. We drop a
small number of observations with missing information on gender, nationality, and civil status. Moreover,
we exclude public sector employees (workers from NACE rev. 1.2 two-digit industries 75, 80, and 85)
since the public sector is not covered comprehensively in the surveys before 2006. One issue with these
data for our analyses is that they only provide the geographical location of the work location and not
the residence location. This creates measurement error for individuals who do not live in the same
canton they work. We address this problem by excluding zip codes where more than 25 percent workers
stem from one of the other groups of cantons relevant in the analysis. Approximately 10 percent of all
observations in the surveys are dropped due to this restriction. The commuting patterns by zip code are
computed from the census in 2000.
We consider the following outcomes:
• Hours of work per worker per month: Hours of work are employer-reported and refer to the month
of October in each year. Hours worked refer to contractual (i.e. normal) hours worked for workers
with monthly wages (4 1/3 times weekly working time) and to actual hours worked for workers
paid by the hour.
• Hourly wages: Hourly wages refer to the month of October in each year. They are computed by
50

Note that we need the information on separated but not (yet) divorced individuals because they are
taxed as singles.

12

dividing the sum of regular gross wage earnings in October plus 1/12 of a possible 13th monthly
wage payment by hours of work per worker. Wage rates thus incorporate regular pay but exclude
overtime and variable pay components (e.g. bonuses). We winsorize the lowest and highest 0.25
percent of wages to reduce the influence of outliers.
• Earnings: Earnings refer to gross labor earnings in 2010 CHF in October of each year, including
social security contributions. Earnings include regular monthly wages and overtime and other
variable pay components (e.g. bonuses). We winsorize the lowest and highest 0.25 percent of
earnings to reduce the influence of outliers.
• Bonuses: Includes bonus payments, premiums, profit shares paid out to employees and other
non-regular wage payments to the worker for the entire year of the survey.

A.2.3

Labor Force Survey (SLFS)

The Swiss Labor Force Survey (SLFS) is the equivalent of the US Current Population Survey. In the
period of interest, this survey was conducted in the second quarter of each year. It includes about 17,000
individuals (approximately 0.5 percent of households) before 2002 and about 50,000 (1.5 percent) from
2002 onward. We focus on Swiss nationals and foreign nationals with residency permit C aged 20–60.
These data also provide information on hours of work. The main drawback relative to our main data
is a very small sample size (the full population data is about 100 times larger). As a result, most of
the series produced with the labor force survey are very noisy compared to the population-wide data.
Another drawback is that most variables are self-reported introducing significant measurement error as
well.
We consider the following outcomes:
• Employment rate: fraction of people employed in the second quarter of each year as a share of
the permanent population (refers to employment in the week before the survey)
• Earnings: total annual labor earnings, self-reported
• Hours of work per week: Hours effectively worked in week before the survey (refers to all jobs
held), self-reported
• Hourly earnings: annual labor earnings divided by 51 times self-reported normal weekly working
hours

A.2.4

Income Tax Rates Data

None of the above micro data sets includes individual’s tax rates. We therefore merge the statutory tax
rate for a given income in a given municipality to these data. Income tax rate data have been collected
and made available by Parchet (2018) for this project. The data set is based on average effective
tax rates on gross income published by the Federal Tax Administration for the 800 (approximately)
largest municipalities. These tax rates are defined as shares of the consolidated cantonal, municipal
and church tax liability in gross annual income for different categories of taxpayers (unmarried, married
without children, married with two children, retired) and gross income classes (from CHF 10,000 to CHF
1,000,000). Parchet (2018) has collected the municipal tax multipliers for all municipalities between
1983 and 2014 and, using the fact that intra-cantonal differences in consolidated tax rates are almost
entirely due to municipal tax multipliers, has estimated the total average tax rate for all municipalities
and taxpayers.
Missing Cantons. Unfortunately, tax rates cannot be estimated with this method for the cantons of
Appenzell Innerhoden and Neuchâtel before 2001. In the former, multipliers are not available; in the

13

latter, municipalities could set their own tax schedule. For these cases, predicting consolidated tax rates
is not possible, nor is the estimation of the cantonal tax rate. Tax rates for these cantons are therefore
missing.
Marginal Tax Rates. We linearly interpolate the tax rates in steps of 1,000 CHF between the income
brackets provided in the original data. For incomes above 1 million CHF we assume a constant marginal
tax rate. Our estimates of the marginal tax rate are based on the local changes in the tax rate in steps
of 1,000 CHF.
Municipality Mergers. The consolidated tax rates and tax multipliers are published in real time for each
municipality, as it exists in a given year. The location information we obtain from the Census data
refers to the registers of municipalities as of November 2010. Since there has been an ongoing trend in
mergers of small municipalities over time, it is not possible to perform a 1:1 match on the tax rate data.
We therefore update the municipality codes in the tax rate data to match the municipality registers as
of November 2010. Individuals living in a merged municipality, we assign the average tax rate of the
merged municipalities. Individuals living in a newly created municipality, we assign the average tax rate
that was applied on this territory prior to the secession.

A.3

Further Robustness Checks and Results

Aggregate time series. Table A2 presents estimates of the labor supply effects of the tax holiday
based on regressions of the aggregate time series for all 5 groups of cantons on year dummies, canton
group dummies, and an indicator which is 1 in the year in which municipal and cantonal taxes are zero.
OLS standard errors are reported. It expands upon the results presented in Table 2.
The estimation sample covers the years 1990–2010 (including 1998). The outcome in columns (1)
and (3) is the share of wage earners in the population (in percent). The outcome in columns (2) and (4)
is the average annual wage per employee with positive wage earnings. Columns (1) and (2) focus on men,
columns (3) and (4) on women. Panel A is estimated using the full sample of adults aged 20–60. Panels
B and C report effects for married individuals aged 20–60 with and without children, respectively. ∆%y
indicates the implied percent change in the outcome by dividing the estimated effect—the coefficient
of the indicator of the tax holiday—by the average level of the outcome variable in the year of the tax
holiday. The Frisch elasticity η F is estimated by dividing %∆y by the estimated percent change in net of
tax wage rates (%∆[1−τ ]) due to the tax holiday for the respective group. %∆[1−τ ] is based on changes
in average tax rates in column (1) and on changes in marginal tax rates in the remaining columns. For
each individual, ∆%[1−τ ] is computed based on hypothetical marginal or average tax rates on the actual
income earned during the tax-free years in the tax system in place prior to the tax holidays.
Figure A13 zooms in on married women whose labor supply decisions are traditionally expected to
be most elastic. This figure displays the employment rate (Panel A) and average earnings including
non-workers (Panel B) for married women by year and groups of cantons from 1990 to 2010. The sample
in a given year t is all female individuals aged 20–60 in year t and married in year t who are still alive
and Swiss residents by 2010 (i.e., present in the 2010 Census). Married women are expected to be
particularly responsive to taxes, yet, the figure does not show effects on employment or average earnings
except perhaps in 1998 for the cantons transitioning early (blue series in circles). Panel B has excellent
parallel trends for all series so that we can be quite confident that earnings of married women, which
include both the intensive and extensive margins, responded at best very modestly to the tax holidays.

14

Effects in the Labor Force Survey. Figure A15 displays various employment outcomes using
the Labor Force Survey (SLFS): (a) employment rate, (b) earnings, (c) hours of work per week among
employees, (d) average hourly earnings among employees. The sample in a given year t includes all
individuals aged 20–60. For hours of work and hourly earnings, we restrict the sample to employees. We
consider 3 groups of cantons: (1) 2 cantons which transitioned in 1999 with a tax holiday for 1998 or
1997–1998 (in blue circles). (2) 19 cantons which transitioned in 2001 with a tax holiday for 2000 or
1999–2000 (in green triangles). (3) 3 cantons which transitioned in 2003 with tax holiday in 2001–02
(in brown squares). (Former groups (1a) and (1b) and groups (2a) and (2b) have been pooled together
given sample size in the survey data.) The dots corresponding to tax holidays are blanked out (as tax
holidays are called blank years in French and German). The figure does not display any tax holiday
effects on these outcomes. Given the noise in the series due to small sample size, this is consistent with
our previous analysis using the much larger social security data and the wage structure survey.

Additional extensive margin effects. Table A3 presents estimates of the effect of the tax
holiday on a set of further extensive margin outcomes constructed using our matched social security and
census data. As before, the regressions are based on aggregate time series for the three main canton
groups. The outcome in column (1) is the number of jobs per person employed. Distinct jobs are identified
in the social security data based on an individual’s number of different register entries with positive labor
earnings in a given year. The outcome in column (2) is the number of months in employment per person
employed during the year. The outcome in column (3) is the number of self-employed as a fraction of the
total population. Finally, the outcome in column (4) is the number of persons moving into the respective
canton group in a given year as a fraction of the total population (recall that the tax holidays actually
reduced incentives to move during a tax holiday as they triggered a betwixt assessment with immediate
pay as you earn taxation, see our discussion above). Panel A reports effects among all individuals aged
20–60. Panel B and C report effects for males and females, respectively. Panel D reports effects for
married women only. Panel E reports effects for individuals with more than 200K average annual labor
income in the 1994–1996 period.
We do not find statistically significant evidence that the tax holiday affected one of these outcomes
for any of these groups. Therefore, the lack of responses along the extensive margin is pervasive and
holds along all the dimensions we have explored.

Effects by income groups based on aggregate time series. Table A4 presents estimates of the tax holiday (TH) on labor supply based on regressions of the aggregate time series for the
5 groups of cantons on year dummies, group dummies, and an indicator which is 1 in the year in which
municipal and cantonal taxes are zero. The estimation sample covers the years 1990–2010 in columns
1–3 and 1987–2010 in column (4). Columns (1) and (2) are estimated using the full sample of adults aged
20–60. Column (3) focuses on wage employees (i.e., individuals with positive wage earnings). Column
(4) is based on all individuals that have positive self-employment earnings in at least one period. The
outcome in column (1) is the employment rate (in percent). The outcome in column (2) is annual labor
earnings per person (including individuals with zero earnings). The outcome in column (3) is the average
wage per employee. The outcome in column (4) is average self-employment earnings (self-employment
earnings of all individuals with positive self-employment earnings in a given year). Individuals are assigned to Panels A–E based on their average annual labor income in the 1994–1996 period. Individuals
with zero earnings in 1994–1996 are dropped. The Frisch elasticity η F is estimated by dividing %∆y
(i.e. the estimated effect relative to the average level of the outcome variable in the year of the tax

15

holiday) by the estimated percent change in net of tax wage rates (%∆[1 − τ ]) due to the tax holiday for
the respective group. %∆[1 − τ ] is based on changes in average tax rates in column (1) and on changes
in marginal tax rates in the remaining columns. For each individual, %∆[1 − τ ] is computed based on
hypothetical marginal or average tax rates on the actual income earned during the tax-free years in the
tax system in place prior to the tax holidays.
The results from the time series are very consistent with the event study estimates reported in Table 4.
For wage earnings, the elasticities along the extensive margin are always zero, while the elasticities along
the intensive margin are sharply increasing with earnings: from 0 at the bottom to about .09 at the top.
For self-employment earnings, the elasticities are within .18–0.26 throughout the distribution.

Event study robustness checks. Table A5 shows that the main event study estimates are
robust along a number of dimensions. It presents semi-elasticities derived from individual-level IV regressions of labor supply outcomes on person and year fixed effects and log(1−τit ), where τ is the average
tax rate in column (1) and the marginal tax rate in the other columns. log(1 − τit ) is instrumented with
an indicator variable which is 1 in the year in which municipal and cantonal taxes are zero due to the tax
holiday. The dependent variable in column (1) is an indicator whether a person has positive wage income
in a given year. The dependent variable in columns (2) and (3) is average wages of males (column 2)
and females (column 3) with positive wage income in a given year. The dependent variable in columns
(4) is annual self-employment income per person (including zeros but in the sample of individuals with
positive self-employment earnings in at least one year) in a given year. The first panel presents our
baseline results (see Tables 3 and 5 for the definition of the estimation samples). Panel B excludes the
control variables included in the baseline. Panel C contains two control variables absorbing effects of
the tax holiday in the the year before and after the tax holiday, thus accounting for possible effects of
the tax holidays on income shifting. In Panel D, we control for the cantonal unemployment rate (based
on register data). In Panel E, we discard observations with imputed place of residence. In Panel F, the
effect is only identified from the response in the second cantonal blank year, controlling for the effect in
the first. Similarly, Panel G identifies the effect only from the response in late-coming cantons with tax
holidays in 2001/02. Panel H uses wage and self-employment incomes that are not capped at 2.5 Mio.
in 2010 CHF. In all Panels B-H, the estimates are very similar to the baseline estimates in Panel A.

Wage Structure Survey results. Table A6 presents estimates of the tax holiday on labor
supply and wages based on regressions of aggregate time series for three groups of cantons (based on their
transition timing) on year dummies, group dummies, linear time trends interacted with groups dummies,
and an indicator which is 1 in the year in which municipal and cantonal taxes are zero. The estimation is
based on the wage structure surveys (LSE) 1994–2010 carried out bi-annually so that the total number
of observations in each regression in 27. OLS standard errors are reported. The dependent variable in
column (1) is monthly earnings in 2010 CHF in October of each year. Earnings include regular salaries
and overtime and other variable pay components (e.g. bonuses). The dependent variable in column
(2) is hourly wages, computed from October salaries in each year, excluding overtime and variable pay
components (e.g. bonuses). The dependent variable in column (3) is employer-reported hours worked
per worker in October. Hours worked refer to contractual (i.e. normal) hours worked for workers with
monthly salaries and to actual hours worked for workers with hourly wages. The dependent variable in
column (4) is the fraction of employees with bonuses above 5,000 in 2010 CHF. Panel A reports results
for all employees aged 20–60 with Swiss passport or residency permit C in the dataset, excluding public
sector employees. Panel B is restricted to workers with individual wage contract. Panel C is restricted

16

to workers falling under a collective (firm-, occupation-, or industry-wide) bargaining agreement. Panel
D is restricted to workers in jobs with the main activities examining, advising, and attesting.
The results from the table show that there is a insignificant effect of .6 percent on total earnings
for the total sample—an estimate that is roughly in line with our baseline estimate based on the social
security data (.71 percent in Table 2, col. (2)). The effect on earnings is much stronger (4.8 percent)
and highly significant in the job category examining/advising/attesting. In this more responsive group,
this effect on total earnings is driven by an effect on hourly wage rates of 4.3 percent (highly significant)
while the effect on hours of work is pretty small (.7 percent) and only marginally significant.
In the full sample, the effect on hours of work is very small (0.1 percent) and insignificant. The
effect on hours of work is stronger (0.5 percent) and marginally significant for workers in individual
contracts while it is slight negative (-0.3 percent) for workers in collective agreement. It is conceivable
that workers in individual contracts have more flexibility to adjust their hours of work than workers in
collective agreement.
The estimated effect on bonuses is fairly large (around 9.4 percent) but only marginally significant.
The effect on bonuses is larger and significant for workers in collective agreement. It is conceivable that
unions managed to negotiate higher bonuses during the tax holidays.

17

Average Tax on CHF 100,000 Gross Income

Tax rate in %
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
No data

Single taxpayer

Figure A1: Average Tax Rates Across Swiss Cantons
Notes: This figure depicts the average income tax rate in 1999 across Swiss municipalities. The tax rate
combines income taxes at the federal, cantonal, and municipal levels and is computed for a single tax
filer with gross income of 100,000 CHF, approximately the 90th percentile of labor earnings across all
Swiss workers. The average tax rate is defined as taxes owed divided by gross income. The graph shows
substantial variation in tax burdens across areas with tax rates as low at 10 percent and tax rates as high
as 25 percent.

18

(A) Press coverage of tax holidays

(B) Voting material explaining tax holidays

Figure A2: Explanations of Tax Holidays in the Press and Official Voting Material
Notes: Panel A shows an illustration of a press article explaining the tax reform and the tax holiday it
creates. The article was published on February 16, 2001 for the canton of Valais, which transitioned in
2003 and hence had a tax holiday for years 2001 and 2002. Hence, as early as the beginning the first
holiday year, the public was clearly informed that incomes earned in 2001 and 2002 would not be taxed.
Panel B depicts the voting pamphlet explaining the incidence of blank years (“Bemessungslücke”) sent
to voters before the tax reform referendum for the canton of Obwalden in October 1999. Such voting
documents were typically produced in cantons organizing a referendum for the tax transition.

19

ZH 8.6.1997
AG 18.4.1999
AI 25.4.1999
GR 13.6.1999
BL 13.6.1999
OW 24.10.1999
GL 7.5.2000
AR 21.5.2000
BE 21.5.2000
UR 21.5.2000
SH 27.8.2000
SZ 24.9.2000
NW 26.11.2000
ZG 26.11.2000

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Date of popular referendum

Figure A3: Dates of Cantonal Referenda
Notes: The figure depicts the dates of cantonal referenda held in each canton where the new law was
put to a public vote. The colored time frames indicate periods of the federal and cantonal tax holidays
applying to the cantons where a vote was held. Note that NW only had a federal holiday. The voting
referendum was the very last part of the reform process.

20

4
Total income tax revenue per capita
(in 1000 CHF, real 2010)
2
3
1
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Tax Holiday in...
1997-98

1998

1999-00

2000

2001-02

Figure A4: Individual Income Tax Collections per Capita
Notes: This figure depicts total income tax revenue per capita collected by year and groups of cantons.
Amounts are expressed in thousands of 2010 CHF. The cantons are divided in five groups based on when
the tax holiday took place. (1a) light blue line with circles: tax holiday in 1997–98 (1 canton), (1b)
dark blue dashed line with circles: tax holiday in 1998 (1 canton), (2a) light green line with triangles:
tax holiday in 1999–2000 (15 cantons), (2b) dark green dashed line with triangles: tax holiday in 2000
(4 cantons), (3) brown line with squares: tax holiday in 2001-02 (3 cantons). In the series, the dots
corresponding to tax holidays are bigger and are blanked out (as tax holidays are called blank years in
French and German). Tax rates are naturally zero during tax holidays. Before the transitions, income
tax collected in a given year typically corresponded to incomes earned in prior years. After the transition,
income tax collected in a given year typically corresponds to incomes earned in the current year. The
figure shows that there was no visible discontinuity in income tax collections across the tax holidays
(there was no double taxation nor gap in tax collection in the transition).

21

Social security earnings records (SSER)
1981

2010
100%

Immigration and Birth
No
unique
match
(6.9%)

Census 2000
(N = 5,217,721)

Census 1990
(N = 4,342,786)

83,2%

Emigration and Death

83%

Register-based census 2010
(N = 6,288,279)

No
unique
match
(7,9%)

Immigration and Birth

Emigration and Death

Figure A5: Illustration of matched SSER-Census data
Notes: This figure illustrates the matched SSER-census dataset. The data cover everyone that ever
generated a social security record between 1981 and 2010 and that is still alive and living in Switzerland
in 2010. Because contributing to the old age insurance is mandatory from age 18 onward, the 6.29
million observations in 2010 represent 98 percent of the actual population aged 18 and older in 2010 in
Switzerland. 83 percent of these individuals (5.18 million individuals) could be matched to a consistent
census 2000 record. 69.1 percent (83.2 percent of 83 percent or 4.34 million individuals) could be matched
to a consistent census 1990 record.

22

5
Population (in Mio.)
2
3
4

.85

.86

.87

.88

.88

.9

.91

.91

.92

.93

.93

.94

.94

.95

.96

.96

.97

.97

.99

0

1

.84

.93

1990

1995

2000
Year

2005

2010

Population aged 20-60 (matched dataset)
Population aged 20-60 (matched dataset, incl. census 2000)
Actual population aged 20-60

Figure A6: Sample Coverage

50

Employment rate in %
60
70
80
90

100

Notes: This figure displays the total resident population of Switzerland aged 20–60, the total population
captured by our sample aged 20–60 (which are all individuals with a social security record in any year
1990–2010 and resident in Switzerland in 2010 so that they can be matched to the Census 2010), and the
population in our sample that can also be matched to the 2000 Census. The numbers show the fraction
of individuals in our sample vs. the full population. Coverage is closer to one in recent years (due to
deaths and migration).

1990

1995

2000
year

2005

2010

Employment rate of Swiss men (matched data set)
Employment rate of Swiss men (SLFS, 2nd quarter)
Employment rate of Swiss women (matched data set)
Employment rate of Swiss women (SLFS, 2nd quarter)

Figure A7: Accuracy of Employment Rate
Notes: This figure displays the employment rates of men and women aged 20–64 separately in our
sample and in official statistics derived from the Swiss Labor Force Survey (SLFS). In our data, we count
individuals as employed if they have non-zero labor earnings in a given year. The official statistics count
a person as employed if she works at least one hour in the second quarter of a specific year. These
differences in the measurement of employment explain the level differences between the two statistics.
We omit 1998 due to the missing social security records in this year.

23

8
7
Population (in Mio.)
3
4
5
6

5.18 5.24

5.81

6.08 6.08 6.12

6.25 6.33 6.4

6.79

7.24
7 7.15

7.41

5.6

0

1

2

4.91 5.05

5.47 5.6 5.62

6.59

1990

1995

2000
year

2005

2010

Number of records
Number of individuals

Figure A8: Missing Records in 1998
Notes: This figure displays the number of records and individuals in our data by year. It illustrates the
issue of missing records in 1998 due to missing social security data for that year.

24

6

1

1

Population (in Mio.)
2
3
4
5

.93
.88
.93
.92
.71

.9

.72

.75

.77

.8

.84

.64 .66
.61 .63

0

1

.56 .57
.54 .55

1990

1995

2000
Year

2005

2010

Individuals with known place of residence
+ imputing if no change between consistent census obs.
+ imputing random moving years
+ imputing last known municipality

1

(A) Share with known place of residence

.91

.9

.91

.92

.94

.94

.92

.92

.92

.93

.94

.95

.96

.98

.98

0

Share of correctly assigned
.2
.4
.6
.8

.92

1995

2000

Year

2005

2010

Canton of residence known from censuses
Canton of residence, incl. imputed

(B) Accuracy of imputed canton of residence

Figure A9: Imputation of Municipality of Residence
Notes: The figure displays statistics of the imputation of municipality of residence. The dashed line
in Panel A shows the number of individuals in the SSES data set for which the place of residence is
known with certainty. The second line shows the number of individuals for which the place of residence
is known if we assume no change in residence between two consistent census reported residence. The
third line further imputes a random year of residence change for those with difference residences across
two decadal censuses. The fourth line further imputes residence using the last known residence. Panel
B evaluates the accuracy of our imputation for the years 1995–2010 regarding the canton of residence.
The figure exploits that registered unemployed are assigned to cantonal agencies based on their canton
of residence. The figure compares the imputed canton of residence of registered unemployed with the
canton of the unemployment agency. The figure shows the share of correctly assigned cantons of residence
for individuals for which we actually know the canton of residence due to the information in the census
(dashed line) and for all individuals, including the imputed places of residence (straight line). The figure
shows that the share of correctly assigned cantons of residences among all individuals is above 90 percent
in all years.

25

1
.8
Share of immigrants
.4
.6
.2
0
0

5

10
15
20
Years since arrival in Switzerland

25

30

Figure A10: Share of Immigrants with C Permit or a Swiss Passport, by Duration of Stay

1
.86

1

1

1

.76
.72 .74

1

.78

1

.8

1

1
.82

.84

1

1
.86

.89

1

1

1

1

1

.91
.79 .81
.75 .77

1
.84

1
.86

1
.89

1
.92

1
.95

1
1

0

1

Population (in Mio.)
2
3
4

5

Notes: The figure displays the share of immigrants with C permit or a Swiss passport, by duration of
stay.

1990

1995

2000
Year

2005

2010

Marital status known
+ imputed between census years
+ only 1 change in civil status
Sample: 20-60 year-olds still living in Switzerland in 2010

Figure A11: Marital Status Imputation
Notes: The figure displays the number of individuals in our sample for which the marital status is known
based on our stepwise imputation method. We focus on the population aged 20–60 in a given year. Line
(1) shows the number of individuals for which the marital status is known. The figure shows that the
share of individuals with respect to the total sample aged 20–60 with known civil status lies at 91 percent
in 2000 and almost 100 percent in 2010 as this information is reported in the decadal censuses. The share
becomes smaller, the further away from the next census year. Line (2) builds on the census information
and imputes missing data between these years. In particular, we always assume no change in the marital
status for the years in-between if the status is unchanged across two consecutive censuses. The third line
further imputes the marital status for the remaining individuals—those with no data from the censuses
1990/2000—by basically assuming that the change in marital status recorded in the 2010 census data is
the only one that ever took place. This assumption allows us imputing the marital status for almost the
entire sample.

26

85

75

65

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00
2000

1997-98
1998

10
20

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

19

19

92

55
90

Wage employees/population (in %)

95

2001-02

95

85

75

65

1997-98
1998

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00
2000

10
20

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

19

19

92

55
90

Wage employees/population (in %)

(A) Males

2001-02

(B) Females

Figure A12: Effects of Tax Holidays on Wage Employment Rates by Gender
Notes: This figure displays the employment rate of wage earners for males (Panel A) and females (Panel
B) by year and groups of cantons from 1990 to 2010. The sample in a given year t is all individuals
aged 20–60 in year t who are still alive and Swiss residents by 2010 (i.e., present in the 2010 Census).
The wage employment rate is computed as the fraction of individuals in the sample with positive wage
earnings during the year. The cantons are divided in five groups based on when the cantonal tax holiday
took place. (1a) light blue circles: 1 canton with tax holiday for cantonal taxes in 1997–98 (1 canton),
(1b) dashed dark blue circles: 1 canton with tax holiday for cantonal taxes in 1998 (1 canton), (2a) light
green triangles: 15 cantons with cantonal tax holiday in 1999–2000, (2b) dashed dark green triangles: 4
cantons with cantonal tax holiday in 2000, (3) brown squares: 3 cantons with cantonal tax holiday in
2001-02. For each of the groups, we represent the corresponding tax holiday periods using the vertical
shading and the same color code. In the series, the dots corresponding to tax holidays are bigger and
are blanked out (as tax holidays are called blank years in French and German). Both panels show no
evidence of employment effects due to the tax holiday.

27

85

75

65

1997-98
1998

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00
2000

20
10

20
08

20
06

20
04

20
02

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

55
19
90

Wage employees/population (in %)

95

2001-02

50
45
40
35
30

1997-98
1998

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00
2000

20
10

20
08

20
06

20
04

20
02

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

25
19
90

Wage earnings per employee (in 1k CHF)

(A) Effects on employment

2001-02

(B) Effects on wage earnings

Figure A13: Employment and Earnings Effects Among Married Women
Notes: This figure displays the share of wage earners (Panel A) and average wage earnings excluding
non-workers (Panel B) for married women by year and groups of cantons from 1990 to 2010. The sample
in a given year t is all female individuals aged 20–60 in year t and married in year t who are still alive
and Swiss residents by 2010 (i.e., present in the 2010 Census). Wage earnings are expressed in 1000s of
2010 CHF (adjusted for inflation). The cantons are divided in five groups based on when the cantonal
tax holiday took place. (1a) light blue circles: tax holiday in 1997-98 (1 canton), (1b) dark blue dashed
circles: tax holiday in 1998 (1 canton), (2a) light green triangles: tax holiday in 1999–2000 (15 cantons),
(2b) dark green triangles: tax holiday in 2000 (4 cantons), (3) brown squares: tax holiday in 2001-02 (3
cantons). For each of the groups, we represent the corresponding tax holiday periods using the vertical
shading and the same color code. Married women are expected to be particularly responsive to taxes;
yet, the figure does not show effects on employment or average wage earnings.

28

85

75

65

1997-98
1998

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00
2000

10
20

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

19

19

92

55
90

Wage employees/population (in %)

95

2001-02

95

85

75

65

1997-98
1998

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00
2000

20
10

20
08

20
06

20
04

20
02

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

55
19
90

Wage employees/population (with >10k)

(A) Wage employment effects among all wage earners with positive earnings

2001-02

(B) Wage employment effects among those with annual earnings >10,000 CHF

Figure A14: Robustness of Wage Employment Effects
Notes: This figure depicts a robustness check on the wage employment effects from Figure 5. Panel A
shows the share of wage earners (pooling together both male and females aged 20–60) where employment
is defined as having any positive wage earnings during the year as in Figure 5. Panel B repeats the
same figure but defines employment as having annual wage earnings above 10,000 CHF (instead of zero)
in 2010 CHF. Both panels show the same absence of employment effects of the tax holiday. Therefore,
the lack of employment effects is robust to changing the minimum threshold of earnings used to define
employment.

29

70
Avg. earnings (in 1000 CHF)
50
55
60
65

95

45

Employment rate in %
65
75
85
55
1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

1995

1997

1999

Tax holiday in...
1997-98

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

Tax holiday in...

1999-00

2001-02

1997-98

2001-02

25

25

Hours worked per week
27
29
31
33

Avg. hourly earnings (in CHF)
30
35

40

(B) Earnings

35

(A) Employment rate

1999-00

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

1995

1997

1999

Tax holiday in...
1997-98

1999-00

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

Tax holiday in...
2001-02

1997-98

(C) Hours of work among employees

1999-00

2001-02

(D) Hourly earnings among employees

Figure A15: Evidence on Hours and Hourly Earnings from the Labor Force Survey
Notes: This figure displays various employment outcomes using the Swiss Labor Force Survey (SLFS):
(A) employment rate, (B) earnings, (C) hours of work per week among employees, (D) average hourly
earnings among employees. The sample in a given year t includes all Swiss and foreign workers with a
resident permit C aged 20–60. For hours of work and hourly earnings, we restrict the sample to employees.
We consider 3 groups of cantons: (1) 2 cantons which transitioned in 1999 with a tax holiday for 1998
or 1997–1998 (in blue circles). (2) 19 cantons which transitioned in 2001 with a tax holiday for 2000 or
1999–2000 (in green triangles). (3) 3 cantons which transitioned in 2003 with tax holiday in 2001–02 (in
brown squares). (Former groups (1a) and (1b) and groups (2a) and (2b) have been pooled together given
sample size in the survey data.) The dots corresponding to tax holidays are blanked out (as tax holidays
are called blank years in French and German). The figure does not display any tax holiday effects on
these outcomes. Given the noise in the series due to small sample size, this is consistent with our previous
analysis using the much larger social security data and the wage structure survey.

30

.025

0

-.025

4
k=

3
k=

2
k=

H
1s
tT

k=
-1

k=
-2

k=
-3

k=
-4

-.05

TH

Employment (Extensive Margin)
Earnings (Intensive Margin)
2n
d

Effect of tax holiday

.05

Years from tax holiday start

(A) Without controls

.025

0

-.025

4
k=

3
k=

2
k=

H
1s
tT

-1
k=

-2
k=

-3
k=

-4
k=

TH

Employment (Extensive Margin)
Earnings (Intensive Margin)

-.05

2n
d

Effect of tax holiday

.05

Years from tax holiday start

(B) With controls

Figure A16: Wage Earners Event Study Estimates: Effect of Controls
Notes: The figure depicts the impact of including controls in the event study estimates on wage employment and wage earnings per employee. Panel A presents estimates without the control variables while
panel B repeats the figure with controls (reported in main text Figure 7.B). Estimates are based on
the event study model (equation 2) of outcomes on event dummies (distance in years from the first tax
holiday). Panel A includes only year and individual fixed effects. Additional control variables in Panel
B include age×gender and age squared×gender, linear time trends by canton of residence in 1996 (the
linear time trends omit the treatment years). The estimation sample covers the years 1994–2006 (±4
years around the tax holiday years), excludes 1998, and comprises 19 cantons which transitioned in 2001
and 3 cantons which transitioned in 2003. We focus on workers aged 22–55 in 1996 and drop workers
older than 62 in later years. Tax holiday years are shaded and denoted by 1st TH and 2nd TH on the
x-axis. The dependent variable in the model “extensive margin” is an indicator equal to 1 if a person
has positive wage income in a given year. The dependent variable in the model “intensive margin” is
real wage earnings (excluding non-workers). The effect is scaled post-estimation by mean outcome in the
estimation sample so that effects can be interpreted as percent change. Individuals are assigned to cantons based on where they lived in 1996. The vertical bars represent cluster-robust 95 percent confidence
intervals.

31

6.75
6.5
6.25
6
5.75

1998

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00 or 2000

10
20

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94

5.5
19

Gross earnings (in Oct, in 1K CHF)

7

2001-02

Figure A17: Effects on Monthly Earnings in Employer Survey
Notes: This figure displays monthly earnings in 2010 CHF in October for all workers by year and groups
of cantons from 1994 to 2010 using the wage structure surveys (LSE) carried out bi-annually. Earnings
include regular salaries and overtime and other variable pay components (e.g. bonuses). The sample in
a given year t contains all workers aged 20–60 with Swiss passport or residency permit C in the dataset
(excluding public sector employees) weighted to represent population averages. We consider 3 groups
of cantons: (1) 2 cantons which transitioned in 1999 with a tax holiday for 1998 or 1997–1998 (in blue
circles). (2) 19 cantons which transitioned in 2001 with a tax holiday for 2000 or 1999–2000 (in green
triangles). (3) 3 cantons which transitioned in 2003 with tax holiday in 2001–02 (in brown squares).
(Former groups (1a) and (1b) and groups (2a) and (2b) have been pooled together given sample size in
the survey data.) The dots corresponding to tax holidays are blanked out (as tax holidays are called
blank years in French and German). Geographical information in the data is based on place of work
while tax treatment is based on residence. To reduce the number of cases where a person works in one
group of cantons but resides in another one, we exclude zip codes in which more than 25 percent workers
commute from one of the other groups of cantons according to the census in 2000.

32

Hourly wage (in CHF)

42
40
38
36
34

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00 or 2000

1998

10
20

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

19

94

32

2001-02

Hourly wage (in CHF)

(A) All workers

54
52
50
48
46

1998

Tax Holiday in...
1999-00 or 2000

10
20

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

19

94

44

2001-02

(B) Workers in job category “Examining, Advising, and Attesting”

Figure A18: Effects on Hourly Wages for Selected Job Categories in Employer Survey
Notes: This figure displays average hourly wages in 2010 CHF by year and groups of cantons from 1994
to 2010 using the wage structure surveys (LSE) carried out bi-annually. Hourly wages are computed
from October salaries in each year and incorporate regular pay but exclude overtime and variable pay
components (e.g. bonuses). In Panel A, the sample in a given year t includes all workers aged 20–60
with Swiss passport or residency permit C in the dataset (excluding public sector employees) weighted
to represent population averages. In Panel B, the sample is restricted to workers in jobs with the
main activities “examining, advising, attesting”. We consider 3 groups of cantons: (1) 2 cantons which
transitioned in 1999 with a tax holiday for 1998 or 1997–1998 (in blue circles). (2) 19 cantons which
transitioned in 2001 with a tax holiday for 2000 or 1999–2000 (in green triangles). (3) 3 cantons which
transitioned in 2003 with tax holiday in 2001–02 (in brown squares). The dots corresponding to tax
holidays are blanked out (as tax holidays are called blank years in French and German). Geographical
information in the data is based on place of work while tax treatment is based on residence. To reduce
the number of cases where a person works in one group of cantons but resides in another one, we exclude
zip codes in which more than 25 percent workers stem from one of the other groups of cantons according
to the census in 2000.

33

Table A1: Date of Cantonal Referenda and Legislative Decisions on the Reform
Holidays

Canton

Date

Share Yes

Turnout Notes

1997-98
TG

6/30/97

no vote

ZH

6/8/97

58.85

38.4

4/18/99
4/25/99
6/13/99
6/13/99
10/24/99
5/7/00
5/21/00
5/21/00
5/21/00
8/27/00
9/24/00
11/26/00
11/26/00
4/9/98
11/22/99
6/6/00

63.17

33.3

1998
1999-00
AG
AI
BL
GR
OW
GL
BE
AR
UR
SH
SZ
ZG
NW**
SG
LU
FR

*
65.19
77.54
61.91

47.57
36.04
26.93
*

60.86

41.72
*

67.11
70.11
81.43
69.27
77.5

45.42
59.99
45.48
45.88
41.33
no vote
no vote
no vote

2000
SO

6/30/99

no vote

VD
TI
VS

7/4/00
7/6/01
9/13/01

no vote
no vote
no vote

2001-02

Notes: Holidays refer to the cantonal (and municipal) income tax holidays. At the federal level all
cantons had a two-year holiday. See text for details. In cantons where no popular vote was held, the
date refers to the date when the cantonal parliament enacted the tax transition law. Popular votes or
parliament votes were the very end of processes that had typically started many months earlier.
* In these cantons, votes are held at a cantonal assembly (Landsgemeinde), which is why statistics are
not available.
** In NW there was no cantonal holiday.

34

Table A2: Macro Estimates of Tax Holiday Labor Supply Effects on Wage Earners
(1)
Wage
employment (in %)
Men

(2)
Wage earnings
per employee
Men

(3)
Wage
employment (in %)
Women

(4)
Wage earnings
per employee
Women

27.6
1.01
(0.53)
0.037
(0.019)

12.5
-0.21
(0.45)
-0.017
(0.036)

26.3
0.48
(0.52)
0.018
(0.020)

Panel B: Married with children
%∆[1 − τ ]
12.1
%∆y
-0.06
(0.24)
Frisch elasticity η F
-0.005
(0.019)

28.4
1.49
(0.90)
0.052
(0.032)

12.7
-0.90
(0.76)
-0.071
(0.060)

29.2
0.80
(0.93)
0.027
(0.032)

Panel C: Married no children
%∆[1 − τ ]
15.7
%∆y
-0.07
(0.22)
Frisch elasticity η F
-0.004
(0.014)

32.8
1.06
(0.42)
0.032
(0.013)

15.9
0.36
(0.65)
0.023
(0.041)

32.9
0.53
(0.78)
0.016
(0.024)

105
Yes
Yes

105
Yes
Yes

105
Yes
Yes

Panel A: Total sample
%∆[1 − τ ]
%∆y
Frisch elasticity η F

Observations
Canton group FE
Period FE

13.2
-0.01
(0.19)
-0.001
(0.014)

105
Yes
Yes

Notes: The table presents estimates of the labor supply effects of the tax holiday based on regressions
of the aggregate time series for all 5 groups of cantons on year dummies, canton group dummies, and an
indicator which is 1 in the year in which municipal and cantonal taxes are zero. OLS standard errors are
reported. The estimation sample covers the years 1990–2010 (including 1998). The outcome in columns
(1) and (3) is the share of wage earners in the population (in percent). The outcome in columns (2) and
(4) is the average annual wage per employee with positive wage earnings. Columns (1) and (2) focus on
men, columns (3) and (4) on women. Panel A is estimated using the full sample of adults aged 20–60.
Panels B and C report effects for married individuals aged 20–60 with and without children, respectively.
∆%y indicates the implied percent change in the outcome by dividing the estimated effect—the coefficient
of the indicator of the tax holiday—by the average level of the outcome variable in the year of the tax
holiday. The Frisch elasticity η F is estimated by dividing %∆y by the estimated percent change in net of
tax wage rates (%∆[1−τ ]) due to the tax holiday for the respective group. %∆[1−τ ] is based on changes
in average tax rates in column (1) and on changes in marginal tax rates in the remaining columns. For
each individual, ∆%[1−τ ] is computed based on hypothetical marginal or average tax rates on the actual
income earned during the tax-free years in the tax system in place prior to the tax holidays.

35

Table A3: Effect of Tax Holiday on Months Employed, Number of Jobs, Unemployment,
and Between Canton-Group Migration

VARIABLES
Panel A : Total sample
Effect in blank year
∆%y
Panel B : Men
Effect in blank year
∆%y
Panel C : Women
Effect in blank year
∆%y
Panel D : Married women
Effect in blank year
∆%y
Panel E : Very high earners
Effect in blank year
∆%y
Observations
Canton group FE
Period FE

(1)
Jobs per
employee

(2)
Months employed
(employees)

(3)
Unemployed /
population (in %)

(4)
Immigrant /
population (in %)

-0.0031
(0.0052)
0.14

0.0178
(0.0108)
0.15

-0.306
(0.239)
-6.25

-0.020
(0.052)
-4.80

-0.0030
(0.0055)
0.24

0.0173
(0.0112)
0.18

-0.307
(0.266)
-5.97

-0.027
(0.048)
-5.92

-0.0031
(0.0054)
0.02

0.0175
(0.0132)
0.10

-0.318
(0.223)
-6.49

-0.010
(0.056)
-3.88

-0.0033
(0.0066)
0.13

0.0152
(0.0194)
0.08

-0.303
(0.180)
-8.98

0.012
(0.024)
-1.60

-0.0028
(0.0155)
0.25

-0.0405
(0.0244)
-0.10

0.013
(0.108)
-20.01

-0.108
(0.098)
-36.68

105
Yes
Yes

105
Yes
Yes

105
Yes
Yes

105
Yes
Yes

Notes: The table presents estimates of the tax holiday on labor supply based on regressions of the
aggregate time series for the 5 groups of cantons on year dummies, group dummies, and an indicator
which is 1 in the year in which municipal and cantonal taxes are zero. The estimation sample covers the
years 1990–2010. The dependent variable in column (1) is the number of jobs per employee. Distinct
jobs are identified based on the number of distinct register entries with positive wage earnings in a given
year. The dependent variable in column (2) is the number of months in employment per employee during
the year. The dependent variable in column (3) is the number of individuals registered as unemployed
at the Swiss public employment service as a fraction of the total population (in %). The dependent
variable in column (4) is the number of persons moving into a canton of the respective canton group
as a fraction of the total population (in %). Panel A reports effects for the total sample aged 20–60.
Panel B and C report effects for males and females aged 20–60, respectively. Panel D reports effects for
married women aged 20–60 only. Panel E reports effects for individuals with more than 200k average
annual labor income in the 1994–1996 period.

36

Table A4: Macro Estimates of Labor Supply Effects by Pre-Holiday Labor Income Groups

Panel A: 1–25k CHF
%∆y
Frisch elasticity η F

Panel B: 25k–50k CHF
%∆y
Frisch elasticity η F

Panel C: 50k–100k CHF
%∆y
Frisch elasticity η F

Panel D: 100k–200k CHF
%∆y
Frisch elasticity η F

Panel E: More than 200k CHF
%∆y
Frisch elasticity η F

Observations
Canton group FE
Period FE

(1)
Wage empl.
(in %)

(2)
Wage earnings
per person

(3)
Wage earnings
per employee

(4)
Self-emp.
earnings per
self employed

-0.24
(0.37)
-0.025
(0.038)

0.72
(3.37)
0.034
(0.159)

1.48
(2.99)
0.070
(0.141)

5.09
(3.76)
0.236
(0.174)

-0.12
(0.24)
-0.010
(0.020)

0.34
(1.46)
0.013
(0.057)

0.52
(1.41)
0.020
(0.054)

6.14
(2.37)
0.238
(0.092)

-0.13
(0.18)
-0.009
(0.012)

0.42
(0.44)
0.013
(0.014)

0.57
(0.60)
0.018
(0.019)

7.97
(3.25)
0.261
(0.107)

-0.03
(0.36)
-0.001
(0.016)

1.65
(0.72)
0.037
(0.016)

1.70
(0.85)
0.038
(0.019)

10.86
(3.85)
0.248
(0.088)

-0.05
(0.68)
-0.001
(0.019)

4.91
(1.69)
0.086
(0.030)

5.08
(2.18)
0.089
(0.038)

10.13
(2.81)
0.182
(0.050)

105
Yes
Yes

105
Yes
Yes

105
Yes
Yes

80
Yes
Yes

Notes: The table presents estimates of the tax holiday (TH) on labor supply based on regressions of the aggregate time
series for the 5 groups of cantons on year dummies, group dummies, and an indicator which is 1 in the year in which
municipal and cantonal taxes are zero. The estimation sample covers the years 1990–2010 in columns 1–3 and 1987–2010
in column (4). Columns (1) and (2) are estimated using the full sample of adults aged 20–60. Column (3) focuses on
wage employees (individuals with positive wage earnings). Column (4) is based on all individuals that have positive selfemployment earnings. The outcome in column (1) is the employment rate (in percent). The outcome in column (2) is
annual labor earnings per person (including individuals with zero earnings). The outcome in column (3) is the average
wage per employee. The outcome in column (4) is average self-employment earnings (self-employment earnings of all
individuals with positive self-employment earnings in a given year). Individuals are assigned to Panels A–E based on their
average annual labor income in the 1994–1996 period. Individuals with zero earnings in 1994–1996 are dropped. The Frisch
elasticity η F is estimated by dividing %∆y (i.e. the estimated effect relative to the average level of the outcome variable
in the year of the tax holiday) by the estimated percent change in net of tax wage rates (%∆[1 − τ ]) due to the tax holiday
for the respective group. %∆[1 − τ ] is based on changes in average tax rates in column (1) and on changes in marginal tax
rates in the remaining columns. For each individual, %∆[1 − τ ] is computed based on hypothetical marginal or average
tax rates on the actual income earned during the tax-free years in the tax system in place prior to the tax holidays.

37

Table A5: Robustness Checks: Specification and Data Construction

VARIABLES
Panel A : Baseline
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel B : No controls
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel C : Controlling for income shifting
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel D : Controlling for unemployment
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel E : No imputed
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel F : Only second year
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel G : Only 2001/02
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F
Panel H : Uncapped earnings
log(1 − τit )
Frisch elasticity η F

(1)
Employee
0/1
All

(2)
Average wage
earnings
Men

(3)
Average wage
earnings
Women

(4)
Earnings per
self-employed
All

-0.012
(0.005)
-0.02 (0.006)

3,792
(606)
0.04 (0.006)

323
(251)
0.01 (0.005)

7,762
(1,827)
0.23 (0.054)

-0.011
(0.005)
-0.01 (0.006)

3,946
(596)
0.04 (0.006)

364
(239)
0.01 (0.005)

7,135
(1,800)
0.21 (0.053)

-0.014
(0.008)
-0.02 (0.009)

4,315
(1,213)
0.04 (0.012)

365
(395)
0.01 (0.008)

7,568
(1,895)
0.22 (0.055)

-0.013
(0.005)
-0.02 (0.006)

3,765
(468)
0.04 (0.004)

455
(254)
0.01 (0.005)

7,121
(1,742)
0.21 (0.051)

-0.016
(0.005)
-0.02 (0.007)

3,856
(484)
0.04 (0.004)

381
(185)
0.01 (0.004)

11,107
(2,144)
0.29 (0.058)

-0.013
(0.006)
-0.02 (0.007)

4,209
(558)
0.04 (0.005)

314
(140)
0.01 (0.003)

12,249
(2,366)
0.36 (0.070)

0.008
(0.010)
0.01 (0.012)

3,687
(2,490)
0.04 (0.026)

216
(775)
0.01 (0.016)

6,713
(1,809)
0.19 (0.053)

-0.012
(0.005)
-0.02 (0.006)

3,784
(670)
0.04 (0.007)

329
(230)
0.01 (0.004)

7,334
(2,377)
0.21 (0.068)

Notes: The table illustrates the robustness of our main results. It presents semi-elasticities derived from individual-level
IV regressions of labor supply outcomes on person and year fixed effects and log(1 − τit ), where τ is the average tax rate in
column (1) and the marginal tax rate in the other columns. log(1 − τit ) is instrumented with an indicator variable which is
1 in the year in which municipal and cantonal taxes are zero due to the tax holiday (equation 1). The dependent variable in
column (1) is an indicator whether a person has positive wage income in a given year. The dependent variable in columns
(2) and (3) is average wages of males (column 2) and females (column 3) with positive wage income in a given year. The
dependent variable in columns (4) is annual self-employment income per person (including 0) in a given year. The first
panel presents our baseline results (see Tables 3 and 5 for the definition of the estimation samples). Panel B excludes the
control variables included in the baseline. Panel C contains two control variables absorbing effects of the tax holiday in
the the year before and after the tax holiday, thus accounting for possible effects of the tax holidays on income shifting.
In Panel D, we control for the cantonal unemployment rate (based on register data). In Panel E, we discard observations
with imputed place of residence. In Panel F, the effect is only identified from the response in the second cantonal blank
year, controlling for the effect in the first. Similarly, Panel G identifies the effect only from the response in late-coming
cantons with tax holidays in 2001 and 2002. Panel H uses wage and self-employment incomes that are not capped at 2.5
Mio. in 2010 CHF. Standard errors are clustered on the level of commuting zones.

38

Table A6: Effect of Tax Holiday on Wage Earnings, Wage Rates, Hours Worked, and
Bonus Payments (Wage Structure Survey)

VARIABLES
Panel A : All workers
Effect in blank year
%∆y
Panel B : Individual contract
Effect in blank year
%∆y
Panel C : Collective agreement
Effect in blank year
%∆y
Panel D : Examining/Advising/Attesting
Effect in blank year
%∆y
Observations
Canton group FE
Period FE
Canton group trends

(1)
Hours
worked

(2)
Hourly
wage

(3)
Wage
earnings

(4)
Bonus
5K+

0.218
(0.324)
0.1%

0.164
(0.185)
0.5%

0.036
(0.040)
0.6%

0.007
(0.004)
9.4%

0.754
(0.430)
0.5%

0.327
(0.204)
0.9%

0.077
(0.047)
1.3%

0.007
(0.006)
7.2%

-0.535
(0.541)
-0.3%

0.080
(0.282)
0.2%

0.018
(0.043)
0.3%

0.013**
(0.005)
32.7%

1.138
(0.659)
0.7%

2.035***
(0.441)
4.3%

0.419***
(0.110)
4.8%

0.021
(0.017)
8.1%

27
Yes
Yes
Yes

27
Yes
Yes
Yes

27
Yes
Yes
Yes

27
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: The table presents estimates of the tax holiday on labor supply and wages based on regressions
of aggregate time series for three groups of cantons (cantons which transitioned in 1999, in 2001 and
in 2003) on year dummies, group dummies, linear time trends interacted with group dummies, and an
indicator which is 1 in the year in which municipal and cantonal taxes are zero. The estimation is based on
the wage structure surveys (LSE) 1994–2010 carried out bi-annually. The dependent variable in column
(1) is earnings in 2010 CHF in October of each year. Earnings include regular salaries and overtime
and other variable pay components (e.g. bonuses). The dependent variable in column (2) is hourly
wages, computed from October salaries in each year excluding overtime and variable pay components
(e.g. bonuses). The dependent variable in column (3) is employer-reported hours worked per worker in
October. Hours worked refer to contractual (i.e. normal) hours worked for workers with monthly wages
and to actual hours worked for workers paid by the hour. The dependent variable in column (4) is the
fraction of employees with bonuses above 5,000 in 2010 CHF. Panel A reports results for all employees
aged 20–60 with Swiss passport or residency permit C in the dataset, excluding public sector employees.
Panel B is restricted to workers with individual wage contract. Panel C is restricted to workers falling
under a collective (firm-, occupation-, or industry-wide) bargaining agreement. Panel D is restricted to
workers in jobs with the main activities examining, advising, and attesting.

39

