                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




FROM REVOLVING DOORS TO REGULATORY CAPTURE? EVIDENCE FROM PATENT
                           EXAMINERS

                                      Haris Tabakovic
                                    Thomas G. Wollmann

                                     Working Paper 24638
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24638


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2018




We thank Juan Alcacer, Marianne Bertrand, Eric Budish, Thom Covert, Janet Freilich, Kinda
Hachem, Elisabeth Kempf, Josh Lerner, Ben Roin, Scott Stern, Chad Syverson, Dennis Yao, as
well as conference discussants and seminar participants for helpful comments. We also thank Stu
Graham, Alan Marco, Andrew Toole, and other members of the USPTO Office of Chief
Economist for creating, documenting, and providing datasets that serve as the basis for much of
this paper. Excellent research assistance was provided by Jordan Bell-Masterson, Kavya
Garikipati, and Divya Vallabhaneni. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Haris Tabakovic and Thomas G. Wollmann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
From Revolving Doors to Regulatory Capture? Evidence from Patent Examiners
Haris Tabakovic and Thomas G. Wollmann
NBER Working Paper No. 24638
May 2018
JEL No. D72,K23,L51,O34

                                         ABSTRACT

Many regulatory agency employees are hired by the firms they regulate, creating a “revolving
door” between government and the private sector. We study these transitions using detailed data
from the US Patent and Trademark Office. We find that patent examiners grant significantly more
patents to the firms that later hire them and that much of this leniency extends to prospective
employers. These effects are strongest in years when firms are actively hiring, and these
relationships hold for the intensive margin of intellectual property protection. Ultimately, this
leads the agency to issue lower quality patents, which we measure in citations. Together with
other supporting evidence, we argue these results are suggestive of regulatory capture.


Haris Tabakovic
Harvard Business School - Cotting Hall
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
htabakovic@hbs.edu

Thomas G. Wollmann
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Thomas.Wollmann@chicagobooth.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24638
1     Introduction

Many regulatory agency employees follow brief, public sector experience with more lucrative work at

the firms they used to regulate. In several industries, the practice is so common that these agencies

appear to have “revolving doors.” This may begin with—and partly be motivated by—firms’ desires

to hire workers with agency experience. The concern, however, is that it leads to a quid pro quo: lax

supervision is exchanged for future employment. Whether explicit or tacit, this arrangement can

have first order welfare consequences stemming from policies that are ineffective at correcting market

failures and unmotivated to protect the public interest [Stigler, 1971, Peltzman, 1976].1,2 Despite this

concern, there is no empirical work studying individual public-to-private sector transitions among

regulatory agency employees at the decision level.

    One agency that both regulates a significant share of commerce and employs a large number of

revolving door workers is the United States Patent and Trademark Office (“USPTO”). The agency is

tasked with issuing patents, which incentivize effort and reward disclosure by granting inventors

a temporary right to exclude others from using the idea. When a patent application arrives at the

agency, it is quasi-randomly routed to a USPTO employee, called an examiner, working in Alexandria,

Virginia.3 These examiners decide whether or not to grant a patent to the inventor(s), so their decisions

affect investment [Budish, Roin, and Williams, 2015], the rate and direction of innovation [Moser, 2005,

Williams, 2013, Moser, 2013, Galasso and Schankerman, 2015], labor income [Kline, Petkova, Williams,

and Zidar, 2016], entrepreneurial activity [Farre-Mensa, Hegde, and Ljungqvist, 2017], and ultimately

industrial organization and economic growth [Jaffe and Lerner, 2004]. Many examiners, though, leave

the agency to join private sector law firms as patent practitioners—licensed specialists who represent

others in the patenting process. This provides increased pay and mobility but creates a potential conflict

of interest, since many examiners evaluate the applications of firms for whom they would like to work.

    To study these transitions, we construct an original dataset that links patent grant decisions to the

examiners who made them, and then ties these examiners to the firms that hired them. In particular,

we observe, for over one million applications, the name and address of the filing firm, the name and
    1 See also Levine and Forrence [1990] and Laffont and Tirole [1991] for more comprehensive reviews of earlier work. These

papers also reference helpful descriptive evidence on revolving doors, e.g. Breyer and Stewart [1979].
    2 It could also erode trust in government. This concern is particularly timely given the latest polls indicate only 19% of the

public believes that the federal government “is run for the benefit of all the people” (as compared to 65% in 1964, the first year
the poll was given). About three-quarters (76%) believe it is “run by a few big interests” (compared to 29% in 1964) [Pew, 2015].
    3 The office was in the neighboring town of Arlington until 2003. However, at the very end of our panel, the USPTO was in

the process of opening satellite offices in Michigan, Texas, California, and Colorado. The new USPTO offices accounted for a
negligible share of examiners in the panel, i.e. <1%, of examiners in our data.) The USPTO also introduced a teleworking option
for examiners at the end of our panel. That particular change affected only experienced examiners and does not impact our
analysis which focuses only on short-tenure junior employees, i.e. those who cycle through the revolving door.)



                                                                2
unique identifier of the examiner, the decisions he or she made, and the dates on which they were made.

For applications that receive grants, we observe the number of citations that the patent receives, which

provides a commonly-used proxy of quality. Separately, we observe periodic snapshots of the full list of

licensed practitioners, including their name and unique identifier, as well as the name and address of

their employer. We also supplement this data with biographical information (where available). In broad

terms, the data links, at the decision level, the individuals setting regulation and the firms affected by

that regulation to the individuals hired away from the regulator and firms hiring those individuals. To

our knowledge, this is the first study to make these connections.

    We investigate whether revolving door examiners behave differently towards future and prospective

employers, whether these differences are suggestive of regulatory capture, and whether they affect the

quality of regulation. Answering the first question establishes an empirical fact that we feel is important

on its own, due to the importance of regulatory consistency. The second presents more of a challenge.

It requires distinguishing between actions whose intent is to gain favor with a potential employer

and those that merely reflect employee preferences or reverse causality. Features of the setting are

helpful here. Unlike prior work that relied upon across-employee differences—or variation across other

dimensions—to assess intent, we can study within-employee within-firm differences. This is important,

since agency employees that do and do not leave for the private sector—as well as firms that do and do

not intensively hire agency employees—can vary on a host of unobservable dimensions. Moreover, for

reasons discussed below, examiner-firm match-specific preferences are likely less important than in

other regulator-regulated relationships. Additional tests, aided by supplementary data, also described

below, further help distinguish these explanations. The last question requires us to rule out that

examiners merely appear favorable by selecting high quality, easy-to-grant applications from the queue.

This would affect grant rates specific to certain examiner-firm pairs but on its own have no real effect.

The allocation of applications to examiners at the USPTO, however, is quasi-random [Williams, 2013].4

    We begin by showing that revolving door examiners grant 12.6-17.6% (8.5-11.9 percentage points)

more patents to firms that later hire them. This result is robust to varying the level of controls, e.g. the

inclusion or exclusion of examiner and firm fixed effects, or limiting the sample to only firms that hire

at least one examiner, which cuts the sample by roughly two-thirds. While the “headline” number

alone is not proof of capture, the robustness does suggest that unobservable differences—at least along

the aforementioned dimensions—are very small.
     4 Work by Righi and Simcoe [2017] shows that examiners do not specialize in high or low value applications, which supports

this assumption, though they provide other evidence of specialization. See Footnote 7 for more details.




                                                              3
   We next ask whether revolving door examiners extend this leniency to prospective employers as

well. Here we rely on two premises: first, that examiners face uncertainty about which firms will have

future job openings and, second, that conditional on the type of work, an employer’s location is the

most important attribute on which workers base their choices [Barber and Roehling, 1993, Turban,

Eyring, and Campion, 1993, Powell and Goulet, 1996]. Thus, we test whether they grant more patents

to other firms in close proximity to the firm that hired them (after excluding any observations where

the filing firm later hired the examiner). We find that examiners extend much of the leniency afforded

to their future employers to other firms that are nearby, and that these results are robust to varying

the granularity of the controls and restricting the sample to only firms or cities that hire at least

one examiner. To be indicative of regulatory capture, this approach requires only that examiners’

match-specific preference shocks are independent across locations, rather than across firms. Hence it

provides somewhat stronger evidence.

   We then expand the analysis to include alternate research designs. First, we plot the coefficients

of interest, by year, against measures of private sector hiring intensity. If revolving door examiners

exhibit leniency to gain favor—or at least not aggravate—prospective employers, then our estimates

should load on periods when firms are frequently hiring. We find precisely this relationship. Since the

level of economy-wide private sector hiring is unrelated to idiosyncratic examiner preferences, this

result mitigates endogeneity concerns. Second, we incorporate data on the educational backgrounds

of the examiners. This approach relies on the premise that prior residency—in particular, where one

was educated—affects location preferences. Thus, if revolving door examiners are lenient towards

their potential employers, then they should grant more patents to firms that are closer to their alma

maters. The data are consistent with the premise as well as the conclusion. Since alma mater location is

“realized” prior to examination decisions, this mitigates reverse causality concerns. Importantly, this

relationship does not exist among examiners that do not become patent practitioners, which helps

rule out “boosterism” as an alternative explanation of this result. Third, we exploit recently-released

patent claims data to construct two measures that the USPTO believes best capture how much patent

scope is reduced by examination, i.e. proxy for how tough the regulator is. We then replicate the

first set of tables while replacing the left-hand side of the estimating equations with these measures.

We show that effects on the intensive margin of intellectual property protection are consistent with

those on the extensive margin. This finding—and the one immediately below—support the notion

that our grant-related results are driven by leniency rather than examiners’ attempts to signal they can

effectively negotiate the prosecution process.


                                                   4
   Finally, we ask whether this behavior results in lower quality patent grants. Examiner leniency

lowers the threshold for which an application results in a grant, so patents granted by revolving door

examiners to their future and prospective employers should receive fewer citations. In line with prior

findings, the results here indicate that patents granted to the firm that later hires a revolving door

examiner receive 21-27% fewer citations. Those granted to firms located near the one that hires the

revolving door examiner receive many fewer, as well.

   We argue that these results, taken together, suggest regulatory capture. The relative narrowness

of the examiner-practitioner pay gap means we likely understate the problem relative to many other

regulator-regulated relationships, although our results should be interpreted carefully. First, while the

firms may not be blindly hiring examiners who treat them favorably, we believe that their ability to

tell good from bad potential employees is not significantly hindered by this behavior. Several facts

support our claim. Firms have access to examiners’ responses to all applications, not just their own, so

there are many other observations on which they can gauge ability or ambition. Also, examiners can

presumably still signal their type while granting a patent. (In the academic profession, this would be

akin to submitting a referee report that acknowledges a paper’s weaknesses in a sophisticated way but

ultimately dismisses those shortcomings.) Moreover, firms still subject ex-examiners to an interview

process as they would any other prospective employees. Beyond all this, patent practitioners face

steep quotas on observable quantity and quality measures. Thus, self-selection may limit how careful

firms must be in screening potential workers. Also, examination leniency may not be the primary

motivation for hiring examiners. Law firms focusing on intellectual property protection independently

value agency experience. Whether or not regulatory capture is the main reason for the USPTO’s

revolving door should not diminish interest in quantifying its effects (although it will affect how policy

addresses it, as discussed below). Further, note that nothing here implies explicit collusion. Finally,

the preferential treatment of prospective employers is probably not the most pressing problem faced

by this particular agency. Instead, we see the USPTO as a data-rich setting to answer basic questions

about regulator behavior.

   In terms of policy, we caution that that these results do not in themselves suggest immediate

changes, e.g. the implementation of a “cooling off” period akin to the ones faced by accountants and

lobbyists. Altering employment contracts to prohibit examiners from working in private sector roles

for which they are best suited can dissuade talented people from joining the USPTO in the first place.

Even if revolving door examiners are biased towards some firms, their work may be higher quality

overall. The variation we exploit cannot cleanly evaluate competence-collusion tradeoffs, although we


                                                    5
argue it provides evidence suggestive of regulatory capture and should merit additional scrutiny.

   This paper contributes to a growing empirical literature on regulator behavior. Prior work exploiting

across-state or across-time variation has tended not to find evidence of regulatory capture among,

for example, bank examiners [Agarwal, Lucca, Seru, and Trebbi, 2014, Lucca, Seru, and Trebbi, 2014].

Related to this, private law firms defending companies targeted by the SEC actually hire harsher

prosecutors, though this result is not defendant-specific [deHaan, Kedia, Koh, and Rajgopal, 2015].

These are provocative findings. We contribute by studying employer-firm relationships, incorporating

the notion of “prospective employers” into the analysis, and intersecting these with novel supporting

evidence and measures of decision quality. Analogous problems arise in the private sector, e.g., due to

credit rating analysts join firms whose credit they previously rated. Interestingly, Cornaggia, Cornaggia,

and Xia [2016] show that corporate finance credit rating analysts issue higher ratings to firms for whom

they later work, but the effect is modest—roughly 10% of a standard deviation in the ratings. Kempf

[2015] finds roughly the same result among leverage finance credit analysts but also shows that this

group of analysts is more accurate overall. These are compelling results, though it is somewhat unclear

how informative they are about behavior among government employees, the quality of whose work is

not disciplined by market forces.

   Also related is work on lobbying [Vidal, Draca, and Fons-Rosen, 2012, Bertrand, Bombardini, and

Trebbi, 2014]. This literature differs from our paper, however, in that previous relationships—rather

than the prospect of future employment—influence behavior. It also differs in that policy outcomes are

unobserved, so changes in administrative or regulatory behavior must be inferred. Lastly the paper

aids in understanding how patent rights are allocated in the United States [Cockburn, Kortum, and

Stern, 2002, Lemley and Shapiro, 2005, Alcacer and Gittelman, 2006, Lemley and Sampat, 2012, Frakes

and Wasserman, 2016a].

   The outline of this paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the patenting process at the USPTO, and

the roles that patent agents, attorneys, and examiners play in it. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4

introduces the empirical framework. Section 5 reports grant-related findings, while Section 6 reports

quality-related results. Section 7 concludes.




                                                    6
2     Institutional background

Applying for US patent protection

The USPTO is tasked with issuing patents, which grant the inventor the temporary, monopoly right

to exclude others from making or using the named invention in exchange for its public disclosure.

The process begins with an application, which may be submitted by either the inventor or a licensed

practitioner.5 Initial filing fees are several hundred dollars.6 All new patent applications are sorted

based on the type of technology, and directed to the appropriate “art unit”—the group of examiners

tasked with examining that subject matter. Art units are highly specialized. For example, units

2687, 2688, and 2689 all handle “Dynamic Storage Systems,” but the first of these handles only

the “Mechanical parts of the Disk Drives” while the latter two handle “Signal Processing & Control

Processing” aspects. Once directed to the particular art unit, the new patent applications are then

randomly allocated to that art unit’s examiners,7 most of whom work at the Alexandria, Virginia

campus.8

    The core of the application is a set of one or more claims. These define the patent’s exclusionary

scope, i.e. the extent of intellectual property protection. As an example, Orville and Wilbur Wright

claimed a “class of flying machines in which...one or more aeroplanes are moved through the air

(...)”.9 Examiners decide whether to allow or reject the claims. They also provide reasons behind their

decisions, which may aid the applicant in revising the claims to have them allowed. The criteria for

claims to be allowed are novelty, usefulness, and non-obviousness. An initial rejection of some or all

claims is very common and referred to as a “non-final rejection.” In response, applicants can modify or

remove claims.

    The process, called “patent prosecution,” may go back and forth several times. Each submission,

modification, and appeal, however, requires additional fees—often times stretching into the thousands
    5 A patent can have one or more applicants which can be individual inventors or organizations—either public entities,

universities or private firms.
    6 Filing fees depend on the size and the type of the patent applicant, and a slew of other factors. For example, requesting

accelerated patent examination can cost between $1,000 and $4,000, depending on the applicant size and type. Requesting
additional time to reply to examiner comments can cost between $50 and $200 for a one month extension, and between $750 and
$3,000 for a five month extension, both depending on the applicant type and size.
    7 Recent work by Righi and Simcoe [2017] shows that examiners do not specialize in high or low value applications, which

tends to rule out the possibility that revolving door examiners are selecting (and/or being allocated) easy-to-grant applications.
Moreover, if one expects USPTO managers to allocate easy-to-grant applications to themselves or their close colleagues, then this
result more broadly suggests that deducing quality from a cursory reading of a patent is simply hard to do. The authors also
show examiners don’t specialize in applications with long or short claims, although they do specialize in particular technologies.
Since our main specifications condition on the examiner, specialization across examiners should not bias our results. Furthermore,
specialization is less likely among revolving door examiners, who typically leave after only a few years at the agency.
    8 See Footnote 3 for more detail on the location of the examiners.
    9 US Patent No. 821,393.




                                                                7
of dollars. Patent prosecution ends with one of the following: the examiner allows a portion of the

claims and the filer is satisfied with this allowance, in which case a patent is issued; or the filer

abandons the application. As Roin [2016] points out, nearly all applications can, in practice, result in

a grant—the filer can simply narrow the claim language to suit the examiner. Abandonment is best

viewed as the case where the examiner insists on such narrow claims that filer deems the application

no longer worth pursuing. Thus, the binary outcome of whether the application resulted in a grant

approximates the somewhat more complicated result.10


2.1     Examiners

Of more than 12,000 USPTO employees, 70% are patent examiners. The job requires a minimum of

a bachelor’s degree in the subject matter covered by an art unit. Many examiners have masters or

doctoral degrees, and most are recruited directly out of school. Their pay depends on the General

Schedule, i.e. the “GS” government pay scale. In an ongoing effort to retain staff, the USPTO has

secured incentive pay to encourage higher production, although these are dull—typically not exceeding

10% of base pay. After two years at the agency, examiners typically reach pay grades of GS-9 to GS-11.

With incentive pay, these equate to pay of roughly $63,000 and $87,000 per year, respectively.11

      Before transitioning into an art unit, all new patent examiners are trained at the agency for several

months. Statute requires that a supervisory patent examiner (“SPE”) reviews all examined applications.

Yet for several reasons this approval is mostly a “rubber stamp.”12 First, SPEs are busy with their own

prosecution cases. Second, rejections of junior examiner submissions slow production, and SPEs are

incentivized to maximize the output of their art units. Third, examiners can wait until the end of a

reporting cycle to dump a large number of cases on an SPEs desk and completely overwhelm them.13

Lack of examiner oversight is a well-known problem at the USPTO and has triggered both a detailed

report by the Office of Inspector General14 and a joint hearing by the US House of Representatives

Ethics and Oversight Committees. As a result, even junior examiners have great discretion over grant
    10 We rely on this approximation throughout the paper, with the exception of a brief discussion at the end of Section 5 and a

more detailed discussion, with accompanying tables, in the Appendix, which show that effects on the intensive margin of patent
protection are consistent with those on the extensive margin.
    11 See http://federalpay.org for individual and summary statistics for federal salaries (retrieved December 16, 2016). See

https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/salaries-wages/2016/general-schedule/ for GS salaries across metropolitan areas
(retrieved December 16, 2016).
    12 See the initial draft of a report by the Office of Inspector General that was leaked to the The Washington Post. The

report states, for example, that “investigators found that first-line supervisors feel powerless to discipline poor performers”
and that “inconsistent enforcement ... has rendered the existing controls completely ineffective.” The report can be found
at https://www.washingtonpost.com/apps/g/page/politics/initial-report-on-us-patent-and-trademark-office-investigation-
of-telework-fraud-allegations/1244/ (retrieved November 17, 2016).
    13 Ibid.
    14 Ibid. See also Frakes and Wasserman [2016b].




                                                                8
decisions—an important factor driving the underlining data generating process in this paper.


2.2     Practitioners

The time and complexity of the patenting process leads most inventors to hire a patent practitioner

to write the application and manage correspondence with the USPTO throughout the process. These

practitioners are employed primarily by law firms. Even large, frequent filers such as Lockheed Martin

and General Electric outsource the bulk of their filings to law firms that specialize in matters related to

intellectual property protection. These firms seek out employees with past examination experience. In

fact, examiner hires are an important selling point for law firms and even mentioned in promotional

materials, including their websites. For example, Oliff states “most of our associate[s] and other

attorneys are registered to practice before the PTO, and many are former PTO Examiners,”15 while

Fish & Richardson states, “more than a dozen Fish attorneys had prior careers at the USPTO.”16

      The salaries of practitioners are much higher than those of examiners. This is one of the main factors

driving high attrition at the USPTO, and it is a common feature of many “regulated firm-regulatory

agency” relationships. Examiners without a law degree can register as patent agents and expect to earn

$100,000 per year or more in most metropolitan areas. Those with a law a degree can register as patent

attorneys and make as much as $160,000 per year starting out.


2.3     Examiner–practitioner interactions

Throughout prosecution, the patent examiner and correspondent are acutely aware of each others’

identity. To see this, one need go only as far as the USPTO cover page, which sits atop the large volume

of transmissions that pass from the agency to the filer. Displayed prominently on each, alongside very

little additional information, are the name and address of the filing firm and the first and last name of

the examiner. To make this concrete, the Appendix provides examples of cover sheets that preceded the

non-final rejection notice for three well-known, relatively recent applications. These include Google’s

1998 application for the PageRank algorithm, GoPro’s 2004 application for an attachment of a camera

to a body, and Square’s 2010 application for a mobile phone attachment that captures credit card

information. Using the Google example, one can see that the transmission is addressed to Harrity &

Snyder of Fairfax, Virginia. (This firm and location appear below in Table III and Table IV, respectively).
  15 See   https://www.oliff.com/practice-areas/patent/ (retrieved January 2, 2017).
  16 See   http://www.fr.com/services/patent-law/ (retrieved January 2, 2017).




                                                               9
Tantamount, the examiner knows that the firm knows exactly whose decision this is. Interestingly,

nowhere does the form provide space to list the firm actually employing the named inventor.17

      Filers can also request interviews with examiners to discuss a application. In these cases, examiners

and filers speak on the phone or meet in person, typically at USPTO headquarters. The USPTO does not,

unfortunately, strictly require examiners record these interviews, so we cannot observe their frequency.

This provides the opportunity for richer interactions, even if these go unmeasured in our study.



3      Data

3.1     Sources

The data come from four main sources. First, the Patent Examination Research Dataset (“PatEx”)

provides application-level data including the name and unique identifier of the examiner, the name

and address of the filing firm, the final decision made by the examiner, and the date on which it was

made.18 The dataset covers substantively all filings between November 29, 2001 and December 31,

2015,19 and for those applications that results in grants, coverage extends back to at least July 1995

[Graham, Marco, and Miller, 2015].20 PatEx is derived from the Public Patent Application Information

Retrieval system (“Public PAIR”), carefully documented by the Office of Chief Economist of the USPTO,

and posted “for public use and [to] encourage users to identify fixes and improvements.”

      Second, the Patent Practitioner Roster lists all individuals registered to practice before the USPTO,

as well as the name and address of their current place of business.21 The list is publicly posted and

constantly updated by the Office of Enrollment and Discipline of the USPTO. As stated above, only

registered practitioners can legally file on behalf of inventors, and since the list is intended, at least in

part, as a resource for inventors looking for representation, the office ostensibly takes availability and

accuracy seriously. The USPTO does not maintain historical lists, but (in addition to the current roster)
    17 No mention of Google, GoPro, or Square appears anywhere on these sheets. All were incorporated when these documents

were mailed, and all but Google were incorporated when the applications were filed. Note that this is not to say that the examiner
is always unaware of or cannot ascertain the identity of the firm that developed the technology—only that this information is
much less salient than the law firm filing the application.
    18 USPTO. https://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/electronic-data-products/patent-examination-research-dataset-

public-pair (retrieved on October 16, 2016).
    19 This paper studies utility patents, which comprise roughly 94.3% of filings. (The remainder cover plants and designs.)

Coverage for regular non-provisional utility patent applications is 95% [Graham, Marco, and Miller, 2015]. The small number
of applications falling outside PatEx do so for idiosyncratic reasons, e.g. are non-public for reasons of national security. The
data is incomplete prior to December 2000, since applications filed prior to that date were not subject to the America Inventors
Protection Act (“AIPA”), which stipulated all non-provisional patent applications be published, even if abandoned. The effects of
this legislation on the coverage of PatEx are evident in the data; see the Appendix for more details.
    20 Law changes that take effect June 8, 1995 affect, among other things, the term of US patents. These create a spike in filings,

and may change other features of the process. To avoid these issues, we merely begin the panel in July 1996.
    21 USPTO. https://oedci.uspto.gov/OEDCI/ (retrieved on October 16, 2016).




                                                                10
we can retrieve “snapshots” of the roster for January 2009, October 2011, February 2013, and March

2015 using the Internet Archive.22 The office issues unique identification numbers to practitioners

upon registration, so joining lists is straightforward, and turnover is low among this group. Thus, this

data represents a nearly-complete list of the work histories of all examiners who leave the USPTO to

practice patent prosecution. We confirmed the high degree of completeness using a randomly drawn

5% sample of examiners using several online resources (described two paragraphs below).

      Third, Thomson Innovation provides forward patent citations, i.e. a count of the number of times a

patent is cited by other published patents. This proxies for quality of the underlying innovation.23,24

Citations accrue from patents published by all national offices.25 This data merges exactly to PatEx on

the USPTO-assigned patent number, which is a unique identifier.

      Fourth, we compile educational histories by combining data from an employment-oriented social

networking website, Martindale-Hubbard’s attorney directory, and the employee profiles hosted on the

websites of law firms. In particular, we record the name and address of any degree-granting institutions

that the examiner attended26 and merge to PatEx on the basis of first, middle, and last name.


3.2     Variable descriptions

The first main outcome of interest, Grant, takes a value of one if PatEx indicates the application’s

status is “issued” and zero if the status is “abandoned.” Observations are dropped if the application

status is “pending.” Pending applications are those that have yet to be examined and are in the

USPTO examination backlog. The second is Citations, which counts references from other published

patents. Year fixed effects correspond to the date of the examiner’s last action on an application, i.e. an

allowance preceding a grant or the last rejection preceding abandonment. Technology center and the

more specific Patent class fixed effects provide alternate, related ways to distinguish between types of

technology.

      To construct distance measures between educational institutions and filing firms, we rely on the

latitude and longitude assigned to five digit US ZIP codes. Relative to addresses, five digit ZIP codes
   22 Internet  Archive. http://web.archive.org/web/*/https://oedci.uspto.gov/OEDCI/ (retrieved on October 16, 2016).
   23 We   considered the proportion of claims that are invalidated in the litigation process, but the incidence of litigation is far too
low to be useful to our analysis. We also considered the proportion of decisions that conflicted with those from the USPTO’s
European or Japanese counterparts, but the incidence of multi-jurisdiction filing and discord is also too low to be useful.
   24 It includes examiner-added citations, since other data begins in 1995 but this distinction is only observable starting in 2001.
   25 A prior version of the paper erroneously stated that we cover only US patents, though the results are not sensitive to this.
   26 A large number of examiners attend law school on a part-time basis in Washington, DC while working at the USPTO. Since

graduation dates are not reliably observed, we cannot distinguish examiners who attend Washington, DC law schools prior to
working at the agency, i.e. in the normal course of their education, from those who attend merely as an artifact of working at the
agency. As a result, we exclude law schools. Including them provides very little information about location preferences and
instead introduces a very large amount of right-hand side measurement error.


                                                                   11
map easily and quickly to geospatial coordinates and do not result in any meaningful measurement

error (relative to the variation that we consider). When an examiner has attended multiple schools, we

use the minimum distance between the filing firm and the set of schools in question. For example, if

the examiner holds degrees from both Berkeley and Clemson, we use the distance to Berkeley if the

filing firm was based in San Francisco.


3.3     Summary statistics

Table I provides an initial summary of the data used to assess patent grant behavior. It covers just

over one million patents, 63% of which result in a grant. The mean examiner decision (across the

longitudinal dimension of the panel) occurs early in 2011. Nearly 30% of applications are filed by

firms that hire at least one examiner, and 7% of applications are examined by employees who become

practitioners.


                                            [Table I about here.]


      Table II provides an initial summary of the data used to assess patent quality. Citations are only

available for granted patents, so the sample size is smaller despite the longer panel. Patents accrue an

average of 11.6 citations. The distribution include a large number of zeros and a small number of very

highly cited patents. The other dimensions of the data are distributed similarly to the sample used to

assess grant behavior. Since earlier patents have more time to accrue acknowledgements, there is a

clear age pattern in forward citations. All empirical specifications include year fixed effects, though,

controlling for this pattern.


                                            [Table II about here.]


      Table III summarizes the data across the firms that most frequently hire examiners. Notably, all

are law firms. Most specialize in intellectual property or at least heavily emphasize this part of their

practice. Finnegan, Henderson, Farabow, Garrett & Dunner, LLP (“Finnegan”) hires the largest number

of examiners. Oblon, McClelland, Maier & Neustadt, LLP (“Oblon”) files the most applications. Overall

grant rates vary across firms although the majority fall close to the group average of 65%, which is

close to the average rate for all filers.


                                            [Table III about here.]




                                                      12
      Table IV describes the geographic distribution. Almost half of the examiners who become prac-

titioners remain in the Washington metropolitan area, including cities like Alexandria, Arlington,

DC, McLean, and Reston. The balance spread is throughout the country. New York City, Chicago,

San Francisco, and Boston are all heavily represented. Other large and/or R&D-focused cities are

represented, including Dallas, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and San Diego. Applications are distributed

similarly to hires, with some minor exceptions. For example, cities near the USPTO headquarters

are slightly over-represented in terms of hiring. Cities such as Minneapolis, Houston, and Irvine are

somewhat under-represented.

                                                    [Table IV about here.]



4      Model

4.1     Conceptual framework

We model the decision of examiner i to grant intellectual property protection to firm j is given by27


                                                      yij = θxij + ηij + eij .                                                    (1)


y denotes the extent of protection. x denotes how much i would like to work at j. θ reflects capture in a

straightforward way: x directly influences y.28 If the parameter is positive, for example, then examiners

are lenient on the firms for whom they would like to work. The remaining terms, η and e, reflect the

degree to which the examiner believes the filer genuinely deserves intellectual property protection.

They differ, though, in that η also determines x while e does not. W denotes any factors observable to

the econometrician (except for `, described below). Without loss of generality, let ηij = Wij γ + η̃ij and

eij = Wij π + ẽij .

      The presence of η in Equation 1 is not merely hypothetical. In most industries, regulatory agency

employees who are most enthusiastic about the activities of the regulated firms are also most likely to
    27 We give agency to the examiners and take as given the human resources policies of the firm or customs of society, which

are longer-lived entities. We remain agnostic as to whether examiners are responding to social norms or an explicit quid quo pro,
though in this setting we find the former more likely. Also, for simplicity, we model the outcome of patent examination and
abstract away from the underlying choice problem. Non-x terms map to, in the latent decision problem, the utility derived from
accurate decisions, e.g. those that avoid censure by management. x maps to, in the latent decision problem, utility derived from,
e.g., later working in a high paying private sector position or not violating a norm.
    28 We take as given that the direct effect of x on y reflects the examiner’s desire to gain favor with, or at least not aggravate,

a prospective employer. An ostensibly plausible alternative explanation for this relationship is that examiners draw inference
about a prospective employer’s quality based on the quality of their applications, which correlates with the grant rate. This
seems unlikely, since examiners have immediate access to much more precise information based on all applications, including
informative summary statistics like average grant rates.


                                                                 13
seek employment at those firms. Similarly, firms that are the most skillful in attracting job applications

may also be the most successful in receiving regulatory approvals. Either creates a correlation between

grants and hires, even in the absence of rent-seeking behavior. A rich set of controls can mitigate this

problem—examiner and firm level fixed effects, for example, will subsume both of the aforementioned

relationships. Even with these controls, residual variation can create a material problem. We address

these match-specific preference shocks, denoted by η̃, at length below.

      The examiner’s desire to work at a firm is given by


                                                  xij = λ`ij + κηij + νij .                                             (2)


` reflects firm attributes that are observable to the econometrician and determine where an examiner
would like to work, but that are unlikely to otherwise influence examination. ` can be a vector or scalar

and take continuous or discrete values. Since prior survey-based studies indicate that conditional on

the type of work, the location of an employer is the most important attribute on which workers base

their preferences [Barber and Roehling, 1993, Turban, Eyring, and Campion, 1993, Powell and Goulet,

1996], we base ` on geography. ν denotes other factors that influence x but not y. Without loss of

generality, let νij = Wij µ + ν̃ij .


4.2     Estimating the effect on grants

We begin by estimating a linear probability model, substituting Grant for y, so that the outcome of

the examination process is binary. Since comparisons between examiners who do and do not become

practitioners—or between firms that do and do not intensively hire examiners—reflect factors besides

regulatory capture, we focus on whether individual examiners are especially lenient on particular firms

or sets of firms. We remain agnostic as to what systematic differences across examiners and firms

indicate (though this is not to say that only “within” estimates are policy relevant).29


4.2.1    Initial specifications

We first assess whether examiners are lenient on firms that later hire them. We assume that examiners

apply to positions at, and ultimatley are employed by, firms for whom they most want to work.30 With
  29 Heterogeneous behavior across agency employees, for example, creates “inconsistent regulation” (in the language of

Agarwal, Lucca, Seru, and Trebbi [2014]). Large inefficiencies often result. See their paper for a more in-depth discussion.
  30 Formally, we require E[x |W, x ? = 1] exceeds E[x |W, x ? = 0].




                                                             14
time subscripts, the estimating equation is


                                           Grantijt = Wijt φ1 + β 1 xij? + ξ ijt ,                                   (3)


where xij? = 1 if j hires i and xij? = 0 otherwise. β 1 is the parameter of interest.

    Endogeneity is a potential concern.31 When E[η̃ |W, x ? = 1] exceeds E[η̃ |W, x ? = 0], non-zero

variance of η̃ results in βˆ1 > 0 even when θ = 0. In this case, the researcher infers regulatory capture

when it does not occur. Aspects of our setting and research design, though, mitigate the problem.

First, granular right-hand side control variables limit the scope of the confounding factors. In the

main specifications below, for example, W comprises examiner and firm (as well as year) fixed effects.

This confines the source of the endogeneity to examiner-firm match-specific preference shocks that

simultaneously influence hiring and granting behavior. These shocks can be problematic if examiners

are particularly enthusiastic about certain brands relative to others, though substantively all revolving

door employees of the USPTO leave for law rather than R&D firms. While individuals may feel strongly

about, for example, Google relative to Samsung or Nokia, they are presumably much less likely to

feel strongly about, say, Foley & Lardner relative to Sughrue Mion or Fish & Richardson.32 These

shocks can also be a problem when examiners have idiosyncratic tastes for some types of technology

over others, are exposed to a range of technologies at the USPTO, and join firms that specialize. The

second of these, though, is ruled out, since examiners are administratively grouped within the USPTO

by specialized “art units,” each of which covers only a narrow amount of technological scope.33 We

believe endogeneity is not a principal concern in our setting. However, it cannot be completely ruled

out on the basis of this argument alone, so it is addressed using alternate research designs below.

    Reverse causality is another potential concern. We infer preferences that influence patent grant

decisions from labor market outcomes, even if those outcomes are realized after examination decisions

are made. This assumes that regulatory agency employees do not draw inference about the quality

of private sector employers from the quality of their applications. If they do, then an examiner who

receives, purely by chance, high quality submissions from a particular firm will be more likely to

grant that firm patents as well as work there. However, law firms that hire examiners are large and

well-known. A host of reputable media outlets and industry publications rank their practices by office
    31 A problem outside the framework presented here exists if examiners choose which applications to work on. To appear

favorable, they might select easy-to-approve applications from firms for whom they would like to work. The quasi-random
allocation of applications to examiners rules this out. See Footnote 7 for details.
    32 These are three commonly-observed law firms in our sample.
    33 As an example, art unit 2687 examines only “the mechanical parts of disk drives for dynamic storage systems.”




                                                            15
location and by specialty. Again, while we believe reverse causality is not a first order concern, it cannot

be ruled out on this basis alone, so it is addressed using alternate research designs below.

   We then assess whether the leniency that examiners show to the firms that actually hire them

extends to the firms for whom they might have worked. We infer the set of prospective employers from

observed location choices. For example, if we compare two groups of revolving door examiners, with

the first taking jobs in Chicago and the second taking jobs in New York, then we infer that Chicago was

more preferable than New York for the first group relative to the second. To minimize the confounding

influence of ηijt , we discard all observations in which the filing firm hired the examiner.

   Using this approach, the estimating equation is


                                                           ?         ?
                                  Grantijt = Wijt φ2 + δ2 `1ij + ρ2 `2ij + τijt ,                        (4)


for observations in which xij? = 0. ` is a two element vector. `1ij
                                                                ? takes a value of one if j resides in the

                                                       ? takes a value of one if j resides in the city
ZIP code in which i was hired and zero otherwise, and `2ij

(but not ZIP code) in which i was hired and zero otherwise. δ2 and ρ2 are the parameters of interest.

   Note that the threats to identification are somewhat smaller here. Examiner-firm match-specific

preference shocks are no longer per se a problem: to bias estimates from Equation 4, η̃ must vary across

geographic locations as well. For example, idiosyncratic tastes for Google over Samsung or for Foley &

Lardner over Sughrue Mion are not on their own problematic (though idiosyncratic tastes for mobile

phone patents filed in Boston rather than San Francisco still are).


4.2.2   Further addressing endogeneity

Examiner behavior intended to influence employers should be most pronounced when firms are actively

hiring and subside in periods when they are not. The data indicates considerable variation along this

dimension: more than three times as many examiners join private sector firms as patent practitioners

in a “boom” year such as 2005 compared to a “bust” year such as 2009. Variation along this dimension,

though, is plausibly unrelated to the magnitude of examiners’ idiosyncratic preference shocks. As

a result, we can further address endogeneity by plotting the estimated coefficients by year against

measure of hiring intensity.

   To do so, Grant is first regressed on (a) an indicator for whether the examiner was later hired as a

practitioner interacted with the year, (b) an indicator for whether the filing firm hired that examiner

interacted with the year, (c) year fixed effects, (d) examiner fixed effects, and (e) firm fixed effects.


                                                        16
We plot coefficients on terms in (b), which are year-specific, against the number of examiners hired

by private sector firms in that particular year. Then, we repeat this exercise but use city-specific

matches (with the appropriate sample and fixed effects adjustments). Finally, for a sense of robustness

around these relationships and a broader, economy-wide measure of hiring intensity, we replicate these

graphs but replace the number of examiner hires with year-over-year private sector seasonally-adjusted

employment gains or losses reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics34 to similar effect.


4.2.3      Further addressing reverse causality

To correctly interpret estimates from Equations 3-4, we require that subsequent employment drives

examination decisions, not the other way around. To support this interpretation, we turn to data

on examiners’ educational backgrounds—in particular, the location of their alma maters. As we

argue immediately below, these locations provide examiner-specific observables that shift employment

preferences and, critically, are realized before examination decisions are made.

    Most examiners join the agency directly after obtaining their undergraduate or graduate degree(s).

While the USPTO presented the best job opportunity upon graduation, valuable other opportunities

arise after a few years of experience to examiners who would like to become practitioners. Prior survey-

based studies indicate that workers prefer jobs near where they have lived and/or were educated.35 In

our context, this means that revolving door examiners want to work at firms that are closer, on average,

to their alma maters. Moreover, if revolving door examiners exhibit leniency towards prospective

employers, then they will grant more patents to firms that are closer, on average, to where they were

educated. We assume that, at least as a first order approximation, the location of one’s alma mater does

not directly influence grant decisions, at least within the narrowly-defined type of technology that one

is exposed to within the USPTO.

    We first test whether examiners do, in fact, take jobs nearer to where they were educated. We then

test whether revolving door examiners grant more patents to firms located near their alma maters. A

positive relationship, though, raises the question of whether the results merely reflect “boosterism”—a

desire to support people and firms in close geographic proximity to their school for reasons that have
   34 US  Dept. of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Current employment survey.” http://www.bls.gov (retrieved July 29, 2017).
   35 Boyd,  Lankford, Loeb, and Wyckoff [2005] shows that most public school teachers take a job close to their hometowns or
their alma mater, and Reininger [2012] shows this extends to college graduates more generally. A survey in Richardson [1966]
states that the preference among University of North Carolina graduates to stay in the Raleigh-Durham area may reflect a desire to
preserve “the Southern way of life.” We are agnostic, though, as to precisely what drives the relationship. Proximity to family and
friends is one likely explanation, especially considering that many examiners attend public colleges, so their alma maters is likely
to be in the same state as where they grew up. (On this last point, see, e.g., http://www.collegexpress.com/lists/list/percentage-
of-out-of-state-students-at-public-universities/360/ (retrieved January 2, 2017)).




                                                                17
nothing to do with gaining favor among prospective employers. To assess this concern, we separately

test whether the same relationship exists for non-revolving door examiners, i.e. employees who did

not join private sector firms as practitioners. This test mitigates the boosterism concern if the positive

relationship exists only for revolving door examiners.


4.3     Estimating the effects on patent quality

We also study whether this leniency results in lower quality patents. Applications affected by capture

face lower thresholds to receive grants. If θ > 0, then for the subset of applications that do result in

grants, those affected by capture will be of systematically lower quality, which we measure in forward

citations.

      The estimating equations for the linear models are given by


                                        Citesijt = Wijt φ3 + β 3 xij? + ψijt                              (5)


and
                                                            ?         ?
                                   Citesijt = Wijt φ4 + δ4 `1ij + ρ4 `2ij + ε ijt ,                       (6)


where, in the case of Equation 6, we restrict to (i, j, t) observations such that xij? = 0. The parameters of

interest are β 3 , δ4 , and ρ4 . We also estimate negative binomial and quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson

models, the later of which better address the count nature of the data [Wooldridge, 1999, Rysman and

Simcoe, 2008, Bertanha and Moser, 2016]. (Note that if the parameters of interest are negative, then

these specifications also further minimize concerns over reverse causality, which were raised above.)



5      Effects on patent grants

5.1     Do examiners favor their future employers?

Table V reports the estimates of Equation 3. These assess whether revolving door examiners are

especially lenient on their future employers and, when the specification allows, assess whether revolving

door examiners are more lenient overall. Grant is regressed on indicator for whether the filing firm

subsequently hired the examiner and, in columns 1-2, an indicator for whether the examiner became a

practitioner. Columns 1-2 include fixed effects to control for the type of technology, while columns 3-4

include examiner fixed effects. In this and later tables, increasing the number of fixed effects forces us


                                                         18
to drop a very small number of observations—always less than 1% of the sample. Columns 2 and 4

include firm fixed effects whereas 1 and 3 do not. All columns include fixed effects for the calendar

year.

                                           [Table V about here.]

      Revolving door examiners grant about 12.6-17.6% (8.5-11.9 percentage points) more patents to

firms that subsequently hire them relative to those that do not. Including firm fixed effects has almost

no impact, while including (the large number of) examiner fixed effects attenuates the estimates by

one-quarter. All specifications yield coefficients that are significant at the 5% level or less. These results

provide an initial indication that examiners are lenient on firms from whom they expect to later ask for

a job.

      Revolving door examiners also grant 7.1-7.4% (4.4-4.6 percentage points) more patents overall. For

firms fortunate enough to have their applications routed to a revolving door examiner who they will

later hire, the first and second row coefficients are added; the probability of receiving a patent increases

by one-quarter. We are reluctant to interpret much, if any, of what appears in the second row as

proof of capture. Nonetheless, the combined size of the coefficients means that filers face “inconsistent

regulation.”


5.2      Do examiners favor prospective employers as well?

We now turn to Table VI, which reports estimates of Equation 4. These assess whether examiners are

more lenient on prospective employers. The layout of Table VI is analogous to that of Table V, except

that the analysis here is across locations rather than across firms. Thus, whereas Grant was previously

regressed on an indicator for whether the firm filing the application later hired the examiner, here it is

regressed on an indicator for whether the filing firm is in the same city or ZIP code as the as the firm

that hired the examiner. City fixed effects replace firm fixed effects. All observations in which the filing

firm later hired the examiner are dropped. This limits the ability of the examiner-firm match-specific

preferences that affect both granting and hiring to drive the results.

                                           [Table VI about here.]

      Table VI shows that half or more of the leniency that revolving door examiners extend to the firms

that hire them is also extended to, on average, all other firms in the area as well. The final column, for

example, which includes both examiner and city fixed effects, reports that revolving door examiners

                                                     19
grant 7.4% (5.0 percentage points) more patents to firms in the same ZIP code as the firm that hired

them. They also grant 3.5% (2.3 percentage points) more patents to firms in the same city (but not ZIP

code) as the firm that hired them. The coefficient on the indicator for whether the examiner became a

practitioner is virtually unchanged from the prior table.


5.3     Robustness to sample restrictions

Many filings are submitted by firms that never hire an examiner. Large, specialized intellectual property

law firms are more likely to be among those hiring. A potential confounding factor in this analysis

arises because revolving door examiners may be particularly enthusiastic about the inventions on which

hiring firms’ applications are based, even conditional on the type of technology. Columns 1-2 of Table

VII address this concern. They replicate columns 2 and 4 of Table V but restrict the sample to firms

that hired at least one examiner. This cuts the sample size by about seventy percent. If the results of

Table V are merely driven by the fact that revolving door examiners are drawn to the work of firms

who are likely to hire, then the coefficients in the second row of Table VII will be much lower than

those found in Table V. However, the overall magnitude and precision are essentially the same. This

suggests the aforementioned concern is second order.

                                          [Table VII about here.]

      The geographic distribution of applications gives rise to a similar concern. Cities may produce

fundamentally different types of technology, even within the narrowly-defined scope of an art unit,

and revolving door examiners may be especially enthusiastic about the specific kind of technology

coming from cities that are otherwise the most likely to hire an examiner. Columns 3-4 of Table VII

address this concern. They replicate columns 2 and 4 of Table V but restrict the sample to cities in

which at least one examiner was hired. This cuts the sample size by about forty percent but results in

estimates that are very close to those reported in the earlier table.


5.4     Are examiners more lenient when firms are actively hiring?

Figure I reports the results of the first exercise described in Section 4.2.2. Here we plot the coefficients

of interest, by year, against the number of examiners hired as patent practitioners in that year. The

top graph reports firm-specific results, while the bottom graph reports city-specific results. The figure

shows that regardless of which set of results one considers, the effects are most pronounced when

private sector hiring is robust.

                                                    20
                                                  [Figure I about here.]

      Figure II then reports the results from the second exercise described in Section 4.2.2. Here we further

assess the relationship by plotting the coefficients of interest, by year, against year-over-year private

sector seasonally-adjusted employment gains or losses.36 These provide a broader, economy-wide

measure of hiring intensity. In the years suffering either weak gains or even losses, firm-based estimates

average out to 7.4 percentage points and the city-based estimates average out to only 1.4 percentage

points. In the years afforded strong gains, however, these numbers are two and three times as large,

respectively. The firm-based estimates average out to almost 16 percentage points, and the city-based

estimates average out to around 5.2 percentage points.

                                                 [Figure II about here.]


5.5     Are examiners more lenient on firms near prior residences?

We now turn to the specifications described in Section 4.2.3. We first assess whether the location of

revolving door examiners’ alma maters does, in fact, predict the location of the firm that subsequently

hires them. Figure III establishes this connection. To maintain continuity with subsequent results, the

unit of observation is the application. The x-axis measures the distance between the filing firm and

the examiner’s alma mater, while the y-axis measures the distance between the filing firm and the

examiner’s subsequent employer.

                                                 [Figure III about here.]

      The unambiguously positive relationship indicates that, holding fixed the filing firm, a revolving

door examiner that was educated nearby is likely to join a firm that is nearby. This is consistent

with revolving door examimers who apply to and accept offers from firms that are, for example, in

close proximity to family and friends or in a city with which they are already familiar. Moreover, as

the Appendix shows, these results are highly robust to instead considering raw (unresidualized) or

winsorized distances, the latter of which account for a small number of Hawaiian schools and firms in

the data.

      Given the relationship evidenced by Figure III, we next test whether examiners grant more patents

to firms near their school. Column 1 of Table VIII indicates this is so. Grant is decreasing in the distance
   36 BLS-reported   economy-wide employment changes are perhaps not a perfect proxy for the private sector demand for
examiners but should provide a good first-order approximation. For example, the left-most three x-axis values correspond to the
Great Recession and tail end of the Dotcom crash. They are also preferable to taking sharp cuts of the employment data based
on subjective calls.


                                                              21
between the filing firm and revolving door examiners’ alma mater. Fixed effects at the examiner, city,

and year level address concerns discussed in the main specifications above.

                                         [Table VIII about here.]

      One alternate explanation for this pattern is “boosterism,” a mere desire to support people and

firms in close proximity to one’s school. To assess this, we incorporate educational information related

to non-revolving door examiners. If boosterism rather than regulatory capture drives the relationship

evidenced in Column 1 of Table VIII, then Grant will be decreasing in the distance between the filing

firm and a non-revolving door examiners’ alma mater as well. Column 2 indicates this is not so. The

coefficient on the revolving door examiners’ firm-to-school distance is negative and significant at under

a 5% level, i.e. it remains virtually unchanged from the prior specification. The coefficients on the

non-revolving door examiners’ firm-school distance, though, is less than one-sixth as large, positive,

and not statistically different from zero.

      To ensure that that the small number of Hawaii-based schools and/or firms do not drive these

results, we replicate the results in Columns 1 and 2 in Columns 3 and 4 but first winsorize the top 1%

of the values. The size and precision of the estimates are effectively unchagned.


5.6     Impact on the intensive margin

Thus far we have considered only the extensive margin of intellectual property protection, i.e. whether

an application resulted in a grant. Examiners also influence the scope of what the patent protects. The

USPTO Office of Chief Economist proposes two simple measures for scope: the length of the shortest

independent claim and the number of independent claims [Marco, Sarnoff, and deGrazia, 2016]. During

patent prosecution, strict examination equates to adding qualifying language to the broadest claim,

thereby lengthening it, and to removing claims altogether. Lenient examination does not. While the

study of patent scope is undoubtedly important to understanding intellectual property protection

[Freilich, 2016, Kuhn, 2016], our discussion here is brief. On the one hand, the currently-available

claims data from the USPTO supports previous findings in this paper—the estimates are signed in

the direction of regulatory capture, with economically meaningful magnitudes and in most cases

statistical significance, as described below. On the other hand, the first release of the claims data

contains parsing errors. The underlying text comprises millions of claims with technical symbols

and non-standard characters, so fully automated parsing is very difficult and manual correction is

unfeasible. However, minor errors result in large skew in the outcome measures. For this reason,

                                                   22
we summarize our claims-related findings here, leaving the accompanying tables and more detailed

discussion to the Appendix.

    The claims data comprises 457,000 applications that result in grants.37 The difference in the length

of the shortest claim between the filed application and the published grant provides one measure of

narrowing scope. On average, patent prosecution increases the shortest claim by about 65 words. In

cases where the filing firm later hires the examiner, however, 11.5 to 13.9 fewer words are added. In

cases where the filing firm resides in a ZIP code as the hiring firm (but is not the hiring firm), 4.7 to

8.5 fewer words are added. If we study firms in the same city (but outside the ZIP code), 0.2 to 4.2

fewer words are added. The ranges given span specifications where raw, 2.5% winsorized, and 5%

winsorized differences are used on the left-hand side. All include year and examiner fixed effects as

well as either firm or city fixed effects (depending on the specification).

    The difference in the number of independent claims between the filed application and the published

grant provide the other measure of narrowing scope. On average, patent prosecution removes 2.1

independent claims. In cases where the filing firm later hires the examiner, however, 0.4 to 1.4 fewer

claims are removed. In cases where the filing firm resides in a ZIP code as the hiring firm (but is not

the hiring firm), 0.3 to 1.1 fewer claims are removed. If we study firms in the same city (but outside the

ZIP code), 0.1 to 0.3 fewer claims are removed.



6     Effects on patent quality

We now turn to the question of whether this leniency translates into lower quality grants, which we

assess using citation counts. Table IX reports the estimates of Equations 5 and 6 on these outcomes,

respectively. The negative binomial, quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson, and linear model estimates

appear in columns 1-2, 3-4, and 5-8, respectively. Each specification includes year fixed effects and

includes either firm or city fixed effects. The non-linear specifications include examiner level controls,

while the linear specifications include either examiner level controls or examiner fixed effects.38


                                                     [Table IX about here.]
    37 Summary   statistics and estimates will differ slightly from the prior version of the paper, primarily due to our correcting for
cancelled claims. See Appendix 3 for more details.
    38 The non-linear models rendered optimization of a very large number of fixed effects infeasible. The proximity of the linear

model coefficients—estimated with and without examiner fixed effects—gave us confidence, however, that the non-linear model
estimates, were we able to estimate them, would not stray too far from the those that appear in the first four columns. This also
forced us to use Technology center rather than Patent class fixed effects. For the sake of comparability, we used Technology center
fixed effects in the final four here columns as well. In the Appendix, we re-estimate the linear model using Patent class fixed
effects and show that the coefficients differ very little—typically by 5-10% and at most by 30%. This, again, gave us confidence
that the non-linear estimates are insensitive to the modeling choice.


                                                                 23
    Across all specifications we see that the patents awarded by revolving door examiners to their future

and prospective employers receive many fewer citations—i.e. are of much lower quality—than the

others they grant. To be precise, patents awarded to future employers receive 21-27% fewer citations,

while those awarded to firms in the same ZIP code and city as the future employer receive 6-8% and

6-11% fewer. The linear model provides similar size effects.39 Also across specifications, we see that the

absolute value of the coefficients on the indicator for whether the filing firm hired the examiner are

roughly twice as large as the coefficients on the indicators based on close proximity to the hiring firm,

which squares with earlier findings related to grant behavior.

    A final feature of the table that deserves discussion are the positive coefficients estimated on the

indicator for revolving door examiners. These imply that patents granted by revolving door examiners

receive roughly 6-9% more citations relative to those granted by their colleagues. This figure is much

smaller in nearly all cases (in absolute value terms) than any of the coefficients on the variables we relate

to capture, i.e. the indicators for whether a filing firm hired the revolving door examiner or was in close

proximity to the one who did. One way to interpret this result is that revolving door examiners make

higher quality grant decisions overall, except on patents related to future or prospective employers.

Kempf [2015] reaches an analogous conclusion, albeit in a different, private sector setting. We are

reluctant to infer too much from mean differences across examiners, although this finding should give

regulators pause when contemplating policies that would restrict ex post employment options.



7     Conclusion

Many regulatory agency employee decisions affect firms for whom these employees hope to subse-

quently work. Societal norms, tacit collusion, or explicit agreements may pressure them to “go easy”

on their prospective employers, creating a conflict of interest for individuals tasked with protection

of the public interest and impartial supervision of economic activity. As a result, understanding the

revolving door phenomenon and its effects is an important theoretical and empirical matter. Moreover,

policymakers have expressed and exhibited some willingness to address this problem.40
    39 Revolving door examiners are present in greater proportions in the beginning of the panel relative to the end, and forward

citations are increasing in the amount of time that has passed since the patent was granted. Hence, for revolving door examiners,
a given within-examiner percent increase or decrease in citations will equate to, in absolute value terms, a larger level change than
it would were revolving door examiners evenly dispersed across the longitudinal dimension of the panel. Thus, the coefficients
reported in columns 5-8 appear large relative to the mean number of citations reported in Table II but are, in fact, consistent with
the coefficients reported in columns 1-4.
    40 For example, 2007 legislation increased “cooling off” period—the length of time one must wait after leaving the government

sector before one can begin lobbying—for members of Congress and their senior staff. In 2009, President Obama doubled the
cooling off period for many senior officials in the executive branch. Separately, in 2013, the Securities and Exchange Commission
eliminated loopholes that exempted senior officials from post-employment restrictions.


                                                                24
   Data from the US Patent and Trademark Office provide insight into the process. Many agency

employees join the very firms whose patent applications they previously examined, and appear to

treat the applications from these firms differently, e.g. by granting them more patents than they

grant to other firms. This alone is not proof of rent-seeking behavior, although we argue that the

preponderance of other evidence here points towards regulatory capture. For example, the relationship

is robust to our treatment of examiner- and firm-specific unobservable attributes, extends to prospective

employers, tends to abate in periods when firms are not hiring, and mirrors other measures of regulatory

leniency that are on the intensive margin. Policy changes—for example, varying the level of agency

compensation, monitoring, or post-employment restrictions—can have unintended consequences, so

these results on their own cannot advocate for one specific policy over another. However, we hope they

compel additional research in this area.


References
Sumit Agarwal, David Lucca, Amit Seru, and Francesco Trebbi. Inconsistent regulators: Evidence from
  banking. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2):889–938, 2014.
Juan Alcacer and Michelle Gittelman. Patent citations as a measure of knowledge flows: The influence
  of examiner citations. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(4):774–779, 2006.
Alison E Barber and Mark V Roehling. Job postings and the decision to interview: A verbal protocol
  analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78(5):845, 1993.
Marinho Bertanha and Petra Moser. Spatial errors in count data regressions. Journal of Econometric
 Methods, 5(1):49–69, 2016.
Marianne Bertrand, Matilde Bombardini, and Francesco Trebbi. Is it whom you know or what you
 know? an empirical assessment of the lobbying process. The American Economic Review, 104(12):
 3885–3920, 2014.
Donald Boyd, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. The draw of home: How teachers’
 preferences for proximity disadvantage urban schools. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
 24(1):113–132, 2005.
Stephen G Breyer and Richard B Stewart. Administrative law and regulatory policy. Aspen Publishers,
  1979.
Eric Budish, Benjamin N Roin, and Heidi Williams. Do firms underinvest in long-term research?
  evidence from cancer clinical trials. The American Economic Review, 105(7):2044–2085, 2015.
Iain M Cockburn, Samuel Kortum, and Scott Stern. Are all patent examiners equal? the impact of
  examiner characteristics. NBER Working Paper No. 8980, 2002.
Jess Cornaggia, Kimberly J Cornaggia, and Han Xia. Revolving doors on Wall Street. Journal of
  Financial Economics, 120(2):400–419, 2016.
Ed deHaan, Simi Kedia, Kevin Koh, and Shivaram Rajgopal. The revolving door and the SEC’s
  enforcement outcomes: Initial evidence from civil litigation. Journal of Accounting and Economics,
  60(2):65–96, 2015.

                                                   25
Joan Farre-Mensa, Deepak Hegde, and Alexander Ljungqvist. What is a patent worth? evidence from
  the u.s. patent “lottery”. 2017.
Michael D. Frakes and Melissa F. Wasserman. Is the time allocated to review patent applications
 inducing examiners to grant invalid patents?: Evidence from micro-level application data. Review of
 Economics and Statistics, (forthcoming), 2016a.

Michael D. Frakes and Melissa F. Wasserman. Procrastination in the Workplace: Evidence from the US
 Patent Office. 2016b.
Janet Freilich. Pushing patent boundaries: An empirical assessment of how patent trolls and other
  litigants use patent scope. 2016. Working paper.

Alberto Galasso and Mark Schankerman. Patents and cumulative innovation: Causal evidence from
  the courts. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(1):317–369, 2015.
Stuart J. H. Graham, Alan C. Marco, and Richard Miller. The USPTO Patent Examination Research
  Dataset: A Window on the Process of Patent Examination. 2015.

Adam B. Jaffe and Josh Lerner. Innovation and Its Discontents: How Our Broken Patent System
 Is Endangering Innovation and Progress, and What to Do about It. Princeton University Press,
 Princeton, NJ, 2004.
Elisabeth Kempf. The job rating game: The effects of revolving doors on analyst incentives. 2015.
  Working paper.

Pat Kline, Neviana Petkova, Heidi Williams, and Owen Zidar. Quasi-experimental estimates of
  rent-sharing: Evidence from administrative tax data. 2016.
Jeffrey M. Kuhn. Property rights and frictions in the sale of patents. 2016. Working paper.
Jean-Jacques Laffont and Jean Tirole. The politics of government decision-making: A theory of
  regulatory capture. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pages 1089–1127, 1991.
Mark A Lemley and Bhaven Sampat. Examiner characteristics and patent office outcomes. Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 94(3):817–827, 2012.
Mark A Lemley and Carl Shapiro. Probabilistic patents. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(2):
 75–98, 2005.

Michael A. Levine and Jennifer L. Forrence. Regulatory capture, public interest, and the public agenda:
 Toward a synthesis. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 6:167–198, 1990.
David Lucca, Amit Seru, and Francesco Trebbi. The revolving door and worker flows in banking
 regulation. Journal of Monetary Economics, 65:17–32, 2014.

Alan C. Marco, Joshua D. Sarnoff, and Charles A. deGrazia. Patent claims and patent scope. 2016.
Petra Moser. How do patent laws influence innovation? evidence from nineteenth-century world’s
  fairs. The American Economic Review, 95(4):1214–36, 2005.
Petra Moser. Patents and innovation: evidence from economic history. The Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 27(1):23–44, 2013.

Sam Peltzman. Toward a more general theory of regulation. The Journal of Law and Economics, 19(2):
  211–240, 1976.
Pew. Beyond Distrust: How Americans View Their Government. Technical report, 2015.



                                                  26
Gary N Powell and Laurel R Goulet. Recruiters’ and applicants’ reactions to campus interviews and
 employment decisions. Academy of Management Journal, 39(6):1619–1640, 1996.
Michelle Reininger. Hometown disadvantage? it depends on where youre from: Teachers location
 preferences and the implications for staffing schools. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
 34(2):127–145, 2012.

Louis A Jr. Richardson. Perceived monetary value of job type, company size, and location among
  college seniors. Journal of Applied Psychology, 50(5):412, 1966.
Cesare Righi and Timothy Simcoe. Patent Examiner Specialization. Boston University Questrom School
  of Business Research Paper, 2017.

Benjamin N. Roin. Discussant comments at the NBER Summer Institute workshop on Technology and
  Innovation. 2016.
Marc Rysman and Timothy Simcoe. Patents and the performance of voluntary standard-setting
 organizations. Management science, 54(11):1920–1934, 2008.

George J Stigler. The theory of economic regulation. The Bell Journal of Economics and Management
 Science, pages 3–21, 1971.
Daniel B Turban, Alison R Eyring, and James E Campion. Job attributes: Preferences compared with
 reasons given for accepting and rejecting job offers. Journal of Occupational and Organizational
 Psychology, 66(1):71–81, 1993.

Jordi Blanes I Vidal, Mirko Draca, and Christian Fons-Rosen. Revolving door lobbyists. The American
  Economic Review, 102(7):3731–3748, 2012.
Heidi L Williams. Intellectual property rights and innovation: Evidence from the human genome.
 Journal of Political Economy, 121(1):1–27, 2013.
Jeffrey M Wooldridge. Distribution-free estimation of some nonlinear panel data models. Journal of
   Econometrics, 90(1):77–97, 1999.




                                                27
Figures


                                                                      Firm-based estimates

                                       .3
                                       .2
                   By-year estimates
                                       .1
                                       0
                                       -.1




                                                  40            60             80           100          120          140


                                                                      City-based estimates
                                       .1
                                       .05
                   By-year estimates
                                       0
                                       -.05
                                       -.1




                                                  40            60             80           100          120          140
                                                                     Private sector hires of examiners



                                              Figure I: Effects are strongest when examiner hiring is most frequent

For the top graph, Grant is regressed on (a) an indicator for whether the examiner was later hired as a practitioner interacted
with the year, (b) an indicator for whether the filing firm hired that examiner interacted with the year, and (c) year fixed effects,
(d) year fixed effects, and (e) firm fixed effects. Then, coefficients on the second set of interactions are plotted on the y-axis. For
the bottom graph, we repeat the exercise but base the second set of interactions on whether the filing firm resided in the same
city as the firm that hire the examiner. (We also substitute city for firm fixed effects and drop any observations where the firm
hired the examiner.) In both graphs, the x-axis counts the number of examiners hired by private sector firms in that year.




                                                                               28
                                                       Firm-based estimates


                                      .3
                                      .2
                  By-year estimates
                                      .1
                                      0
                                      -.1




                                             -6000   -4000        -2000             0             2000


                                                        City-based estimates
                                      .1
                                      .05
                  By-year estimates
                                      0
                                      -.05
                                      -.1




                                             -6000   -4000        -2000             0             2000
                                                     Year-over-year employment growth



               Figure II: Economy-wide employment changes yield similar results to observed examiner hires

To arrive at the top graph, Grant is regressed on (a) an indicator for whether the examiner was later hired as a practitioner
interacted with the year, (b) an indicator for whether the filing firm hired that examiner interacted with the year, and (c) year,
examiner, and firm fixed effects. Then, coefficients on the second set of interactions are plotted on the y-axis. To arrive at the
bottom graph, we repeat the exercise but base the second set of interactions on whether the filing firm resided in the same city
as the firm that hire the examiner. (We also substitute city for firm fixed effects and drop any observations where the firm hired
the examiner.) The x-axis measures the year-over-year change in private seasonally-adjusted US employment in thousands.




                                                                29
                                   2000
                                   1500
                Distance to firm
                                   1000
                                   500
                                   0




                                          0   500            1000            1500            2000            2500
                                                           Distance to school

              Figure III: Where an examiner is educated predicts his or her post-USPTO employment location

The unit of observation is the application (to remain consistent with forthcoming specifications). The x-axis measures the
distance, in miles, from the filing firm to the examiner alma mater, and the y-axis measures the distance, in miles, from the
filing firm to the the firm that later hires the examiner. Distances are residualized using examiner, city, and year fixed effects.
A positive slope indicates that revolving door examiners tend to work, on average, close to where they were educated.




                                                               30
Tables

                                  Table I: Summary of data that assesses grant behavior

                                                   N         Mean      Std. Dev.    Minimum     Maximum
                 Grant                        1,023,669       0.63        0.48          0            1
                 Year                         1,023,669     2011.39       3.03        2001         2016
                 Experience                   1,023,669       6.37        2.27          0           10
                 1[Firm hires an examiner]    1,023,669       0.29        0.45          0            1
                 1[Revolving examiner]        1,023,669       0.07        0.25          0            1


This data based covers the period from November 2001 through the end of 2015, i.e. period for which PatEx has complete
application data for both granted and abandoned patents. See the text, above, for variable definitions.




                                      Table II: Summary of data that assesses quality

                                                   N        Mean      Std. Dev.    Minimum     Maximum
                  Citations                    727,920      11.57       36.40           0         3072
                  Year                         727,920     2010.04       5.03        1995         2016
                  Experience                   727,920       6.30        2.35           0          10
                  1[Firm hires an examiner]    727,920       0.29        0.45           0           1
                  1[Revolving examiner]        727,920       0.11        0.31           0           1


This data covers filings from July 1995 through the end of 2015, i.e. all observations subsequent to the June 1995 law change
affecting patent terms. See the text, above, for variable definitions.




                                                             31
                             Table III: Firms where revolving examiners are most frequently hired

                                                               Count                             Mean
               City                              Examiner hires    Filed applications    Grant      Citations

               Banner Witcoff                          10                3941              .69        9.27
               Birch Stewart                           15               10782              .62        7.21
               Buchanan Ingersoll                      12                4744              .66        11.8
               Cooley                                   8                2117              .64        19.7
               Finnegan Henderson                      48                7127              .54        13.0
               Fish & Richardson                       13               11262              .68        12.5
               Fitzpatrick                              9                7452              .77        10.0
               Foley & Lardner                         13                9835              .68        14.0
               Greenblum                                9                3048              .63        7.44
               Harness Dickey                          11               10864              .67        7.25
               Harrity & Harrity                       11                1050              .88        8.32
               Hunton                                  10                 818              .57        17.3
               Knobbe                                   8                9855              .64        18.2
               Lee & Morse                             11                3994              .68        11.8
               McDermott                                8                7922              .58        10.3
               Morgan Lewis                             9                8449              .67        9.44
               Oblon McClelland                        17               17343              .69        7.96
               Oliff                                   13               10228              .73        8.05
               Sterne Kessler                          15                3235              .76        12.6
               Sughrue                                 17               13602              .57        7.78
               Townsend (merged)                        8                9426              .67        14.9
               Venable                                  8                1506              .60        8.44



“Examiner hires” counts the number of examiners who joined a firm in this city directly after leaving the employ of the
USPTO. “Filed applications” counts the number of filings originating from this firm. Firm names are abbreviated. The firm
of Townsend and Townsend and Crew merged with the larger firm of Kilpatrick Stockton to become Kilpatrick Townsend
& Stockton. Here “Townsend” refers to the former of the pre-merger entities while “Kilpatrick” refers to the latter of the
pre-merger entities and the post-merger entity.




                                                             32
                         Table IV: Locations where revolving examiners are most frequently hired

                                                             Count                             Mean
              City                             Examiner hires   Filed applications     Grant       Citations

              Alexandria, VA                         68               56844             .64          8.51
              Arlington, VA                          14               11832             .70          13.3
              Atlanta, GA                            16               14224             .54          19.2
              Austin, TX                              7               20017             .75          12.5
              Baltimore, MD                          10                911              .51          13.8
              Bethesda, MD                           14               5201              .63          8.73
              Boston, MA                             30               26165             .61           14
              Chicago, IL                            39               40262             .68          18.0
              Cleveland, OH                          14               14124             .62          10.6
              Dallas, TX                             20               26308             .63          11.1
              Denver, CO                              8               5894              .69          14.3
              D. of Columbia                        299              112572             .82          18.6
              Fairfax, VA                            41               22387             .60          6.80
              Houston, TX                            14               34027             .62          9.44
              Irvine, CA                             12               27916             .64          13.6
              McLean, VA                             28               20313             .58          7.96
              Minneapolis, MN                        14               50585             .66          12.2
              New York City, NY                      46               43561             .62          12.3
              Philadelphia, PA                       24               15106             .60          13.5
              Pittsburgh, PA                         10               5440              .58          11.6
              Reston, VA                             47               25121             .62          6.21
              San Diego, CA                          19               12125             .68          10.5
              San Francisco, CA                      30               32572             .66          14.4
              San Jose area, CA                      27               34411             .68          13.9
              Seattle, WA                            13               13101             .62          14.7
              Troy, MI                               10               11938             .64          9.63



“Examiner hires” counts the number of examiners who joined a firm in this city directly after leaving the employ of the
USPTO. “Filed applications” counts the number of filings originating from this city.




                                                           33
                                Table V: Examiners grant more patents to firms that hire them

                                                             (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
                     VARIABLES                             All firms       All firms       All firms        All firms


                     1[Revolving examiner]             .0458***            .0447***
                                                       (.00562)            (.00566)
                     1[Filing firm hires examiner]         .119***          .114***        .0907***         .0845***
                                                           (.0297)          (.0236)         (.0326)          (.0258)


                     Observations                     1,023,660            1,023,660       1,023,287        1,023,287
                     R-squared                               .126             .14            .204             .216
                     Year FE                                 Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
                     Firm FE                                 No               Yes             No               Yes
                     Patent class FE                         Yes              Yes              –                –
                     Experience FE                           Yes              Yes              –                –
                     Examiner FE                             No               No              Yes              Yes

???   p < 0.01, ?? p < 0.05, ? p < 0.1
Grant is on the left-hand side of the estimating equation. The right-hand side measures comprise an indicator for whether an
examiner was later hired as a practitioner (in the first row of coefficients) and an indicator for whether the filing firm later
hired the examiner (in the second row of coefficients). Standard errors are clustered at the examiner and firm level.




                Table VI: Examiners grant more patents to firms in close proximity the ones that hire them

                                                                    (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)
                 VARIABLES                                     All firms       All firms       All firms        All firms


                 1[Revolving examiner]                         .0447***        .0429***
                                                               (.00697)         (.0069)
                 1[Filing ZIP hires examiner]                  .0658***        .0745***        .0419***         .0497**
                                                                (.019)          (.0246)            (.014)           (.0194)
                 1[Filing city, not ZIP, hires examiner]       .0197**         .0341***             .0102           .023**
                                                                (.0081)        (.00947)        (.00847)         (.00993)


                 Observations                                 1,023,489       1,023,439       1,023,116        1,023,066
                 R-squared                                         .126             .144            .204             .219
                 Year FE                                            Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
                 City FE                                            No              Yes              No              Yes
                 Patent class FE                                    Yes             Yes               –                –
                 Experience FE                                      Yes             Yes               –                –
                 Examiner FE                                        No              No               Yes             Yes

???   p < 0.01, ?? p < 0.05, ? p < 0.1
Grant is on the left-hand side of the estimating equation. The right-hand side measures comprise an indicator for whether an
examiner was later hired as a practitioner (in the first row of coefficients) and indicators for whether the firm resides in a ZIP
code or city in which the examiner was later hired (in the second and third rows of coefficients, respectively). Columns 2 and 4
include city fixed effects, while columns 3-4 include examiner fixed effects. The sample is restricted to observations where the
filing firm did not subsequently hire the examiner. Standard errors are clustered at the examiner and city level.




                                                                     34
                    Table VII: Estimates are robust to limiting the sample to hiring firms or hiring cities

                                                            (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)
              VARIABLES                                 Hiring firms   Hiring firms   Hiring cities   Hiring cities


              1[Revolving examiner]                      .0392***                       .0451***
                                                         (.00826)                       (.00739)
              1[Filing firm hires examiner]               .113***        .0764**
                                                          (.0231)        (.0289)
              1[Filing ZIP hires examiner]                                              .0722***        .0496**
                                                                                         (.0241)        (.0229)
              1[Filing city, not ZIP, hires examiner]                                   .0342***        .0244**
                                                                                        (.00979)        (.0104)


              Observations                               292,023        291,503         668,035         667,604
              R-squared                                    .152           .244             .13            .213
              Year FE                                       Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
              Firm FE                                       Yes            Yes             No              No
              City FE                                       No             No              Yes            Yes
              Examiner FE                                   No             Yes             No             Yes

???   p < 0.01, ?? p < 0.05, ? p < 0.1
Columns 1-2 restrict the sample to filing firms that hired at least one examiner. Columns 3-4 restrict the sample to cities that
did the same. Grant is on the left-hand side of the estimating equation. The right-hand side measures comprise an indicator for
whether an examiner was later hired as a practitioner (in the first row of coefficients), an indicator for whether the filing firm
later hired the examiner (in the second row of coefficients), and indicators for whether the firm resides in a city or ZIP code
in which the examiner was later hired (in the third and fourth rows of coefficients, respectively). As in prior tables, for our
location-based specifications, i.e. those whose results are reported in columns 3-4 here, the sample is restricted to observations
where the filing firm did not subsequently hire the examiner. Standard errors are clustered at the examiner and firm level in
columns 1-2 and at the examiner and city level in columns 3-4.




                                                                  35
                Table VIII: Revolving door examiners grant more patents to firms closer to their alma maters

                                                                             (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)
                                                                                                     1.0% Wins.     1.0% Wins.
   VARIABLES                                                              Distance      Distance       distance       distance


   Filing firm distance to revolver’s school (miles)                     -.00843**     -.00849**
                                                                          (.00331)      (.0033)
   Filing firm distance to non-revolver’s school (miles)                                 .00139
                                                                                        (.00284)
   Filing firm distance to revolver’s school (1.0% Wins. miles)                                        -.0098**      -.00988**
                                                                                                       (.00423)       (.00422)
   Filing firm distance to non-revolver’s school (1.0% Wins. miles)                                                    .00132
                                                                                                                      (.0029)


   Observations                                                           952,162      1,084,104       952,162       1,084,104
   R-squared                                                                .221           .22           .221            .22
   Year FE                                                                   Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
   City FE                                                                   Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
   Examiner FE                                                               Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes

???   p < 0.01, ?? p < 0.05, ? p < 0.1
“Revolving examiner” is abbreviated “revolver” here. Grant is on the left-hand side of the estimating equation. On the
right-hand side, we place the distance from the filing firm to the examiner’s alma mater. In the first row, this distance is specific
to revolving door examiners, and in the second row, it is specific to non-revolving door examiners, i.e. those that stay employed
at the USPTO or subsequently join a government entity. To assess robustness to outliers, i.e. principally those derived from
firms and schools in Hawaii and Alaska, we also winsorize the the left- and right-hand side measures at 1%. Those results are
reported in the third and fourth rows and columns. Standard errors are clustered at the examiner and city level.




                                                                 36
                                                           Table IX: Patents granted to subsequent employers receive fewer citations

                                                                        (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
                                                                     Neg. bin.   Neg. bin.    Poisson      Poisson
                           VARIABLES                                   count       count       count        count       Count       Count       Count       Count


                           1[Revolving examiner]                      .0552***    .0585***    .085***     .0893***     2.03**                  2.34**
                                                                      (.00745)    (.00741)    (.00628)     (.0129)      (.811)                  (1.17)
                           1[Filing firm hires examiner]               -.21**                 -.272***                 -9.78***    -6.3***
                                                                      (.0995)                  (.104)                   (2.32)      (2.11)
                           1[Filing ZIP hires examiner]                            -.0781                  -.0573                              -4.73***     -2.11*
                                                                                  (.0706)                  (.0724)                              (1.47)      (1.08)
                           1[Filing city, not ZIP, hires examiner]                -.0596*                 -.107***                             -6.87***   -4.44***
                                                                                  (.0309)                  (.029)                               (.934)      (.766)


                           Observations                               727,920     727,694     727,920     727,610     727,920     727,335     727,616     727,032
                           R-squared                                                                                     .19        .325        .194        .327




37
                           Year FE                                      Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
                           Firm FE                                      Yes          No         Yes          No          Yes         Yes         No          No
                           City FE                                      No          Yes          No          Yes         No          No          Yes         Yes
                           Technology center FE                         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          –          Yes          –
                           Experience FE                                Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          –          Yes          –
                           Examiner FE                                  No           No          No          No          No          Yes         No          Yes

     ???   p < 0.01, ?? p < 0.05, ? p < 0.1
     The left-hand side measure is the count of forward citations from other patents. The right-hand side measures comprise an indicator for whether an examiner was later hired as a
     practitioner (in the first row of coefficients), an indicator for whether the filing firm later hired the examiner (in the second row of coefficients), and indicators for whether the
     firm resides in a city or ZIP code in which the examiner was later hired (in the third and fourth rows of coefficients, respectively). As in prior tables, for our location-based
     specifications, i.e. those whose results are reported in even-numbered columns here, the sample is restricted to observations where the filing firm did not subsequently hire the
     examiner. Robust standard errors are provided for the non-linear specifications; in the other columns, standard errors are clustered at the examiner and either firm or city level,
     depending on the specification. Note that the within-examiner level changes reported in columns 5-8 appear large relative to the mean number of citations reported in Table II
     but are, in fact, in line with the percent changes implied by columns 1-4. See Footnote 39 for a brief explanation.
