                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE MINIMUM WAGE, FRINGE BENEFITS, AND WORKER WELFARE

                                        Jeffrey Clemens
                                          Lisa B. Kahn
                                         Jonathan Meer

                                      Working Paper 24635
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24635


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2018




We thank Jason Abaluck, Julie Cullen, Roger Gordon, and seminar participants at Cornell,
Federal Reserve Board of Governors, George Washington, Harvard Business School (E\&M),
Harvard Medical School (Health Care Policy), San Diego State, UC Santa Barbara, University of
Maryland, and the World Bank for helpful comments and conversations. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Jeffrey Clemens, Lisa B. Kahn, and Jonathan Meer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Minimum Wage, Fringe Benefits, and Worker Welfare
Jeffrey Clemens, Lisa B. Kahn, and Jonathan Meer
NBER Working Paper No. 24635
May 2018
JEL No. I13,J23,J32,J33

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper explores the relationship between the minimum wage, the structure of employee
compensation, and worker welfare. We advance a conceptual framework that describes the
conditions under which a minimum wage increase will alter the provision of fringe benefits, alter
employment outcomes, and either increase or decrease worker welfare. Using American
Community Survey data from 2011-2016, we find robust evidence that state-level minimum wage
changes decreased the likelihood that individuals report having employer-sponsored health
insurance. Effects are largest among workers in very low-paying occupations, for whom coverage
declines offset 9 percent of the wage gains associated with minimum wage hikes. We find
evidence that both insurance coverage and wage effects exhibit spillovers into occupations
moderately higher up the wage distribution. For these groups, reductions in coverage offset a
more substantial share of the wage gains we estimate.

Jeffrey Clemens                                 Jonathan Meer
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego             TAMU 4228
9500 Gilman Drive #0508                         College Station, TX 77843
La Jolla, CA 92093                              and NBER
and NBER                                        jmeer@econmail.tamu.edu
jeffclemens@ucsd.edu

Lisa B. Kahn
Yale University
School of Management
P. O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
lisa.kahn@yale.edu
    The minimum wage has risen in prominence among the policy instruments intended
to improve well-being for low-skilled individuals. But policy discussions about the min-
imum wage often conflate impacts on employment with welfare effects. While the em-
ployment margin is of first-order importance, there are limitations to what one can con-
clude from employment alone.1 In particular, the impact of minimum wage policy on
non-wage job attributes has received little attention, even though such attributes are im-
portant for understanding how workers value employment arrangements (Sorkin, 2017;
Mas and Pallais, 2017).2
    In this paper, we explore the theoretical and empirical relationship between the min-
imum wage and fringe benefits, with a focus on employer-sponsored health insurance.
We develop a conceptual framework where firms may optimally shift compensation from
non-cash attributes to wages in the presence of a minimum wage increase. This force
impacts worker welfare, even absent any effects on employment. In our analysis using
American Community Survey (ACS) data from 2011-2016, we show that state-level min-
imum wage increases are associated with losses in employer provided health insurance.
This suggests the welfare effects highlighted in our model are empirically relevant.
    In our model, compensation consists of a combination of cash and non-cash at-
tributes, and depends on worker productivity. We also allow for the possibility of a
bargaining wedge whereby the firm pays less in total compensation (cash and non-cash
benefits) than a worker’s marginal product.3 When the minimum wage rises above the
prevailing wage (cash payment) but below a worker’s marginal product, the firm will


   1 These   limitations have been recognized in an older theoretical literature (Wessels, 1980; McKenzie,
1980).
   2A  handful of papers have either directly or indirectly analyzed minimum wage effects on training and
earnings trajectories (Hashimoto, 1982; Acemoglu and Pischke, 1999; Rosen, 1972; Clemens and Wither,
2014). Simon and Kaestner (2004), which we discuss in more detail below, analyze the relationship between
the minimum wage and health insurance coverage over an earlier period, 1979-2000.
   3 Bargaining   position is linked, in turn, to how closely the market approximates perfect competition.


                                                     1
shift the mix of compensation towards cash and away from non-cash benefits, but will
still find it worthwhile to employ the worker. This distortion can create losses to worker
welfare which, if large enough, will push workers to prefer their outside option of non-
work.
   We also show that, in the presence of a bargaining wedge, the welfare effects of
minimum wage increases are non-monotonic. In general, wage gains associated with
increases in worker bargaining power will tend to improve welfare, while wage gains
that are accommodated through reductions in non-cash benefits can reduce welfare.
Finally, for firms that hire both low- and high-skilled workers, benefits packages may be
set collectively.4 This commonality may lead minimum wage increases to have spillover
effects on the compensation packages of higher-skilled workers.
   Our empirical analysis focuses primarily on the relationship between minimum wage
increases and the prevalence of employer-sponsored health insurance, a major compo-
nent of non-wage compensation. We exploit recent state-level minimum wage increases
and the large samples available in the ACS from 2011-2016. To isolate the workers most
likely to be impacted by minimum wage policy, we categorize them based on typical
wages in their current or most recent occupation. We focus especially on occupations
that we categorize as Very Low (e.g., food service), Low (e.g., retail sales), and Modest-
paying (e.g., clerks and supervisors of food service workers). The former are more likely
to be directly impacted by minimum wage increases, while the latter tend to earn just
above, but adjacent to, minimum wages. We also explore more traditional categoriza-
tions of low-skilled individuals based on their demographics (e.g., age and education).
   Using a difference-in-differences research design, we estimate that recent minimum
wage increases are accompanied by significant declines in employer coverage. For those


   4 Administrative   costs and anti-discrimination law may make it costly for firms to offer worker-specific
benefits packages.


                                                      2
in Very Low and Low paying occupations, we find that a $1 minimum wage increase is
associated with a 1 to 2 percentage point (2 to 4%) reduction in the probability of cover-
age. We also estimate a 1 percentage point (1.5%) loss in coverage for those in Modest
paying occupations, suggesting a non-trivial role for spillovers. Losses in employer cov-
erage manifest largely among employed workers, rather than through impacts of the
minimum wage on employment.
   Our estimates are robust to controlling flexibly for factors related to the implemen-
tation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). They are similarly robust to controlling for
proxies of aggregate economic and labor market conditions. Controlling for these fac-
tors increases the precision of our estimates without substantially altering the point
estimates. Estimates are also very similar when we employ a triple-difference estimation
strategy, using those in high wage occupations to control flexibly for state-time variation
in employer coverage.
   To benchmark the magnitudes of employer coverage losses, we compare them to
estimated wage gains associated with the minimum wage. We use Occupational Em-
ployment Statistics (OES) data, an employer-based survey administered by the Bureau
of Labor Statistics, which has large sample sizes, even at disaggregated levels (such as
state-occupation). Relative to household surveys, employer surveys likely suffer less
from the canonical measurement error problems that can frustrate efforts to estimate
impacts of the minimum wage on the earnings distribution (see, for example, Lee (1999);
Autor, Manning, and Smith (2016)).
   We find that a $1 minimum wage increase generates significant wage increases for
workers in low-to-modest paying occupations. At the 10th percentile, increases are on
the order of 12% and 9% for Very Low and Low paying occupations, respectively, and
even 3% for Modest paying occupations. We also see sizable increases at the mean wage
for both Very Low and Low paying occupations. Importantly, the wage increases we


                                            3
estimate are substantially larger than what would be required to comply with the new
prevailing wage. For example, based on the wage distribution in 2011-2013, a $1 min-
imum wage increase would have required a $0.50 wage increase at the mean for Very
Low paying occupations, yet our estimate implies a $0.90 increase. Wage increases for
Low and Modest-wage occupation groups also tend to be $0.30 to $0.40 larger than what
would have been required due to compliance alone. This again implies that minimum
wage policy spills over onto modestly higher earners. Our model rationalizes these
spillover effects as driven by shifts from non-wage compensation. These findings may
also be driven by several other forces, including truncation of the wage distribution due
to employment losses, spillover effects associated with wage hierarchies, and substitu-
tion towards more skilled labor. Clemens, Kahn, and Meer (2018) find evidence of the
latter using data on job vacancy postings, in addition to employment data.
   When we compare wage changes to changes in employer coverage, we find that cov-
erage declines offset a modest 9% of wage gains for Very Low wage occupations and
a larger fraction for the Low and Modest groups (16% and 57%, respectively). The off-
sets we estimate are, unsurprisingly, much larger for the latter groups that experienced
relatively small wage gains following minimum wage hikes. Since we cannot reliably
measure changes in employer contributions on the intensive margin, which may also
decrease in response to minimum wage hikes, these estimates are likely lower bounds.
   Our finding of sizeable losses to employer health insurance coverage suggest that wel-
fare effects due to changes in non-wage attributes can be important. We therefore con-
tribute to the literature on the welfare consequences of compensation regulation (Stigler,
1946; Wessels, 1980; McKenzie, 1980; Lee and Saez, 2012). Our framework succinctly
merges intuitions connected to bargaining frictions, non-wage job attributes, and the
conditions under which a minimum wage increase will tend to increase versus decrease
individual welfare. These insights on the welfare implications of non-wage job attributes


                                            4
also connect to the literature on benefit incidence (Summers, 1989; Gruber, 1994; Clemens
and Cutler, 2014; Kolstad and Kowalski, 2016).
   On the empirical side, our analysis contributes to a surprisingly small literature on
the relationship between the minimum wage and non-wage job attributes. Driven by
analyses of general and firm-specific human capital, early papers focused on job training
(Rosen, 1972; Hashimoto, 1982; Acemoglu and Pischke, 1999). The evidence from these
papers is mixed. In more recent work, Simon and Kaestner (2004) find no evidence that
minimum wage increases affected employer insurance coverage in an analysis spanning
the 1980s and 1990s.5
   Finally, we contribute to the growing literature on the role of firms as mediators of
the effects of labor market shocks on individual outcomes.6 Specifically, we illustrate
how benefit arrangements may lead the effects of minimum wage changes to spill over
from the least-skilled individuals to the compensation of moderately higher-skilled indi-
viduals. Such spillovers are important for interpreting the effects of the minimum wage
on earnings and benefit receipt across skill groups.
   This paper proceeds as follows. In section 1, we present a conceptual framework
for assessing the welfare implications of minimum wage changes, through effects on
wages, non-wage compensation, and employment. Section 2 describes the data we use
to analyze the effect of minimum wage changes on employer-sponsored health insurance


   5 Bucila (2008) and Marks (2011) explore heterogeneity in this finding (see also Royalty (2001)). Our
empirical analysis differs from these papers along several dimensions. First, we harness the insurance
coverage variables in the ACS, which has annual samples roughly 20 times that of the March supplements
of the Current Population Survey (CPS) used in Simon and Kaestner (2004) and the other papers. Second,
we analyze a time period during which a large number of substantial minimum wage changes were
enacted over a small number of years. Benefit arrangements may have been poised for redesign over this
time period due to the contemporaneous implementation of the ACA. Third, we highlight the theoretical
and empirical relevance of spillover effects that may emerge across firms, occupations, and industries.
Fourth, we connect our empirical insurance coverage analysis to one exploring the impact of the minimum
wage on wage rates in order to quantify that magnitude of the associated offset to compensation costs.
   6 See, for example Chetty, Friedman, Olsen, and Pistaferri (2011); Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis
(1999); Song, Price, Guvenen, Bloom, and Von Wachter (2015); Card, Cardoso, Heining, and Kline (2018).


                                                   5
and wage rates. Section 3 presents our empirical strategy, and section 4 presents our
results. We conclude in section 5 by discussing some additional implications of our
results.



1 A Framework For Analyzing the Effects of Minimum

      Wage Regulation on Worker Welfare

1.1 Basic Set-up

    Suppose a worker has an exogenous productivity level a, the value of the output
he or she produces when employed. The individual also has a reservation value v,
which reflects his or her valuation of leisure and the consumption that could be financed
through social insurance transfers.7
    Assume for now that compensation consists entirely of wage income. Bargaining
frictions, perhaps due to search costs, enable firms to pay workers wage rates equal
to fraction θ of the value of their output.8 The wage is thus w = θa unless the firm is
constrained by the minimum wage. Firms maximize profits by employing all individuals
they can retain at wage rates less than or equal to the value of their output.
    Under these conditions, the minimum wage causes job loss when it exceeds the value
of a worker’s production. It can also increase earnings when bargaining frictions create
wedges between unconstrained wage rates and the value of output. It is also possi-

   7 In a framework that explicitly models search, the outside option will also be a function of the value
of the matches the individual might find if he or she turns down employment at some initial firm.
   8 Ifexpressed as in a Nash bargaining problem in which the bargaining parameters are α and 1 −
α, we would have w = θa = αa + (1 − α)v. The relationship between our “reduced form bargaining
                                                                         αa+(1−α)v
parameter” and a standard Nash bargaining parameter is thus θ =              a     . The wage equals the
individual’s marginal product under perfectly competitive conditions, which are captured through either
of two channels. First, w = a if the individual’s outside option v equals the value of his or her output a,
perhaps due to an absence of search frictions. Second, w = a if the Nash bargaining parameter equals 1,
which implies that the reduced form bargaining parameter also equals 1.


                                                    6
ble for bargaining wedges to create settings in which a minimum wage hike increases
employment.9



1.2 Extension To Non-Cash Benefits

    Suppose now that compensation includes a combination of cash wages w and non-
cash benefits b. For simplicity, let worker utility be U (w, b) = u(w) + g(b), with both u
and g assumed to be strictly increasing, concave, and twice continuously differentiable,
and with g(0) = u(0) = 0. That is, worker utility is separable in wages and benefits.10
The optimal division of compensation between wages and benefits sets the wage equal
to w∗ such that u0 (w∗ ) = g0 (θa − w∗ ). Compensation packages that satisfy this condition
minimize the firm’s cost for providing the worker with a given level of utility. In this
setting, the effect of the minimum wage depends on its value relative to a, as well as the
bargaining wedge, 1 − θ.
    Consider first the case of perfect competition, when θ = 1 (i.e., the bargaining wedge
is 0). Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between the minimum wage and worker utility
for an individual with productivity a under this assumption. When the minimum wage
falls between 0 and w∗ , it is non-binding. For minimum wages greater than a, firms
cease offering employment, as in the base case illustrated above. Utility then equals the
reservation utility, v.


   9 See the 2016 revision of Clemens and Wither (2014) for a more fleshed out discussion of these cases.
The minimum wage can increase employment if there are firms that make wage offers that individuals
are unwilling to accept even when those individuals would be willing to work at wage rates that are less
than or equal to the value of what they can produce. That is, there are cases in which a > v, but aθ < v.
This implies that, absent the minimum wage, employment fails to materialize in cases in which it would
be bilaterally efficient. This can arise in “wage posting” models, but would not occur in standard “ex post
bargaining” models (Manning, 2011).
  10 This formulation embeds the possibility that the firm may be able to provide benefits more cheaply
than it would cost the worker to buy with cash (e.g., due to tax preference or risk pooling in the case
of health insurance). The separate utility functions, u and g, allow a worker to value a dollar spent on
benefits differently than a dollar spent on cash.


                                                    7
   The nuance of taking into account non-wage compensation arises for the region w∗
to a. Here, the minimum wage binds the mix of compensation between wages and non-
wage benefits, but does not exceed the value of worker output. Firms are thus willing
to offer employment, but the utility from compensation with a wage of wmin and benefit
of b = a − wmin falls short of U (w∗ , a − w∗ ). The concavity of u and g implies that
the cost of this distortion will rise with the minimum wage in this region (between w∗
and a). Figure 1 illustrates two possibilities. Individuals may continue to work because
U (wmin , a − wmin ) > v even as wmin approaches a (the red dashed line). Alternatively,
they may exit employment because the minimum wage passes a level wv defined such
that U (wv , a − wv ) = v (the blue solid line).
   Thus, in the perfect competition case, allowing for cash and non-cash benefits yields
two additional implications. First, worker welfare is weakly decreasing in the minimum
wage whenever it binds on the mix of compensation and benefits, and this is true even
when there is no impact on employment. Furthermore, effects are likely to be non-
linear in the minimum wage (i.e., decreasing at an increasing rate). Second, employment
effects can arise through the traditional channel (the minimum wage exceeding worker
productivity), but also when utility from the mix of wages and benefits falls below
the worker’s reservation wage. This latter force can offset job shortage effects that are
emphasized in traditional models that ignore non-wage job attributes.
   Next consider the imperfect competition case. Here, firms have more flexibility to
absorb mandated wage increases. Figure 2 illustrates an example in which, absent a
binding minimum wage, workers are paid less than the value of their output due to the
existence of a bargaining wedge. As before, the minimum wage is non-binding between
0 and w∗ , and, for wmin > a, firms cease offering employment.
   Between w∗ and aθ, the minimum wage binds on the mix of compensation but not
on the total cost of compensation to the firm. We depict the case in which U (wmin , aθ −


                                                   8
wmin ) > v throughout this region. Effects are analogous to the w∗ to a region in the
perfect competition case.11
    Between aθ and a, the minimum wage binds on the total value of compensation, but
does not exceed the value of worker output. Firms would then optimally respond by
maintaining employment and increasing total compensation. The concavity of u implies
that utility will increase with wmin at a decreasing rate over this interval. We depict the
case in which there is a region over which U (wmin , 0) > U (w∗ , aθ − w∗ ), implying a net
improvement in the individual’s welfare.
    The case of imperfect competition illustrates several important features. First, welfare
effects are non-monotonic in the minimum wage. As we have drawn it, welfare first
decreases (at an increasing rate) as wmin first exceeds w∗ . Welfare then rises back towards
and eventually above its initial level before declining sharply when the individual loses
employment. Naturally, other outcomes are possible. For example, there may be no
interval over which welfare improves. There may also be an interval where workers are
pushed below their reservation wage, v, in which case there will be employment effects
driven by labor supply.
    The existence of various regions, their length, and the size of the potential welfare
gains and losses depend crucially on the bargaining wedge (1 − θ) and a. Our simple
framework illustrates that the welfare effects of minimum wage changes can be quite nu-
anced when jobs have non-wage attributes. First, the minimum wage can affect worker
welfare in the absence of effects on either the total cost of compensation or the extensive
margin of employment. Second, welfare effects can be negative even when compensation


   11 Herewe assume that θ does not change when the minimum wage does not bind on total compen-
sation. Other outcomes are possible. For example, if the new mix of compensation and benefits pushes
workers below their reservation wage, v, then firms may respond by increasing θ. Or, the existence of the
wedge may allow firms flexibility, for example, to raise wages for small minimum wage increases, without
adjusting benefits (effectively increasing θ), if they find that to be an easier path. In these instances, the
description for the region aθ to a may be more applicable to the w∗ to aθ region as well.


                                                      9
costs rise and no jobs are lost.



1.3 Further Considerations

    The analysis thus far assumes that there is just one type of worker, with productivity
a and preferences described by u and g. However, firms frequently employ workers of
multiple skill types and/or workers with different preferences for wage income relative
to health insurance benefits. In these cases, firms may choose to design benefits packages
collectively, rather than on an individual basis, because of administrative costs and for
legal reasons. Provisions in the Affordable Care Act (ACA), for example, make it difficult
for employers to provide less generous health insurance benefits to low wage employees
by making smaller contributions to their premiums.12 Empirically, most firms use the
same benefits plans for all workers or for broad categories of workers.13
    When firms offer a common benefits package to workers of multiple skill types, min-
imum wage increases may alter the compensation packages offered to both minimum
wage and non-minimum wage workers. Indeed, the optimal mix of pay and benefits
will tend to trade off the utility cost of distortions to compensation packages for all
types of workers, in proportion to their relative shares of a firm’s workforce. This has
both empirical and welfare implications.
    Empirically, reductions in the generosity of benefit packages will also affect individ-
uals higher up the skill distribution. When firms substitute cash for non-cash compen-
sation, cash incomes will rise for both minimum wage workers and workers higher up
in the skill distribution. Changes in non-cash compensation can thus generate a “ripple

  12 More specifically, coverage fails the ACA’s affordability requirements if the employee must contribute
an amount in excess of 9.5 percent of their gross income. Note, however, that because most minimum wage
workers do not work full time schedules, employers will tend not to be subject to penalties for failing to
provide them with access to affordable insurance.
  13 For   example, roughly half of firms that provide health insurance offer only one plan (Summary Table
II.a.2.d, 2016 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey).


                                                    10
effect,” whereby minimum wage increases result in wage gains for non-minimum wage
workers (Lee, 1999; Autor, Manning, and Smith, 2016).14
   Changes in the mix of compensation can have nuanced welfare implications. Initial
compensation packages will involve mixes of cash and non-cash benefits that are exces-
sively weighted towards cash from the perspective of some workers and towards benefits
from the perspective of others. When firms shift from non-cash to cash compensation
due to an increase in the minimum wage, the former group’s welfare will rise while the
latter group’s welfare will decline.
   The intuition that impacts on worker welfare may be non-monotonic in the minimum
wage still holds in settings where firms set one benefits package for multiple types of
workers. For workers whose initial preference was for greater cash relative to benefits,
welfare will first rise with the minimum wage before falling as compensation shifts
excessively away from benefits. Welfare gains and losses will depend on the initial mix
of compensation and benefits, as well as on which types of workers are further distorted
by firms’ responses to the minimum wage. There may be additional implications for
firm behavior; for example, minimum wage increases may push firms to alter production
technology so that they can produce with a more homogenous workforce. While these
issues are outside the scope of our framework, we briefly return to them in this paper’s
conclusion.



1.4 Empirical Implications

   We conclude this section by summarizing the empirical implications of the theoret-
ical considerations developed above. First, the most direct empirical implication of our
model is that wage increases generated by minimum wage changes may be partially


  14 There
         are, naturally, many proposed mechanisms that can generate wage increases for non-minimum
wage workers. We discuss these in more detail in section 4.2.


                                               11
offset by changes in non-cash compensation. We test for this directly in the context of
employer provided health insurance. While our theoretical framework does not specify
the dynamics or mechanisms through which such changes might take place, we have
several in mind. Individual firms may choose to drop coverage, though because such
adjustments are costly for firms, they may accrue only gradually (Meer and West, 2016).
Over the time period we study, however, implementation of the ACA may have pro-
vided opportunities for firms to change benefits arrangements. Firms with large shares
of employment in minimum wage jobs may have chosen not to add coverage, even while
employer coverage expanded as a whole over this time period. Changes in the pool
of firms themselves is also likely to be important, as new firms may be less likely to
sponsor insurance coverage when faced with higher minimum wages. As in the “putty-
clay” model emphasized by Sorkin (2015) and Aaronson, French, Sorkin, and To (2018),
newly-entering firms tend to be more flexible than existing firms. In addition, sorting
of workers across firms may play a role, especially in these notoriously high-turnover
minimum age jobs.
   Second, our framework highlights the possibility that both wage and benefit arrange-
ments may exhibit spillovers to individuals whose wage rates are not mechanically
bound by changes in the minimum wage. We test for such spillovers by investigat-
ing wage and benefits outcomes for individuals in occupations that tend to earn above
the minimum wage. The most direct mechanism for such effects in our model involves
firm-level shifts towards cash and away from benefits in cases where benefit packages
are set in common across workers of multiple skill types.
   Finally, we explore the dollar value of these benefit offsets. A one-for-one offset
would imply that the reduction in costs associated with benefits payout equal the in-
crease in costs from wage hikes. We hypothesize that offsets will be closer to one-for-one
for spillover-driven changes in wage rates and insurance coverage than for the minimum


                                           12
wage’s mechanical effects on wage rates. This reflects two theory-driven factors. First,
wage gains that accrue to very low skilled individuals may stem in part from improve-
ments in their bargaining position and thus may not be offset at all. Second, wage
changes that occur at the occupation level, which is the focus of our empirical analysis,
may stem in part from the employment of modestly higher skilled individuals in place
of very low skilled individuals. By contrast, spillover-driven changes in wage rates may
be a direct consequence of changes in benefit arrangements, in which case a one-for-one
exchange would be predicted in a competitive market setting.



2 Data and Setting

   We explore the impact of state-level minimum wage changes on employer-sponsored
health insurance and wage rates, as well as heterogeneity in these effects across worker
characteristics.   We focus on the years 2011-2016, a time period in which we have
individual-level data on health insurance coverage and substantial variation in statutory
minimum wage policies. In this section, we describe the key data sets and variables,
characterize variation in minimum wage laws, and present summary statistics. See ap-
pendix A for more detail.



2.1 Key Variables

   We use data from the American Community Survey (ACS) to measure employer-
sponsored insurance coverage. The ACS is a household-based survey, which began a
battery of health insurance questions in 2008. These questions ask whether a respondent
has health insurance at the time of the interview and, if so, its source. We focus on the
probability that an individual reports having coverage through an employer or union,
among the working age population (16-64). The ACS allows us to maintain relatively


                                           13
large samples, even within state-time-occupation cells. This contrasts with the March
supplement to the Current Population Survey (CPS), which has much smaller samples
(roughly one-twentieth the size of the ACS), though we explore robustness to this sample
as well.
   Because individuals vary in the likelihood that their compensation will be directly
influenced by a minimum wage hike, we isolate subgroups based on worker characteris-
tics. Previous literature has focused on population groups such as teenagers and adults
with low levels of education.15 Much of our empirical analysis focuses on occupations
as a way to categorize workers.16 We use data from Occupational Employment Statis-
tics (OES) to identify occupations that are more likely to be affected by minimum wage
increases. The OES is a large employer-based survey produced by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS). It provides information on wage distributions for narrowly defined oc-
cupations at both the national and state levels. Wage rates in the OES incorporate tips
and overtime pay, but exclude benefits.
   We divide occupations into deciles based on the 10th percentile of their 2006 wage
distribution.17 This wage distribution predates both the variation in minimum wages
that we analyze and the Great Recession. Occupations whose lowest earners are at the
bottom of this distribution are the most likely to be mechanically impacted by minimum
wage increases.
   We describe three groups of relatively low wage occupations in table 1. Within the
bottom decile, we distinguish between “Very Low” (e.g., food and beverage servers)
and “Low” wage (e.g., retail sales) occupations, comprising the bottom and top half of


  15 See,   for example, Neumark and Wascher (1992); Card (1992b,a).
  16 Aaronsonand Phelan (2017) similarly focus their analysis on occupations to explore the relationship
between minimum wage increases and technological substitution.
  17 We use four-digit Standard Occupation Classification (SOC) codes and define deciles using ACS
population weights across occupations in our estimation sample.


                                                   14
occupations in the decile, respectively.18
   We group the remaining deciles into three roughly equally sized groups, namely a
“Modest” wage group (deciles 2 through 4), a “Middle” wage group (deciles 5 through
7), and a “High” wage group (deciles 8 through 10). We also present estimates for the
disaggregated set of 10 deciles. Modest wage occupations are also listed in table 1. These
are recognizable as relatively low-paying jobs as well, but higher paying than the bottom
group (e.g., the first-line supervisors of food and beverage serving workers).
   We map OES data to ACS data using four-digit SOC occupation codes. In the ACS,
these codes correspond to an individual’s primary or most recent occupation (if unem-
ployed). We use the full population of experienced workers as our sample, estimating the
probability of having employer-sponsored health insurance for those currently or previ-
ously employed in a given occupation. This allows for the minimum wage to influence
coverage due to both job loss and changes to coverage conditional on employment; we
explore both channels. We unfortunately cannot measure changes in employer contribu-
tions, conditional on coverage. The latter is likely an important margin of adjustment as
well, but difficult to measure accurately in datasets with worker characteristics.
   In addition to analyzing low-wage occupations, we analyze samples selected on the
basis of age and education. These samples are more comparable to those analyzed in
previous minimum wage research, and allow us to relax the restriction that individuals
must be connected to an occupation.
   A benefit of the occupation-based approach is that it allows us to track the wage
response to minimum wage laws using OES data. We explore movement in average
hourly wages, as well as 10th and 25th percentiles, by occupation, state, and time period.
Although we have explored movement in individual-level wages using CPS and ACS

  18 To make this divide, we simply group half the occupations into each subcategory, so that each sub-
group comprises three (four-digit SOC) occupations. The Very Low wage occupations make up one-
quarter of weighted ACS observations in the decile, while Low wage occupations make up the rest.


                                                  15
data, we find that the OES more faithfully tracks minimum wage increases among the
lowest earning occupations. This is likely in part because the OES is larger and in
part because, as an employer-based survey, it measures hourly wages with less noise
than household survey data. Since OES annual statistics are based on 3-year moving
averages, we include only 2013 and 2016 in our wage estimation sample, so that the
moving averages contain no overlap. This comparison works well with the timing of the
policy changes we exploit, see below.



2.2 Variation in State Minimum Wages

   We focus our attention on state-level minimum wage changes that occur after 2011.19
As discussed by Clemens and Strain (2017), there was a lull in minimum wage policy
making between the Great Recession and 2013. From 2011 through 2013, all minimum
wage increases were linked to inflation indexing provisions. Since January 2013, over a
dozen states have increased their minimum wages through new legislation. Data from
2011 through 2013 thus provide a base period after which states’ minimum wage policies
diverged substantially. We link state-level minimum wages in July of a given year to the
ACS on an annual basis.20 In the OES data, we apply the 3-year moving average of the
July minimum wage rates in effect over 2011-2013 and 2014-2016 time periods, to align
with the OES data structure.
   Appendix table 3 summarizes minimum wage changes by state, listing the minimum
wage change across the full time period for each state that had a change. We also list the


  19 The sources underlying our minimum wage series include Meer and West (2016), Vaghul and Zip-
perer (2016) and Clemens and Strain (2017), and are further described in appendix A.
  20 Respondents   in the ACS may be surveyed at any time during the calendar year, but the survey date is
not available in the public-use files. Since we cannot pinpoint with certainty what the prevailing minimum
wage was at the time a respondent was surveyed, we impute with the midpoint of the year. However,
we believe this problem is small, since all but a handful of minimum wage changes over this time period
were in January of a given year.


                                                   16
number of years in which a change occurred (on a July-to-July basis) and the year of the
first change. States with inflation indexing provisions had increases in almost every year
in the sample, while those with new legislation tend to have fewer increases beginning
later in the sample. Across the states in which minimum wage changes occurred, the
average change was roughly $1.35 from July 2011 to July 2016 and $0.87 using 3-year
moving averages from 2011-2013 to 2014-2016. Note that while our analysis does not
explicitly incorporate sub-state minimum wage changes, we report estimates in which
we exclude states in which such changes have been enacted.



2.3 Summary Statistics

   Table 2 provides summary statistics separately by the occupation groups described
above – Very Low, Low, Modest, Middle, and High wages. ACS data reveal that em-
ployer insurance coverage rates are substantial among all occupation groups. Even in
the Very Low wage group, 46 percent of respondents had employer provided insur-
ance. This includes coverage obtained through a family member’s employer as well
as through one’s own. When we restrict to households with no adults associated with
higher earning occupations, the employer coverage rate is a more modest 37 percent. To
the extent that some low wage individuals already obtain coverage through relatives,
and are therefore unaffected by the benefits policies of their own employers, our results
will be attenuated. Coverage rates rise as one moves up the occupational wage distribu-
tion. For example, among the High wage occupations, the average coverage rate was 81
percent.
   We also report the total insurance coverage rates by occupation group. Those not
covered by employers can purchase private health insurance or receive coverage through
public programs such as Medicaid. In Very Low and Low wage occupations, roughly
three-quarters of respondents are covered by some form of health insurance. This insur-


                                           17
ance rate still falls well below that in higher wage occupations, but substantially narrows
the gap in employer coverage.
   Respondents that can be linked to Very Low and Low wage occupations are also less
likely to be currently employed. Recall that the occupation link is based on the current
or most recent occupation; while nearly 90 percent of those linked to a High wage
occupation are employed at the survey date, the same is true of only 72 percent of those
linked to Very Low and Low wage occupations. These workers are also younger and
less educated. For example, in Very Low wage occupations, 35 percent of respondents
are between 16 and 21 years old and 60 percent have no higher education. In panel B,
the OES wage data reveal that the 10th and 25th percentile wage rates for the Very Low
wage occupations were between $8 and $9, with the mean wage at $10.21 per hour. Low
wage occupations have a similar range of wages but a slightly higher mean.
   Table A.1 provides more detail on how the minimum wage increases enacted over this
time period compare to prevailing wages. For each occupation group, we first list the
average minimum wage change across the 2011-2013 base and 2014-2016 post periods.
We restrict the table to states with minimum wage changes over this time period. The
average minimum wage increase was roughly $0.85.21 The remainder of the table reports
the average amount by which wages would have needed to rise in order to comply with
minimum wage laws. That is, we calculate the gap between wages in the pre-period
(2011-2013) and the level of the minimum wage in the post-period (2014-2016). In rows
2-4 of table A.1, we summarize this gap for 10th, 25th, and 50th percentile, respectively,
in each occupation group.22 For most occupation groups and for most parts of the

  21 Statistics are weighted by average employment in the occupation-state from 2011-2016. Average
minimum wage changes will vary across occupation groups only because of this weighting – states have
different representation across occupation groups. The mean here is somewhat smaller than the full
change over our time period, reported above as $1.35. Again, because the OES is a 3-year moving average,
variables reflect the means of 2011-2013 and 2014-2016, rather than the full change from 2011 to 2016.
  22 We  calculate the gap between the 2014-2016 minimum wage and the 2011-2013 10th, 25th, and 50th
percentile wage. For each moment, we define a variable that is the maximum of this gap and zero, and


                                                  18
pay distribution, pre-period wages are already well above the eventual minimum wage.
However, for the very bottom of the wage distribution among Very Low and Low wage
occupations, this gap is non-trivial.
   For example, in Very Low wage occupations, the average 10th percentile wage in
the pre-period was $0.44 below the new post-period minimum wage, among states that
had minimum wage increases. That is, the bottom decile of Very Low wage occupations
needed to rise by about half the average minimum wage increase to be in compliance
with the new laws. At the 25th percentile, wages would have needed to rise by $0.20 to
keep up with the law change, relative to what workers were earning in 2011-2013. At
the median, workers were earning just a few cents below the new minimum wage in the
pre-period, so these workers would hardly have been mechanically impacted by the law
changes.
   Low wage occupations exhibit about half the exposure of Very Low wage occupations
at the 10th percentile: their wages should have risen by $0.26 to comply with minimum
wage laws. However, they have very little direct exposure higher up in the wage distri-
bution. Other occupation groups are unlikely to experience direct, mechanical impacts
of the minimum wage – that is, workers in these occupations were unlikely to have
wages below the minimum wage in 2014-2016.
   In summary, Very Low and Low wage occupation groups are directly exposed to
minimum wage increases, since the lowest earners in these occupations were earning less
than the eventual minimum wage in 2014-2016. Individuals in other occupations, as well
as the highest paid individuals in Low and Very Low wage occupations, would not tend
to experience any mechanical impacts of minimum wage increases. Of course, this does
not rule out indirect impacts of the minimum wage on these groups. Note, however that
our estimates of effective minimum wage changes are upper bounds since they do not


then take the mean across occupation-states for states with non-zero minimum wage increases.


                                                 19
take into account any nominal wage growth that might have otherwise occurred across
time periods. Compared to this benchmark, our estimates will, if anything, understate
the role played by spillover effects.



3 Methods

   We begin with the following regression specification:



                  Yi,o,s,t = βMinimum Wage Policys,t + States α1 + Timet α2

                         + Occupationo α3 + Xs,t γ + ε i,o,s,t                                       (1)


where i indexes individuals, o indexes occupations, s indexes states, and t indexes years.
The variable Minimum Wage Policys,t describes variation in state-level minimum wage
policies. In our main specification, we use continuous variation in the level of the mini-
mum wage (recall we use the prevailing minimum wage in July of a given year because
the ACS does not report the month during which an individual was surveyed). We
estimate separate regressions for each occupation wage group.
   We explore two key outcome variables: (1) whether individuals report having employer-
sponsored health insurance, as measured in ACS data from 2011-2016, and (2) wage
rates, obtained from the OES. Specifications using ACS data are estimated on individual-
level observations. Specifications using OES data are estimated on occupation-state-year
observations, the level at which the OES data are reported.23 We weight ACS regressions
using sample weights and OES regressions by occupation-state-year employment.


  23 We restrict observations to OES estimates in 2013 and 2016 to ensure independent observations across
survey years, since OES data report 3-year rolling averages. We apply the 3-year moving average of the
July minimum wage rates in effect over the 2011-2013 and 2014-2016 time periods. Time-varying control
variables are also constructed as 3-year moving averages across each period.


                                                   20
   Our baseline specification includes state, occupation, and time fixed effects (the vec-
tors α1 , α2 , and α3 ). The coefficient of interest, β, is therefore a difference-in-differences
estimator of the effect of changes in the minimum wage on outcome, Y. This most basic
set of fixed effects accounts for national-level time shocks and baseline differences in
outcomes across states and occupations. The identifying assumption is that the outcome
of interest would have followed similar trends across states if not for differential changes
in their minimum wage policy regimes.
   If occupation-state pairs trend differently for other reasons, this identifying assump-
tion may not hold. We augment the basic specification with controls that proxy for
at least a subset of such potential confounding factors. For instance, we add state-by-
occupation and occupation-by-year fixed effects. The former allow for differences in
outcomes across state-by-occupation cells. This may be relevant if, for example, retail
sales workers in California are more likely to have health insurance than those in Mis-
sissippi. The latter allow outcomes to trend differently across occupations on a national
basis; this may be relevant if, for example, retail sales workers have become increas-
ingly more likely to receive health insurance. Not controlling for these trends would be
problematic if they were also correlated with minimum wage policy.
   We further control for a range of other factors (Xs,t ) that may have shaped employer
insurance coverage decisions over this time period. To control for variation across states
in the evolution of macroeconomic well-being, such as differences in economic recov-
eries following the Great Recession, we add controls for state-level employment rates
(obtained from the BLS), log income per capita (from the Bureau of Economic Analysis),
and a median house price index (from the Federal Housing Finance Agency). These
controls are important because both wages and the generosity of benefit arrangements
tend to fluctuate with market conditions, and the latter may be correlated with mini-
mum wage policy. Indeed, Clemens and Strain (2017) document that market conditions


                                               21
improved more strongly over this time period in states that increased their minimum
wage rates than in those that did not. Failure to account for the underlying condition
of state economies would thus tend to bias our wage estimates towards larger positive
values and our insurance estimates towards less negative values.
    We also control for multiple factors related to the evolution of insurance markets
across states. Over the time period we analyze, the prevalence of employer health insur-
ance coverage grew from 58.6 to 60.3 percent across the working age population, accord-
ing to the ACS. This varied across states for several reasons. We capture one relevant
source of variation by controlling for states’ decisions regarding the ACA’s Medicaid
expansion. These controls are potentially relevant because Medicaid expansions were
more common in states that increased minimum wages. Specifically, we include an in-
dicator equalling one if an ACA Medicaid expansion is in effect in the given year, and
we include a second indicator that allows this effect to vary after 2013, when the ACA’s
key coverage provisions were in effect.24 We also control for state-time variation in mar-
ket concentration across the providers of insurance to both large and small employers,
as changes in insurer market power may affect coverage rates. Because changes in in-
surance market concentration are only modestly correlated with minimum wage policy,
these controls have only modest effects on our results.25
    To further account for factors that potentially vary across states and over time, we
explore a triple-difference framework specified in equation (2).

  24 The  key provisions, implemented in January 2014, include generous federal reimbursement for Med-
icaid expansion-driven coverage, as well as ACA exchange subsidies. Several states enacted Medicaid
expansions prior to 2014, but take-up would have likely been lower before these ACA provisions were in
effect. We have explored a range of approaches that allow for flexibility in the time path of the Medicaid
expansion impact, all yielding similar results. However, any of these controls will absorb some of the main
effect of interest, since minimum wage increases were more prevalent both later in our time period and
in states that implemented Medicaid expansions. As an alternative approach, we present specifications in
which we limit the sample to states that implemented Medicaid expansions.
  25 We take data on the market shares of the three largest insurers in states’ large and small group mar-
ketplaces from Kaiser: https://www.kff.org/state-category/health-insurance-managed-care/insurance-
market-competitiveness/


                                                    22
   Yo,d(o),s,t =       ∑          β d(o) Minimum Wages,t × Deciled(o) + States × Occupationo α1
                   d(o )6= High

             + Timet × Occupationo α2 + Timet × States α3

             + Xs,t × Deciled(o) γ + ε o,d(o),s,t .                                               (2)


In equation (2), we pool all occupation groups in one regression, and estimate inter-
actions between the minimum wage and occupation group dummies (β d(o) ). These re-
gressions also include state-by-year fixed effects. The regressions thus use High wage
occupations, the omitted occupation group, as a within-state-time control group. This
triple-difference approach is useful if states are in fact trending differently over this time
period, but in a similar manner across occupation groups. For example, employer cov-
erage may be rising more quickly in states with larger minimum wage increases due to
a dimension of macroeconomic conditions for which our covariates have failed to ac-
count. As long as these trends are similar for both high- and low-wage occupations, the
triple-difference will control for this effect.



4 Results

   This section presents our estimates of the effects of recent minimum wage changes
on employer insurance coverage (section 4.1) and wages (section 4.2). We discuss mag-
nitudes and the relationship between the insurance and earnings estimates in section
4.3.




                                                      23
4.1 Employer Insurance Coverage

   Figure 3 gives a general sense of the relationship between state-level minimum wage
changes and changes in employer coverage. The five panels present this relationship
separately for each of the five occupation groups we analyze. The changes are calcu-
lated from the “base” period (2011-2013) to the “post” period (2014-2016) – the period
in which the statutory minimum wage increases occur. We also plot the (unweighted)
best linear fit across states. For the Very Low wage occupations (top left), this line is
downward sloping and steep. Washington, DC, and Rhode Island, for example, had
large minimum wage increases that were accompanied by large declines in insurance
coverage. In contrast, coverage for individuals in Very Low wage occupations increased
on average in states with no minimum wage changes. The slope of the relationship be-
tween minimum wage changes and insurance coverage becomes successively less steep
as we examine higher-skilled occupations. For our High wage occupations, the line is
essentially flat. These relationships are consistent with our expectation that effects will
be stronger for workers who are closer to earning the minimum wage.
   Table 4 presents regression estimates of equation (1). The five panels correspond with
the five occupation groups. The specification in column 1 controls for state, year, and
occupation fixed effects. Column 2 adds two-way fixed effects at the occupation-by-year
and occupation-by-state levels. Columns 3 and 4 add macroeconomic and insurance
market controls, respectively.
   Minimum wage increases were associated with substantial declines in employer-
sponsored insurance across Very Low, Low, and Modest wage occupations. Beginning
with Very Low wage occupations in panel A, we estimate that a $1 minimum wage in-
crease reduces the probability of employer provided insurance by 1.4 to 2.3 percentage
points. All estimates are significant at the 5% or 1% level. With full controls (column
4), the estimate of -0.0188 (with a standard error of 0.006) implies a nearly 2 percentage


                                            24
point reduction in coverage, or a 4% decline.
    Results for the Low wage group, reported in Panel B, are moderately smaller in
magnitude and are statistically significant at the 5% or 1% level across all specifications.
With full controls, we find a 1.2 percentage point reduction in coverage for this group, or
2.5%. We find a similarly large effect, reported in Panel C, among individuals in Modest
wage occupations. Relative to Very Low wage occupations, effects on both Low and
Modest groups are more likely to be driven by spillovers than by mechanical minimum
wage effects (see table 3).
    Moving to panels D and E, our estimates for Middle and High wage occupations
are much smaller in magnitude. They range from -0.003 to -0.009 for Middle wage
occupations, and -0.002 to -0.004 for High wage occupations. While a few point estimates
are statistically significant, the general impression from these panels is a lack of robust
or economically meaningful impacts on these groups. This is particularly true, as we
would expect, of estimates associated with High wage occupations.
    Figure 4 presents estimates separately for each wage decile, again disaggregating the
bottom decile into Very Low and Low. We estimate equation (1) separately for each
decile or group, using full controls (column 4). The figure confirms that we lose little
information by aggregating occupations into groups, as in table 4. The Very Low and
Low wage occupations exhibit a pronounced, negative relationship between minimum
wage increases and employer-sponsored coverage. Estimates involving the next several
deciles are smaller but non-trivially negative. Estimates involving the top few deciles
are all quite close to zero.26
    We show in appendix table A.2 that results are robust to different ways of specifying
minimum wage policy. When using the log minimum wage (panel B), rather than the

   26 Theone apparent anomaly in figure 4 is the estimate for the fourth decile, which is substantially more
negative than those around it. This effect is driven by a single four-digit occupation group, Motor Vehicle
Operators.


                                                    25
level, results are similar in significance and larger in magnitude. We can also categorize
states by the type of minimum wage change enacted: changes driven by new statutory
legislation over the time period, and inflation indexed changes. These groupings are
important to explore since changes due to inflation indexing may be fundamentally
different – they are small in magnitude (on the order of $0.15 per year) and anticipated.
In panel C, we report coefficients on the interaction of these groupings and an indicator
for whether the first minimum wage increase in the state (or any increase thereafter) is
in effect. Results look quite consistent with our results using the linear specification:
modest coefficients on indexers, and larger coefficients for statutory increasers. In panel
D we show that our results are little changed when we exclude the 6 states with sub-state
minimum wage changes during our sample period.
    In panel E of appendix table A.2 we restrict to states that implemented ACA Medicaid
expansions in order to understand the potential relevance of states’ Medicaid expansion
decisions for our results. Restricting the analysis sample to states that implemented
the expansion is a complementary approach to reducing the exposure of our minimum
wage analysis to any effects from the expansion. Reassuringly, estimates in the Medicaid
expansion sample are similar to the baseline estimates reported in panel A.27
    We next present results using the triple-difference specification in equation (2). As
discussed earlier, this specification allows us to use High wage occupations as a state-
time control, in case our previous control sets have accounted insufficiently for factors
that influence compensation packages are correlated with minimum wage changes. In
table 5, we report coefficients on interactions between the minimum wage and indicators
for Very Low, Low, Modest, and Middle wage occupations. For column 1, the specifi-
cation includes all standard two-way fixed effects: occupation-by-state, occupation-by-

  27 Inthese specifications we omit the Medicaid expansion controls since, as noted above, they potentially
bias our minimum wage estimate. Nonetheless, we are reassured that this set of results is similar if time-
varying Medicaid expansion controls are included in the specification.


                                                    26
time, and state-by-time. The reported coefficients give the differential impact of mini-
mum wage increases on insurance outcomes for each occupation group, relative to High
wage occupations (the omitted category). Columns 2 and 3 add macroeconomic and
ACA controls, respectively. In each case, we interact the control sets with occupation-
group indicators, allowing insurance outcomes to be differentially sensitive to economic
conditions or ACA variables across occupation groups. For example, coverage in low
wage occupations may be more sensitive to business cycle fluctuations.28
   The results again show that minimum wage increases predict declines in employer-
sponsored insurance among individuals in relatively low wage occupations. From col-
umn 3 (full controls), a $1 minimum wage increase predicts a 1.6 percentage point de-
cline in employer coverage among individuals in Very Low wage occupations and de-
clines of nearly 1 percentage point in Low and Modest wage occupations. This is roughly
what one would predict by simply comparing coefficients across occupation groups from
table 4 and differencing out the coefficient for High wage occupations.
   Losses in employer insurance may be due to general employment losses associated
with the minimum wage or losses in coverage conditional on employment. The latter
could manifest because employers choose to stop offering health insurance, or because
low-skilled workers become more likely to work for employers that never offered insur-
ance.29 Table 6 shows that the insurance declines we estimate are primarily associated
with the employed. The table reproduces estimates for the adult population with full
controls (column 4 of table 4) and compares these to estimates restricted to the sam-
ple of currently employed. We focus on the difference-in-differences results, though

  28 Indeed, in our difference-in-differences specifications a given change in macroeconomic conditions
tends to predict a larger change in coverage among individuals in the lower paying occupation groups
than among individuals in the higher paying groups.
  29 The latter margin connects conceptually to the “putty-clay” dynamics emphasized by Sorkin (2015)
and Aaronson, French, Sorkin, and To (2018). The key insight is that some responses to minimum wage
changes will occur through the production technology and compensation design choices of new firms, as
they are more flexible, rather than through changes in the more rigid operations of continuing firms.


                                                  27
the triple-difference specification looks similar. The point estimates are slightly larger
in magnitude for this sub-sample. For example, for Very Low wage occupations, a $1
increase in the state minimum wage is associated with a 2.0 percentage point reduction
in the prevalence of employer provided insurance coverage among the employed pop-
ulation, compared to 1.9 percentage points for the whole population of those currently
or previously employed in Very Low wage occupations. This is consistent with the fact
that we do not see evidence of strong impacts on employment. In appendix table A.3,
for example, we show that impacts of the minimum wage on employment, hours, and
weeks worked in each of our occupation groups are small in magnitude and statistically
insignificant.30
   Appendix Table A.4 shows that our findings are robust to analyzing alternative sub-
samples and relaxing one of our primary sample inclusion criteria. The results presented
thus far are restricted to respondents that can be linked to an occupation, which elim-
inates from the sample individuals who have not been employed in the recent past (5
years). We can instead analyze skill-groups selected on the basis of age and education,
which avoids this restriction. Many previous analyses of the minimum wage have fo-
cused on young workers and adults with low education levels as groups that might be
particularly impacted by minimum wage hikes.
   Appendix tables A.4 and A.5 explore results based on these subgroups. We find that
the relationship between minimum wage increases and employer insurance coverage is
particularly large for young adults (age 16-21) and those with less education (high school
or less). Controlling for worker demographics, within these categories, has little effect on
the results. We also find that, though estimated effects on employment probability are
quite small in economic magnitude for most subgroups, they are nontrivial for young
adults: we estimate that a $1 minimum wage increase is associated with a 0.8 to 1.0

  30 We   do, however, find evidence of reductions in the employment of young adults (see table A.4).


                                                    28
percentage point reduction in employment probability for young adults. Finally, in table
A.5, we show that within Very Low wage occupations, coverage declines are strong
for highly-educated adults as well as for younger workers. This reflects the substantial
exposure of these occupations to minimum wage changes. In contrast, effects for other
occupation groups tend to be concentrated in the low-skilled demographic groups.
    In summary, we find robust evidence that minimum wage hikes are accompanied
by losses in employer-sponsored health insurance. We conclude this subsection by ex-
ploring whether individuals offset these coverage declines via other sources. Appendix
table A.6 presents results for three additional outcomes: whether the individual has
any health insurance, public-sector health insurance, or privately purchased insurance.
Here, using our full controls specification, we do not see any evidence of offsets from
these other sources. Indeed the minimum wage coefficient on any coverage is similar in
sign and magnitude to that for employer coverage, and impacts on public and private
insurance are small in magnitude and generally insignificant. Many of the individuals
in Very Low and Low wage occupations who lost coverage would be eligible for fairly
generous subsidies through the ACA exchanges, but have elected to remain uninsured
over the period under analysis.31
    Finally, we investigate whether the coverage changes we estimate are influenced by
the presence of family members who may provide alternative sources of employer-based
coverage. In table A.7, we explore a range of sub-samples where we believe individuals
are unlikely to have coverage from family members. In particular, we restrict to samples

   31 These  results are somewhat sensitive to the inclusion of ACA controls. This is because the minimum
wage changes are largely concentrated in Medicaid expansion states, in which a substantial fraction of
low wage individuals obtained insurance through Medicaid in the later period. Not controlling for this
would result in a positive relationship between the minimum wage and public insurance, and suggest
some offset of the losses in employer coverage. However, the fact that our employer coverage results are
less sensitive to ACA controls (table 4) suggests that, by and large, those transitioning to Medicaid were in
jobs that did not have access to employer coverage. This is consistent with evidence from Duggan, Goda,
and Jackson (2017) and Frean, Gruber, and Sommers (2017), who find that the ACA’s Medicaid expansions
did not substantively crowd out employer provided coverage.


                                                     29
in which there is no spouse, no working spouse, or no higher earning spouse, and to
families in which there is no other adult (spouse included), no other working adult, or
no higher earning adult. We present the results of this analysis for individuals employed
in Very Low (panel A) and Low (panel B) wage occupations in table A.7. On average,
the point estimates on sub-samples with a lower likelihood of access to coverage through
others in their household are a bit larger in magnitude, especially for Very Low wage
workers with no other adults in their household, though the difference is in no case
statistically distinguishable from 0. Coverage through other members of low-skilled in-
dividuals’ households thus appear to play a relatively minor role in the overall coverage
changes we estimate.



4.2 Earnings Outcomes

   In table 7, we explore the effect of minimum wage changes on wage rates for each
of our occupation groups. We present estimates of equation (1) using our controls from
column 3 of table 4 specification for three separate dependent variables: the log of the
10th percentile of wage rates, the log of the 25th percentile, and the log of the mean wage
rate, in columns 1-3 respectively.
   Column 1 of Panel A shows that, for Very Low wage occupations, a $1 minimum
wage increase predicts a 0.117 increase in log hourly wages, or a 12% increase, at the
10th percentile for these occupations. Off a base of $8.26 (table 2), this reflects a $0.97
hourly pay increase. From columns 2 and 3 of panel A, we also observe effects up the
wage distribution: roughly 8% increases at the 25th percentile and the mean, amounting
to $0.65 and $0.82 increases (off bases of $8.62 and $10.21), respectively.
   In Panel B, we find estimates that are somewhat smaller in magnitude, though still
statistically significant, for Low wage occupations. Here, a $1 minimum wage increase
predicts a 9% wage increase at the 10th percentile, or $0.74. Effects amount to nearly


                                             30
4% at the 25th percentile, or $0.35, and 3% ($0.33) at the mean. Modest wage occupa-
tions (panel C) see a similar sized increase at their 10th percentile (3% or $0.33). They
also experience effects amounting to about $0.10 at the 25th percentile and the mean,
though only the former is (marginally) significant. Finally, for Medium and High wage
occupations, effects are small in magnitude.
   Figure 5 presents estimates separately for each decile of the distribution of occupa-
tions. The figure shows that we lose little information through the use of our more
aggregated occupation grouping. For the 10th percentile wage outcome (top left panel),
we find effects are positive and significant for the first several deciles and very close to
zero for the rest. For the other outcomes (25th percentile and mean wages), effects are
only significant in the Very Low and Low wage occupations, and at zero for the other
deciles.
   Wage effects are thus concentrated in the lowest paying occupations, in line with
their proximity to the actual minimum wage changes. That is, in 2011-2013, these groups
(Very Low wage and Low wage occupations) are more likely to be earning close to, or
below, the eventual minimum wage in 2014-2016. Some of the wage raises experienced
by these groups were necessary in order for firms to be in compliance with increases in
minimum wage rates. However, the literature also recognizes that minimum wage laws
may induce employers to raise wages for groups earning above the minimum wage, but
proximate to it. Autor, Manning, and Smith (2016), for example, estimate that minimum
wage increases compress 50-10 wage differentials despite not binding on 10th percentile
wage rates directly. They are unable, however, to reject the possibility that these spillover
effects are due to reporting artifacts. Our approach, using OES wage data, has two key
advantages: (1) data are based on large, firm-level surveys; (2) hourly wage rates are
likely to be reported with less error in the context of a firm survey than in a household
survey.


                                             31
   To what extent do the wage increases we estimate reflect the mechanical effects of
minimum wage changes and to what extent do they reflect spillovers? We can use
our calculations of the gap between pre-period (2011-2013) wages and the level of the
minimum wage in the post period (2014-2016) from table 3 to understand the relative
contributions of mechanical effects and spillovers.
   For Very Low Wage occupations, the average 10th percentile wage in the pre-period
was $0.42 below the new post-period minimum wage, among states that had minimum
wage increases, or about half of the actual minimum wage increase. For a $1 minimum
wage increase, we might have then expected a $0.50 wage increase at the 10th percentile
in pure compliance effects. Instead we find that 10th percentile wages for Very Low wage
occupations increased by $0.97. Thus only a little more than half of our estimated wage
increase can be accounted for by mechanical raises in compliance with new minimum
wage laws.
   For other parts of the distribution, the role of non-mechanical explanations is even
larger. For example, for the 25th percentile of Very Low wage occupations, a $0.20 wage
increase per $1 of minimum wage increase would be required to bring this group up to
the prevailing wage in the post period.32 Instead, we estimate a $0.65 increase.
   For the 10th percentile of Low wage occupations, the purely mechanical effect would
have amounted to a $0.28 increase per $1 of minimum wage hike. Instead, we observe
an effect more than twice that size. Finally, for the 25th percentile of Low wage occu-
pations and for the 10th percentile of Modest wage occupations, the purely mechanical
effect would be negligible because wage rates were only a few cents below the eventual
minimum wages. Instead, we estimate increases just over $0.30.
   The wage increases in table 7 are thus primarily not driven by mechanical effects


  32 From  table 3, we estimate that a $0.16 wage increase at the 25th percentile would be necessary, on
average, to keep up with the average $0.80 minimum wage increase, or 20% of the full increase.


                                                  32
of the minimum wage. We cannot fully rule out the possibility that wages were, on
the whole, growing faster in states that increased their minimum wage rates than in
those that did not. However, triple difference estimates, which use the evolution of High
wage occupations as a control for state-time variation in wages, are very similar (see
appendix table A.8). Given this result and our controls for macroeconomic conditions,
our reading of the evidence is that our wage estimates reflect a sizeable role for non-
mechanical effects of minimum wage policy on higher wage workers. Note that for
these groups, we also find sizeable impacts on insurance coverage, even though their
mechanical exposure to minimum wage increases was minimal.
   Minimum wage increases may affect compensation at above-minimum wage jobs
through several channels. Past work emphasizes channels including firm-worker bar-
gaining and compensation hierarchies (Akerlof and Yellen, 1990; Katz and Krueger,
1992). In the context of our model, spillovers arise when firms set benefits packages
collectively for heterogeneous workers. Notably, the mechanism in our model can ratio-
nalize both the wage and insurance coverage spillovers we find. An additional potential
mechanism is labor-labor substitution, wherein employers re-optimize the skill of their
labor force, potentially leading to wage increases within occupation (Hamermesh and
Grant, 1979). In concurrent work exploiting the same statutory minimum wage changes,
(Clemens, Kahn, and Meer, 2018) we find a shift towards more educated and older work-
ers among both job ads and employed workers for low-paying occupations.



4.3 To What Extent Do Coverage Declines Offset Wage Increases?

   We now consider the extent to which declines in health insurance coverage offset
the wage increases associated with the minimum wage. This requires an estimate of
employer contributions to the cost of insurance coverage. We obtain such estimates
from a combination of the March CPS supplements and the Kaiser Family Foundation’s


                                           33
(KFF) Employer Health Benefits Survey. The March CPS supplements contain worker
self-reports of employer contributions to their health care plans, accompanied by basic
demographic and employment data. In this survey, employer contributions to insurance
plans rise moderately across our occupation groups. In Very Low wage occupations, the
average employer contribution, conditional on a positive contribution, was $3,800.33 For
Low wage occupations, the estimate is $4,400; Modest wage occupations average $5,400;
Medium wage occupations average $5,900; High wage occupations average $6,600 in
employer contributions to their health care plans.34 Though based on self-reports, these
numbers are in line with estimates from the KFF surveys.35
   For Very Low wage occupations, our estimates suggest that a $1 rise in the minimum
wage increases mean hourly wages by 8% and reduces the likelihood of having employer
provided coverage by 2 percentage points among employed workers (table 7 and 6,
using specifications with full controls).36 In the 2011-2013 ACS data, annual earnings
among individuals associated with these occupations was $10,700. The implied effect
of the minimum wage changes on annual earnings was thus an average of $860. The
decline in employer insurance coverage reduces the cost of this group’s compensation
by an average of $75 per worker.37 Therefore, 9% of the wage gains associated with

  33 This estimate includes all employed people age 16-64 in survey years 2012-2017, which cover the
previous calendar year.
  34 The March CPS supplements have much smaller sample sizes than the ACS (roughly one-twentieth
the number of observations), but contain sufficient information for a parallel analysis of the impact of
minimum wage increases on employer coverage. We find qualitatively similar, though noisier estimates
given the smaller samples. These estimates can be found in appendix table A.9.
  35 The  KFF’s 2017 Employer Health Benefits Survey found that employer contributions were just over
$4,000 for single coverage and $11,000 for family coverage. These estimates are based on average an-
nual premiums for retail workers ($5,716 for single coverage and $16,920 for family coverage, see figure
1.4) and average worker contribution rates (roughly 26 percent of the single premium and 36 percent
of the family premium, see figure 6.26): https://www.kff.org/health-costs/report/2017-employer-health-
benefits-survey/.
  36 Sincewage estimates are necessarily restricted to employed workers, we focus on the analogous
sample for insurance coverage effects.
  37 From    above, the average employer contribution for this group was $3,800, which would fall by 2% on


                                                    34
minimum wage hikes were offset by declines in employer provided insurance coverage
for individuals in Very Low wage occupations.
   For Low wage occupations, we calculate that a $1 minimum wage increase would,
on average, generate an annual earnings gain of $377 and a roughly $60 decline in the
cost of insurance coverage. The coverage decline thus offsets roughly 16% of the wage
gain. For Modest wage occupations, average annual earnings increase by a statistically
insignificant $123, while the cost of employer coverage declines by $70.38 The coverage
decline thus offsets roughly 57% of the wage gain.
   Substantial heterogeneity likely underlies these estimates of average impacts on wages
and health insurance coverage. Most importantly, some individuals retain health insur-
ance while others lose it. The distribution of changes in individual welfare thus depends
crucially on two factors. First, it depends on the extent to which wage gains accrued to
individuals who lost coverage.39 On this point, we are unable to ascertain whether the
same individuals experienced both coverage declines and large wage gains. A second
key factor, as discussed in section 1, involves the extent to which individuals in Very Low
and Low wage occupations value insurance. Risk aversion linked to subsistence con-
straints could make these valuations high, while the availability of substitutable forms of
coverage, for example from the ACA, could make these valuations low (Mahoney, 2015;
Finkelstein, Hendren, and Luttmer, 2015; Finkelstein, Hendren, and Shepard, 2017).




account of those who lose coverage.
  38 Theseestimates use annual earnings calculations from the ACS in 2011-2013: $13,000 for Low wage
occupations and $20,500 for Modest wage occupations.
  39 Note  that wage gains going to those who lost coverage is precisely what canonical benefit-incidence
theory predicts, as it is the outcome that would most closely maintain the alignment of workers’ produc-
tivity and compensation (Summers, 1989; Wessels, 1980; McKenzie, 1980).


                                                   35
5 Discussion and Conclusion

   This paper explores the relationship between the minimum wage, the structure of
employee compensation, and worker welfare. We advance a conceptual framework that
highlights the relevance of non-wage job attributes for evaluating worker welfare and
for understanding the spillover effects of minimum wage increases.
   We find robust evidence that recent state minimum wage increases resulted in de-
clines in employer-sponsored health insurance for minimum wage earners. Our esti-
mates also suggest that insurance and wage effects spill over to those earning above, but
not far from, the minimum wage. Previous work has considered the possibility of wage
spillovers linked to firm-worker bargaining or resulting from compensation hierarchies
(Akerlof and Yellen, 1990; Katz and Krueger, 1992). While these perspectives predict
wage spillovers, they do not predict the changes we estimate in non-cash compensation.
As noted in section 1, benefit packages set in common for high and low skilled workers
can rationalize both the wage and insurance coverage spillovers we estimate.40
   We conclude by observing that while employer insurance coverage is an important
non-wage job attribute, it is but one of many non-wage job attributes. Our findings thus
point to the need for an analysis of other job attributes and how they fluctuate with the
minimum wage. Margins of interest, some of which have received attention in recent
work, include the flexibility of work hours (Mas and Pallais, 2017), implicit effort con-
tracts (Bils, Chang, and Kim, 2014), the pace of work (Obenauer and von der Nienburg,
1915; Hirsch, Kaufman, and Zelenska, 2015), and occupational safety. Standard theory
suggests that such margins may have high relevance for worker welfare. Our estimates


  40 Interestingly,
                  the spillover effects in wages go in the opposite direction of an endogeneity concern
in which states increase minimum wages when general labor market conditions erode (and this drives
any associated employment losses). In that case, we should see wage losses accompanying the insurance
losses, when instead we see minimum wage hikes accompanied by wage gains spilling over onto non-
minimum wage workers.


                                                  36
can be viewed as a lower bound on the extent to which adjustments of non-wage job
attributes shape the welfare affects of minimum wage increases. Examining these other
non-pecuniary margins, particularly those that are more difficult to observe in traditional
data sources – like workplace amenities – is a fruitful direction for future research.




                                            37
References

Aaronson, D., E. French, I. Sorkin, and T. To (2018): “Industry Dynamics and the
  Minimum Wage: A Putty-Clay Approach,” International Economic Review, 59(1), 51–84.

Aaronson, D., and B. J. Phelan (2017): “Wage Shocks and the Technological Substitu-
  tion of Low-Wage Jobs,” The Economic Journal.

Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis (1999): “High wage workers and high
  wage firms,” Econometrica, 67(2), 251–333.

Acemoglu, D., and J.-S. Pischke (1999): “Minimum wages and on-the-job training,”
  NBER Working Paper 7184.

Akerlof, G. A., and J. L. Yellen (1990): “The fair wage-effort hypothesis and unem-
  ployment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(2), 255–283.

Autor, D. H., A. Manning, and C. L. Smith (2016): “The contribution of the minimum
  wage to US wage inequality over three decades: a reassessment,” American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 8(1), 58–99.

Bils, M., Y. Chang, and S.-B. Kim (2014): “How Sticky Wages in Existing Jobs Can Affect
  Hiring,” Working Paper 19821, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bucila, L. (2008): “Employment-Based Health Insurance and the Minimum Wage,” Dis-
  cussion paper, College of the Holy Cross, Department of Economics.

Card, D. (1992a): “Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment? A Case Study of Califor-
  nia, 1987-89,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 46(1), 38–54.

       (1992b): “Using Regional Variation in Wages to Measure the Effects of the Federal
  Minimum Wage,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 46(1), 22–37.


                                             38
Card, D., A. R. Cardoso, J. Heining, and P. Kline (2018): “Firms and labor market
  inequality: Evidence and some theory,” Journal of Labor Economics, 36(S1), S13–S70.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, T. Olsen, and L. Pistaferri (2011): “Adjustment costs, firm
  responses, and micro vs. macro labor supply elasticities: Evidence from Danish tax
  records,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), 749–804.

Clemens, J., and D. M. Cutler (2014): “Who pays for public employee health costs?,”
  Journal of health economics, 38, 65–76.

Clemens, J., L. B. Kahn, and J. Meer (2018): “Impacts of the Minimum Wage on Skill
  Requirements: Evidence from Vacancy Postings,” Discussion paper, Yale University.

Clemens, J., and M. R. Strain (2017): “Estimating the Employment Effects of Recent
  Minimum Wage Changes: Early Evidence, an Interpretative Framework, and a Pre-
  Commitment to Future Analysis,” NBER Working Paper 23084.

Clemens, J., and M. Wither (2014): “The Minimum Wage and the Great Recession: Evi-
  dence of Effects on the Employment and Income Trajectories of Low-Skilled Workers,”
  NBER Working Paper 20724.

Duggan, M., G. S. Goda, and E. Jackson (2017): “The Effects of the Affordable Care Act
  on Health Insurance Coverage and Labor Market Outcomes,” (23607).

Finkelstein, A., N. Hendren, and E. F. Luttmer (2015): “The Value of Medicaid: Inter-
  preting Results from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment,” Working Paper 21308,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Finkelstein, A., N. Hendren, and M. Shepard (2017): “Subsidizing Health Insurance
  for Low-Income Adults: Evidence from Massachusetts,” Working Paper 23668, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research.


                                            39
Frean, M., J. Gruber, and B. D. Sommers (2017): “Premium subsidies, the mandate, and
  Medicaid expansion: Coverage effects of the Affordable Care Act,” Journal of Health
  Economics, 53, 72–86.

Gruber, J. (1994): “The incidence of mandated maternity benefits,” The American eco-
  nomic review, pp. 622–641.

Hamermesh, D. S., and J. Grant (1979): “Econometric Studies of Labor-Labor Substitu-
  tion and Their Implications for Policy,” Journal of Human Resources, 14(4), 528–542.

Hashimoto, M. (1982): “Minimum wage effects on training on the job,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, pp. 1070–1087.

Hirsch, B. T., B. E. Kaufman, and T. Zelenska (2015): “Minimum wage channels of
  adjustment,” Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 54(2), 199–239.

Katz, L. F., and A. B. Krueger (1992): “The effect of the minimum wage on the fast-food
  industry,” ILR Review, 46(1), 6–21.

Kolstad, J. T., and A. E. Kowalski (2016): “Mandate-based health reform and the labor
  market: Evidence from the Massachusetts reform,” Journal of health economics, 47, 81–
  106.

Lee, D., and E. Saez (2012): “Optimal minimum wage policy in competitive labor mar-
  kets,” Journal of Public Economics, 96(9), 739–749.

Lee, D. S. (1999): “Wage inequality in the United States during the 1980s: Rising disper-
  sion or falling minimum wage?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 977–1023.

Mahoney, N. (2015): “Bankruptcy as implicit health insurance,” The American Economic
  Review, 105(2), 710–746.



                                             40
Manning, A. (2011): “Imperfect competition in the labor market,” Handbook of labor
  economics, 4, 973–1041.

Marks, M. S. (2011): “Minimum Wages, Employer-Provided Health Insurance, and the
  Non-discrimination Law,” Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 50(2),
  241–262.

Mas, A., and A. Pallais (2017): “Valuing alternative work arrangements,” American
  Economic Review, 107(12), 3722–59.

McKenzie, R. B. (1980): “The Labor Market Effects of Minimum Wage Laws: A New
  Perspective.,” Journal of Labor Research, 1(2).

Meer, J., and J. West (2016): “Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment Dynamics.,”
  Journal of Human Resources, 51(2).

Neumark, D., and W. Wascher (1992): “Employment effects of minimum and submini-
  mum wages: panel data on state minimum wage laws,” ILR Review, 46(1), 55–81.

Obenauer, M. L., and B. M. von der Nienburg (1915): “Effect of Minimum-wage De-
  terminations in Oregon,” Bulletin of the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, July(176).

Rosen, S. (1972): “Learning and experience in the labor market,” Journal of Human Re-
  sources, pp. 326–342.

Royalty, A. (2001): “Do Minimum Wage Increases Lower the Probability that Low-
  Skilled Workers Will Receive Fringe Benefits?,” Discussion paper, Northwestern Uni-
  versity/University of Chicago Joint Center for Poverty Research.

Ruggles, S., K. Genadek, R. Goeken, J. Grover, and M. Sobek (2017): “Integrated Public
  Use Microdata Series: Version 7.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota,
  2017,” .

                                              41
Simon, K. I., and R. Kaestner (2004): “Do minimum wages affect non-wage job at-
  tributes? Evidence on fringe benefits,” ILR Review, 58(1), 52–70.

Song, J., D. J. Price, F. Guvenen, N. Bloom, and T. Von Wachter (2015): “Firming up
  inequality,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Sorkin, I. (2015): “Are there long-run effects of the minimum wage?,” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 18(2), 306–333.

        (2017): “Ranking firms using revealed preference,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics.

Stigler, G. J. (1946): “The economics of minimum wage legislation,” American Economic
  Review, pp. 358–365.

Summers, L. H. (1989): “Some simple economics of mandated benefits,” The American
  Economic Review, 79(2), 177–183.

Vaghul,     K.,   and B. Zipperer (2016):        “Historical state and sub-state mini-
  mum wage data,” Washington Center for Equitable Growth. http://equitablegrowth.
  org/workingpapers/historical-state-and-sub-state-minimum-wage-data.

Wessels, W. J. (1980): “The effect of minimum wages in the presence of fringe benefits:
  An expanded model,” Economic Inquiry, 18(2), 293–313.




                                            42
Figures and Tables




        43
                                         Individual Welfare As a Function of the Minimum Wage:
                                               Case of Perfectly Competitive Labor Market

                          U (w,b)
                                                                                                     1) Non-binding region.

                                                                                                     2) Region with distortion
                                                                                                        to compensation mix.

                                                                                                     3) Case in which
                    U   (w*,a   -w*)                                                                    distortion drives the
                                                                                                        value of compensation
                                                                                                        below the reservation
                                                                                                        value.




44
                                                                                                     4) Region in which the
                                                                                                        minimum wage
                                                                                                        exceeds the value of
                            v                                                                           worker output.



                                         w*                                wv           a         wmin




     Figure 1: Individual Utility: Perfect Competition
     The figure depicts an individual’s utility as a function of the minimum wage in the case of a perfectly competitive labor market. The
     individual has productivity of a and receives compensation in the form of benefits b and cash wages a, over which he or she is assumed to
     have additively separable utility that is increasing and concave in both a and b, U (w, b) = u(w) + g(b) The individual has a reservation utility
     of v, and thus works so long as U (w, b) ≥ v. The assumption of a perfectly competitive labor market implies that w + b = a. The solid blue
     line depicts a case in which utility loss from distortion to the compensation package drives the utility from employment below the reservation
     utility before the minimum wage exceeds the value of the individual’s output to the firm. The red dashed line depicts the opposite case.
                                        Individual Welfare As a Function of the Minimum Wage:
                                             Case of Labor Market with Bargaining Wedge

                        U (w,b)
                                                                                                    1) Non-binding region.

                                                                                                    2) Region with distortion
                                                                                                       to compensation mix.

                                                                                                    3) Region with increased
                  U (w*, a -w*)                                                                        value of total
                                                                                                       compensation.

                                                                                                    4) Region in which the
                                                                                                       minimum wage
                                                                                                       exceeds the value of




45
                                                                                                       worker output.

                           v



                                          w*                                           a         wmin




     Figure 2: Individual Utility: Bargaining Wedge
     The figure depicts an individual’s utility as a function of the minimum wage in the case of an imperfectly competitive labor market in which
     a bargaining wedge introduces the possibility that the minimum wage can increase the value of total compensation. The individual has
     productivity of a and receives compensation in the form of benefits b and cash wages a, over which he or she is assumed to have additively
     separable utility that is increasing and concave in both a and b, U (w, b) = u(w) + g(b) The individual has a reservation utility of v, and
     thus works so long as U (w, b) ≥ v. The bargaining wedge is defined such that, unless the minimum wage is binding on the total cost of the
     worker’s compensation, w + b = θa. The figure depicts the case in which u(θa) ≥ v, so that distortion to the compensation package does
     not lead the individual to exit employment. Further, it depicts the case in which there are values of the minimum wage that are less than a
     and for which u(wmin > u(w∗ , θa − w∗ ), so that the minimum wage increases the individual’s utility relative to the case in which it is fully
     non-binding.
                                                  Very Low Wage                                         Low Wage                            Modest Wage
                                                                                              ND




                                     .1
                                                                                   .1
                                                                                                                              .1
                                                ME
                                                ID
                                                TN AZ
                                                UT    CO                                      SC
                                                WI                                                                                       TX




                                     .05
                                                                                   .05
                                                                                                                              .05
                                                OK
                                                TX MO
                                                    MT                                        MS
                                                                                              UT
                                                                                              TX                                         LA
                                                IL
                                                GA AR MI                                      LA
                                                                                              NH
                                                                                              ME
                                                                                              KS MO    WV                                OK
                                                                                                                                         AL
                                                                                                                                         NC
                                                                                                                                         WY
                                                IN
                                                NV    HI       CA                             IA  AZ
                                                                                                  MT    NE
                                                                                                        SD
                                                                                                     HI DE                               NV
                                                                                                                                         GA
                                                                                                                                         KS
                                                                                                                                         UT
                                                                                                                                         ND
                                                                                                                                         IN
                                                                                                                                             AZHI
                                                                                                                                            MO
                                                MS
                                                VA
                                                NM  OR                                        NM
                                                                                              WI                                         ID
                                                                                                                                         MS
                                                                                                                                         WI
                                                                                                                                         IL
                                                                                                                                         SC   WA
                                                                                                                                             FL CO
                                                                                                                                                MI NE     CA
                                                LA
                                                WY  FL
                                                    WA WVSD
                                                          DE   NY                             AL
                                                                                              GA
                                                                                              VA
                                                                                              OK
                                                                                              IN
                                                                                                  FL VT
                                                                                                              CA                         TN
                                                                                                                                         KY
                                                                                                                                         VA
                                                NC
                                                SC
                                                KY                                            NC
                                                                                              TN
                                                                                              ID  OHCO
                                                                                                   WA                                        OH
                                                                                                                                             MT    MN
                                                                                                                                                   SDAK
                                                ND
                                                KS OH                                         IL
                                                                                              NV                                         IA AROR  WV
                                                                                                                                                       NJ RI




                                     0
                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                 AR
                                                                                                     MI AK
                                                                                                   OR MD      NY                         ME
                                                                                                                                         NM
                                                                                                                                         PA        DE
                                                                                                                                                  VTCT    NY
                                                AL
                                                IA
                                                PA       MD                                   PA
                                                                                              WY
                                                                                              KY        MN NJ
                                                                                                          MA                             NH        MDMA            DC
                                                NH        CTNJ
                                                          MN
                                                         VT                                                   RI        DC
                                                         NEAK
                                                            MA                                           CT
                                                               RI




                                     -.05
                                                                                   -.05
                                                                                                                              -.05
                                                                             DC

                                            0      .5     1        1.5   2   2.5          0        .5     1   1.5   2   2.5          0       .5     1    1.5   2


                                                    Middle Wage                                         High Wage




                                     .1
                                                                                   .1




46
                                     .05
                                                                                   .05
                                                ME    HI
                                                MS
                                                TX
                                                LA
                                                NM              CA                                      NE
                                                GA
                                                NV
                                                WI
                                                AL
                                                ID   WA
                                                      CO




          Employer Coverage Change
                                                UT
                                                TN
                                                NC
                                                IL
                                                WY  AZ
                                                IN MO
                                                SC AR
                                                    FL    NE                                  GA
                                                                                              KS  MTHI SD
                                                OK
                                                KS
                                                IA  OH
                                                    ORMIWV
                                                    MT                                        LA
                                                                                              ND
                                                                                              TX
                                                                                              MS
                                                                                              AL MO
                                                ND
                                                KY
                                                VA        SD NJ NY
                                                          MD                                  NV
                                                                                              IN
                                                                                              TN
                                                                                              IA ARWA
                                                                                                  AZ
                                                                                                  OH          CA




                                     0
                                                                                   0
                                                PA
                                                NH        DE                                  ME
                                                                                              WI
                                                                                              OK
                                                                                              WY
                                                                                              SC
                                                                                              IL
                                                                                              KY
                                                                                              NC
                                                                                              UT   ORMI MNAK
                                                                                                           NJ RI
                                                          MNMA RI                             PA
                                                                                              NH FLCO MD
                                                         VTCT                                 VA      WV CT
                                                                                                        DEMA  NY        DC
                                                                             DC               ID      VT
                                                                                              NM
                                                              AK




                                     -.05
                                                                                   -.05
                                            0      .5     1        1.5   2   2.5          0        .5     1   1.5   2   2.5


                                                                                   Minimum Wage Change

     Figure 3: Minimum Wage Changes and Employer Coverage Changes
     Note: The figure presents scatter plots of the state-level change in employer insurance coverage on the state-level change in the minimum
     wage, separately by occupation group. Changes refer to the 2014-2016 mean minus the 2011-2013 mean. We group occupations based on
     their decile of the 10th percentile wage distribution, as measured in the 2006 Occupational Employment Statistics. “Modest”, “Medium”,
     and “High” wage occupations correspond to the 2-4, 5-7, and 8-10 deciles, respectively. The bottom decile is split into “Very Low wage”
     occupations, which represent the bottom quarter of observations in the decile, and “Low wage” occupations, which cover the rest of the
     decile; see table 1.
                                                Insurance Coverage and the Minimum Wage
                                                               Estimates by Decile
                                     .01
         Minimum Wage Coefficient

                                     0
                                     -.01
                                     -.02
                                     -.03
                                            w
                                                w


                                                    2


                                                          3


                                                                 4


                                                                       5


                                                                              6


                                                                                     7


                                                                                           8


                                                                                                  9

                                                                                                      10
                                         Lo
                                              Lo
                                     ry
                                    Ve




                                                    Decile of Occupation's 10th Percentile Wage

Figure 4: Insurance Coverage Estimates across Deciles
Note: The figure reports results of equation (1), estimated separately by decile of the occupation’s 10th
percentile wage (the bottom decile is split into “Very Low” wage occupations, which represent the bot-
tom quarter of observations in the decile, and “Low” wage occupations, which make up the rest). The
dependent variable is an indicator for whether an individual has employer provided insurance coverage,
as measured in the American Community Survey from 2011-2016. We regress insurance coverage on the
minimum wage in July of each calendar year, as well as full controls (see table 4). We plot the coefficient
on the July minimum wage and 95 percent confidence bands.




                                                                      47
                                                    Wage Outcomes and Minimum Wage Changes
                                                                             Estimates by Decile
                                                    Log 10th Percentile Wage                                          Log 25th Percentile Wage




                        -.05 0 .05 .1 .15
                                                                                          -.05 0 .05 .1 .15
                                              w w    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                         w w    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10
                                            lo lo                                                             lo lo
                                        v                                                                 v


                                                         Log Mean Wage




          Coefficient



48
                        -.05 0 .05 .1 .15
                                              w w    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10
                                            lo lo
                                        v

                                                                                 Wage Decile

     Figure 5: Wage Outcomes across Deciles
     Note: The figure reports results of equation (1), estimated separately by decile of their 10th percentile wage (the bottom decile is split into
     “Very Low” wage occupations, which represent the bottom quarter of observations in the decile, and “Low” wage occupations, which make
     up the rest). The dependent variables are points in the occupation-state-year wage distribution, as measured in Occupational Employment
     Statistics (OES). Our sample consists of OES estimates in 2013 and 2016. Since the OES reports three-year rolling averages, these years reflect
     2011-2013 and 2014-2016, respectively. We regress insurance coverage on the average July minimum wage in the each time period, as well as
     full controls (see table 7). We plot the coefficient on the minimum wage and 95 percent confidence bands.
                       Table 1: Description of Low Wage Occupations

 SOC 10th Ptile        Occupation Description
 code Wage
                                Panel A: Very Low Wage Occupations

 3530    $5.85         Food and Beverage Serving Workers
 3590    $6.00         Other Food Preparation and Serving Related Workers
 3930    $6.04         Entertainment Attendants and Related Workers
                                 Panel B: Low Wage Occupations

 3990    $6.40         Other Personal Care and Service Workers
 3520    $6.41         Cooks and Food Preparation Workers
 4120    $6.57         Retail Sales Workers
                                Panel C: Modest Wage Occupations

 3920    $6.65         Animal Care/Service             3940   $7.61   Funeral Service
 3720    $6.66         Building Cleaning/Pest          4390   $7.64   Oth. Office Support
 3950    $6.71         Personal Appearance             5191   $7.77   Misc. Production
 3970    $6.74         Tour and Travel Guides          4320   $7.81   Comm. Equipment Op.
 3960    $6.80         Porters, Bellhops, etc.         4391   $7.91   Oth. Admin. Support
 4520    $6.95         Agricultural Workers            4730   $8.00   Helpers, Construction
 5160    $7.13         Textile, Apparel, Furn.         5120   $8.00   Assemblers, Fabricators
 3390    $7.23         Other Protective Serv.          4351   $8.03   Recordkeeping
 5370    $7.35         Material Moving                 2720   $8.11   Ent. and Perf., Sports and Rel.
 4530    $7.35         Fishing and Hunting             5170   $8.14   Woodworkers
 5360    $7.35         Oth. Transportation             4341   $8.38   Record Clerks
 3730    $7.35         Grounds Maintenance             3510   $8.50   Supervisors of Food Prep/Serv.
 5130    $7.44         Food Processing                 2530   $8.52   Other Teach. and Instr.
 3110    $7.53         Home Health Aides               4340   $8.69   Information Clerks
 2590    $7.59         Other Ed, Train, Lib            5330   $8.71   Motor Vehicle Operators
Note: The table lists the 4-digit SOC occupation code, the 10th percentile wage, as measured in the 2006
Occupational Employment Statistics, and the occupation description. We group occupations based on
their decile of the 10th percentile wage distribution, as measured in the 2006 Occupational Employment
Statistics. The bottom decile is split into “Very Low wage” occupations, which represent the bottom
quarter of observations in the decile, and “Low wage” occupations, which cover the rest of the decile
“Modest” wage occupations correspond to the 2-4th deciles. “Medium” and ‘High” wage occupations are
not shown.




                                                  49
                                    Table 2: Summary Statistics

      Occupation Group             Very Low     Low     Modest              Middle          High
                                      Panel A: ACS Variables
      Employer Insurance             0.456      0.473    0.550                0.653         0.807
                                    (0.498)    (0.499)  (0.497)              (0.476)       (0.395)

      Any Insurance                   0.731        0.750        0.770         0.826         0.933
                                     (0.443)      (0.433)      (0.421)       (0.379)       (0.250)

      Employed                        0.723        0.727        0.778         0.832         0.894
                                     (0.447)      (0.445)      (0.415)       (0.373)       (0.307)

      Young adult                     0.352        0.263        0.114        0.0546        0.0153
                                     (0.478)      (0.441)      (0.317)       (0.227)       (0.123)

      HS or Less                      0.601        0.593        0.610         0.467         0.161
                                     (0.490)      (0.491)      (0.488)       (0.499)       (0.367)

      Minimum Wage                   7.770      7.787    7.775               7.762         7.798
                                    (0.686)    (0.709)  (0.699)             (0.692)       (0.719)
      Observations                  333,948    967,696 2,516,357           2,966,480     3,014,456
                                      Panel B: OES Variables
      10th Percentile Wage           8.259      8.468    9.640                12.73         22.46
                                    (0.716)    (0.701)  (1.109)              (2.379)       (6.117)

      25th Percentile Wage            8.623        9.117        11.26         15.76         28.94
                                     (0.646)      (0.723)      (1.662)       (3.201)       (8.666)

      Mean Wage                       10.21        11.64        15.02         21.32         40.98
                                     (1.226)      (1.144)      (3.095)       (5.296)       (13.41)
      Occ-State-Years                  306          306         2937          3785          3332
Note: This table presents means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for our key dependent variables,
by occupation group. We group occupations based on their decile of the 10th percentile wage distribution,
as measured in the 2006 Occupational Employment Statistics. “Modest”, “Medium”, and “High” wage
occupations correspond to the 2-4, 5-7, and 8-10 deciles, respectively. The bottom decile is split into “Very
Low” wage occupations, which represent the bottom quarter of observations in the decile, and “Low
wage” occupations, which cover the rest of the decile; see table 1. American Community Survey (ACS)
variables are summarizes using sample weights. Minimum Wage refers to the minimum wage in the
state as of July in a given year. Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) variables are at the 4-digit
occupation-year-state level and summarized using employment weights. Because OES estimates reflect
3-year averages, we restrict OES data to 2013 and 2016 waves.




                                                     50
       Table 3: Effective Minimum Wage Changes, Conditional on Any Change

 Occupation Group                Very Low          Low       Modest    Middle                 High
 Minimum Wage Change               0.843           0.861      0.869     0.861                 0.893
                                  (0.416)         (0.409)    (0.410)   (0.411)               (0.425)
                                               Effective Minimum Wage Change

 At 10th Percentile                 0.443          0.264         0.0611       0.0000197          0
                                   (0.406)        (0.325)        (0.176)      (0.00326)         (0)

 As Ratio                          0.0544          0.0315       0.00706      0.00000231          0
                                  (0.0494)        (0.0385)      (0.0205)     (0.000385)         (0)

 At 25th Percentile                 0.204          0.0383       0.00785      0.00000940          0
                                   (0.287)        (0.0978)      (0.0708)      (0.00215)         (0)

 As Ratio                          0.0237         0.00419      0.000903      0.00000109          0
                                  (0.0331)        (0.0107)     (0.00817)     (0.000248)         (0)

 At Median                         0.0256       0.0000179       0.00194      0.00000288          0
                                  (0.0708)      (0.000399)      (0.0190)     (0.000657)         (0)

 As Ratio                          0.00274     0.00000171      0.000212      0.000000320        0
                                  (0.00744)    (0.0000380)     (0.00207)     (0.0000730)       (0)
 Observations                         78            78            746            956           845
Note: This table summarizes minimum wage changes from the 2011-13 pre-period to the 2014-16 period,
among the 26 states with changes over this time period. Means and standard deviations (in parentheses)
are weighted by average employment in the occupation-states that make up the occupation group cell. (See
table 2 for detail on occupation groups.) The raw change from the midpoint of each period (July 2012 to
July 2015) is summarized in the first row, and differs across occupation groups only because of weighting
(i.e., variation in the distribution of high wage jobs across states). “Effective Minimum Wage Change”
summarizes the gap between Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) wages in 2011-13 and the 2014-16
average minimum wage for occupation-state pairs. We take an average of this gap, imputing zeros for
occupation-states whose wages are already above the eventual minimum. Because OES estimates reflect
3-year averages, we restrict OES data to 2013 and 2016 waves, corresponding to 2011-2013 and 2014-2016
estimates, respectively.




                                                   51
          Table 4: Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance and Minimum Wages

        Dependent Variable                          Individual Has Employer Coverage
                                                  (1)        (2)       (3)          (4)
        Panel A:                                       Very Low Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                          -0.0145** -0.0139** -0.0225*** -0.0188***
                                              (0.00612) (0.00620) (0.00514)     (0.00603)

        Observations                           333,948   333,948   333,948     333,948
        Panel A:                                        Low Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                          -0.0129** -0.0126** -0.0186*** -0.0120***
                                              (0.00578) (0.00596) (0.00400)   (0.00383)

        Observations                           967,696   967,696   967,696     967,696
        Panel B:                                       Modest Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                          -0.0113** -0.0102*  -0.0163*** -0.0122***
                                              (0.00557) (0.00528) (0.00340)   (0.00275)

        Observations                          2,516,357 2,516,351 2,516,351   2,516,351
        Panel C:                                       Middle Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                          -0.00369 -0.00325 -0.00916*** -0.00607**
                                              (0.00445) (0.00407) (0.00211)    (0.00237)

        Observations                          2,966,480 2,966,475 2,966,475   2,966,475
        Panel D:                                        High Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                          -0.00193 -0.00191 -0.00444**    -0.00286
                                              (0.00303) (0.00290) (0.00209)   (0.00186)

        Observations               3,014,456                3,014,455       3,014,455       3,014,455
        Occ, State, and Year FE       Yes                      Yes             Yes             Yes
        Occ-by-Yr, Occ-by-State FE    No                       Yes             Yes             Yes
        Macroeconomic Controls        No                       No              Yes             Yes
        ACA Expansion Controls        No                       No              No              Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Each panel
reports separate regressions (of equation 1) restricted to a given occupation group. The dependent variable
is an indicator for whether an individual has employer provided insurance coverage, as measured in the
American Community Survey from 2011-2016. We regress insurance coverage on the minimum wage in
July of the calendar year, as well as the controls indicated, separately by occupation group (see table 2).
Macroeconomic controls are the log of personal income, a housing price index, and the employment rate
in the state-year. ACA expansion controls are indicators for whether a medicaid expansion is in effect in
the state-year, the expansion indicator interacted with an after 2013 indicator, and the health insurance
market concentration for providers to large and small firms. Standard errors are clustered at the state
level.


                                                       52
    Table 5: Employer Coverage and Minimum Wages: Triple Difference Estimates

 Dependent Variable                                              Individual Has Employer Coverage
                                                                       (1)        (2)        (3)
 Very Low X Minimum Wage                                           -0.0120** -0.0182*** -0.0158**
                                                                   (0.00494)  (0.00599)  (0.00642)
 Low X Minimum Wage                                               -0.0111*** -0.0144*** -0.00930***
                                                                   (0.00370)  (0.00322)  (0.00337)
 Modest X Minimum Wage                                           -0.00879*** -0.0122*** -0.00966***
                                                                   (0.00306)  (0.00273)  (0.00233)
 Medium X Minimum Wage                                             -0.00140  -0.00474*    -0.00331
                                                                   (0.00203)  (0.00239)  (0.00282)

 Observations                                                     9,798,925       9,798,925       9,798,925
 R-squared                                                          0.116           0.116           0.116
 Occ-by-Year FE                                                      Yes             Yes             Yes
 Occ-by-State FE                                                     Yes             Yes             Yes
 State-by-Year FE                                                    Yes             Yes             Yes
 Macroeconomic Controls by Occupation Group                          No              Yes             Yes
 ACA Expansion by Occupation Group                                   No              No              Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. The table
reports estimates of equation (2) on the full sample of workers with a non-missing occupation from 2011-
2016. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether an individual has employer provided insurance
coverage, as measured in the American Community Survey from 2011-2016. We regress insurance coverage
on the minimum wage in July of each calendar year interacted with occupation group dummies (High
wage occupations are the omitted category), as well as the controls indicated. Standard errors are clustered
at the state level. See table 4 for a description of occupation groups and control variables.




                                                       53
   Table 6: Employer Coverage and Minimum Wages: Conditional on Employment

              Dependent Variable                  Individual Has Employer Coverage
                                                       (1)              (2)
                                                      All          Employed
              Panel A:                                Very Low Wage Occupations
              Minimum Wage                        -0.0188***       -0.0205***
                                                   (0.00603)        (0.00653)

              Observations                          333,948          228,891
              Panel A:                                   Low Wage Occupations
              Minimum Wage                        -0.0120***       -0.0128***
                                                   (0.00383)        (0.00442)

              Observations                          967,696          676,224
              Panel B:                                 Modest Wage Occupations
              Minimum Wage                        -0.0122***       -0.0128***
                                                   (0.00275)        (0.00327)

              Observations                         2,516,351        1,903,476
              Panel C:                                 Middle Wage Occupations
              Minimum Wage                        -0.00607**       -0.00694***
                                                   (0.00237)        (0.00245)

              Observations                        2,966,475        2,425,639
              Panel D:                                  High Wage Occupations
              Minimum Wage                         -0.00286         -0.00293
                                                  (0.00186)        (0.00185)

              Observations                        3,014,455               2,672,127
              Full Controls from table 4             Yes                     Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Column
1 replicates the full controls estimate from the estimates from table 4 (column 4). Column 2 restricts to
individuals who were employed at the time of the survey.




                                                     54
                  Table 7: Wage Outcomes and Minimum Wages Changes

                                                  (1)              (2)            (3)
         Dependent Variable                log(10th pctile) log(25th pctile) log(mean)
         Panel A:                                   Very Low Wage Occupations
         Minimum Wage                          0.117***        0.0755***      0.0805***
                                              (0.00696)        (0.00539)       (0.0114)

         Observations                             306          306           306
         Panel B:                                    Low Wage Occupations
         Minimum Wage                         0.0879***     0.0384***     0.0290***
                                              (0.00604)     (0.00615)     (0.00748)

         Observations                            306            306           306
         Panel C:                                   Modest Wage Occupations
         Minimum Wage                         0.0339***      0.00870*       0.00601
                                              (0.00543)      (0.00502)    (0.00504)

         Observations                           2,866          2,866         2,866
         Panel D:                                   Middle Wage Occupations
         Minimum Wage                         0.000245       -0.00305       0.00384
                                              (0.00469)      (0.00397)     (0.00279)

         Observations                            3,742         3,742         3,742
         Panel E:                                    High Wage Occupations
         Minimum Wage                          0.00478        0.00786      0.00842*
                                              (0.00869)      (0.00723)     (0.00469)

         Observations                            3,312                3,312             3,312
         Full controls from table 4               Yes                  Yes               Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Each
panel reports separate regressions (of equation 1) restricted to a given occupation group. See table 4
for a description of groups and control variables. The dependent variables are points in the occupation-
state-year wage distribution as reported in Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) data. Our sample
consists of OES estimates in 2013 and 2016. Since the OES reports three-year rolling averages, these
years reflect 2011-2013 and 2014-2016, respectively. We regress insurance coverage on the average July
minimum wage in each time period; macroeconomic and ACA expansion controls are also three-year
averages. Observations are weighted by OES occupation-state-year employment and standard errors are
clustered at the state level.




                                                    55
                               Appendix Material

A     Data Appendix

    This section briefly summarizes information related to the datasets we analyze.
    The full American Community Survey (ACS) sample consists of all individuals ages
16 through 64 surveyed in years 2011-2016, extracted from IPUMS (Ruggles, Genadek,
Goeken, Grover, and Sobek, 2017). This otherwise unrestricted sample contains 11,936,824
observations. Our primary estimation sample further restricts to the 9,798,937 individ-
uals (the sum of sample sizes across columns in panel A of table 2) associated with a
non-military occupation – individuals are asked to report the occupation on their pri-
mary job, or, if not working, their most recent occupation of the last 5 years. This sample
thus excludes people with no recent work experience. When we instead explore effects
across demographic groups (age and education), we can use the full sample of 11.9
million.
    Regression samples typically fall a handful short of the full number of observations
due to “singleton observations,” meaning cases in which there is a single observation in a
given occupation-by-state-by-year cell. In our triple-difference specification, for example,
we lose 12 such observations; this yields the reported observation count of 9,798,925.
    We merge in occupation wage data from Occupational Employment Statistics at ei-
ther the four-digit occupation level, or the state-by-occupation level. OES data are ex-
tracted from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (https://www.bls.gov/oes/tables.htm). For
wage data, we follow the convention of replacing topcoded observations with 1.5 times
the top code value. When hourly pay data are not available we use annual earnings di-
vided by 2000. For occupation codes, we need a crosswalk between the 2000 SOC codes
used by OES until 2011 to the 2010 system used in recent OES years and in the ACS.
We use a BLS crosswalk (https://www.bls.gov/soc/soc 2000 to 2010 crosswalk.xls) for

                                            56
occupations that match one-to-one; we simply recode occupations that were combined;
for occupations that split at the 6-digit level, we apply a stochastic crosswalk based on
empirical shares observed in the IPUMS versions of the 2009 ACS (which contains the
2000 SOC) and the 2010-2012 ACS (which contains the 2010 SOC).41
    At the national level, all 4-digit occupations observed in the ACS can be matched to
an occupation in the 2006 OES except 4700 (miscellaneous construction). We impute the
10th percentile wage in this occupation by taking the average of all occupations from
4700 to 4799.
    Our data on minimum wage rates is assembled from several sources. First, we ex-
tended the monthly minimum wage panel used for the analysis in Meer and West (2016).
We then cross-checked the extended series against two additional databases that pro-
vide information on monthly minimum wage rates from July 2011 through July 2016,
namely the minimum wage data compiled by Vaghul and Zipperer (2016) and the mini-
mum wage data compiled by Clemens and Strain (2017). When discrepancies emerged,
we further cross-checked against information provided by state labor departments or
through legislative texts.




   41 Occupations  that split were randomly assigned to one of the splits based on the empirical distribution
of the splits in 2010-2012. Since these splits almost never cross the 4-digit SOC level, which we use in all
analyses, measurement error from this stochastic assignment is trivial.


                                                     57
B     Appendix Tables and Figures

                 Table A.1: States with Minimum Wage Changes 2011-2016

              State                  Total Change ($)    # Changes    Year of First Change
              Alaska                       2.00              2                2015
              Arizona                      0.70              4                2012
              Arkansas                     0.75              2                2015
              California                   2.00              2                2014
              Colorado                     0.95              5                2012
              Connecticut                  1.35              3                2014
              Delaware                     1.00              2                2014
              District of Columbia         3.25              3                2014
              Florida                      0.74              4                2012
              Hawaii                       1.25              2                2015
              Maryland                     1.50              2                2015
              Massachusetts                2.00              2                2015
              Michigan                     1.10              2                2015
              Minnesota                    1.75              2                2015
              Missouri                     0.40              3                2013
              Montana                      0.70              4                2012
              Nebraska                     1.75              2                2015
              New Jersey                   1.13              2                2014
              New York                     1.75              3                2014
              Ohio                         0.70              4                2012
              Oregon                       0.75              4                2012
              Rhode Island                 2.20              4                2013
              South Dakota                 1.30              2                2015
              Vermont                      1.45              5                2012
              Washington                   0.80              4                2012
              West Virginia                1.50              2                2015
Note: The table summarizes minimum wage changes among states that had any change between 2011 and
2016. The first column lists the total change across the full time period. The second column lists whether
the changes in the state are through statutory legislation or because their minimum wage is indexed to
inflation. The third column lists the number of years within the time period where the July minimum
wage of that year differed from the July minimum wage in the preceding year. The last column provides
the year of the first minimum wage change within the time period.




                                                   58
             Table A.2: Employer Coverage and Minimum Wages: Robustness

           Occupation Group          Very Low        Low          Modest      Middle           High
           Dependent Variable                     Individual Has Employer Coverage
                                         (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)            (5)
           Panel A:                                       Level of the Min. Wage
           Minimum Wage              -0.0188***   -0.0120*** -0.0122*** -0.00607**           -0.00286
                                      (0.00603)   (0.00383)      (0.00275)   (0.00237)       (0.00186)

           Observations               333,948      967,696      2,516,351 2,966,475          3,014,455
           Panel B:                                    Log of the Minimum Wage
           Ln(Minimum Wage)          -0.149***    -0.0949***    -0.100*** -0.0473**          -0.0237
                                      (0.0512)     (0.0308)      (0.0215)  (0.0198)          (0.0151)

           Observations               333,948       967,696      2,516,351    2,966,475      3,014,455
           Panel C:                                          Policy Categories
           Statutory*After            -0.0157*     -0.0116**     -0.0115***    -0.00452      -0.00256
                                     (0.00820)     (0.00481)      (0.00322)   (0.00326)      (0.00211)
           Indexer*After              -0.00901      -0.00503       -0.00401    0.00197        0.00138
                                     (0.00741)     (0.00472)      (0.00285)   (0.00386)      (0.00334)

           Observations               333,948      967,696    2,516,351  2,966,475  3,014,455
           Panel D:                       States with No Sub-State Minimum Wage Changes
           Minimum Wage              -0.0162** -0.0148*** -0.0136***     -0.00537* -0.00461**
                                     (0.00672)    (0.00424)   (0.00313)  (0.00294)  (0.00184)

           Observations                269,702      756,169   1,981,172 2,363,587  2,351,408
           Panel E:                         States That Adopted ACA Medicaid Expansion
           Minimum Wage              -0.0169*** -0.0112** -0.00951*** -0.00413*     -0.00268
                                      (0.00588)    (0.00421)  (0.00298) (0.00226)   (0.00175)

           Observations               209,614       610,950      1,577,936     1,836,257     1,903,730
           Full Controls                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. See table 4.
Panels A replicates the specification from column 4. Panel B uses the log of the minimum wage (instead
of the level) as the key explanatory variable. Panel C divides states with minimum wage changes into: (1)
those with newly legislated increases and (2) inflation indexers. We report coefficients on the interaction
of these groupings and an indicator for whether the first minimum wage increase in our time period is in
effect. Panel D reports our preferred specification (the level minimum wage), excluding states with sub-
state minimum wage changes during our time period: California, Illinois, Maine, Maryland, New Mexico,
and Washington State (according to the University of California Berkeley Center for Labor Research and
Education). Panel E excludes states that had not adopted the ACA Medicaid expansion as of 2016. In all
panels except E, full controls are those listed in the fourth column of table 4. In Panel E, we omit Medicaid
expansion controls (though still include market concentration variables) from the specification since, as
noted in the text, they may bias our minimum wage estimate, and all states in this subsample have the
expansion in place at some point.




                                                        59
          Table A.3: Effects on Extensive and Intensive Margins of Employment

                                    (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)
  Panel A:                          Share of Population Employed in Occupation Group:
                                 Very Low      Low       Modest      Middle      High

  Minimum Wage                    0.000155       -0.000143       -0.000373       0.000334       0.000477*
                                 (0.000131)      (0.000277)     (0.000426)      (0.000443)      (0.000282)

  Observations                   11,936,812  11,936,812 11,936,812 11,936,812 11,936,812
  Panel B:                                          Usual Weekly Hours,
                                      Conditional on Employment in Occupation Group

  Minimum Wage (Jan)              0.00911          0.0419        -0.0916**         -0.0186        -0.0403
                                  (0.137)         (0.0918)        (0.0423)        (0.0275)        (0.0336)

  Observations                    228,891         676,2241,903,476 2,425,639 2,672,127
  Occupation                     Very Low          Low    Modest    Middle       High
  Panel C:                                            Weeks worked,
                                      Conditional on Employment in Occupation Group

  Minimum Wage (Jan)                0.153          0.0859         -0.0325          -0.0170        -0.0224
                                   (0.115)        (0.0756)        (0.0536)        (0.0306)        (0.0198)

  Observations                    228,891         676,224        1,903,476       2,425,639       2,672,127
  Occupation                     Very Low          Low            Modest          Middle           High
  Full Controls                     Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. See table
4. The table reports estimates of equation (1). The dependent variable in panel A is an indicator equalling
1 if the individual is employed in the indicated occupation group and zero otherwise. It is estimated on
the full American Community Survey sample (age 16-64). In panels B and C, the samples are restricted
to employed individuals in the indicated occupation group. We use the prevailing minimum wage in
January (rather than July) of the survey year because the dependent variables refer to work variables in
the previous 12 months. Because the dependent variables in this table involve employment, we exclude
the aggregate employment rate in the control set, but include all other controls from column 4 of table 4.




                                                       60
Table A.4: Estimates across Age and Education Groups: Employer Coverage and Em-
ployment

     Dependent Variable                       Employer Coverage         Employment
                                                 (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)
     Panel A:                                              Young Adults
     Minimum Wage                           -0.0127*** -0.0126*** -0.00844** -0.0101**
                                             (0.00359)  (0.00372)  (0.00412) (0.00415)

     Observations                           1,519,158   1,519,158   1,519,158 1,519,158
     Panel B:                                      Low Experience, Low Education
     Minimum Wage                           -0.0148*** -0.0144***    -0.00381  -0.00347
                                             (0.00341)  (0.00296)   (0.00312) (0.00313)

     Observations                           1,692,654   1,692,654   1,692,654 1,692,654
     Panel C:                                     High Experience, Low Education
     Minimum Wage                          -0.00760*** -0.00764***   0.00189   0.00305
                                            (0.00248)   (0.00247)   (0.00189) (0.00198)

     Observations                           2,911,108  2,911,108   2,911,108 2,911,108
     Panel D:                                     Low Experience, High Education
     Minimum Wage                           -0.00459*  -0.00421*     0.00126   0.00196
                                            (0.00250)  (0.00228)    (0.00166) (0.00167)

     Observations                           2,463,832   2,463,832   2,463,832 2,463,832
     Panel E:                                     High Experience, High Education
     Minimum Wage                           -0.00395*   -0.00362*    0.00170    0.00243
                                            (0.00204)   (0.00209)   (0.00155) (0.00153)

     Observations                           3,350,072       3,350,072       3,350,072     3,350,072
     State and Year FE                         Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
     Macroeconomic Controls                    Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
     ACA Expansion Controls                    Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
     Demographic by Yr Controls                No              Yes             No            Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Each
panel reports separate regressions (of equation 1 restricted to a given demographic group. See table 4.
We include all observations in a given demographic group, including those that cannot be linked to an
occupation. Groups are exhaustive: Young Adults restrict to age 16-21, Low Experience is age 22-40,
High Experience is age 41-64, Low Education is high school or less, High Education is some college or
more. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 (3 and 4) is an indicator for whether an individual has
employer provided insurance coverage (is employed), as measured in the American Community Survey
from 2011-2016. Specifications include most of the full controls listed in column 4 of table 4, except fixed
effects related to occupation. (We also omit controls for the aggregate employment rate in columns 3 and
4.) Where indicated, we add demographic controls for linear age and years of education, both interacted
with year dummies.
                                                    61
Table A.5: Employer Coverage and Minimum Wages: Estimates across Occupation and
Age/Education Groups

 Demographic Group                      All        Young Adult Low Ed Adult High Ed Adult
                                        (1)              (2)          (3)           (4)
 Panel A:                                             Very Low Wage Occupations
 Minimum Wage                       -0.0188***      -0.0184***     -0.00943     -0.0220**
                                     (0.00603)       (0.00668)    (0.00825)      (0.0104)

 Observations                        333,948           126,198       116,692                   91,058
 Panel B:                                                 Low Wage Occupations
 Minimum Wage                       -0.0120***       -0.0184***     -0.0146**                -0.000901
                                     (0.00383)        (0.00536)     (0.00565)                (0.00391)

 Observations                        967,696           265,525       398,176                  303,995
 Panel C:                                               Modest Wage Occupations
 Minimum Wage                       -0.0122***       -0.0160***    -0.0153***                -0.00650*
                                     (0.00275)        (0.00417)     (0.00304)                (0.00339)

 Observations                       2,516,351         300,902       1,345,676                 869,695
 Panel D:                                               Middle Wage Occupations
 Minimum Wage                       -0.00607**        -0.00650     -0.00851***               -0.00431*
                                     (0.00237)       (0.00668)      (0.00313)                (0.00245)

 Observations                       2,966,475         159,717      1,291,090                 1,515,569
 Panel E:                                                High Wage Occupations
 Minimum Wage                         -0.00286        -0.0135        -0.00488                  -0.00194
                                     (0.00186)       (0.00968)      (0.00395)                 (0.00212)

 Observations                       3,014,455            45,711           472,487            2,496,043
 Full Controls from Table 4            Yes                Yes               Yes                 Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Each
panel reports separate regressions (of equation 1) restricted to a given occupation (indicated at the panel
heading) and age/education group (indicated at the top). Full controls are those included in column 4 of
Table 4. Groups in columns 2-4 are mutually exclusive and exhaustive. Young Adults restrict to age 16-21,
Low Education is high school or less, High Education is some college or more. See also table A.4.




                                                    62
            Table A.6: Other Sources of Health Insurance and Minimum Wages

        Type of Coverage                      Employer       Any     Public     Private
                                                   (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)
        Panel A:                                       Very Low Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                          -0.0188*** -0.0180** 0.000621    -0.00354
                                               (0.00603) (0.00776) (0.00865) (0.00331)

        Observations                            333,948   333,948   333,948   333,948
        Panel B:                                        Low Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                          -0.0120*** -0.0172** -0.00499   -0.00281
                                               (0.00383) (0.00842) (0.00757) (0.00248)

        Observations                            967,696   967,696    967,696    967,696
        Panel C:                                        Modest Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                          -0.0122*** -0.0142** -0.000610 -0.00537**
                                               (0.00275) (0.00616) (0.00527) (0.00208)

        Observations                           2,516,351  2,516,351 2,516,351 2,516,351
        Panel D:                                        Middle Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                          -0.00607** -0.00813* -0.000144 -0.00398**
                                               (0.00237) (0.00412) (0.00353) (0.00168)

        Observations                           2,966,475 2,966,475 2,966,475 2,966,475
        Panel E:                                        High Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                           -0.00286 -0.00444** -0.000674 -0.00227*
                                               (0.00186) (0.00215) (0.00142) (0.00132)

        Observations                           3,014,455      3,014,455       3,014,455      3,014,455
        Full Controls from Table 4                Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. See table 4.
“Any” is an indicator equaling one if the individual had any health insurance coverage at the time of the
interview. “Public” equals one if the individual had insurance coverage through the Medicare, Medicaid,
or Veterans Affairs programs. “Private” equals one if the individual had coverage purchased directly from
a private insurer by themselves or a family member.




                                                        63
                             Table A.7: Employer Coverage and Minimum Wages: Family Relationships

             Dependent Variable                                          Individual Has Employer Coverage
                                             (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)          (5)        (6)             (7)
             Group                           All                 Spouse Restriction                     Other Adult Restriction
                                                          Any      Working Higher Earning          Any      Working Higher Earning
             Panel A:                                                       Very Low Wage Occupations
             Minimum Wage                 -0.0171***   -0.0156**   -0.0165**      -0.0177***     -0.0213*   -0.0175         -0.0199*
                                           (0.00557)   (0.00652)  (0.00644)        (0.00658)     (0.0113)   (0.0113)        (0.0110)

             Observations                  333,948      244,544      262,447        275,681      104,210      142,271        162,961
             Panel B:                                                          Low Wage Occupations




64
             Minimum Wage                 -0.0129***   -0.0148***   -0.0155***    -0.0152***   -0.0141***    -0.0134***     -0.0141***
                                           (0.00331)    (0.00382)    (0.00365)     (0.00376)    (0.00341)     (0.00352)      (0.00338)

             Observations                  967,696      616,700      690,501       726,382        270,024     403,444        458,204
             Full Controls from table 4      Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes
     Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Column 1 replicates the full controls
     specification (column 4) from table 4. Columns 2-4 explore restrictions to individuals where there is no spouse present (Any), no working
     spouse present (Working), and no spouse working in an occupation that earns above the Low Wage occupation group (Higher Earning),
     respectively. Columns 5-7 explore the same restrictions but for any adult in the family, not just the spouse.
     Table A.8: Wage Outcomes and Minimum Wages: Triple Difference Estimates

                                                               (1)                    (2)                  (3)
 Dependent Variable                                     log(10th pctile)       log(25th pctile)       log(mean)
 Very Low X Minimum Wage                                    0.113***              0.0669***            0.0709***
                                                            (0.0103)               (0.0100)             (0.0135)
 Low X Minimum Wage                                        0.0839***              0.0308***            0.0204***
                                                           (0.00984)              (0.00873)            (0.00692)
 Modest X Minimum Wage                                     0.0299***               0.00122             -0.00243
                                                            (0.0101)              (0.00800)            (0.00660)
 Medium X Minimum Wage                                     -0.00418                -0.0109*            -0.00478
                                                           (0.00700)              (0.00605)            (0.00473)

 Observations                                                 10,532                 10,532             10,532
 R-squared                                                    0.997                  0.998              0.999
 Occ-by-Year FE                                                Yes                    Yes                Yes
 Occ-by-State FE                                               Yes                    Yes                Yes
 State-by-Year FE                                              Yes                    Yes                Yes
 Macroeconomic Controls by Occ Group                           Yes                    Yes                Yes
 ACA Expansion by Occ Group                                    Yes                    Yes                Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. See tables 5
and 7. The table reports estimates of equation (2). We regress wage outcomes (as measured in the OES) on
the minimum wage interacted with occupation group dummies (High wage occupations are the omitted
category), as well as the controls indicated.




                                                        65
            Table A.9: Employer Coverage and Minimum Wages: March CPS

        Dependent Variable                          Individual Has Employer Coverage
                                                   (1)         (2)      (3)        (4)
        Panel A:                                       Very Low Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                            -0.0270     -0.0259 -0.0486*** -0.0412**
                                               (0.0228)     (0.0227) (0.0149)   (0.0171)

        Observations                            14,174     14,174    14,174     14,174
        Panel B:                                        Low Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                           -0.0213*   -0.0218* -0.0347*** -0.0263**
                                               (0.0125)   (0.0130)  (0.0106)   (0.0125)

        Observations                            41,686    41,686    41,686     41,686
        Panel C:                                       Modest Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                           -0.00915 -0.00918 -0.0139** -0.00529
                                              (0.00769) (0.00740) (0.00658) (0.00605)

        Observations                           112,483    112,392    112,392   112,392
        Panel D:                                       Middle Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                          -0.000469 8.50e-05    -0.00965 -0.00865
                                               (0.0101) (0.00978) (0.00708) (0.00777)

        Observations                           146,570   146,523   146,523   146,523
        Panel E:                                       High Wage Occupations
        Minimum Wage                           -0.00327 -0.00332  -0.00469 -0.00298
                                              (0.00596) (0.00595) (0.00710) (0.00678)

        Observations                           164,866       164,861       164,861       164,861
        Occ, State and Year FE                   Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
        Occ-by-Year, Occ-by-State FE             No            Yes           Yes           Yes
        Macroeconomic Controls                   No            No            Yes           Yes
        ACA Expansion Controls                   No            No            No            Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Each
panel reports separate regressions (of equation 1) restricted to a given occupation group estimated on the
Current Population Survey (CPS) March supplement from survey years 2012-2017 (representing coverage
in the previous calendar year). See notes to tables 1 and 4 for descriptions of occupation groups and
control variables.




                                                    66
