                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE, INNOVATION AND PRODUCTIVITY:
                HETEROGENEITY, ASYMMETRIES AND HYSTERESIS

                                            Laura Alfaro
                                           Alejandro Cuñat
                                           Harald Fadinger
                                            Yanping Liu

                                        Working Paper 24633
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w24633


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                              May 2018
We thank participants at NBER Summer Institute, AEA meetings, ESSIM, Barcelona GSE Summer
Forum, Princeton JRCPPF Conference, IMF Macro-Financial Research Conference, SED, EAE-ESEM
Lisbon and Cologne, Econometric Society North American Summer Meeting and China Meeting,
CEBRA, CompNet 7th Annual Conference, Workshop on International Economic Networks (WIEN),
Verein fuer Socialpolitik, XIX Conference in International Economics, Central Bank Macro Modeling
Workshop, IMF 19th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference and seminar participants at Aarhus,
Bank of Canada, Central Bank of Chile, CERGE-EI, CREI, ETH, Frankfurt, IADB, IFN, Iowa, Indiana,
Mannheim, Nottingham, NES Moscow, Notre Dame, Oslo, The Graduate Institute Geneva, Universidad
Catolica de Chile, Queen Mary University of London, and Ufuk Akcigit, Pol Antras, Antoine Berthou,
Kamran Bilir, Richard Brauer, Alberto Cavallo, Anusha Chari, Fabrice Defever, Jonathan Eaton, Jeff
Frieden, Julian di Giovanni, Manuel Garcia-Santana, Steve Redding, Mark Roberts, Jesse Schreger,
Stefano Schiavo, Monika Schnitzer, Bent Sorensen, Jim Tybout, Van Anh Vuong, and Shang-Jin Wei
for helpful comments. We particularly thank Andy Powell, Julian Caballero, and the researchers at
the IADB's Red de Centros project on the structure of firms' balance sheets. The views do not necessarily
represent the views of Cornerstone Research nor the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Laura Alfaro, Alejandro Cuñat, Harald Fadinger, and Yanping Liu. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Real Exchange Rate, Innovation and Productivity: Heterogeneity, Asymmetries and Hysteresis
Laura Alfaro, Alejandro Cuñat, Harald Fadinger, and Yanping Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 24633
May 2018, Revised April 2020
JEL No. F0,O1

                                               ABSTRACT

We evaluate manufacturing firms' responses to changes in the real exchange rate (RER) using detailed
firm-level data for a large set of countries for the period 2001-2010. We uncover the following stylized
facts about regional variation of manufacturing firms' integration into global value chains: firms in
emerging Asia are very export oriented relative to their dependence on imported intermediates; firms
from Latin America and Eastern Europe depend heavily on imported intermediates compared to their
export orientation; firms from high-income countries export on average as much as they import. Motivated
by these facts, we build a dynamic model in which real depreciations raise the cost of importing intermediates,
affect export demand, borrowing-constraints and the profitability of engaging in innovation (R&D).
We decompose the effects of RER changes on average firm-level productivity growth across regions
into these channels. We then structurally estimate the model and quantitatively evaluate the different
mechanisms by providing counterfactual simulations of temporary RER movements. In export-oriented
emerging Asia, real depreciations are on average associated with higher firm-level probabilities to
engage in R&D, faster growth of firm-level productivity and cash-flow and higher export entry rates.
We find negative average effects for firms in other emerging economies, which are relatively more
import dependent, and no significant average effects for firms in industrialized economies. Effects
on physical TFP growth, while different across regions, are non-linear and asymmetric.


Laura Alfaro                                           Harald Fadinger
Harvard Business School                                University of Mannheim
Morgan Hall 263                                        Department of Economics
Soldiers Field                                         L7 3-5, D-68131 Mannheim, Germany
Boston, MA 02163                                       and CEPR
and NBER                                               harald.fadinger@uni-mannheim.de
lalfaro@hbs.edu
                                                       Yanping Liu
Alejandro Cuñat                                        University of Mannheim
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
University of Vienna                                   L7, 3-5, 68131 Mannheim, Germany
Oskar Morgenstern Platz 1                              yanping.liu@uni-mannheim.de
A-1090 Vienna
Austria
alejandro.cunat@univie.ac.at
         The Real Exchange Rate, Innovation and Productivity∗
   Laura Alfaro†              Alejandro Cuñat‡                  Harald Fadinger§                     Yanping Liu¶
   HBS and NBER              U. Vienna and CES-ifo             U. Mannheim and CEPR                Cornerstone Research



                                                        April 2020



                                                          Abstract

           We evaluate manufacturing firms’ responses to changes in the real exchange rate (RER) using detailed
       firm-level data for a large set of countries for the period 2001-2010. We uncover the following stylized facts
       about regional variation of manufacturing firms’ integration into global value chains: firms in emerging Asia
       are very export oriented relative to their dependence on imported intermediates; firms from Latin America
       and Eastern Europe depend heavily on imported intermediates compared to their export orientation; firms
       from high-income countries export on average as much as they import. Motivated by these facts, we build a
       dynamic model in which real depreciations raise the cost of importing intermediates, affect export demand,
       borrowing-constraints and the profitability of engaging in innovation (R&D). We decompose the effects of
       RER changes on average firm-level productivity growth across regions into these channels. We then struc-
       turally estimate the model and quantitatively evaluate the different mechanisms by providing counterfactual
       simulations of temporary RER movements. In export-oriented emerging Asia, real depreciations are on aver-
       age associated with higher firm-level probabilities to engage in R&D, faster growth of firm-level productivity
       and cash-flow and higher export entry rates. We find negative average effects for firms in other emerging
       economies, which are relatively more import dependent, and no significant average effects for firms in in-
       dustrialized economies. Effects on physical TFP growth, while different across regions, are non-linear and
       asymmetric.
          JEL Codes: F, O.
          Key Words: real exchange rate, innovation, productivity, exporting, importing, financial
       constraints, firm-level data

    ∗ We thank participants at NBER Summer Institute, AEA meetings, ESSIM, Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, Princeton
JRCPPF Conference, IMF Macro-Financial Research Conference, SED, EAE-ESEM Lisbon and Cologne, Econometric Society
North American Summer Meeting and China Meeting, CEBRA, CompNet 7th Annual Conference, Workshop on International
Economic Networks (WIEN), Verein fuer Socialpolitik, XIX Conference in International Economics, Central Bank Macro Modeling
Workshop, IMF 19th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference and seminar participants at Aarhus, Bank of Canada, Central
Bank of Chile, CERGE-EI, CREI, ETH, Frankfurt, IADB, IFN, Iowa, Indiana, Mannheim, Nottingham, NES Moscow, Notre
Dame, Oslo, The Graduate Institute Geneva, Universidad Católica de Chile, Queen Mary University of London, and Ufuk Akcigit,
Pol Antràs, Antoine Berthou, Kamran Bilir, Richard Brauer, Alberto Cavallo, Anusha Chari, Fabrice Defever, Jonathan Eaton,
Jeff Frieden, Julian di Giovanni, Manuel Garcı́a-Santana, Steve Redding, Mark Roberts, Jesse Schreger, Stefano Schiavo, Monika
Schnitzer, Bent Sorensen, Jim Tybout, Van Anh Vuong, and Shang-Jin Wei for helpful comments. We particularly thank Andy
Powell, Julian Caballero, and the researchers at the IADB’s Red de Centros project on the structure of firms’ balance sheets.
Hayley Pallan, Haviland Sheldahl-Thomason, George Chao, Daniel Ramos, Sang Hyu Hahn and Harald Kerschhofer provided great
research assistance. Cuñat and Fadinger gratefully acknowledge the hospitality of CREI. Fadinger and Liu gratefully acknowledge
financial support by the DFG (grant FA 1411/1-1 and CRC TR 224). Liu also gratefully acknowledges financial support from
the European Research Council through grant no. 313623. Liu coauthored this paper before joining Cornerstone Research. The
views expressed herein are solely those of the authors who are responsible for the content, and do not necessarily represent the
views of Cornerstone Research.
   † Email:lalfaro@hbs.edu
   ‡ Email:alejandro.cunat@univie.ac.at
  § Email: harald.fadinger@uni-mannheim.de Address: Department of Economics, University of Mannheim, L7 3-5, 68131

Mannheim, Germany.
  ¶ Email: yaliu@cornerstone.com
1          Introduction
This paper looks into the link between real exchange rate (hereafter RER) changes and firm-level
productivity growth. A number of policy debates have renewed the interest in the effects of RER move-
ments on manufacturing activity (e.g. the experience of China’s export-led industrialization strategy is
often regarded as based on an undervalued real exchange rate).1 Real appreciations and their effects
are also at the center stage of concerns over the effects of large capital inflows associated with the
quantitative-easing policies implemented in the aftermath of the global financial crisis.2 Finally, the
idea of governments defining interventionist industrial policies has ceased to be taboo even in the polit-
ical debate of market-friendly countries. RER changes, for example, can produce effects comparable to
those of the combination of import tariffs and export subsidies and are not constrained by the WTO.3
     On the academic side, the empirical evidence regarding the effects of RER changes on economic
activity is far from conclusive. On the one hand, there is some evidence that RER depreciations
are associated with more manufacturing activity and faster economic growth in developing countries.
This has been rationalized theoretically with sizable market imperfections specific to traded goods,
in particular manufacturing exports.4 However, precise evidence on the channels through which this
positive effect operates remains elusive and is hard to obtain.5 On the other hand, there is ample micro-
level evidence of substantial productivity gains from importing intermediate goods (Halpern, Koren and
Szeidl, 2015). RER depreciations increase the cost of importing them and are associated with aggregate
productivity losses (Gopinath and Neiman, 2014). Finally, nowadays manufacturing production is based
to a great extent on global value chains, which imply that firms simultaneously import intermediates
and export their output; at the same time, the degree of firms’ integration into these global value chains
varies across regions (Baldwin, 2016). All of this suggests a more nuanced view of the impact of RER
fluctuations on manufacturing activity and productivity.
     We revisit this question by studying the effects of medium-term fluctuations in the RER on firm-level
export and import decisions, innovation, and productivity growth using a dynamic heterogenous-firm
model and micro data for many countries. We view changes in productivity as the result of firms’
deliberate decisions and not as the outcome of externalities and develop a dynamic model of R&D
investment by heterogeneous firms that can also choose to export their output and import intermediate
inputs.6
    1 S.Korea’s industrialization is understood as partly based on an undervalued real exchange rate (Eichengreen, 2008).
    2 Policymakers   in emerging markets have expressed concerns that large capital inflows can bring about the appreciation
of their RERs and a corresponding loss of competitiveness in manufacturing. The use of reserve accumulation and capital
controls has been suggested to limit exchange rate appreciations. (See Alfaro et al., 2017, Benigno et al., 2016, and Magud
et al., 2018, for a discussion.) In rich countries, worries about appreciated RERs and their impact on economic activity,
mainly in the manufacturing industry, have made recent headlines.
    3 Barattieri et al., 2018, for example, analyze macro-level effects of recent trade policy, in particular anti-dumping.
    4 See Rodrik, 2008, and Benigno and Fornaro, 2012. In the latter, given the traded nature of manufactures, a RER

depreciation can be understood as a subsidy that remedies the under-provision of manufacturing output through an
increase in exports.
    5 Henry, 2008, and Woodford, 2008, raise a number of empirical issues regarding this macro-level evidence (omitted

variables, reverse causality, etc.).
    6 A related literature on the link between trade liberalization and innovation has highlighted general-equilibrium aspects

as potentially important channels. For example, Atkeson and Burstein, 2010, emphasize the role of free entry.




                                                              1
    Our model implies that RER depreciations have different effects on firms’ sales, profits and cash flow
according to their trade status: they rise for exporters as these gain market shares abroad; and fall for
importers as their costs rise.7 For firms engaging in both activities, the net effect on profits and cash flow
depends on their export intensity relative to their import intensity. If RER fluctuations are persistent,
they affect both current and future profits and thus the net present value of innovation. Subsequently,
exporting firms’ R&D activities and thereby TFP growth are enhanced by RER depreciations, whereas
importing firms reduce their R&D during depreciations. Whether changes in cash flow or expected
future profits drive the response of R&D activity to RER fluctuations depends on the importance of
credit constraints, which may matter particularly in the case of emerging economies. We therefore allow
for the potential presence of credit constraints in the model. Due to sunk innovation costs, the model
yields asymmetric effects of real depreciations and appreciations, as first discussed by the hysteresis
literature. Firms tend to respond less to a negative profitability shock compared to a positive one
because they try to avoid having to repay the R&D start-up cost in case they stop doing innovation.8
    We then evaluate the model’s quantitative performance by structurally estimating its key parame-
ters using firm-level micro data for many countries. Since to our knowledge no single available dataset
contains all the information we need, we combine firm-level data from a series of sources (Orbis, Word-
base, World Bank’s Exporter Dynamics Database, representative micro data for several countries)9 for
around 70 emerging economies and 20 industrialized countries for the period 2001-2010 to evaluate
manufacturing firms’ responses to changes in the RER.10
    In our analysis, we group countries into three macro regions that display substantial differences as
far as their firms’ integration into the global economy is concerned: emerging Asia; other emerging
markets (Latin America and Eastern Europe); industrialized countries. In comparison with firms from
other emerging countries, firms from emerging Asia display a larger export orientation (in terms of both
the probability to export and the ratio of exports to sales) relative to their import orientation (in terms
of both the probability to import and the ratio of imports to sales). Industrial-country firms lie in
between these two groups in this regard. These differences characterize the heterogeneous responses of
manufacturing firms to RER changes.
    Table 1 provides evidence for differences in export and import orientation of manufacturing firms.
It reports firm-level import and export probabilities and intensities (imports/sales for importers; ex-
ports/sales for exporters) based on representative micro data sets for four countries for which we have
detailed administrative firm-level data available: China, Colombia, Hungary, and France.11 Firms in
China, representative for emerging Asia, have a high relative export orientation compared to firms from
   7 RER changes are taken as exogenous by firms and are passed on one-to-one to prices of exports and imports. See

Burstein et al, 2005, on the responsiveness of export and import prices to exchange-rate changes.
   8 See Baldwin, 1988, Baldwin and Krugman, 1989, and Dixit, 1989.
   9 A detailed description of the data sources can be found in Section 4.1.
  10 Previous evidence based on firm-level studies, discussed below, is relatively scarce. Here, data availability for a

wide range of countries including emerging economies has been an obvious constraint, limiting the analysis of firm-level
mechanisms and their aggregate implications, as well as their external validity.
  11 The numbers for China have been computed by the authors from representative plant-level administrative data;

information for Colombia is also from administrative data (we thank Norbert Czinkan for sharing this information with
us); data for Hungary are from Halpern et al., 2015; data for France are from Blaum et al., 2018. The analysis considers
that many firms are exporters and importers.



                                                           2
the other countries (for Chinese firms the export probability divided by the import probability is 1.53,
whereas the firms’ average export intensity divided by the corresponding import intensity is 4.62) while
firms from Colombia (0.82 and 0.71) and Hungary (0.90 and 0.42), representative for the other emerging
economies, have a low relative export orientation. Firms in France (1.15 and 1.64), representative for
industrialized countries, have intermediate relative export propensities and intensities.12 In Appendix
Table B-2 we compute the same statistics for emerging Asia and other emerging economies from the
Worldbank’s 2016 Enterprise Survey. This dataset includes a much larger sample of countries in these
regions. We find similar numbers, thus confirming the representativeness of the four countries for their
respective regions.13


          Table 1: Evidence on import and export propensity/intensity of manufacturing firms

                                  (Computed from representative micro data)
                                                China Colombia Hungary                     France
                                   Export prob.   0.26        0.37       0.35                0.23

                                  Import prob.         0.17          0.45          0.39       0.20

                         Relative export prob.         1.53          0.82          0.90       1.15

                        Avg. export intensity           0.6          0.10          0.10       0.23
                                  (exporters)
                       Avg. import intensity           0.13          0.14          0.24       0.14
                                  (importers)
                     Relative export intensity         4.62          0.71          0.42       1.64

Data Sources: China: computed from administrative data; Colombia: computed from administrative data; Hungary:
Halpern et al., 2015; France: Blaum et al., 2015.


    With these stylized facts in mind, we then estimate the model’s structural parameters separately
for each region using an indirect-inference procedure. We match reduced-form regression coefficients
of the impact of RER changes on firm-level outcomes such as TFP growth14 and the sensitivity of
firms’ R&D activity to cash flow, as well as a number of additional firm-level statistics, such as cross-
regional differences in firms’ average export and import orientation, innovation decisions and the firm-
size distribution. To evaluate the fit of the estimated model, we show that it can reproduce a number
of non-targeted moments, such as the sensitivity of firm-level R&D, cash flow and the aggregate export
entry rate to RER changes. The model also fits well moments conditional on trade participation: it can
quantitatively replicate the positive effect of RER depreciations on exporting firms and the negative
one on importing firms in terms of their R&D decisions and cash flow.
 12 Defever  and Riaño, 2017, document similar evidence for a broader sample of countries.
 13 The  Enterprise Survey does not cover most industrialized countries. We also performed complementary analysis on
regional differences in import and export propensity for the full set of countries in each region using information from
Worldbase, which reports export and import status by plant. This evidence confirms the results presented above.
  14 The reduced-form regressions net out confounding factors that may impact on firm-level outcomes, such as aggregate

supply or demand shocks to the manufacturing sector other than RER shocks, which are absent from the structural model.
We thus match conditional correlations that are fully consistent with our structural model.



                                                           3
    Due to the regional heterogeneity in relative export orientation, the model predicts qualitatively
different effects of RER depreciations on average firm outcomes: (i) manufacturing firms from emerging
Asia experience positive average effects of real depreciations on their revenue productivity (TFPR)
growth and R&D activity; (ii) firms from other emerging countries (Eastern Europe and Latin America)
experience instead negative average effects on these outcomes; (iii) industrial-country firms do not react
much to real depreciations.15 In this context, we use our structural model to disentangle the different
effects of RER depreciations that contribute to growth in firm-level TFPR that we can observe in the
micro data: (i) transitory export demand effects; (ii) transitory productivity effects due to changes in
firm-level imports; and (iii) persistent physical productivity effects due to innovation.16
    We find that real depreciations have the largest positive effects on average firm-level physical pro-
ductivity growth in emerging Asia, where firms display a high relative export orientation. In this region,
the additional demand for exports dominates the negative effect on TFPR operating via the higher costs
of imported intermediates. Thus, firm-level profitability increases on average. This induces additional
firms to engage in R&D and leads to faster physical TFP growth. By contrast, negative average effects
are found for other emerging markets (Latin America and Eastern Europe), which are not particularly
export oriented and rely heavily on imported intermediates. Finally, negative and positive effects of real
depreciations tend to offset each other in industrialized economies.
    These facts are consistent with different productivity channels – seemingly contradictory – stressed
in different strands of the literature. In line with the “development” tradition our paper shows that
RER depreciations increase exports and solve a market failure by enabling certain firms to relax financial
constraints that prevent them from investing in innovation (R&D activity). As argued by the “inter-
national” literature, depending on their (trade/financial) integration into the world economy, different
firms and regions can experience disparate gains, in magnitude and sign, from similar changes in the
RER.17
    Finally, we quantitatively evaluate the different mechanisms by providing counterfactual simulations
of temporary RER movements. Several key results emerge here. First, even relatively short-lived
(temporary) real depreciations can trigger sizable (positive or negative) long-run impacts on innovation
and productivity growth because the evolution of physical TFP is very persistent. In emerging Asia, a
25-percent real depreciation over a five-year period (corresponding to one standard deviation of RER
changes) raises average firm-level TFPR growth by up to 7 and physical TFP growth by up to 0.5
percentage points. By contrast, in the other emerging economies, the same depreciation reduces average
firm-level TFPR growth by around 3 and physical TFP growth by up to 0.3 percentage points. Finally,
the average industrialized-country firm does not react significantly to such a shock.
    Second, the effects of real depreciations and appreciations are asymmetric due to hysteresis. In
 15 These  predictions are corroborated by the reduced-form evidence that we present in the Appendix.
 16 In our model RER movements are triggered by productivity shocks to the outside sector. We do not provide a welfare
analysis weighing benefits and costs of RER depreciations. Among the latter, for example, one should consider the costs
of reserve accumulation, inflation, financial repression, tensions among countries, etc. (See Woodford, 2008, and Henry,
2008.)
  17 Negative effects are consistent with Diaz Alejandro’s (1965) early characterization of those due to RER movements

in Latin America, where “the existing manufacturing sector generally takes a dim view of exchange rate devaluations and
fears such policy.”


                                                           4
the case of emerging Asia, for example, the negative impact of a real appreciation on TFPR and
physical TFP growth is roughly a third of the size of the positive effect of a real depreciation of the
same magnitude. In other emerging markets, the positive impact of an appreciation on productivity
is instead more than twice as large as the negative impact of a depreciation of identical magnitude.
These regional asymmetries are due to the heterogeneous impact of depreciations on average firm-level
profitability and the corresponding changes in the option value of engaging in R&D: firms’ innovation
responses to a positive profitability shock are larger than to a negative one because of sunk costs. These
differences across regions also find support in our reduced-form evidence.
    Third, the quantitative effects of depreciations are non-linear: for emerging Asia, doubling the
magnitude of a depreciation leads to (positive) effects on firm-level outcomes that are more than double
in magnitude. In other emerging markets instead, the (negative) impact of a larger depreciation is
comparatively smaller in proportional terms than the impact of a depreciation of half the size. These
non-linearities are explained by the substitution effects between domestic and imported inputs. These
cushion the impact of larger depreciations on import costs in emerging Asia and boost the impact of
larger appreciations in other emerging economies.
    We conduct several robustness checks. First, we evaluate the role of credit constraints. Since
R&D investments are large, sunk, and intangible, they may be hard to finance from external sources.
Therefore, in our benchmark model we allow for credit-constraints, so that firms’ innovation decisions
are not necessarily based exclusively on net-present-value considerations, but also on the availability of
sufficient cash flow to fund them. We thus compare our benchmark model against one with no credit
constraints. Not surprisingly, the latter model delivers larger effects of RER fluctuations on physical
TFP growth, as innovation responds more to changes in future profit expectations. However, this comes
at the price of the model’s inability to match key data moments. In particular, the tight link between
R&D and cash flow that we observe in the data is lost without credit constraints.
    Second, we introduce export sunk costs into the model, which have been shown to be quantitatively
important for export responses to RER fluctuations (see, e.g., Alessandria and Choi, 2007). We find
that our results are robust to this feature and that the firm-level effects of RER changes are qualitatively
unchanged. In comparison with our baseline model, the impact of a depreciation on firm outcomes is a
bit less positive for emerging Asia and more negative for the other emerging economies because in the
presence of export sunk costs exports are less responsive to changes in the RER.
    Third, we look into the valuation effects associated with changes in the RER. This ”balance-sheet
channel” may be relevant as devaluations raise the domestic value of debt for firms that issue unhedged
foreign-denominated liabilities.18 In terms of foreign currency debt, data on currency composition
and hedging for a wide range of countries is not easily available. We complement our analysis with
information on currency denomination of foreign debt from the World Bank Enterprise survey and
  18 A vast literature has analyzed the effects of the balance-sheet channel. For theoretical work, see Céspedes et al.,

2004, and references therein; Salomão and Varela, 2018, develop a firm-dynamics model with endogenous currency-debt
composition using data for Hungary. Kohn et al., 2019, study the impact of financial frictions and balance-sheet effects
on exports.




                                                           5
national sources.19 We uncover that Eastern European and Latin American firms are more exposed
to foreign-currency debt than firms from emerging Asia. Moreover, exporters borrow more in foreign
currency compared to other firms. We then extend our structural model to account for a simple form of
valuation effects. We show that for the empirically observed foreign-debt shares and the magnitude of
RER fluctuations in the data, the qualitative and quantitative implications of our simulated model are
similar: exporting and importing continue to be the dominating factors through which RER movements
affect firm-level innovation decisions and TFP growth.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The next section presents a short review of the
related literature. In Section 3 we lay out our theoretical framework. Section 4 presents our data and
discusses our structural estimation strategy. In Section 5 we use our estimated model to run a number
of counterfactual experiments and in Section 6 we report a number of extensions and robustness checks.
Section 7 presents some concluding remarks.


2     Related Literature
Our findings relate to structural research based on firm-level data studying the link between trade,
innovation, and productivity growth. Aw et al., 2011, estimate a dynamic framework to study the
joint incentive to innovate and export for Taiwanese electronics manufacturers.Kasahara and Lapham,
2013, study the export and import choices of heterogeneous firms in a structurally estimated model for
Chilean manufacturers that abstracts from R&D decisions. As far as the relationship between imports
and innovation is concerned, Bøler et al., 2015, provide evidence for complementarities between these de-
cisions using a panel of Norwegian firms. Regarding the link between imports and productivity, Halpern
et al., 2015, structurally estimate these gains for Hungarian manufacturing firms, while Gopinath and
Neimann, 2014, uncover large productivity losses due to reductions in imports at the product and firm
level during the Argentine crisis that followed the collapse of the currency board. The role of imperfect
substitution between foreign and domestic inputs has also been shown to be quantitatively important
in explaining productivity losses in sovereign default episodes and, more generally, in explaining effects
of large financial shocks. See Mendoza and Yue, 2012, and references therein. Large devaluations in
emerging markets have also been used to study exporting behavior. See Alessandria et al., 2010, and
Burstein and Gopinath, 2014, for an overview of the effects of large devaluations. A contemporaneous
paper by Blaum, 2019, based exclusively on Mexican detailed micro data, considers the reaction of firms’
joint export and import behavior in the face of large devaluations. He studies the resulting effects on
aggregate productivity through within-industry reallocations, but does not look into firms’ innovation
activity. None of these papers uses cross-country firm-level data to identify changes in the incentives for
innovation; furthermore, none takes into account the joint impact of exporting, imported intermediate
inputs and financial constraints and none highlights the heterogeneous aggregate impact a given shock
may have across countries due to differences in countries’ integration into global value chains.
    While our model is very rich, it still abstracts from a number of theoretical channels through which
 19 We   cross-check the data with additional sources, as explained in the next section.



                                                             6
trade may affect innovation. (Shu and Steinwender, 2018, provide a systematic review of the related
empirical evidence.) In particular, we disregard a number of general-equilibrium effects, such as free
entry (Atkison and Burstein, 2010) and import competition in firms’ domestic market. In this regard,
we do not find much evidence in support of an import-competition channel: firms that neither export
nor import intermediates do not seem to respond to RER changes with changes in their R&D activity
or their productivity. We do not look into the free-entry channel due to data limitations.
    Turning to the role of credit constraints, Bond et al., 2015, use Colombian firm-level data to study
the negative implications of financial constraints for entrepreneurial decisions in the presence of high
fixed costs to entry. The relation between financial constraints and trade is explored by Manova,
2013.20 She develops a static model of financial constraints and exporting in which fixed and variable
costs of exporting have to be financed with internal cash flows. These financial constraints reduce
exports at the extensive and the intensive margins. The link between trade, financial constraints, and
innovation is studied in Gorodnichenko and Schnitzer, 2013, who produce a static model in which
exports and innovation are complementary activities for financially unconstrained firms, but might
become substitutes when financial constraints are binding. Our model avoids this feature by assuming
that exporting is not subject to financial constraints. Finally, Midrigan and Xu, 2014, use Korean
producer-level data to evaluate the role of financial frictions in determining total factor productivity
(TFP): they find that financial frictions distort entry and technology adoption decisions and generate
dispersion in the returns to capital across existing producers, and thus productivity losses from mis-
allocation. In line with this literature, our paper shows that RER fluctuations affect financial constraints
that prevent firms from investing in R&D activity subject to sizable fixed costs.


3     Theoretical Framework
We build a model with heterogeneous firms that choose whether or not to invest in R&D, which in
turn affects their future productivity, disciplined by the empirical evidence. The model focuses on
the manufacturing sector, which is our object of empirical analysis. We adopt a small-open-economy
approach in which foreign prices and expenditure are given. Free capital mobility keeps the interest rate
constant.21 Since R&D is an intangible investment that cannot be used as collateral easily, borrowing
constraints are key: only firms with sufficiently large cash flow can finance the fixed and sunk costs
involved in R&D activity. Domestic firms self-select into exporting their output and/or importing
materials. RER fluctuations change the profitability of these activities, as well as cash flow and the net
present value of innovation and affect thereby firms’ behavior.


3.1       The Real Exchange Rate
We think of the RER as the price of a country’s consumption basket relative to that of the rest of the
world. In the Appendix, we model its fluctuations in a Balassa-Samuelson way: productivity increases
 20 Chaney,   2016, also considers the role of financial constraints in determining firm export export behavior.
 21 The   interest rate may still vary across regions due to differences in risk premia.


                                                             7
in a freely traded numéraire sector lead to a higher wage and thereby higher prices in manufacturing
and non-tradables;22 this brings about an RER appreciation, making exportables more expensive and
importables cheaper. The logarithm of the cost-shifter (inverse of productivity) in the numéraire sector
follows an AR(1) process:

                                 log(et ) = γ0 + γ1 log(et−1 ) + νt ,             νt ∼ N (0, σν2 ).                      (1)

We impose enough structure so that the (log) real exchange rate log(Pt∗ /Pt ) ≈ log(et ): a higher et leads
to lower factor prices and thereby a real depreciation.


3.2       Preferences and Technologies
There is a continuum of differentiated varieties of manufacturing goods. Consumers have the following
preferences over manufacturing varieties i,
                                                                                              σ
                                                                                           ! σ−1
                                               Z          σ−1
                                                                      Z              σ−1
                                   DT,t =               di,t di +
                                                           σ
                                                                                 di,t di
                                                                                      σ
                                                                                                   .                     (2)
                                                i∈ΩT                      i∈Ω∗
                                                                             T



ΩT and Ω∗T denote the sets of domestically produced and imported varieties, respectively, which are
given23 and dit is consumption of individual varieties. Since each variety is associated with a different
producer, the number of firms equals the number of varieties. Firms are infinitely lived and heteroge-
neous in terms of log-productivity ωit , which follows a Markov process defined below and is realized
before firms make decisions in each period.
Each firm i produces a single variety of the manufacturing good using technology:

                                                                βk βl     βm
                                            Yi,t = exp (ωi,t ) Ki,t Li,t Mi,t .                                          (3)

Ki,t , Li,t , and Mi,t denote the amounts of capital, labor and materials, respectively, employed by i.


3.3       Imports
Manufacturing firms can use domestic and imported intermediates, which are imperfect substitutes with
elasticity of substitution ε:
                                                   h                 ε           ε    i ε−1
                                                                                         ε
                                                       B ∗ Xi,t
                                                            ∗
                                                                   ε−1       ε−1
                                         Mi,t =                           + Xi,t              .                          (4)

                                                                             ∗
Xi,t is the quantity of domestically produced intermediates used by firm i; Xi,t is the quantity of
imported intermediate inputs (see Halpern et al., 2015). B ∗ is a quality shifter that allows imported
intermediates to be of a quality different from that of domestic intermediates. In case a firm decides to
 22 The   rental rate of capital, which equals the interest rate, is assumed constant due to international capital mobility.
 23 We   do not allow firms to enter or exit the manufacturing sector since in our data we do not observe these decisions.




                                                                  8
import foreign inputs, the price index of intermediates is

                                                   PM,t = PX,t exp [−ãt (et )] .                                               (5)
                                                                                                               h           ε−1 i
                                                                                                        −1
PX,t is the price of domestically produced intermediates and ãt (et ) = (ε − 1)                             ln 1 + At e−1
                                                                                                                        t         is
the cost reduction from importing that results from a combination of relative price, quality and imperfect
substitution. (At ≡ B ∗ /PX,t
                          ∗
                              is the price-adjusted quality of imported intermediates.)24 It is easy to
show that the elasticity of exp [−ã (e)] with respect to e is positive: a depreciation raises the relative
                                 ∗
price of imported intermediates PX,t /PX,t and the price of materials for importing relative to non-
importing firms, for which PM,t = PX,t . Moreover, this elasticity depends negatively on e: substitution
of domestic intermediates for foreign intermediates makes the response of PM,t /PX,t to depreciations
more muted the larger these are. Our assumptions thus imply that all importers have the same import
intensity and that import intensity decreases in e.
    Materials expenditure M̃t ≡ PM,t Mt can be written as M̃t = PX,t exp [−ãt (et )] Mt . Substituting
this into the production function and taking logs, and using z ≡ log Z, Z = K, L, M̃ ,

                    yi,t = β0 + βk ki,t + βl li,t + βm m̃i,t − βm log(PX,t ) + Imi,t βm ãt (et ) + ωi,t .                      (6)

Imi,t is an indicator that equals one if firm i imports in period t. The term Imi,t βm ãt (et ) captures
the productivity gains from importing intermediates. In case the firm does not import, this term
disappears from the corresponding expression for the production function. We discuss the choice to
import intermediates below.


3.4       Demand
Given preferences (2), demand faced by firm i is

                                                          −σ                                 −σ
                                   di,t = (pi,t /PT,t )        DT,t and d∗i,t = pi,t /PT,t
                                                                                       ∗            ∗
                                                                                                   DT,t .                       (7)

Here, di,t is the domestic demand and d∗i,t is foreign demand faced by firm i; pi,t is the price charged
by firm i. PT,t is the price index of the manufacturing sector; DT,t is demand for the CES aggregate by
domestic consumers. Both are taken as given by firms. The mass of foreign firms Ω∗T , foreign demand
 ∗                                ∗
DT,t and the foreign price level PT,t are also given. Firms behave as monopolists and charge a constant
mark-up over their marginal production costs.25 Firm i’s domestic revenue is

                                                     d
                                                    Ri,t = p1−σ  σ−1
                                                            i,t PT,t (ET,t ) ,                                                  (8)
  24 Note                                     ∗ , such as transport costs and tariffs on imports of intermediates.
        that At includes anything affecting PX,t
  25 Aswe show in the Appendix, due to the endogenous response of the wage to the change in e, the price
charged by non-importing firms is pi,t (ωi,t , et ) = e−1   σ
                                                       t σ−1 exp (−ωi,t ).   Importing firms charge pi,t (ωi,t , et ) =
e−1
 t exp [−ãt (et )]
                    βm    σ
                         σ−1
                               exp (−ωi,t ).




                                                                      9
where ET,t = PT,t DT,t . As shown in the Appendix, non-importing (N I) firms face factor costs propor-
tional to e−1 . By substituting the optimal price into (8) we get:
                                                       1−σ
                                                   σ
                          d
                         Ri,t     (ωi,t ) =                    exp [(σ − 1) ωi,t ] eσ−1
                                                                                    t
                                                                                         σ−1
                                                                                        PT,t (ET,t ) .                  (9)
                                                  σ−1

                                                d
Variable domestic profits are given by Πdi,t = Ri,t                             d
                                                    /σ. Notice that et affects Ri,t by (i) impacting on the
marginal cost faced by the firm and thereby the price pi,t it charges, and (ii) by shifting the domestic
aggregate price level in manufacturing PT,t . Both effects are proportional to e−1
                                                                                t  and cancel out. (See
the Appendix). Thus, conditional on aggregate expenditure on manufacturing ET,t , et has no effect
    d
on Ri,t and Πdi,t . By contrast, in the case of importing (I) firms, et has an additional negative effect on
revenue (and profits) through the effect of the price of imported intermediates on the price these firms
charge:
                                       1−σ
                                   σ                                                      (1−σ)βm
              d
             Ri,t (ωi,t ) =                       exp [(σ − 1) ωi,t ] eσ−1
                                                                       t   exp [−ãt (et )]            σ−1
                                                                                                      PT,t (ET,t ) .   (10)
                                  σ−1

Hence, a real depreciation reduces the domestic revenue and profits of importers. These profit reductions
are proportionally smaller for larger depreciations, due to the fact that the elasticity of exp [−ã (e)] with
respect to e depends negatively on e: substitution of domestic for foreign intermediates makes the
response of PM,t /PX,t to depreciations more muted the larger these are.


3.5     Exports
If a firm with log-productivity level ωit chooses to export, its export revenue is

                                                               ∗
                                                                       σ−1    ∗
                                                   x
                                                       = p1−σ
                                                                                   
                                                  Ri,t    i,t PT,t            ET,t   .                                 (11)

For non-importing (N I) firms,
                                                   1−σ
                                               σ                                     ∗
                                                                                              σ−1    ∗
                       x
                                                           exp [(σ − 1) ωi,t ] eσ−1
                                                                                                          
                      Ri,t (ωi,t ) =                                            t   PT,t             ET,t   .          (12)
                                              σ−1

Variable export profits are Πxi,t = Ri,t
                                     x
                                         /σ. Changes in et affect export revenues and profits by impacting
on a firm’s marginal cost. A real depreciation reduces domestic factor costs, thereby reducing export
                                                                                          ∗
prices and increasing sales and profits in the export market.26 (The foreign price level PT,t is unaffected
by the shift in et .) This effect is smaller for exporters that also import (I), since a real depreciation
makes imports of intermediate inputs more expensive.27
  26 Our model assumes that exports are invoiced in the exporting country’s currency. If they were invoiced in a foreign

currency, a depreciation would still lead to a larger amount of profits in domestic currency for the exporting firm by
increasing the domestic-currency value of export revenue for a given amount of export revenue. Qualitatively, this leads
to the same impact of RER movements on export decisions and the dynamic choice of R&D.
  27 As in the case of domestic sales, export revenues and profits of importers and non-importers differ by term

exp [−ãt (et )](1−σ)βm . Because the elasticity of exp [−ã (e)] with respect to e depends negatively on e, the difference
in importing and non-importing exporters performance becomes proportionally smaller with larger depreciations.



                                                                  10
3.6     Exporter and Importer Status
Importing and exporting decisions involve per-period fixed costs fm and fx , respectively.28 Each firm’s
fixed costs are i.i.d. random draws from an exponential distribution. More productive firms self-select
into one or both of these activities. The resulting decisions are static choices. Moreover, they are
complements: each activity raises the gain from the other. Export and import decisions are made after
ωi,t is realized. Firm i chooses one among four different “regimes”, which characterize the following
per-period profit function:
                      h                                                                             i
                        (x,m)                    (x,0)               (0,m)               (0,0)
    Πi,t (ωi,t ) = max Πi,t (ωi,t ) − fx − fm , Πi,t (ωi,t ) − fx , Πi,t (ωi,t ) − fm , Πi,t (ωi,t ) ,                   (13)

where Πx,m            d                                x
       i,t (ωi,t ) = Πi,t [ωi,t , exp [−ãt (et )]] + Πi,t [ωi,t , et , exp [−ãt (et )]] are the profits of a firm that
                                    (x,0)
both exports and imports; Πi,t              (ωi,t ) = Πdi,t (ωi,t ) + Πxi,t (ωi,t , et ) are the profits of an exporting firm
                                             (0,m)
that does not import materials; Πi,t                 (ωi,t ) = Πdi,t [ωi,t , exp [−ãt (et )]] are the profits of an importing
                       (0,0)
non-exporter; and Πi,t         (ωi,t ) = Πdi,t (ωi,t ) > 0 are the profits of a firm that neither exports nor imports.
Notice that firms that choose to export and/or import can always finance the corresponding fixed costs
with their profits.


3.7     Dynamic Choice of R&D
Unlike the static export and import choices, the R&D choice is dynamic due to both the existence of
stochastic fixed and sunk costs and its impact on productivity, which is persistent. Innovation increases
productivity, but is subject to an i.i.d sunk cost fRD,0 in the period the firm starts innovating and
i.i.d. fixed costs fRD in other periods in which it innovates. Both costs are drawn from exponential
distributions. We follow Aw et al., 2011, and assume that log-productivity ωi,t follows the following
Markov process
                         ωi,t = α0 + α1 ωi,t−1 + α2 IiRD,t−1 + ui,t ,             ui,t ∼ N (0, σu2 ).                    (14)

IiRD,t−1 is an indicator variable for innovation in t − 1 and α2 is the short-run log-productivity re-
turn to innovation. Under |α1 | < 1, the stochastic process is stationary and the model does not
produce any long-run productivity trends. A firm that always engages in R&D has expected log-
                                                 α0 +α2
productivity E(ωi,t |IiRD,t = 1 ∀t) =            1−α1 ;    a firm that never does R&D has expected log-productivity
                                 α0
E(ωi,t |IiRD,t = 0 ∀t) =        1−α1 .
    We model credit constraints by assuming that in each period the sum of all sunk and fixed costs
cannot go beyond a proportion θ of current period’s cash flow:

                       IiRD,t [fRD,0 (1 − IiRD,t−1 ) + fRD IiRD,t−1 ] ≤ θi,t Πi,t (ωi,t , et ) .                        (15)

Parameter θ ∈ [1, θ̄] reflects the quality of the financial system: the lower θ, the more financially
constrained the firms. i,t is an i.i.d. shock that affects cash flow and thereby the amount that can
  28 Unlike with the R&D decision, we assume no one-time sunk cost is required for either of these two activities. We

consider a model with export sunk costs in an extension, discussed in Section 6 below.


                                                                 11
be borrowed to finance R&D, but not the profit and value of doing R&D. It is distributed lognormal:
ln() ∼ N (0, 1).29
    As in Manova, 2013, firms do not have any savings from past cash flows or profits and they rent
whatever physical capital they use. Therefore they cannot pledge any assets as collateral.30 In order
to avoid moral-hazard problems, lenders expect borrowing firms to have some ”skin in the game” by
financing a fraction of the investment themselves (that is, a down-payment).31 The more important the
moral-hazard problems, the lower θ, which implies that a larger fraction of the project must be financed
out of firm’s cash flow.
    To sum up, firms maximize

                            ∞
                                            −t
                            X
                       E0         (1 + r)        {Πi,t − IiRD,t [fRD,0 (1 − IiRD,t−1 ) + fRD IiRD,t−1 ]}                (16)
                            t=0


s.t. (1), (13), (14), (15). r denotes the interest rate, which is constant due to capital mobility and our
small-open-economy assumption.32 This objective function can be derived by maximizing the value of
the firm given an initial debt level Bi,0 , the budget constraint:

             Bi,t+1 + Πi,t = IiRD,t [fRD,0 (1 − IiRD,t−1 ) + fRD IiRD,t−1 ] + (1 + r) Bi,t ,           for Bi,t > 0, (17)
              Πi,t − IiRD,t [fRD,0 (1 − IiRD,t−1 ) + fRD IiRD,t−1 ] = dividendsi,t ,           for Bi,t = 0,

                                                                   t
the credit constraint (15) and limt→∞ Bi,t / (1 + r) ≤ 0. The current state for firm i in year t is given
by the vector si,t = (ωi,t , et , IiRD,t−1 ). The firm’s value function is then,

Vi,t (si,t ) =                                                                                                          (18)
            ERD [ max {Πi,t (ωi,t , et ) − [fRD,0 (1 − IiRD,t−1 ) + fRD IiRD,t−1 ] + βEt Vi,t+1 (si,t+1 |IiRD,t = 1, si,t ),
                  IiRD,t

            Πi,t (ωi,t , et ) + βEt Vi,t+1 (si,t+1 |IiRD,t = 0, si,t )}],

                           −1
where β = (1 + r)               and ERD indicates expectations with respect to the R&D fixed and sunk costs,
fRD and fRD,0 . The firm then chooses an infinite sequence of R&D decisions IiRD,t that maximizes the
value function subject to the financial constraint for R&D.33
  29 This  shock breaks the perfect correlation between profits and cash flow in the model. This feature enables us to match
some data moments better further below.
   30 In Manova, 2013, firms cannot use profits from past periods to finance future operations: in the absence of debt they

have to distribute all profits to shareholders due to (unmodeled) principal-agent problems; in the presence of outstanding
debt they use all profits for repayment.
   31 Alternatively, one could assume that a constant fraction of profits goes to dividends and the rest to debt repayment.
   32 Discounting with the constant interest rate r implicitly assumes that firm owners are risk neutral or able to diversify

away the firm’s idiosyncratic risk.
   33 This way of modeling R&D choice helps us understand the economics of the results we report in Section 4.5 below.

Small (i.e. low-productivity) firms are unlikely to carry out any R&D activity: for sufficiently large sunk costs, these
firms have no incentive whatsoever to invest in R&D even in the absence of credit constraints; since they barely make
any profits, the net present value of such a decision is negative. For higher-productivity firms, the net present value of
investing in R&D is positive, but the credit constraint limits such activity to the amount of current cash flow corrected by
the tightness of the constraint. The looser the constraint, the less current profits matter for R&D decisions. Finally, for
very highly productive firms, current profits are large enough for them to finance R&D regardless of the credit constraint.
Their investment activity is guided exclusively by the net present value of R&D activity.



                                                                  12
To summarize, the timing of decision making in period t is the following:
   1.   Observe si,t = (ωi,t , et , IiRD,t−1 ).
   2.   Observe the realizations of fx and fm .
   3.   Choose variables inputs (Mi,t , Li,t , Ki,t ), export status Iix,t and import status Iim,t .
   4.   Observe realization of cash-flow shock i,t and R&D fixed costs fRD,0 , and fRD .
   5.   Make R&D decision IiRD,t .
    Having set up the model, we now discuss how to connect it to the data. According to our model,
changes in innovation and import behavior induced by RER fluctuations should impact on firm-level
productivity growth. Thus, we next show how to obtain an empirical measure of (revenue-based)
productivity growth; how the empirical measure of productivity growth responds to changes in the
RER; and how to relate it to its theoretical counterpart in the model.


3.8         Revenue-based Productivity
We follow de Loecker, 2011, Halpern et al., 2015 and Aw et al., 2011, to obtain consistent estimates of
the short-run return to R&D α2 and the output elasticities βi from firm-level data on revenue, capital
and labor inputs, material expenditure and R&D status.34 Substituting the demand function (7) into
the definition of total revenue, the latter can be expressed as:35

                                                                            σ−1
                            Ri,t = pi,t di,t + IiX,t pi,t d∗i,t = (Yi,t )                      ∗
                                                                                                       
                                                                             σ    Gi,t DT,t , DT,t , et ,                  (19)

where Yi,t is physical output and Gi,t captures the state of aggregate demand, which depends on the
RER et . Gi,t varies by firm only through IiX,t , an indicator variable that equals one if the firm exports
and thus allows the firm to also attract foreign demand.36 Note that, conditional on exporting, export
intensity is the same for all firms and depends positively on et . Taking logs and plugging in production
function (6), we obtain a log-linear expression of firm revenue in terms of physical output and aggregate
demand faced by each firm:
       h                                                                                   i
                                                                                                           ∗
                                                                                                                   
 ri,t = β̃0 + β̃k ki,t + β̃l li,t + β̃m m̃i,t − β̃m log(PX,t ) + Iim,t β̃m ãt (et ) + ω̃it + gi,t DT,t , DT,t , et , (20)

                                                                                                        σ−1
where x indicates the natural log of the variable and x̃ indicates multiplication by                     σ .   In the Appendix,
we show how to combine (20) with the Markov process for log productivity (14) in order to consistently
estimate output elasticities β̃i and the short-run return to R&D α̃2 .
    Having recovered the output elasticities, we can construct an empirical measure of the log of firm-
level revenue-based productivity (TFPR) as
                                                h                                          i
                                                                                                          ∗
                                                                                                                  
 tf pri,t ≡ ri,t −β̃l li,t −β̃k ki,t −β̃m mi,t = β̃0 + ω̃i,t + Iim,t β̃m ãt − β̃m log PX,t +gi,t DT,t , DT,t , et . (21)
  34 Like   the vast majority of studies, we do not have information on firm-level prices of outputs and materials available.
  35 Details   of the derivation can be found in Appendix A-1.4.
                               1
                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                         
                                                                               σ−1                       σ−1
  36 G              ∗,e                                        ∗                                               ∗ 1     ∗
                              σ
                                                                                     σ
      i,t    DT , D T   t ≡ DT PT if IiX,t = 0 and Gi,t DT , DT , et ≡ νt (et ) σ DT PT + (1 − νt (et )) σ (DT ) σ (PT ) if

IiX,t = 1, where 1 − νt (et ) is the (common) export intensity.



                                                                13
Notice that this empirical measure of TFPR is a combination of physical productivity β̃0 + ω̃i,t , import
                                                                     ∗
                                                                             
effects on TFPR Iim,t β̃m ãi,t (et ) and export demand gi,t DT,t , DT,t , et . We do not control for the effect
of exporting and importing when constructing the empirical measure of TFPR because in our micro
data we neither observe time variation in firms’ export and import indicators (just a constant trade
status) nor their import and export intensities. We thus need to use our structural model to decompose
it into these three components.37


3.9     Decomposing the Revenue-based Productivity Effects of RER Changes
We now use our structural model to derive a decomposition that splits the revenue-based productivity
elasticity with respect to the RER into physical TFP growth due to changes in innovation, an import
channel and an export-demand channel.
    In the structural estimation procedure discussed below, we match the empirical average firm-level
RER elasticity of TFPR with the one generated by our model. In the regression we run on the data, we
model the conditional expectation of the log of TFPR as E(tf pric,t |Xic,t ) = β0 + β1 log ec,t + β2 Xsc,t +
δi + δt , where δi and δt are respectively firm and time fixed effects, and Xsc,t is a vector of control
variables. Taking time differences to eliminate δi , we obtain the empirical regression specification

                                       ∆tf pric,t = β1 ∆ log ect + β2 ∆Xsc,t + ∆δt + uict ,                         (22)

                E(tf pric,t |Xsc,t )
where β1 =            log ect           is the short-run elasticity of firm-level TFPR with respect to the RER
conditional on Xsc,t . In our empirical specification, Xsc,t includes business cycle controls (the growth
rate of real GDP and the inflation rate), as well as country-sector fixed effects that absorb the average
growth rate of TFPR in each 3-digit sector in a given country. Therefore, this estimate corresponds to
a partial-equilibrium elasticity net of general equilibrium effects.
Taking expectations of (21) and derivatives with respect to RER, we can compute the model counterpart
to regression coefficient β1 :

                                                                                                ∗
                ∂E(tf pri,t )       ∂P rob(IiRD,t−1 = 1)       ∂E(Iim,t ãt ) ∂E(gi,t (DT,t , DT,t , et ))
         β1 ≡                 = α̃2                      + β̃m               +                                      (23)
                 ∂ log et                  ∂ log et              ∂ log et              ∂ log et
                                |           {z         } |        {z        } |           {z             }
                                                innovation                   imports           export demand


                ∂P rob(IRD,t−1 =1)           α̃2 ∂P rob(IRD,t−1 =1)
Note that α̃2         ∂ log et           =   γ1       ∂ log et−1    .   This is the innovation channel of the elasticity
of TFPR with respect to RER. The magnitude of the innovation channel depends on the product of the
short-run TFP return to R&D and the sensitivity of firms’ innovation status to changes in the RER.
This depends both on (i) a market-size effect and (ii) a financial-constraints effect. The former affects
R&D activity through changes in export market profits and, subsequently, in the net present value of
future profits. The latter operates through a change of current cash flow and, subsequently, of the
  37 In the construction of the empirical measure of TFPR, we do not adjust for the markup term (i.e., we do not multiply

the output elasticities by σ/(σ − 1)). As we show in Appendix Table A-3 adjusting output elasticities for this term
makes no substantial difference for the empirical results. Consistently, when computing the decomposition of tfpr from
the structural model, we also multiply coefficients by (σ − 1)/σ (see below).



                                                                   14
borrowing constraint. Below we decompose the innovation channel into these two effects.
    The second term is the import channel of the elasticity of TFPR with respect to the RER, which
affects the elasticity of TFPR negatively. It operates through changes in marginal costs due to changes
in the imports of intermediate inputs. These changes in importing of intermediates imply transitory
changes in TFPR. They can be further divided into two terms: an extensive margin, which measures the
change in the probability to import weighted by the average import intensity; and an intensive margin,
which measures the change in import intensity weighted by the average probability to import.38 The
import channel is more relevant in the presence of a larger fraction of importers and a higher import
intensity.
    Finally, the third term is the export-demand channel of the elasticity of TFPR. An increase in
the RER increases demand and revenue for exporters. Again, this term can be further decomposed into
two terms: an extensive margin, which represents the change in the probability of exporting weighted
by average export sales; and an intensive margin, which measures the average change in export sales
weighted by the probability of exporting.39 The export-demand channel is more important in the
presence of a larger fraction of exporters and a higher export intensity.


4     Structural Estimation
In this section, we first provide a detailed description of the different datasets we use and how we
combine them before discussing the structural estimation procedure and the estimation results.


4.1      Data and Sources
We combine several data sources to obtain information on firm-level outcomes, such as TFPR growth,
cash flow, R&D status and export and import status for manufacturing firms located in each of the
regions; representative information on export and import participation of manufacturing firms in each
region; and macro variables, such as the RER.40 Of course, one cannot expect the same level of data
quality as in high-quality micro datasets available for individual countries. However, the use of cross-
country firm-level data (i) guarantees much better external validity of our findings without the need to
extrapolate results for a single country to other economies and (ii) allows us to exploit the structural
differences across regions that we have highlighted in the introduction.
    Regarding firm-level data, our first data source is Orbis (Bureau Van Dijk), which provides infor-
mation for listed and unlisted firms on sales, materials, capital stock (measured as total fixed assets),
cash flow (all measured in domestic currency),41 employees, and R&D participation. Our sample spans
the period 2001-2010: we have an unbalanced annual panel of firms in 76 emerging economies and 23
industrialized countries. Data coverage varies a lot across countries and the sample is not necessarily
                                                                                               ∂E(ãt |Iim,t >0)
                                h                                                                                 i
 38 β̃ ∂E(Iim,t ãt )   = β̃m
                                 ∂P rob(Iim,t >0)
                                                  E(ãt |Iim,t > 0) + P rob(Iim,t > 0)                            .
      m  ∂ log e                     ∂ log et                                                      ∂ log et
                  t
                      ∗                                                                                                             ∗
                                                                                                                                                        
 39 ∂E(gi,t (DT ,t ,DT ,t ,et )) = ∂P rob(Iix,t =1) E(g (D        , D ∗   , e   )|I      = 1) + P rob(I       =  1)
                                                                                                                    ∂E(gt (DT ,t ,DT  ,t ,et )|Iix,t =1)
                                                                                                                                                          .
             ∂ log et                    ∂ log et         t   T,t     T,t     t     ix,t                 ix,t                    ∂ log et
 40 A detailed explanation of the datasets we use can be found in the Appendix.
 41 Cash   flow is the difference in the amount of cash available at the beginning and end of a period.


                                                                           15
representative in all countries (see Appendix Table B-1, Panel A).42 We focus on manufacturing firms
(US-SIC codes 200-399). The sample is selected according to the availability of the data necessary to
construct TFPR (gross output, materials, capital stock and employees). It includes around 1,333,000
firm-year observations corresponding to around 495,000 firms (see Appendix Table B-1, Panel B for
descriptive statistics). Our second data source is Worldbase (Dun and Bradstreet), which provides
plant-level information of production activities, export and import status and plant ownership for the
same set of countries as Orbis.43 We use an algorithm to match firms in the two data sets based on
company names. We use the export and import status in the first year the firm reports this information
and are able to match around 177,000 firms. We also construct a dummy for the multinational status
of a company for the same set of firms.44
    In terms of representative firm-level data that we use to match aggregate statistics, we also draw
on data from several sources. The World Bank’s Exporter Dynamics Database reports entry rates
into exporting by country and year for a large set of countries for our sample period. This variable
is computed from underlying customs micro data covering all export transactions (see Fernandes et
al., 2016 for more details). We also use detailed administrative firm-level data on sales, exports and
imports for China, Colombia, Hungary and France to compute representative statistics on export and
import probabilities and intensities for these countries. As an alternative source for this information
for emerging economies, we use representative firm-level data from the Worldbank’s 2016 version of the
World Enterprise Survey. In addition, we take advantage of information on the fraction of manufacturing
firms performing R&D by region from the OECD’s Science, Technology and Innovation Scoreboard,
which is based on representative survey data.
    We obtain data on the exposure of firms to foreign-currency borrowing from various sources. First,
we use the 2002-2006 version of the World Enterprise Survey. This vintage of the dataset has the
advantage that it provides information for a wide range of countries included in our sample. Second, for
a subset of countries, we have more detailed data collected from Central Banks and the IADB research
department.45
    We define the real exchange rate (RER) as log(ec,t ) = log(1/Pc,t ), where Pc,t is the price level of
GDP in PPP (expenditure-based) from PWT 8.0 in country c in year t.46 This RER measure is defined
relative to the U.S. and is our main empirical measure of the RER since its definition is consistent with
our structural model. An increase indicates a real depreciation of the currency (making exports cheaper
   42 Since data coverage varies substantially across countries within each macro region, we prefer to look at macro regions,

rather than exploiting heterogeneity across individual countries.
   43 This data set is more comprehensive in terms of coverage than Orbis. It provides the 4-digit SIC code of the primary

industry in which each establishment operates; SIC codes of as many as five secondary industries; basic operational
information (sales, employment, export and import status); and ownership information to link plants within the same
firm. But it does not include the balance-sheet variables to construct TFPR nor information on plants’ R&D status.
   44 The set of countries in each region and the corresponding numbers of firm-level observations in Orbis, the descriptive

statistics for firm-level variables and for the growth rate of the RER are listed in Table B-1, panels A-D.
   45 We use data provided by the IADB databases compiled as part of the Research Network project Structure and

Composition of Firms’ Balance Sheets. For Colombia the data comes from Barajas et al., 2016, for Brazil, Valle et al.,
2017, and Chile, Alvarez and Hansen, 2017.
   46 We obtain similar results using PPP from PWT 7.1. We prefer using version 8.0 since the accuracy of version 7.1 has

recently been questioned (see Feenstra et al., 2015). However, since we use growth rates of RER rather than levels and
the measurement problems are related to levels, our results are not affected by them. See Cavallo and Rigobon, 2017, for
an in-depth discussion.


                                                             16
                                                Table 2: Parameters needed
  Parameter                  Description                  Value       Parameter                   Description
        (*set without solving the dynamic model*)                                          (*estimated parameters*)
        σ                demand elasticity                  4             fx               export fixed cost, mean
        ε         subst. elasticity intermediates          4             fm               import fixed cost, mean
        r            interest rate (emerging)             0.10          fRD,0              R&D sunk cost, mean
        r           interest rate (industrialized)        0.05           fRD               R&D fixed cost, mean
       α2                  return to R&D                  0.06            θ           coefficient for credit constraint
       γ1               persistence, log RER              0.93            α1           persistence, log productivity
       σν                   s.d., log RER                  0.1            σu        s.d., innovation of log productivity
                                                                       log(ET )             log domestic demand
                                                                       log(ET∗ )             log foreign demand



and imports more expensive).47
    In terms of other macro data, we draw on the real GDP growth rate from the Penn World Tables 8.0
(PWT 8.0); compute inflation rates from GDP deflators as reported by the IMF; and take information
on private credit/GDP by country from the World Bank’s Global Financial Development Database.


4.2      Calibration
We now identify the structural model parameters of the model and estimate them separately for each
of the three macro regions (emerging Asia, other emerging economices, industrialized countries).
    First, we calibrate a few model parameters (r, σ, ε) that we cannot identify from the data. Table
2 reports our preferred values for these parameters. For industrialized economies, we choose a real
interest rate of 5%. For emerging markets, we set the annual real interest rate to 10%. These numbers
are obtained from the World Development Indicators and correspond to the average annual real interest
rates for firm bonds in these regions during the sample period. We set the elasticity of demand σ equal
to 4 (see Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare, 2014). We set the elasticity of substitution between domestic
and imported intermediates equal to 4, which is in the range estimated by Halpern et al., 2015, for
Hungarian firms. We provide robustness checks for all of these parameter choices in Section 6.

4.3      Estimates of the RER Process
The parameters of the RER process can be estimated without simulating the model. We estimate a
single AR(1) process of log(et ) (see equation (1)) for the period 2001-2010. We pool all countries in
the sample because we do not want variation in outcomes to be driven by regional differences in the
stochastic process governing RER fluctuations.48 Table B-3 in the Appendix reports the corresponding
  47 Alternatively, we also construct export-weighted and import-weighted country-sector-specific RERs by combin-

ing country-level PPP deflators with bilateral sectoral export and import shares at the        P 3-digit       US-SIC level (164
manufacturing sectors) from UN COMTRADE database. We define log(eEXP                 sc,t ) ≡     c
                                                                                                       EXP
                                                                                                    0 wcc0 s0 log(Pc0 ,t /Pc,t ) and

log(eIM  P            IM P                        EXP         IM P                                                                 0
               P
     sc,t ) ≡     c0 wcc0 s0 log(Pc0 ,t /Pc,t ). wcc0 s0 and wcc0 s0 are the sector-s export share of country c to country c
and the import share of country c from country c0 , respectively. Both shares are calculated for the first period of the
sample. This measure of the RER is used in robustness checks.
  48 Moreover, we do not find much evidence that the RER process varies systematically across regions.




                                                                 17
results. The point estimate for the auto-correlation of the log RER γ1 is 0.93: swings in the RER are
very persistent and can thus potentially have a significant effect on firms’ dynamic R&D investment
decisions. The estimated standard deviation of the RER shock σv is 0.1.


4.4     Estimates of the Return to R&D and Output Elasticities
Also the short-run physical TFP return to R&D and the production function coefficients can be struc-
turally estimated without simulating the full model. Table B-4 in the Appendix reports the point
estimates of both the production-function parameters (equation (6)) and the parameters of the stochas-
tic process for log-productivity (equation (14)). Again, we do not want to allow for heterogeneity in
these coefficients across regions and thus estimate a single value for these parameters in the pooled sam-
ple. In columns (1) and (2) of Table B-4 we report unconstrained estimates of the output elasticities of
factor inputs for the gross-output and value-added production functions, while in columns (3) and (4)
we report estimates imposing constant returns to scale. Depending on the specification, the estimate
for the R&D coefficient α̃2 is in the interval [0.033, 0.078], which, given a value of σ of 4, corresponds to
a short-run TFP return to R&D α2 of 4.4 to 10.4 percent. Given an auto-correlation of TFP of around
0.85, this implies a steady-state TFP difference between a firm that never engages in R&D and one that
always performs R&D of 30 to 70 percent. These numbers are broadly in line with the literature (see,
e.g., Aw et al., 2010). To be conservative, we set α2 equal to 6 percent in the model simulation, and
provide robustness checks for an even lower value.
    The estimates for the output elasticities suggest increasing returns to scale for the case of the gross-
output-based production function and constant returns for the value-added production function.49 In
the model simulations, we use gross-output-based production functions and TFPR and scale output
elasticities to add up to unity (constant returns).


4.5     Estimation of Model Parameters using Indirect Inference
The remaining model parameters are estimated structurally by matching model-generated statistics with
the data. The structural estimation method employed is Indirect Inference (Gouriéroux and Monfort,
1993). We first choose a set of auxiliary statistics that provide a rich statistical description of the data
and then try to find parameter values such that the model generates similar values for these auxiliary
statistics. More formally, let ν be the p × 1 vector of data statistics and let ν(Θ) denote the synthetic
counterpart of ν with the same statistics computed from artificial data generated by the structural
model. Then the indirect-inference estimator of the q × 1 vector Θ, Θ̃ is the value that solves

                                            min(ν − ν(Θ))0 V (ν − ν(Θ)),                                              (24)
                                              Θ
  49 The coefficients on labor, capital and materials in column (1) are 0.336, 0.097 and 0.681 and correspond to β = 0.448,
                                                                                                                  L
βK = 0.129 and βM = 0.899, which suggests increasing returns to scale. By contrast, the estimates for the value-added-
based output elasticities in column (2) are β̃L = 0.533, and β̃K = 0.208 (βL = 0.71 and βK = 0.28), suggesting constant
returns. The estimates for the constrained coefficients in column (3) are 0.336, 0.051 and 0.363 and imply βL = 0.448,
βK = 0.068 and βM = 0.484.




                                                            18
where V is the p × p optimal weighting matrix (the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix of the data
statistics ν). The following parameters Θ̃ are estimated within the structural model: the mean export
fixed cost fx , the mean import fixed cost fm , the mean R&D sunk cost fRD,0 , the mean R&D fixed
cost fRD , the credit-constraint parameter θ and the domestic and foreign (log) aggregate demand levels
log(ET ) and log(ET∗ ).50 We also estimate within the model the auto-correlation coefficient of TFP, α1 ,
and the standard deviation of the TFP shocks σu .51
    We estimate these structural parameter values separately for each of the three regions. In order
to identify the model parameters, we choose to match a number of cross-sectional statistics and dy-
namic moments. In terms of cross-sectional statistics, crucial moments are each region’s firms’ export
and import orientation. We thus match the model’s implied export probability, import probability,
export/sales ratio for exporters, import/sales ratio for importers, with the ones reported in Table 1. We
target statistics for China for emerging Asia, statistics for Hungary for other emerging economies and
statistics for France for industrialized economies. We also match the model’s implied R&D probability
to the R&D probability for firms of each region using information from the OECD’s innovation score
board, and we match the model’s implied mean and standard deviation of the firm-size distribution (in
terms of log sales) to the corresponding moments for each region in the Orbis data. The values of the
targeted statistics for each region can be found in Tables 4-6.
    In addition, we target a number of dynamic moments. The first key dynamic statistic that we
target is the elasticity of firm-level TFPR with respect to the RER for each region, as estimated from
regression (22). This moment is informative about the average firm-level response of the observable
productivity measure TFPR with respect to the RER. The point estimates for these elasticities for each
region are reported in Tables 4-6 and the full regression specifications can be found in Appendix Table
A-1. For manufacturing firms from emerging Asia, there is a significant positive association between
real depreciations and TFPR growth (elasticity 0.12, s.d. 0.02), whereas for firms from other emerging
economies the relationship is significantly negative (elasticity -0.11, s.d. 0.04). Finally, for industrial-
country firms there is no significant correlation between the growth rate of the RER and firm-level TFPR
growth (elasticity -0.03, s.d. 0.03). Note that these elasticity estimates are conceptually consistent with
our model, since they partial out potential general equilibrium effects of RER movements. See the
Appendix for a detailed discussion of the econometric identification.
    The second important dynamic moment that we target is informative about the relationship between
R&D status and credit constraints. To obtain reduced-form estimates for the sensitivity of R&D to firm-
level cash flow, we regress the firm-level R&D status on log cash flow, allowing the relationship to vary
both by the level of financial development and by firm size bins. We run the following regression for
  50 Since E is treated as a parameter, the model is effectively identified in partial equilibrium. This is consistent with the
             T
theory where wt fluctuates exogenously with shocks to et and there are no general-equilibrium feedback effects of firms’
innovation decisions on factor prices. Since we control for general-equilibrium effects in the reduced-form regressions from
which we take a number of targeted moments, the empirical moments are conceptually consistent with the model-generated
moments.
  51 In principle, these parameters can be directly recovered from the production-function estimation, but there we allow

for a Markov process which is a bit more general than AR(1). We do this because the production-function estimation
works much better when we also allow for a square term in lagged productivity.




                                                              19
firms in the Orbis dataset:

              4
              X                                              4
                                                             X
IiRD,t = β0         β1i log(cashf low)i,t × sizei +                β2i log(cashf low)i,t × sizei × f in.dev.c + β4 Xic,t + νi,t ,
              i=1                                            i=1


where IiRD,t is an indicator that equals one if firm i performs R&D in year t. log(cash flow) i,t is the
firm’s cash flow (in logs), size i is a dummy indicator for the firm-size quartile (measured in terms of
log(employment)), fin. dev.c is a measure of the country’s financial development (private credit/GDP)
and Xic,t is a vector of controls.52 Table 3 summarizes the estimated marginal effects for each region
by firm-size bin.53 Indeed, the estimated marginal effect of cash flow on the probability to engage in
innovation is positive for sufficiently large firms, but the relationship is stronger for emerging-market
firms compared to firms located in industrialized economies. We thus target for each region the elasticity
of R&D with respect to cash flow of the top firm-size quartile; and the ratio of this elasticity for the
fourth relative to the second firm-size quartile.


         Table 3: Marginal effects of cash flow on firms’ R&D probability (estimates by region)
                                                                              emerging     other       industrialized
                                                                                Asia      emerging
      credit/GDP                                                                0.84        0.50            1.47
      marginal effect     of   cash   flow   –   firm-size   quartile     1       0          0                0
      marginal effect     of   cash   flow   –   firm-size   quartile     2    0.017       0.024            0.003
      marginal effect     of   cash   flow   –   firm-size   quartile     3    0.034       0.041            0.020
      marginal effect     of   cash   flow   –   firm-size   quartile     4    0.039       0.046            0.026
Notes: Predicted marginal effects of (log) cash flow on R&D probability by firm size quartile for each region based on the
regression specifications reported in Table A-6.


    We also match the model-generated start and continuation rates of R&D for firms in each region
with the ones computed from Orbis data. Note that R&D status is very persistent with a continuation
rate of around 0.9 and a low start rate of around 0.06. Finally, we target the autocorrelation of the
empirical measure of firm-level TFPR for each region, which is in the ballpark of 0.9. Overall, the model
is over-identified: we estimate 10 parameters while targeting 13 statistics.
    While parameters and moments are all jointly identified, some moments are much more sensitive to
certain parameters than to others. The export probability mainly identifies the distribution of export
fixed costs, while the export-to-sales ratio is informative about relative foreign demand. A higher mean
export fixed cost reduces export participation, while higher foreign demand increases the exports-to-
sales ratio. The elasticity of TFPR with respect to the RER also plays a role for pinning down these
parameters: ceteris paribus, the smaller the export fixed costs and the larger foreign demand, the higher
the export participation and intensity. Thus, the elasticities of average export demand and TFPR with
respect to the RER will be higher in this case.
   52 The controls account for additional heterogeneity absent in our model and business-cycle controls. They consist of

firm-size-bin dummies, capital stock (in logs), the inflation rate, the real growth rate of GDP and country-sector fixed
effects.
   53 The corresponding point estimates are reported in Appendix Table A-6.




                                                                     20
   The import probability and the import-to-sales ratio are most sensitive to import fixed costs and the
relative quality of imported intermediates. A larger mean import fixed cost reduces import participa-
tion, while a larger price-adjusted quality of imported intermediates increases import intensity. Higher
import participation and import intensity also reduce the average elasticity of TFPR with respect to
the RER: for importers, TFPR contains the import component which is affected negatively by an RER
depreciation.
   The elasticity of R&D with respect to cash flow is informative about the credit-constraint parameter,
as it governs the extent to which R&D decisions are determined by current profits rather than by the
net present value of future profits. Moreover, comparing the elasticities of R&D with respect to cash
flow for the fourth and second firm-size quartiles is informative about how this statistic varies with
firm size, which in turn depends on the level of credit constraints (see Table 3). In the presence of
sufficiently large start-up costs of R&D, low-productivity firms never find it worthwhile to engage in
R&D, independently of the level of credit constraints (so their decision not to invest in R&D is insensitive
to cash flow). When credit constraints are tight, medium to high-productivity firms in principle would
find it profitable to do R&D but they are credit constrained. Thus, the R&D decisions are very
sensitive to current profits for sufficiently productive firms. By contrast, with loose credit constraints,
high-productivity firms’ decisions are determined by net-present-value considerations. Consequently,
the R&D choices of sufficiently productive firms are not very sensitive to changes in the level of current
cash flow. Thus, when credit constraints are relaxed, the relationship between the elasticity of R&D
with respect to cash flow and firm size becomes looser.
   The identification of the parameters related to R&D is more complicated, since individual parameters
affect several moments simultaneously. Given the TFP-return to R&D, α2 , and the process for the RER,
the R&D probability, the R&D start rate, the R&D continuation rate, the auto-correlation of TFPR and
the firm-size distribution together identify the R&D sunk and fixed costs, the auto-correlation and the
standard deviation of TFP. Other things equal, a higher R&D sunk cost reduces the R&D participation
and start rates, and raises the R&D continuation rate; it also affects the auto-correlation of TFPR and
the elasticity of TFPR with respect to the RER by making R&D less sensitive to fluctuations in the
RER. A higher R&D fixed cost mainly reduces the R&D participation rate. Finally, the auto-correlation
and standard deviation of TFP affect the firm-size distribution, export and import participation, the
net present value of R&D and its option value, thereby influencing the R&D participation, start and
continuation rates.
   The indirect-inference procedure is implemented as follows. For a given set of parameter values, we
solve the value function and the corresponding policy function with a value-function iteration procedure:
we first draw a set of productivity and RER shocks; we then simulate a set of firms for multiple countries
with different realizations of the RER and compute the statistics of interest. We compare the simulated
and data statistics and update the parameter values to minimize the weighted distance between them.
We iterate these steps (keeping the draws of the shocks fixed) until convergence. See the Appendix for
details.




                                                    21
4.6    Indirect Inference – Estimation Results
Tables 4-6 report the parameter values estimated using the indirect-inference procedure for the three
regions and a comparison between the data and the simulated statistics. We report standard errors in
parentheses. In general, the model performs well in terms of fitting both cross-sectional moments as well
as dynamic statistics. The firm-size distribution and the import and export probabilities and intensities
are always very precisely matched, while the model slightly under-predicts R&D participation rates.
R&D start and continuation rates are also quite closely matched in all regions. The model also matches
the difference in signs of the elasticity of firm-level TFPR with respect to the RER across regions. The
predicted RER elasticities are slightly larger in absolute magnitudes (0.21 vs. 0.12 for emerging Asia;
-0.15 vs. -0.10 for other emerging economies) and the elasticities of R&D with respect to cash flow for
the top firm-size quartile display slightly more variation across regions in the model than in the data.
Overall, the discrepancies between model-generated and data moments are small.
   The parameters are estimated quite precisely. The mean sunk costs incurred by R&D starters are
large for firms in all regions. The values are remarkable relative to average R&D benefits (17.6 percent
of average R&D benefits for emerging Asia, around 28 percent for other emerging economies and 102
percent for industrialized countries).54 The mean R&D fixed cost for continuous R&D performers is
much smaller than R&D start-up costs: these costs correspond to roughly 0.24 to 1 percent of mean
R&D benefits. The mean fixed cost for importing is relatively low in relation to importers’ sales
(corresponding to the 4th-5th percentile of importers’ sales). The mean fixed cost for exporting is more
sizable and corresponds to the 10-12th percentile of exporters’ sales. The high export intensity of firms
in emerging Asia is due to large foreign demand relative to domestic demand as shown by the values of
log(ET∗ ) and log(ET ).
   The value of A, the price-adjusted relative quality of imported intermediates, is significantly lower
than one for emerging Asia and the industrialized countries (0.72 and 0.69, respectively), whereas it
takes on a larger value for other emerging economies (0.97). Credit constraints are substantial in
emerging Asia and other emerging economies (firms in these regions are estimated to be able to borrow
up to 15 and 11 times their current profits, respectively), and pretty much non-binding in industrialized
countries (their firms can borrow up to 53 times current profits). This parameter is estimated relatively
precisely, except for industrialized countries. Finally, the parameters ruling the stochastic process of
log-productivity ω are comparable across the three subsamples: α1 and σu are in the ballpark of 0.85
and 0.45, respectively.


4.7    Non-targeted Moments
In order to assess the model’s external validity, we now report the model’s performance as far as a
number of non-targeted moments are concerned. We first show that the model can replicate the average
firm-level elasticity of R&D, cash flow and the entry rate into exporting in each region in response to
  54 By R&D benefits we understand the net present value of the firm’s expected flow of profits if R&D takes place

compared to the same variable in case no R&D occurs.




                                                       22
a RER depreciation. These moments were not targeted in the structural estimation and thus there is
no intrinsic reason why the model should perform in well in replicating them. We present the point
estimates from reduced-form regressions and compare them with the estimates obtained from running
the same regressions on the simulated data.
    The empirical regression specification we use to estimate these elasticities in the data is the same
as in equation (22), but the dependent variable is now the change in the R&D status, the change in
log cash flow and the change in the log export entry rate.55 Table 7 reports model-generated and
data moments for these statistics. For emerging Asia, the model somewhat under-predicts the average
firm-level elasticity of R&D (0.05 compared to 0.19); it performs extremely well in terms of replicating
the average firm-level elasticity of cash flow (0.75 compared to 0.78); and somewhat under-predicts the
elasticity of the export entry rate (0.33 compared to 0.55). In all cases, the model-generated elasticity
lies within the confidence interval of the data moments. For other emerging economies, the elasticity
of R&D is -0.04 (0.16 in the data). However, this reduced-form point estimate is very noisy and not
statistically significant, so that the model-generated elasticity is within the data confidence interval. In
line with our model, the model generates a negative elasticity of cash flow (-0.51 compared to -0.55)
and an elasticity of the export entry rate (0.21 compared to 0.06) similar to the corresponding data
moments. Finally, for industrialized countries, there are somewhat larger discrepancies between the
model-predicted elasticities, which are basically zero for the R&D and cash-flow elasticities, and the
corresponding estimates from the data. However, in this case the data estimates are very noisy and not
statistically significant; the zero elasticity of R&D is well within the confidence interval.
    Table 7 also reports estimates of firm-level elasticities of R&D status and cash flow to changes in
the RER conditional on trade status. We interact the RER shock with dummies for firms’ exporter and
importer status and absorb the impact on domestic firms by including country-sector-year fixed effects
in the regression.56 These numbers are to be interpreted as the effect of RER changes relative to the
ommited baseline category (firms that neither export nor import). The model almost always captures
that the effects on these outcomes are positive for exporters and negative for importers, like in the data.
Moreover, the model also matches well the magnitudes of these effects in most cases. Overall, the model
performs very well in terms of fitting the non-targeted moments, confirming its validity.


4.8        Decomposing the Short-run Elasticity of Revenue-Productivity Growth
Our model highlights very different effects of real depreciations on TFPR growth and its components
across regions due to the regional differences in the underlying structure of these economies. In Table
8, we use equation (23) to decompose the short-run elasticity of TFPR with respect to the RER into
its various components for each of the regions. For emerging Asia, the overall elasticity is 0.21: a
one-percent depreciation leads to a 0.266 percentage-point increase in export demand growth; a 0.055
percentage-point reduction in TFPR growth due to less importing; and a 0.013 percentage-point increase
  55 The regression specifications are discussed in more detail in the Appendix and the results can be found in Table A-1.
  56 Likein the reduced-form regressions on the data, we keep the trade status fixed to the one at the beginning of the
simulation and then use 10 years of simulated data to estimate the coefficients. Detailed results for this specification can
be found in the Appendix and in A-5.


                                                            23
in physical TFP growth associated to the innovation channel due to more R&D. Thus, in the short run,
even in emerging Asia physical productivity gains from innovation are outweighted by TFPR losses from
reduced importing. However, we show below that this result is reversed in the medium run because
the productivity gains from R&D are persistent, while the TFPR losses due to reduced importing are
temporary. In the set of other emerging economies, a one-percent depreciation is associated with a
0.153 percentage-point loss in TFPR growth, which is composed of a 0.051 percentage-point increase in
export demand growth, a 0.207 percentage-point loss in TFPR growth to reduced imports, and a 0.009
percentage-point TFP gain from increased R&D. The large import dependence relative to the export
orientation of these economies exacerbates the negative effects of the depreciation. Finally, the elasticity
of TFPR is basically zero in industrialized countries (-0.017). It consists of a 0.051 percentage-point
increase in export demand growth, a 0.069 percentage-point TFPR growth loss due to reduced imports,
and a 0.013 percentage-point productivity growth gain from increased R&D.


5     Counterfactuals and the Long-run Response of Revenue-Productivity
      Growth to RER Changes
In this section, we perform a number of counterfactual exercises (separately for each region) with the
estimated model in order to understand its quantitative implications regarding the long-run response of
TFPR growth to changes in the RER. As a benchmark exercise, we first simulate an unanticipated tem-
porary depreciation of the RER. We allow for a yearly depreciation of 5% for five years with a subsequent
sudden 25% appreciation back to the initial level of the RER (Figure 1).57 This magnitude corresponds
roughly to a one-standard-deviation change in the RER over a five-year interval (see Appendix Table
B-1 Panel D). The corresponding results show, in line with our evidence, that the effects of depreciations
are heterogeneous across regions with different relative export orientation. We then simulate a similar
RER depreciation of smaller magnitude (12.5%) and show that the impact of depreciations is non-linear
due to a number of mechanisms, such as the substitution of domestic intermediates with foreign ones,
and the complementarities between the decisions to export and import. Finally, we simulate a 25%
appreciation and find remarkable asymmetries in firms’ responses: these arise due to the presence of
sunk costs, which give rise to the option value of a firm continuing with its R&D investments.58




  57 These yearly changes should be interpreted as unexpected shocks. In all exercises we keep firms’ beliefs about the

exchange-rate process the same as in the baseline case. (See equation (1)).
  58 We take a partial-equilibrium approach here and focus on the reaction of firms to changes in the RER. While the

impact of RER changes on wages is accounted for, we do not consider the feedback effect on expenditure ET . In the
Appendix we discuss potential ways to close the model in general equilibrium.


                                                          24
                                                    Table 4: Estimated parameters and model fit: emerging Asia
     Parameter            Description             Value (Standard dev.) [Economic magnitude]                                Moments                                 Data    Model
                                                                                                                  (*Cross-sectional moments*)
         fx        log export fixed cost,mean      7.98 (0.01) [11th pctile of exporters’ sales]                        R&D probability                             0.25    0.19
       fRD,0       log R&D sunk cost, mean        13.38 (0.53) [17.6 pct. of avg. R&D benefit]                         Export probability                           0.26    0.26
        fRD        log R&D fixed cost, mean       9.06 (0.43) [0.24 pct. of avg. R&D benefit]                       Export/sales Ratio, mean                        0.60    0.64
         fm          import fixed cost, mean       7.99 (0.03) [5th pctile of importers’ sales]                        Import probability                           0.17    0.19
          A       quality of imported intermed.                    0.72 (0.01)                                         Import/sales ratio                           0.17    0.19
      log(ET )         log domestic demand                         5.56 (0.01)                                    Mean firm size (log revenue)                       6.6    6.7
      log(ET∗ )         log foreign demand                         6.53 (0.01)                                     Sd, firm size (log revenue)                      3.23    3.19
         α1         persistence, productivity                     0.86 (0.003)                                       (*Dynamic moments*)
         σu           sd, productivity shock                       0.44 (0.006)                                     R&D, continuation prob.                          0.90   0.86
          θ               credit constraint                       15.11 (7.94)                                          R&D, start prob.                             0.06    0.04
                                                                                                                        autocorr. TFPR                               0.91    0.86
                                                                                                                   Elast. of TFPR w.r.t RER                          0.12    0.21
                                                                                                      Elast. of R&D prob. w.r.t c.f. (4th firm-size quantile)       0.041   0.054
                                                                                                   Elast. of R&D prob. w.r.t c.f. (diff. of 4th and 2nd quantile)   0.030   0.034




25
                                             Table 5: Estimated parameters and model fit: other emerging economies
     Parameter            Description             Value (Standard dev.) [Economic magnitude]                                Moments                                 Data    Model
                                                                                                                  (*Cross-sectional moments*)
         fx         log export fixed cost,mean     4.17 (2.18) [10th pctile of exporters’ sales]                        R&D probability                             0.25    0.22
       fRD,0        log R&D sunk cost, mean        11.24 (0.31) [28 pct. of avg. R&D benefit]                          Export probability                           0.35    0.30
        fRD         log R&D fixed cost, mean        7.84 (0.32) [1 pct. of avg. R&D benefit]                        Export/sales Ratio, mean                        0.10    0.12
         fm        log import fixed cost, mean     5.88 (0.81) [4th pctile of importers’ sales]                        Import probability                           0.39    0.35
          A       quality of imported intermed.                     0.97 (0.35)                                        Import/sales ratio                           0.24    0.25
      log(ET )         log domestic demand                          4.88 (0.30)                                   Mean firm size (log revenue)                      5.97    5.98
      log(ET∗ )         log foreign demand                          3.02 (2.01)                                    Sd, firm size (log revenue)                      2.63    2.67
         α1          persistence, productivity                      0.84 (0.01)                                      (*Dynamic moments*)
         σu           sd, productivity shock                        0.40 (0.06)                                     R&D, continuation prob.                          0.90    0.83
          θ               credit constraint                        11.02 (2.80)                                         R&D, start prob.                             0.06    0.05
                                                                                                                        autocorr. TFPR                               0.84    0.85
                                                                                                                   Elast. of TFPR w.r.t RER                         -0.10   -0.15
                                                                                                      Elast. of R&D prob. w.r.t c.f. (4th firm-size quantile)       0.048   0.072
                                                                                                   Elast. of R&D prob. w.r.t c.f. (diff. of 4th and 2nd quantile)   0.035   0.039
                                                Table 6: Estimated parameters and model fit: industrialized countries
     Parameter           Description            Value (Standard dev.) [Economic magnitude]                                  Moments                                Data    Model
                                                                                                                  (*Cross-sectional moments*)
         fx        log export fixed cost,mean     6.82 (1.35) [12th pctile of exporters’ sales]                         R&D probability                            0.56    0.40
       fRD,0       log R&D sunk cost, mean       13.75 (0.47) [102 pct. of avg. R&D benefit]                           Export probability                          0.23    0.24
        fRD        log R&D fixed cost, mean        9.11 (0.46) [1 pct. of avg. R&D benefit]                         Export/sales Ratio, mean                       0.17    0.15
         fm       log import fixed cost, mean     8.42 (1.28) [5th pctile of importers’ sales]                         Import probability                          0.20    0.19
          A       quality imported intermed.                       0.69 (0.33)                                         Import/sales ratio                          0.14    0.13




26
      log(ET )        log domestic demand                          6.66 (0.14)                                    Mean firm size (log revenue)                     7.64    7.64
      log(ET∗ )        log foreign demand                          4.99 (1.30)                                       Sd, firm size (revenue)                       2.91    2.91
         α1         persistence, productivity                     0.79 (0.003)                                       (*Dynamic moments*)
         σu          sd, productivity shock                        0.54 (0.04)                                      R&D, continuation prob.                         0.90    0.90
          θ              credit constraint                         53 (27.17)                                           R&D, start prob.                            0.06    0.07
                                                                                                                        autocorr. TFPR                              0.90    0.81
                                                                                                                   Elast. of TFPR w.r.t RER                        -0.03   -0.02
                                                                                                      Elast. of R&D prob. w.r.t c.f.(4th firm-size quantile)       0.027   0.049
                                                                                                  Elast. of R&D prob. w.r.t c.f. (diff. of 4th and 2nd quantile)   0.022   0.001
                                           Table 7: Non-targeted moments
                                                                           Model       Data     Confidence interval
                                                                                                data moments
       Emerging Asia
       elasticity of R&D w.r.t RER                                          0.052      0.190    [0.004, 0.376]
       elasticity of cash flow w.r.t RER                                    0.745      0.783    [0.560, 1.006]
       elasticity of export entry rate w.r.t RER                            0.326      0.552    [0.146, 0.958]
       elasticity of R&D w.r.t RER exporters rel. domestic                  0.073      0.065    [0.043, 0.087]
       elasticity of R&D w.r.t RER importers rel. domestic                 -0.003     -0.101    [-0.125, -0.077]
       elasticity of cash flow w.r.t RER exporters rel. domestic            0.568      0.243    [0.173, 0.313]
       elasticity of cash flow w.r.t RER importers rel. domestic           -0.150     -0.123    [-0.221, -0.025]
       Other emerging
       elasticity of R&D w.r.t RER                                          -0.043    0.160     [-0.085, 0.405]
       elasticity of cash flow w.r.t RER                                   -0.514     -0.557    [-0.839, -0.275]
       elasticity of export entry rate w.r.t RER                             0.217     0.063    [-0.053, 0.179]
       elasticity of R&D w.r.t RER exporters rel. domestic                  0.010      0.167    [0.109, 0.225]
       elasticity of R&D w.r.t RER importers rel. domestic                 -0.047     -0.119    [-0.263, 0.025]
       elasticity of cash flow w.r.t RER exporters rel. domestic             0.132     1.162    [0.600, 1.724]
       elasticity of cash flow w.r.t RER importers rel. domestic           -0.597     -0.803    [-1.209, -0.297]
       Industrialized
       elasticity of R&D w.r.t RER                                         -0.0002    -0.168    [-0.460, 0.124]
       elasticity of cash flow w.r.t RER                                    -0.041    -0.319    [-0.566, -0.072]
       elasticity of export entry rate w.r.t RER                            -0.264    -0.275    [-0.812, 0.262]
       elasticity of R&D w.r.t RER exporters rel. domestic                   0.046    -0.004    [-0.04, 0.032]
       elasticity of R&D w.r.t RER importers rel. domestic                 -0.069     -0.042    [-0.074, -0.010]
       elasticity of cash flow w.r.t RER exporters rel. domestic             0.134     0.272    [0.102, 0.442]
       elasticity of cash flow w.r.t RER importers rel. domestic            -0.052    -0.052    [-0.208, 0.104]
Notes: This table presents the point estimates of the elasticities of various firm-level outcomes as well as the elasticity of
the export entry rate w.r.t the RER obtained from running regression (22) on the simulated data. It compares them with
the point estimates obtained from running the same regression on the firm-level data from Orbis and the export entry
rate from the Exporter Dynamics database.



5.1     Regional Heterogeneity: 25% Depreciation
Emerging Asia Figure 2 plots the simulation results for the outcomes averaged over the firm distri-
bution. In particular, for every period t, t = 1, ..., T , we report ∆E(tf pri,t ), the average proportional
difference between firm-level TFPR in the counterfactual and its baseline level. We think of this as the
”growth rate” of firm-level TFPR in the counterfactual with respect to the baseline. We do the same
for the components of TFPR: (i) physical TFP growth due to the innovation channel, (ii) TFPR growth
due to the import channel and (iii) TFPR growth due to the export-demand channel. The continuous
red lines plot the effects of the benchmark 25% real depreciation.59 The impact of a depreciation on
TFPR growth is positive: it leads to up to a 6.5 percentage-point increase in average firm-level TFPR
growth (always with respect to the baseline case). The positive export-demand effect of the depreciation
on TFPR growth is even larger (up to 8 percentage points), while the negative impact on TFPR growth
  59 The blue dashed-dotted lines plot the effect of a 12.5% depreciation. The gray dashed lines lines correspond to the

effects of a 25% appreciation. Figures 3 and 4 should be read similarly.



                                                             27
                    Table 8: Decompositon of short-run elasticity of TFPR w.r.t. RER

                                              Innovation    Imports      Export       Total
                                                (R&D)                    Demand     Elasticity
                         Emerging Asia           0.013          -0.055    0.266       0.210
                         Other emerging          0.009          -0.207    0.051      -0.153
                         Industrialized          0.013          -0.069    0.051      -0.017



           Figure 1: Unexpected real depreciation (25%, 12.5%) and real appreciation (25%).




through the import channel is relatively small (with a minimum of −1 percentage point). Physical TFP
growth due to innovation increases by up to 0.5 percentage points in response to the depreciation.
    In a sub-sample of countries with relatively export-intensive firms, the average profit increase due
to higher demand for firms’ exports is larger than the decrease due to the fact that intermediate inputs
become more expensive. The resulting net increase in profits leads to more R&D investment and
an increase in physical productivity. Notice that the increase in physical productivity due to more
innovation persists much longer than the other effects, which disappear as soon as the RER appreciates
back to its initial level: temporary RER movements can have very long-lasting effects on physical TFP
growth. Finally, there is both a direct and an indirect impact of the depreciation working through the
innovation channel of physical TFP growth. The direct effect comes through more R&D participation,
while the indirect impact works through the additional exporting and importing in the future (at the
extensive and intensive margins) induced by the additional R&D. These changes influence future trade
participation and thus the import and demand components of TFPR.60
Other Emerging Economies The overall impact of the depreciation on average firm-level TFPR
growth is negative: the depreciation leads roughly to a 3% decline in TFPR growth. (See Figure 3.)
The negative effect of the depreciation on TFPR growth through the import channel (-4.3 percentage
  60 Quantitatively, the indirect effect on average TFPR growth turns out to be relatively small: it accounts for at most

0.1 percentage points (around the time the RER re-appreciates back to the initial level).



                                                           28
Figure 2: Average effect of an unexpected real depreciation (25%, 12.5%) and appreciation (25%) for
emerging Asia.




Figure 3: Average effect of an unexpected real depreciation (25%, 12.5%) and appreciation (25%) for
other emerging economies.




                                                29
Figure 4: Average effect of an unexpected real depreciation (25%, 12.5%) and appreciation (25%) for
industrialized economies.




points) dominates the positive effect operating through the export-demand channel (1.6 percentage
points). Physical productivity due to innovation falls by up to 0.3 percentage points. Again, changes
in physical productivity due to R&D are much more long lasting than those of the other components of
TFPR. Moreover, the direct impact of the decline in physical TFP due to less innovation explains only
around 10% of the reduction in TFPR.61
   In comparison with emerging Asia, firms in this sub-sample are on average relatively import intensive.
This reverses the net effect of the depreciation on firms’ profits, which becomes negative and induces
firms to reduce their investment in R&D and a subsequent decrease in physical TFP growth.
Industrialized Countries The pattern of long-lasting changes in physical productivity growth due
to innovation and merely transitory reactions of the other two components of TFPR growth repeats
itself once more. (See Figure 4.) The overall effect of the depreciation on average firm-level TFPR
growth is positive but tiny in comparison with the magnitudes of the responses in emerging economies.
In this case, export demand and import TFPR growth are of similar magnitude. The increase in
profits induced by a larger volume of exports is compensated by the decrease in profits due to more
expensive intermediate-input imports. Since the positive and negative effects of the depreciation on
profits roughly cancel each other, R&D investment hardly reacts: changes in physical TFP due to this
channel are positive but very close to zero.


5.2    Non-linearities: 12.5% Depreciation
We now simulate a 12.5% depreciation (blue dashed-dotted lines in Figures 1-4).
  61 The indirect impact of changes in R&D on TFPR via less exports and imports accounts for a TFPR reduction of

-0.05%.



                                                      30
Emerging Asia The overall impact of the 25% depreciation on average firm-level outcomes is more
than double in magnitude than that of the 12.5% depreciation: Figure 2 shows that TFPR growth
increases by slightly more than 2 percentage points (compared to more than 6 percentage points for the
25% depreciation); physical TFP growth due to innovation is raised by 0.2 percentage points (compared
to around 0.5 percentage points); the export-demand component of TFPR growth rises by around 3
percentage points (compared to 8 percentage points); and the import component of TFPR growth
decreases by less than 0.5 percentage points (compared to more than 1 percentage point).
    Why do larger depreciations in emerging Asia bring about more than proportional increases in
profitability in comparison with smaller depreciations? Given the high relative export intensity of this
region’s firms, the losses from more expensive imported inputs are more than compensated by the
profits from better access to export markets. First, holding constant import costs, firm-level variable
export profits respond to changes in e with a constant elasticity σ − 1 > 1 (see Section 3.5). Therefore,
disproportionately more firms find it profitable to export for larger depreciations and hence the extensive
margin of exports reacts more. Second, the elasticity of exp [−ã (e)] with respect to e becomes smaller
with larger depreciations (see Section 3.3), and therefore revenues for importing firms are reduced
proportionally less with a larger depreciation. Third, a larger increase in exports subsequent to a
larger depreciation induces more firms to import through the complementarity between these two choice
variables (an increase in the extensive margin of imports); this partly compensates the negative effect of
higher import costs on the use of foreign intermediates (a decrease in the intensive margin of imports).
Finally, since profitability increases disproportionately more with a larger depreciation, physical TFP
due to innovation also rises disproportionately more, as the number of firms that start investing in R&D
is significantly higher with the larger depreciation.
Other Emerging Economies Unlike in emerging Asia, the impact of a smaller depreciation in other
emerging economies is comparatively larger. The total (negative) effect of a 12.5% depreciation on TFPR
growth (-2 compared to -3 percentage points), physical TFP growth due to innovation (-0.2 compared
to -0.3 percentage points) and the import component of TFPR growth (-3 compared to -4.5 percentage
points) is proportionally bigger in absolute magnitude than the one of a 25% depreciation. The impact
on the export-demand component of TFPR growth is instead relatively larger for a depreciation of
larger magnitude (1.8% compared to 0.6%).
    Since this region’s firms feature a high relative import intensity, depreciations reduce their profitabil-
ity. Since the elasticity of exp [−ã (e)] with respect to e becomes smaller with larger depreciations, the
latter have less of a proportional effect on the revenues of importing firms. Thus, larger depreciations
have disproportionately smaller negative effects on exports and profits. Besides, this implies that, in the
presence of complementarities between export and import decisions, imports decline proportionally less
with larger depreciations. Finally, since the average firm’s profitability is reduced disproportionately
less with the larger depreciation, innovation and thus physical TFP growth also fall disproportionately
less.
Industrialized Countries The negative impact of the 12.5% depreciation is larger in absolute terms
than the one of the 25% depreciation. Import and export intensities are very similar, so that the


                                                     31
larger profitability induced by a depreciation through the export channel is roughly offset by higher
import costs. Because of the non-linear effect of a depreciation on the import costs, import costs
fall disproportionately less with a larger depreciation. It turns out that for the 12.5% depreciation
the import component of TFPR dominates the export component, so that firms become slightly less
profitable and thus perform slightly less innovation, reducing physical TFP growth. By contrast, with
the 25% depreciation the increase in profits via the export channel dominates the import component
and profitability and thus physical TFP growth increase slightly.


5.3     Asymmetries: 25% Appreciation
We now simulate an unanticipated temporary yearly appreciation of 5% for five years with a subsequent
sudden 25% depreciation back to the initial level of the RER (see the gray dashed lines in Figures 1-4).
Emerging Asia The effects of an appreciation on average firm-level TFPR growth and its components
are opposite to those of a depreciation. (See Figure 2.) The reduction in TFPR growth through lower
exports and lower physical TFP growth due to less innovation dominates the positive effect on TFPR
growth through more imports. However, the quantitative impact on TFPR growth and its components
(TFPR growth falls by at most 2 percentage points, which can be decomposed into a 4 percentage-point
drop in export demand, a 1.8 percentage-point increase in TFPR growth due to cheaper imported inputs
and a 0.2 percentage-point reduction in physical TFP growth due to less innovation) is just around a
third of the size of the corresponding effects of a depreciation of the same absolute magnitude.
    Due to the large magnitude of R&D sunk costs relative to that of fixed costs, firms respond more to
a positive shock to the net present value of innovation than to a negative one. They try to avoid paying
the sunk costs of re-starting innovation in case they stop performing R&D. In other words, R&D has
an option value in the face of a negative shock. This effect relates to the classical hysteresis argument
made by Baldwin, 1988, Baldwin and Krugman, 1989, and Dixit, 1989. For firms in this region, a
depreciation corresponds to a positive shock to R&D profitability, while an appreciation corresponds to
a negative one. Thus, in this region physical TFP growth responds more to a depreciation than to an
appreciation.62
    Moreover, a depreciation triggers a reduction in imports that is smaller than the increase associated
to an appreciation. This is the result of three feedback effects: (i) for a depreciation, the positive
change in physical TFP growth due to more innovation mitigates the impact of higher import costs;
(ii) the import component of TFPR growth decreases less during a depreciation than it increases for
an appreciation of the same magnitude due to substitution effects; (iii) complementarities between
exporting and importing activities: since emerging Asia export intensity is high compared to import
intensity, the positive effect of higher exports on imports is larger than the negative effect of lower
imports on exports. Finally, a depreciation triggers an increase in exports larger than the decline
caused by an appreciation: the extensive margin of exports responds more to a depreciation because of
  62 There is an additional channel via credit constraints: credit constraints are relaxed for more firms during a depreciation

than they are tightened during an appreciation because R&D continuation costs are smaller than start-up costs. This
effect turns out to be quantitatively small in comparison with the asymmetries induced by the option value.



                                                              32
the stronger selection into exporting triggered by the more sizable change in physical TFP growth.
Other Emerging Economies In stark contrast to emerging Asia, the impact of the appreciation
on TFPR growth is in this case positive and more than twice as large as the negative effect of the
depreciation. As seen in Figure 3, TFPR growth increases by around 6.5 percentage points, com-
pared to the three-percentage-point decline following the depreciation. This effect is composed of a 6.5
percentage-point increase in TFPR growth through increased imports, a 0.5 percentage-point decline
through reduced exports and a 0.5 percentage-point increase via larger physical TFP growth due to more
innovation. A positive shock to profitability has a larger impact on innovation and thus on physical
TFP growth than a negative one.
   The explanation of these effects is the mirror image of the emerging-Asia case: since for other
emerging economies an appreciation increases the profitability of R&D, while a depreciation reduces
it, an appreciation has a larger effect on physical TFP growth than a depreciation due to the option-
value effect. Besides, due to complementarities between exporting and importing decisions, the larger
import orientation and the smaller export orientation of these economies, the effects of larger imports
on exports via the appreciation are more sizeable than the effects of larger exports on imports via the
depreciation. Moreover, the increase in physical TFP due to the appreciation leads more firms to select
into exporting and importing and thus also raises TFPR growth through these channels.
Industrialized Countries In this case, the impact of RER movements on TFPR growth is quanti-
tatively small compared to the other regions and qualitatively similar to the case of other developing
countries. (See Figure 4.) The effect of the 25% appreciation on TFPR growth is positive and larger in
magnitude compared to the one of a depreciation of equal size. In the case of a depreciation, the negative
impact on TFPR growth via the import channel is almost exactly offset by the positive effect through
more exports, so that innovation and physical TFP growth are almost unchanged. For an appreciation,
the positive effects through cheaper inputs and increased profitability of R&D dominate the negative
effects on TFPR growth through reduced exports so that the net effects on TFPR growth are positive
but small (TFPR growth increases by two percent and physical TFP growth due to innovation by 0.1).
The intuition is very similar to the case of other developing countries.

   The model’s predictions for the asymmetric effects of RER depreciations and appreciations are
consistent with the corresponding reduced-form estimates, as we show in Appendix Table B-5. In these
specifications, we allow for differential effects of RER depreciations and appreciations on firm-level
outcomes for each region. In emerging Asia, the effect of RER depreciations is positive, large and highly
statistically significant, while RER appreciations have no significant impact on firm-level outcomes.
In the other emerging economies, the impact of RER appreciations on firm-level outcomes is instead
positive, large and highly significant, while depreciations have no statistically significant effect. Finally,
for industrialized countries, neither depreciations nor appreciations have significant effects.




                                                     33
5.4        Decomposition of Physical Productivity Growth: Market-size Effects
           versus Credit Constraints
Finally, we decompose the effect of the 25% temporary depreciation on physical TFP growth into (i)
market-size effects and (ii) relaxed credit constraints. We provide the corresponding results for the five-
year depreciation period on Table 12. In emerging Asia, the R&D participation rate increases by 2.6
percentage points during the depreciation. 87% of the new R&D performers start this activity due to
a relaxation of credit constraints (firms that found it profitable to do R&D in net-present-value terms,
for which the credit constraint was initially binding), while only 13% of the new R&D investment is
due to an increase in market size (firms that were initially unconstrained but found it unprofitable to
engage in R&D in net-present-value terms, for which it now becomes profitable to perform R&D). By
contrast, in the other emerging economies, the R&D participation rate falls by 1.7 percentage points.
This change can be decomposed into a 82% reduction due to a tightening of credit constraints and a
18% reduction due to reduced market-size effects.63


Table 9: Elasticity of R&D w.r.t. RER, decomposition into market size and financial constraints (25%
depreciation over 5-year period).

                                         Innovation Channel       Market size    Financial constraints
                                      (Change in R&D prob.)
                      emerging Asia                    2.6%              13%                      87%
                     other emerging                   -1.7%              18%                      82%




5.5        Aggregate Results
Figures B-1-B-3 in the Appendix report the aggregate results of our counterfactuals. We compute these
by aggregating the time paths of firm-specific variables using as weights the firms’ market shares prior
to the RER depreciation/appreciation episode and holding them fixed. Qualitatively, the results are
similar to the ones we discussed above: depreciations lead to higher productivity in emerging Asia and
lower productivity in other emerging countries whereas appreciations induce the opposite results in
the two regions; the effects of RER changes are much weaker for industrialized countries; finally, the
asymmetric effects of depreciations and appreciations also apply here.
    Quantitatively, the aggregate effects are stronger than the average effects (e.g, up to 10 percentage
points more aggregate annual TFPR growth and 0.7 percentage points more physical TFP growth in
emerging Asia due to the 25% depreciation). This is due to the fact that firms responding to RER
movements in terms of exporting, importing and R&D tend to be relatively productive and have large
market shares. The reaction of these firms to changes in the RER is not only more likely, but also
carries a larger weight when aggregating firms’ responses.64
  63 Decomposition   for industrialized countries not reported as R&D participation rate hardly reacts to the depreciation.
  64 One caveat is that we hold the number of firms fixed. Atkeson and Burstein, 2010 show in a calibrated model that
allowing for free entry tends to reduce the aggregate effects of changes in trade costs on innovation.




                                                            34
6     Extensions and Robustness

6.1    Model without Credit Constraints
n our first robustness check, we assume away credit constraints, so that equation (15) never binds.
In this case, firms’ R&D decisions are based purely on net present value considerations and they just
maximize their value function (18). To assess the qualitative and quantitative performance of this
model, we reestimate it for each region, targeting the same set of moments as in the baseline case
with credit constraints. The results are reported in Appendix Tables B-6 to B-8. In general, the fit
is very similar to the case with credit constraints, except for one important exception: without credit
constraints the model is not able to reproduce the strong positive correlation between cash flow and
R&D that is present in the data: it predicts basically no correlation between these variables. In terms
of parameter estimates, most remain quite similar to the baseline estimates except for R&D sunk and
fixed costs. Without credit constraints, these need to be larger in magnitude in order to account for the
relatively low R&D participation rate in the data.
    We now discuss the counterfactual simulation results for this model, reported in Figure 5. For brevity
purposes we only report results for the baseline scenario of a 25% RER depreciation.
Emerging Asia Like in the model with credit constraints, a depreciation triggers a positive response
of both average revenue and physical TFP, as well as export demand growth, while the import channel
reacts negatively. The magnitude of the responses of the export and import channels of TFPR growth
remains similar to the baseline case. However, the response of physical TFP growth is much more
pronounced (up to 1.5 percentage points compared to 0.5 percentage points in the baseline case). Before
the depreciation, a large fraction of firms do not find it profitable to do R&D. With the persistent
depreciation, this changes for a significant mass of them, leading to a switch in their R&D decisions.
Without credit constraints R&D activity responds exclusively to changes in the net present value of
innovation. With a persistent RER change, changes in the net present value of innovation are large.
By contrast, in the presence of credit constraints – provided these are binding – R&D activity responds
only to contemporaneous relaxations of the constraint. This dampens the sensitivity of R&D activity
to RER changes.
Other Emerging Economies Also in this region firms’ average response to a depreciation is similar
to the baseline case in terms of sign: TFPR growth and its components respond negatively, except for
exports. Again, the magnitude of the responses is also similar, with the exception of physical TFP
growth, which now responds more negatively because there is a larger mass of firms that are close to
the margin of changing their R&D decisions.
Industrialized Countries In this region, the positive effect on TFPR growth operating via the export
channel is more than offset by the negative import effect, leading overall to a small negative response
of innovation and physical TFP growth, which, in absolute terms, is again larger than in the presence
of credit constraints. Thus, overall, neglecting the role of credit constraints leads to an overestimation
of the innovation response to changes in the RER.



                                                     35
Figure 5: No credit constraints: average effect of an unexpected real depreciation (25%) in the three
regions.




6.2     Sunk Export Costs
The literature suggests that sunk export costs are important for understanding the quantitative impact
of real exchange rate fluctuations on export dynamics (see, e.g., Alessandria and Choi, 2007). We
therefore introduce this feature into our model in order to understand whether it changes its quantitative
implications. Our modelling strategy for export and R&D decisions is inspired by Aw et al., 2011. In
contrast with them, we also allow for a static import decision and introduce credit constraints exclusively
for the R&D decision, as in our baseline model. We lay out the details of this model in Appendix A-1.3
and only provide a discussion of the simulation results in the main text. Lack of good information
on export entry decisions in our data prevents us from estimating the magnitude of export sunk costs
within our model.65 Thus, we use the estimates from Aw et al., 2011, to calibrate this parameter. They
find that mean export sunk costs are roughly 4.61 times mean export fixed costs.66 The remaining
structural parameters are re-estimated following the same procedure as for our main model. Parameter
estimates are generally similar to those of our main model, with the exception of per-period export fixed
costs (not reported). In the presence of sunk export costs, these must be smaller to keep the export
participation rate constant.
   We now discuss the counterfactual simulation results for this model, reported in Figure 6. Again,
we focus on the baseline scenario of a 25% RER depreciation.
Emerging Asia Like in the model without export sunk costs, a depreciation triggers a positive response
 65 Recall that information on firm-level export status from Worldbase is available only for a small number of years.
 66 Results are similar when, alternatively, setting mean export sunk costs proportional to mean R&D sunk costs, using
again estimates by Aw et al., 2011.




                                                         36
Figure 6: Sunk export costs: average effect of an unexpected real depreciation (25%) in the three
regions.




of both average revenue and physical TFP, and export demand growth, while the import channel reacts
negatively. However, the magnitude of the positive responses of the individual components is smaller.
This is not surprising since the export sunk cost creates an option value of waiting and makes the export
decision less responsive to changes in the RER. As a consequence, the reaction of profits and cash flow
is also less pronounced, which implies that less firms start doing innovation.
Other Emerging Economies Again, in this region the depreciation produces a negative profitability
shock. Compared to the model without export sunk costs, export demand increases by less, while
revenue and physical TFP growth decrease by more. The smaller responsiveness of exports due to the
export sunk costs implies that increases in export profits compensate less for the rise in import costs.
Profits therefore fall by more than without export sunk costs inducing an even larger negative response
of innovation due to a more pronounced tightening of credit constraints.
Industrialized Countries Finally, in this case the magnitudes of the responses are again very small.
However, while the export and the import components were exactly offsetting each other in the model
without export sunk costs, exports now become less responsive to the depreciation compared to imports,
making the overall impact on profitability negative. As a result, physical and revenue TFP growth
decline slightly.


6.3    Foreign-currency Borrowing
An alternative explanation for the heterogeneity of RER effects on firm-level outcomes across regions lies
in the fact that firms, in particular in emerging economies, often borrow in foreign currency. In this case,
a RER depreciation makes foreign borrowing more expensive and may thus discourage R&D investment


                                                    37
for firms that finance a large share of their debt in foreign currency. While firms in industrialized
countries mostly borrow in their own currency, we employ the Worldbank’s World Enterprise Survey
to show that firms in Latin America and Eastern Europe are far more exposed to foreign-currency
borrowing than firms in emerging Asia. As explained in the data section, we cross-checked the data
with several alternative local sources.67
    In the first column of Table 6.3,we report the OLS regression results from running the share of
manufacturing firms’ foreign-currency liabilities in total liabilities on dummies for emerging Asia and
other emerging economies (Latin America and Eastern Europe). The latter’s average share of foreign
borrowing is roughly twice as large as that of the former (around 20% compared to 10%). In column (2)
we add interactions of region dummies with exporter and importer status dummies. Not surprisingly,
in both regions exporting firms exhibit a much larger average share of foreign-currency borrowing than
importing firms or firms that do not engage in international trade. Still, the overall effect suggests that
firms from emerging Asia are much less dependent on foreign-currency borrowing than firms from other
emerging countries. Thus, it is possible that RER depreciations lead to different effects across regions
not only because of differences in export and import orientation, but also because of differential exposure
of firms to foreign-currency borrowing. Given their stronger reliance on such sources of financing, firms
from other emerging economies experience an increase in borrowing costs in the event of a depreciation
in comparison with firms from emerging Asia.68


                                      Table 10: Foreign debt shares by region
                                                             (1)                   (2)
                                                     foreign debt share    foreign debt share

                               emerging Asiac             10.61***              4.820***
                                                           (0.338)               (0.462)
                               emerging Asiac ×                                 18.21***
                               exporterf                                         (0.876)
                               emerging Asiac ×                                    0.433
                               importerf                                         (0.626)
                               other emergingc            19.09***              14.15***
                                                           (0.386)               (0.581)
                               other emergingc ×                                24.90***
                               exporterf                                         (1.073)
                               other emergingc ×                                  -0.919
                               importerf                                         (0.759)
                               Observations                14,554                14,554
                               R-squared                   0.201                  0.271
                               Cluster                      Firm                   Firm
Notes: The dependent variable in columns (1)-(5) is the foreign debt share for manufacturing firms in emerging Asia and
other emerging economies (Latin America, Eastern Europe) in the 2002-2006 World Enterprise Survey. Standard errors
are clustered at the firm level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels..

    We extend our structural model to consider foreign-currency borrowing. We assume that firms
contract loans for period t in period t − 1. Lenders loan a multiple θ of the firms’ period-t expected
  67 For our time period, we analyze as well foreign currency patterns in Hungary and Colombia. For France, according
to BIS, most firms tend to borrow in local currency.
  68 The more positive effects of depreciations on exporters and the more negative effects on importers found above cannot

be rationalized with differential foreign currency exposure, since exporters borrow more in foreign currency, while importers
are not different from firms that do not trade.



                                                             38
profits Et−1 Πi,t . A share λ is borrowed by the firm in domestic consumption units and a share 1 − λ
is borrowed in foreign consumption units, where λ is an exogenous parameter that we allow to vary by
region and trade status.69 In the event of a RER depreciation (that is, et−1 /et < 1), the corresponding
credit constraint becomes tighter, as a given amount of expected profits in domestic consumption units
elicits a smaller amount of credit in foreign consumption units. (Implicit is the assumption that lenders,
at the moment in which et is realized, do not have time to revise expectations.) The credit constraint
now is as follows:70
                                         
                               Et−1 (et )
             θi,t λ + (1 − λ)              Et−1 Πi,t ≥ IiRD,t [fRD,0 (1 − IiRD,t−1 ) + fRD IiRD,t−1 ] .             (25)
                                  et

    We calibrate the model by using the baseline model’s parameter estimates (see Tables 4-6) and
setting the foreign debt shares for emerging markets equal to the estimated ones for each region and
trade-participation status, as reported in column 2 of Table 10. We set foreign debt shares for indus-
trialized countries to zero.71 We simulate a 25% depreciation as described above. The corresponding
effects, reported in Figure 7, are qualitatively and quantitatively comparable to those of our baseline
counterfactuals. TFPR growth is roughly the same for emerging Asia. The negative impact of the
depreciation on TFPR in other emerging economies becomes slightly larger, but the most important
channel continues to be importing. One would need to assume a foreign-debt share much higher than in
the data for the tightening of the credit constraint through valuation effects to become dominant, and
innovation and physical TFP to decline on impact upon a depreciation. Thus, our results are robust to
introducing foreign-currency borrowing.


6.4       Sensitivity Checks
We now present robustness checks regarding the values of the calibrated parameters. We consider
different values for the elasticity of demand (σ), the elasticity of substitution between domestic and
imported intermediates (ε) and the return to R&D (α1 ). We vary each of these parameters one by
one and re-estimate the structural model given the new parameter value. We report results for the
indirect-inference parameter estimates and the simulated model statistics in Appendix Tables B6-B8.
    We first consider a higher value for the elasticity of demand within the reasonable range for this
parameter (σ = 6 instead of σ = 4), while leaving the other preset parameters at their baseline values.
Increasing σ makes the sales distribution more sensitive to the underlying TFP differences and thus
reduces the estimate of the standard deviation of the TFP process σu required to fit the firm-size
distribution. To keep the R&D continuation and start probabilities fixed, this then requires a lower
  69 We  abstract from firm’s endogenous choice in terms of debt’s currency denomination (see Salomão and Varela, 2018.
  70 Under  the assumption that the firm makes repayments so as to keep a fraction λ of domestic debt and a fraction 1 − λ
of foreign debt, the firm’s budget constraint needs to be modified as follows:
                                                                   
       Bi,t+1 + Πi,t − IiRD,t fRD,0 1 − IiRD,t−1 + fRD IiRD,t−1 = (1 + r) [λ + (1 − λ) et /et−1 ] Bi,t , Bi,t > 0.
The term et /et−1 represents the effect of a RER depreciation on the value of the firm’s outstanding debts in terms
of domestic consumption. Notice, however, that our assumptions on the firm’s behavior regarding dividends and debt
repayment prevent RER changes from affecting the firm’s credit constraint via the firm’s stock of outstanding debt.
  71 Results obtained by ignoring trade status in the calibration (column 1 of Table 10) yield similar results.




                                                           39
 Figure 7: Foreign debt: average effect of an unexpected real depreciation (25%) in the three regions.




estimate of the R&D sunk cost fRD,0 . The remaining parameter estimates are not affected much and
the fit of the model is overall similar to the baseline case.
   Next, we change the elasticity of substitution between intermediates ε and consider a value of 6
instead of 4, which is still within the range of values estimated by Halpern et al., 2015. Increasing ε
makes imports more sensitive to price-adjusted quality and thus requires us to adjust downward the
estimate of the quality of imported intermediates A to keep the import to sales ratio fixed. This then
requires a lower estimate for the import fixed cost fm in order to hold the import probability constant.
The remaining parameter estimates are not significantly altered and the model fit is overall not changed
much compared to the baseline case.
   Third, we reduce the short-run return to R&D from 6 to 4 percent (this is the lower bound of our
estimates from the production-function estimation). A lower return to R&D mainly requires a downward
adjustment in the R&D sunk cost fRD,0 to keep the R&D start and continuation rates roughly similar.
However, with a lower R&D sunk cost the R&D continuation rate is reduced and very low in comparison
with the targeted rate.
   Finally, our results are also robust to considering higher or lower real interest rates (15% and 5%)
for discounting firm-level profits. As the estimated parameters are hardly affected, we do not report
these results for brevity. The decomposition of innovation responses into credit constraints and market
size slightly shifts (results available upon request).
   Overall, the model fit is robust to altering the value of these calibrated parameters – alternative
values give similar model fit. In addition, this robustness also implies that these parameters need to be



                                                     40
set outside of the indirect-inference procedure because the targeted statistics are not very informative
about their values.


7     Conclusions
This paper evaluates firms’ responses to changes in the real exchange rate. We limit the analysis to
manufacturing firms, as we exploit detailed firm-level data for a large set of countries for the period
2001-2010. Our focus on the firm level enables us to tease the micro channels through which the
aggregate economic effects of changes in the real exchange rate operate. We also establish that the
relative strength of these channels varies across regions and types of firms.
    To motivate our analysis, we first present a number of stylized facts. Exporters are positively
affected by real depreciations in terms of their cash flow and innovation decisions, while firms importing
intermediates are hurt. Moreover, firms in emerging Asia are relatively more export oriented and less
reliant on imported intermediates than firms in other emerging economies and industrialized countries.
Our firm-level evidence also establishes that a firm’s R&D choice depends on the level of internal cash
flow, and the more so the less developed local financial markets are.
    We build and estimate structurally a dynamic heterogeneous-firm model in which higher current
profits relax borrowing constraints and allow firms to overcome the fixed-cost hurdle for financing R&D.
Real depreciations increase the cost of importing intermediates, but raise exports. Depending on the
relative export orientation of firms, the RER affects profits and thereby R&D activity one way or another.
The model enables us to decompose the effects of RER changes on observed revenue-based productivity
growth into an innovation, an import and an export demand channel; explain regional heterogeneity in
the effects of RER changes on average firm-level outcomes in terms of differences in export and import
orientation and financial constraints; and quantitatively evaluate the different mechanisms by providing
counter-factual simulations.
    Regarding the latter, we obtain a number of interesting results. First, as in our reduced-form
evidence, RER changes have different impacts depending on the relative export orientation of regions
and the prevalence of credit constraints: while in emerging Asia a real depreciation leads to more R&D
and an increase in physical productivity, other emerging economies experience effects with the opposite
sign; finally, in industrialized economies opposing effects operating through the export and import
channels largely offset each other. Second, the effects on physical productivity are rather persistent,
extending far beyond the length of the real depreciation. Finally, we also show that depreciations and
appreciations yield asymmetric effects due to the presence of sunk costs to R&D.
    Our analysis remains silent about welfare effects, as we take movements in the real exchange rate as
given. We also take the origins of the regional differences in export and import behavior and financial
constraints as the result of exogenously determined parameters. Still, the huge heterogeneity of effects
across regions for similar changes in RER suggests that some aspects of our work may be informative
for policy-making. First, as opposed to conventional analysis, the effects of RER fluctuations on the
manufacturing sector depend on the firms’ average export and import participation. Hence, cross-


                                                   41
country differences in the degree of firms’ integration into global value chains are a key factor in our
understanding of the implications of real depreciations. Triggering a depreciation would perhaps seem
to be a reasonable policy for (export-intensive) emerging Asia but certainly not for (import-intensive)
Latin America and Central and Eastern Europe, where engineering an appreciation may potentially
have positive effects on productivity growth in manufacturing. Second, as global value chains evolve,
or the degree of integration of a country’s firms into them changes, the effects of RER fluctuations
might change over time. As emerging-country firms follow the path of industrialized-country firms and
become ever more integrated into global value chains, manipulating the RER will be less effective, as
opposing effects will offset each other. Third, a deeper integration of firms into global value chains that
makes them both export their output and import intermediates is likely to reduce the effectiveness of
real exchange rate manipulation as a policy tool, as effects operating in opposite directions will cancel
each other out, as is already the case for industrial-country firms. This will allow firms to become less
vulnerable to exchange-rate shocks. Finally, the non-linearities and asymmetries in the effects of RER
appreciations and depreciations we have uncovered suggest that the link between RER changes and
macroeconomic performance might be much more nuanced than usually thought.
   We limited the analysis to manufacturing firms due to data restrictions. Future work should aim to
study the response of firms in the services industry, too, as it is becoming the most important sector
both in industrialized and many emerging markets.


References

[1] Alessandria, George and Horag Choi, 2007, “Do Sunk Costs for Exporting Matter for Net Export
    Dynamics?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (1), 289-336, 2007.
[2] Alessandria, George, Joseph P. Kaboski and Virgiliu Midrigan, 2010, “Inventories, Lumpy Trade,
    and Large Devaluations,” American Economic Review, 100(5), 2304-2339.
[3] Alfaro, Laura, Anusha Chari and Fabio Kanczuk, 2017, “The Real Effects of Capital Controls:
    Firm-Level Evidence from a Policy Experiment,” Journal of International Economics, 108,191-210.
[4] Alfaro, Laura, Paola Conconi, Harald Fadinger, and Andrew Newman, 2016, “Do Price Determine
    Vertical Integration?” Review of Economic Studies, 83(3), 855-888.
[5] Alfaro, Laura, Alejandro Cuñat, Harald Fadinger, and Yanping Liu, 2018, “The Real Exchange
    Rate, Innovation and Productivity: Regional Heterogeneity, Asymmetries and Hysteresis,” NBER
    WP#24633
[6] Alfaro, Laura, and Maggie X. Chen, 2018, “Selection and Market Reallocation: Productivity Gains
    from Multinational Production,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(2), 1-38.
[7] Alvarez and Hansen, Erwin, 2017, “Corporate Currency Risk and Hedging in Chile: Real and Finan-
    cial Effects,” Inter-American Development Bank Working Paper Series IDB-WP-769. Washington
    DC, February.
[8] Aw, Bee, Mark Roberts and Daniel Xu, 2011, “R&D Investment, Exporting and Productivity Dy-
    namics,” American Economic Review, 101(4), 1312-44.
[9] Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein, 2010, “Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and International Trade,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 118,(3) 433-484
[10] Baldwin, Richard, 1988, “Hysteresis in Import Prices: The Beachhead Effect,” American Economic
    Review, 78(4), 773-785.

                                                    42
[11] Baldwin, Richard, 2016, The Great Convergence. Information Technology and the New Globaliza-
    tion, Harvard University Press.
[12] Baldwin, Richard and Paul Krugman, 1989, “Persistent Trade Effects of Large Exchange Rate
    Shocks,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(4), 635-654
[13] Barajas, Adolfo, Sergio Restrepo, Roberto Steiner, Juan Medellı́n and César Pabón, 2016, “Balance
    Sheet Effects in Colombian Non-Financial Firms,”Inter-American Development Bank Working Paper
    Series IDB-WP-740. Washington DC, October.
[14] Barattieri, Alessandro, Matteo Cacciatore, and Fabio Ghironi, 2018, “Protectionism and the Busi-
    ness Cycle,”NBER Working Paper No. 24353.
[15] Benigno, Gianluca, and Luca Fornaro, 2012, “Reserve Accumulation, Growth and Financial Crises,”
    CEP Discussion Paper 1161.
[16] Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric Young, 2016,
    “Optimal Capital Controls and Real Exchange Rate Policies: A Pecuniary Externality Perspective,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 84(C),147-165.
[17] Blaum, Joaquin, 2019 “Global Firms in Large Devaluations,” working paper.
[18] Blaum, Joaquin, Claire LeLarge and Michael Peters, 2018, “The Gains from Input Trade with
    Heterogeneous Importers,”American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10(4), 77-127.
[19] Bøler, Esther, Andreas Moxnes, and Karen Ulltveit-Moe, 2015, “R&D, International Sourcing, and
    the Joint Impact on Firm Performance,”American Economic Review, 105(12), 3704-39.
[20] Bond, Eric W., James Tybout, and Hale Utar, 2015, “Credit Rationing, Risk Aversion, and Indus-
    trial Evolution in Developing Countries,”International Economic Review, 56 (3), 695-722.
[21] Brito, Steve, Nicolas E. Magud, and Sebastian Sosa, 2018,“Real Exchange Rates, Economic Com-
    plexity, and Investment,” IMF Working Paper 18/107.
[22] Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo 2005, “Large Devaluations and the Real
    Exchange Rate,” Journal of Political Economy, 113 (4), 742-784.
[23] Burstein, Ariel, and Gita Gopinath, 2014, “International Prices and Exchange Rates,” in Gopinath,
    G., Helpman, E., and Rogoff, K. (Eds.): Handbook of International Economics Volume 4, Amster-
    dam: Elsevier.
[24] Cavallo, Alberto, 2017 “Retail Prices and the Real Exchange Rate,” working paper.
[25] Céspedes, Luis F., Roberto Chang and Andrés Velasco, 2004 “Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate
    Policy,” American Economic Review 94(4), 1183-1193.
[26] Chaney, Thomas, 2016, “Liquidity Constrained Exporters,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and
    Control, 72, 141-54.
[27] Chinn, Menzie D. and Hiro Ito, 2006, “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,
    Institutions, and Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics, 81(1), 163-192.
[28] Cosar, Kerem, Nezih Guner and James Tybout, 2016 “Firm Dynamics, Job Turnover, and Wage
    Distributions in an Open Economy, ” American Economic Review, 106(3), 625-63.
[29] Costinot, Arnaud, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, 2014, “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying
    the Consequences of Globalization” in Gopinath, G., Helpman, E., & Rogoff, K. (Eds.): Handbook
    of International Economics Volume 4, Amsterdam: Elsevier
[30] Defever, Fabrice, and Alejandro Riaño, 2017 “Twin Peaks,” CEP Discussion paper 1505.
[31] De Loecker, Jan, 2011, “Product Differentiation, Multi-Product Firms and Estimating the Impact
    of Trade Liberalization on Productivity,” Econometrica, 79(5), 1407-1451.
[32] Diaz Alejandro, Carlos F., 1965, Exchange-rate Devaluation in a Semi-industrialized Country. The
    Experience of Argentina 1955-1961, MIT Press.
[33] Dix-Carneiro, Rafael, 2014, “Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics,” Econometrica,
    82(3).
[34] Dixit, Avinash, 1989, “Entry and Exit Decisions under Uncertainty,” Journal of Political Economy,
    97(3), 620-638

                                                  43
[35] Eichengreen, Barry, 2008, “The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth,” Commission on
    Growth and Development Working Paper No. 4, The World Bank
[36] Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel P. Timmer, 2015. “ The Next Generation of the
    Penn World Table,” American Economic Review, 105(10), 3150-82.
[37] Fernandes, A., Freund, C. and M. Pierola, 2016. “ Exporter Behavior, Country Size and Stage
    of Development: Evidence from the Exporter Dynamics Database,” Journal of Development Eco-
    nomics, 119, 121-137.
[38] Gopinath, Gita and Brent Neimann, 2014, “Trade Adjustment and Productivity in Large Crises,”
    American Economic Review, 2014, 104(3), 793-831.
[39] Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Monika Schnitzer, 2013, “Financial Constraints and Innovation: Why
    Poor Countries Don’t Catch Up,” Journal of European Economic Association, 11, 1115-1152
[40] Gouriéroux, Christian, Montfort, Alain and Eric Renault, 1993, “Indirect Inference,” Journal of
    Applied Econometrics, 8, 85-118.
[41] Halpern, László, Miklós Koren and Adam Szeidl, 2015, “Imported Inputs and Productivity,” Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 105(12), 3660-3703.
[42] Henry, Peter Blair, 2008, “Comment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, 413-420.
[43] Kasahara, Hiroyuki and Beverly Lapham, 2013 “Productivity and the Decision to Import and
    Export: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of International Economics, 89(2), 297-316.
[44] Kohn, David, Fernando Leibovici, and Michal Szkup, 2019, “Financial Frictions and Export Dy-
    namics in Large Devaluations,” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
[45] Lerner, Josh, and Bronwyn H Hall, 2010, “The Financing of R&D and Innovation.” In Handbook
    of the Economics of Innovation. Vol. 1, edited by Bronwyn Hall and Nathan Rosenberg. Elsevier.
[46] Magud, Nicolas, Carmen Reinhart, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2018, “Capital Controls: Myth and Real-
    ity? A Portfolio Balance Approach,” Annals of Economics and Finance, 19(1), May.
[47] Manova, Kalina, 2013, “Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms, and International Trade,” Re-
    view of Economic Studies 80, 711-744.
[48] Mendoza, Enrique and Viven Yue, 2012, “A General Equilibrium Model Of Sovereign Default and
    Business Cycles” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2), 889-946.
[49] Midrigan, Virgiliu, and Daniel Yi Xu, 2014, “Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-Level
    Data,” American Economic Review, 104(2), 422-458.
[50] Rodrik, Dani, 2008, “The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
    nomic Activity, Fall, 365-412.
[51] Salomão, Juliana, and Liliana Varela, 2018, “Exchange Rate Exposure and Firm Dynamics,” CEPR
    Discussion Paper 12654.
[52] Shu, Pian and Claudia Steinwender, 2019, “The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Firm Produc-
    tivity and Innovation” in Lerner, J. and Stern, S. (Eds.): NBER Book Series Innovation Policy and
    the Economy, Volume 19.
[53] Valle et al. 2017, “The Correlation Effect between Commodity Prices and Exchange Rate for
    Brazilian Firms’ Balance Sheets,” Inter-American Development Bank Technical Note IDB-TN-1168.
    Washington DC, January.
[54] Woodford, Michael, 2008, “Comment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, 420-437.




                                                 44
Appendix A

A-1.1       Model
This Appendix presents the small-open-economy model that leads to a number of results we have used
implicitly in section 3.

A-1.1.1     Preferences, Technologies and Market Environment

Each country has a representative consumer who maximizes a Cobb-Douglas per-period utility:
                                         α        α         α
                                    CN T,t N T DO,t O DT,t T
                             Ut =                                   ,                       (A-1.1)
                                     αN T         αO         αT
                      P
αj ∈ (0, 1) for all j, j αj = 1. CN T,t , DO,t and DT,t denote consumption of, respectively, a non-
traded, a numéraire and a manufacturing good; t denotes time. The non-traded and numéraire sectors
are perfectly competitive. The manufacturing sector features differentiated varieties produced under
monopolistic competition. The consumption-based price index associated to this utility function is
Pt = PNαNT,t
          T   αO αT
             PO,t PT,t . We take a small-open-economy approach whereby countries face given foreign
prices and a given foreign price index Pt∗ . Stars denote foreign variables. The RER is defined as Pt∗ /Pt .
Thus, given our assumptions, changes in Pt also reflect changes in the real exchange rate.

A-1.1.2     Numéraire and Non-traded Sectors

The numéraire good is freely traded and produced with technology
                                                            βk              β            βm
                              YO,t = e−1
                                      t (KO,t /βk )              (LO,t /βl ) l (XO,t /βm )    ,               (A-1.2)

                            P
βh > 0, {h = k, l, m},         h   βh = 1. KO,t , LO,t , and XO,t respectively denote capital, labor and a
domestically produced intermediate input employed by the numéraire sector. et is a shifter inversely
related to the sector’s productivity. All countries produce the numéraire good. Since PO,t = 1, an
increase in et makes domestic production factors cheaper. The non-traded sector is produced with
                                       βk               β                  βm
technology YN T,t = (KN T,t /βk )           (LN T,t /βl ) l (XN T,t /βm )       . We assume that non-tradables can be
used for final non-traded consumption or as the domestic intermediate input Xt , which implies PN T,t =
PX,t = wtβl rβk PX,t
                 βm
                     = e−1                                                                      −1
                        t . Thus, the mininum cost bundle of non-importers in manufacturing is et
and these firms charge a price pi,t (ωi,t , et ) = e−1 σ
                                                    t σ−1 exp(−ωit ). Similarly, the mininum cost bundle for
                                           βm
importing manufacturing firms is wtβl rβk PX,t exp[−ãt (et )]βm = e−1
                                                                    t exp[−ãt (et )]
                                                                                     βm
                                                                                        and so they charge
pi,t (ωi,t , et ) = e−1
                     t exp[−ãt (et )]
                                      βm σ
                                        σ−1 exp(−ωit ).

A-1.1.3     Aggregate Prices and the Real Exchange Rate

The domestic consumption-based price of the manufacturing CES aggregator is
                       "Z                                                   1
                                                                         # 1−σ
                                           Z               Z
                                   1−σ             1−σ           ∗1−σ
                  PT =           pi di +          pi di +       pi    di       .                              (A-1.3)
                                   i∈ΩT ,N I                i∈ΩT ,I              i∈Ω∗
                                                                                    T




                                                                 45
                                                     hR                   1
                                                                       i 1−σ
Define the price of imported goods PT∗ =                i∈Ω∗
                                                               p∗1−σ
                                                                i    di      and the price of domestic goods
                                                           T

                                                h                      i 1
                                                                    1−σ 1−σ
                                   PT H = PT,N I 1 + (PT,I /PT,N I )        ,                                                  (A-1.4)

                                                                       hR                                 1
                                                                                                       i 1−σ
                                                 β
where PT,N I = e−1 ∆T,N I , PT,I = e−1 (PM /PX ) m ∆T,I , ∆T,N I ≡ σ−1
                                                                    σ
                                                                         i∈ΩT ,N I
                                                                                   exp [ωi (σ − 1)] di
                hR                           1
                                          i 1−σ
             σ
and ∆T,I ≡ σ−1 i∈ΩT ,I exp [ωi (σ − 1)] di      . One can express PT as
                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                   1−σ
                h
                                    1−σ
                                           1
                                        i 1−σ                                          PT∗ 1−σ
     PT = PT,N I 1 + (PT,I /PT,N I )          1 +                                h                               i      .    (A-1.5)
                                                                            1−σ                             1−σ
                                                                (PT,N I )             1 + (PT,I /PT,N I )

Substituting from the definitions of PT,N I , PT,I , and PT∗ , imposing ε = σ and manipulating the resulting
                                              1
expression yields PT = e−1 ∆T,N I Γ 1−σ , where
                         "                                              1−σ #
                                     e 1−σ βm  ∆     1−σ 
                                                                  ePT∗
                                                     T,I
                     Γ≡ 1+ 1+                                 +                .                                               (A-1.6)
                                       A           ∆T,N I        ∆T,N I

e has a direct negative effect on PT via e−1 , and a number of indirect effects that operate through (1) the
                                                                  h            σ−1 i
prices of imported final goods, ePT∗ , and intermediate inputs, 1 + Ae−1              , and (2) the extensive
margins of ∆T,N I and ∆T,I . Changes in ωi only have lagged effects on PT , as they operate with a time
lag via the innovation process.
                                                              1
   Taking logs, ln PT = − ln (e) + ln ∆T,N I +               1−σ
                                                                                e = ln X − ln X as the log deviation of
                                                                   ln Γ. Define X
variable X from its steady state X:
                                                                             1 e
                                                  PeT = −e
                                                         e+∆
                                                           e T,N I +            Γ.                                             (A-1.7)
                                                                            1−σ

Log-linearizing Γ (·),
                                  ""                                 #                                #
                                                       1−σ
                 e ≈ (1 − σ)                βm (e/A)                                           
                 Γ                     Γ2               1−σ   + Γ3       ee + Γ2 ∆T,I − Γ2 + Γ3 ∆T,N I ,
                                                                                 e               e                             (A-1.8)
                                            1 + (e/A)

where                        h               iβ
                                        1−σ m                  1−σ                  1−σ
                         Γ2 ≡ 1 + (e/A)          ∆T,I /∆T,N I       = P T,I /P T,N I      ,                                    (A-1.9)
                                           1−σ                1−σ
                         Γ3 ≡ ePT∗ /∆T,N I      = PT∗ /P T,N I      ,                                                         (A-1.10)
                         Γ ≡ 1 + Γ2 + Γ3 .                                                                                    (A-1.11)

Plugging back into (A-1.7),
                                  " "                                           !#                            #
                                                                         1−σ
                             −1                           βm (e/A)
                   PeT ≈ Γ        − 1 + Γ2           1−                   1−σ         ee + ∆
                                                                                           e T,N I + Γ2 ∆
                                                                                                        e T,I .               (A-1.12)
                                                          1 + (e/A)

Notice that the direct effect −e
                               e is of a larger magnitude than the indirect effects provided changes in
e do not bring about large changes in the extensive margins of ∆T,N I and ∆T,I . If we therefore ignore



                                                                   46
the last two terms of this equation and 1 + Γ2 is large relative to Γ3 , then PeT ≈ −e
                                                                                     e.
   Finally, plugging the results obtained above for PT into aggregate consumption-based price index
P = PNαNT T POαO PTαT yields
                                                                               1
                         ln P = − (αN T + αT ) ln e + αT ln ∆T,N I + αT           ln Γ.                      (A-1.13)
                                                                              1−σ


                                              e T,N I + αT 1 Γ
                  Pe = − (αN T + αT ) ee + αT ∆                   e=                                         (A-1.14)
                                                           1−σ
                                h                            i
                                                    (e/A)1−σ
                                                                
                                 1 + Γ2 1 − βm 1+(e/A)
                                                                  ee + αT 1 ∆
                                                                             e T,N I + αT Γ2 ∆
                                                          1−σ
              ≈   − αN T + αT                                                               e T,I .
                                               Γ                           Γ              Γ


Notice that both αT /Γ and αT Γ2 /Γ are close to zero. As for the coefficient of ee, it can be approximated
by αN T + αT , which we assume close to 1: Pe ≈ −e  e. We can therefore think of an increase in et as a
real depreciation.

A-1.2      Closing the Model in General Equilibrium
A proper general-equilibrium approach to our counterfactuals would entail specifying how expenditure
(aggregate income minus the current account) reacts to changes in the RER. In the model, aggregate
income consists of factor income (an immediate function of the RER e and the given rate of return r)
and the manufacturing sector’s profits (that is, the aggregation of individual firms’ profits). We can
think of the current account as savings minus investment. Investment only comprises R&D fixed costs.
However, obtaining savings requires modeling the consumer’s lifetime utility maximization problem,
which depends on the expected time paths of e, productivity and profits, among other things. The
current account is given by
                                     Z                               Z                          Z
 CAt = St − It = wt (et )L + rK +        Πt (ωt )dG(ωt ) − Pt Ut −       fRD,0 (ωt )dG(ωt ) −       fRD (ωt )dG(ωt ),
                                                                                                             (A-1.15)
where K is the (given) capital stock owned by domestic consumers, which is not necessarily equal to
                                                   R
the domestic capital stock due to capital mobility; Πt (ωt )dG(ωt ) is total profits; Pt Ut is aggregate
consumption expenditure; the last two terms correspond to R&D investment. Note that Pt Ut – and
therefore the current account – is not determined unless we define the consumer’s lifetime utility maxi-
mization problem.
   The following alternative approach bypasses the need for solving the consumer”s lifetime utility
maximization problem. One could estimate the reduced-form response of the current account to changes
in the RER. The corresponding estimate would determine a rule that – in combination with the model’s
implications for aggregate factor income, profits and R&D decisions – would enable us to obtain the
reaction of aggregate consumption expenditure to changes in the RER as a residual.




                                                      47
A-1.3      Model with Export Sunk Costs
The setup is inspired by Aw et al., 2011. We assume that in each period the firm first observes values of
the fixed import cost fm , the fixed and sunk costs of exporting, fx and fx,0 and the fixed and sunk cost
of R&D investment, fRD and fRD,0 . Subsequently, it makes its discrete decision to export in year t,
Iix,t and afterwards the discrete decision to undertake R&D IiRD,t subject to a credit constraint. The
state vector is now given by ( ωi,t , et , IiRD,t−1 Iix,t−1 ).
   The firm’s value function is given by:

           Vi,t (si,t ) = Ex [ max{Πdi,t (Iix,t = 1) + Πxi,t − fx0 (1 − Iix,t−1 ) − fx Iix,t−1 + Vi,t
                                                                                                   x
                                                                                                      (si,t ),
                                Iix,t

                              Πdi,t (Iix,t = 0) + Vi,t
                                                    d
                                                       (si,t )}],

where the expectations operator Ex is with respect to the exporting fixed and sunk costs. In this
                                                         x        d
equation, the value of investing in R&D is subsumed in Vi,t and Vi,t , which are, respectively, the value
                                                                           x
of an exporting and a non-exporting firm. The value of an exporting firm Vi,t is given by:
      x
    Vi,t (si,t ) = ERD [ max {βEt Vi,t+1 (si,t+1 |Iix,t = IiRD,t = 1) − fRD0 (1 − IiRD,t−1 ) − fRD IiRD,t−1 ,
                       IiRD,t

                      βEt Vi,t+1 (si,t+1 |Iix,t = 1, IiRD,t = 0)}],

where the expectations operator ERD is with respect to the R&D fixed and sunk costs. The value is
subject to the credit constraint:

                 IiRD,t [fRD,0 (1 − IiRD,t−1 ) + fRD IiRD,t−1 ] ≤ θi,t (Πdi,t (Iix,t = 1) + Πxi,t )

                                    d
The value of a non-exporting firm Vi,t is given by:
    d
  Vi,t (si,t ) = ERD [ max {βEt Vi,t+1 (si,t+1 |Iix,t = 0, IiRD,t = 1) − fRD0 (1 − IiRD,t−1 ) − fRD IiRD,t−1 ,
                     IiRD,t

                     βEt Vi,t+1 (si,t+1 |Iix,t = IiRD,t = 0)}]

and is subject to the credit constraint:

                      IiRD,t [fRD,0 (1 − IiRD,t−1 ) + fRD IiRD,t−1 ] ≤ θi,t Πdti (Iix,t = 0)

In comparison with Aw, Robert and Xu (2011), firms also face a static import decision. The optimal
import choice of an exporter is given by:

                Πdi,t (Iix,t = 1) + Πxi,t = max{Πdi,t (Iix,t = Iim,t = 1) + Πxi,t (Iim,t = 1) − fm ,
                                                Iim,t

                                                        Πdi,t (Iix,t = 1, Iim,t = 0) + Πxi,t (Iim,t = 0)}

The optimal import choice of a non-exporter is given by:

               Πdi,t (Iix,t = 0) = max{Πdi,t (Iix,t = 0, Iim,t = 1) − fm , Πdi,t (Iix,t = Iim,t = 0)}
                                        Iim,t



                                                                 48
A-1.4            Production-function Estimation
In this Appendix we explain the details of the production-function estimation procedure we use to
construct the gross-output-based and the value-added based revenue-productivity measures. In the
exposition we focus on the model consistent gross-output-based measure. For the case of value added,
we subtract material expenditure from gross output and use it as the dependent variable. Most steps
are analogous to the case of gross output.


A-1.4.1   Firm-level Revenue-Productivity Measures
                                          −σ
Rewriting the demand function (7) as di = PpTi DT , we get the inverse demand function pi =
  −1       1
                                                           σ
di σ DTσ PT . Using optimal pricing pi =                  σ−1 M Ci ,    it is easy to show that the fraction of domestic sales
                                                                                 σ−1         σ−1    σ−1
                                di
is given by νi (e) ≡         di +d∗  .   Since di = νi Yi , we have that di σ = νi
                                                                           Yi σ . For the case of an exporting
                                                                                              σ
                                   i
                                                                       σ−1 h     σ−1   1                σ−1
                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                               1
firm, we can then write total revenue Ri = pit dit +pit d∗it as Ri = Yi σ ν(e) σ DTσ PT + (1 − ν(e)) σ (DT∗ ) σ (PT∗ ) ≡
     σ−1
Yi    σ
           Gi (DT , DT∗ , e). Total revenue can be expressed as:
                                                                                  σ−1
                                 Ri,t = pi,t di,t + IiX,t pi,t d∗i,t = (Yi,t )                       ∗
                                                                                                             
                                                                                   σ    Gi,t DT,t , DT,t , et ,

where Yi,t is physical output and Gi,t captures the state of aggregate demand, which depends on the
RER et . Gi,t varies by firm through IiX,t , which is an indicator that equals one if the firm exports,
while conditional on exporting, the export share (1 − ν(e)) is not firm-specific. Taking logs and plugging
in production function (6),
           σ−1                                                                                                     ∗
                                                                                                                           
ri,t =         [β0 + βk ki,t + βl li,t + βm m̃i,t − βm log(PX,t ) + Iim,t βm ãt (et ) + ωit + i,t ]+gi,t DT,t , DT,t , et .
            σ
                                                                                                              (A-1.16)

A-1.4.2          First Stage
Materials are chosen conditional on observing ωit , the capital stock kit , the export and import sta-
                                                                        ∗
tus Iix,t , Iim,t , the RER et and aggregate demand DT,t , DT,t           . Since material expenditure m̃i,t =
                            ∗                                        72
m̃i,t ωi,t , ki,t , DT,t , DT,t , et is strictly increasing in ωi,t , we can express ωi,t as a function of capital
                                                                         ∗
ki,t , material expenditure m̃i,t and aggregate demand (DT,t , DT,t         , et ).
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                           ∗                       ∗
ri,t   =       β̃l li,t + β̃0 + β̃k ki,t + β̃m m̃i,t + Iim,t β̃m ãt (et ) − β̃m log(PX,t ) + ω̃i,t ki,t , m̃i,t , DT,t , DT,t , et + gi,t DT,t , DT,t , et + i,t =
                                                          
                                                   ∗
       =       β̃l li,t + Φ ki,t , m̃i,t , DT,t , DT,t , et + i,t ,

                  σ−1                    σ−1                              ∗
                                                                                  
where β̃ =         σ β    and ω̃ =        σ ω.   Φ ki,t , m̃i,t , DT,t , DT,t , et is a function that captures a combination of
ω̃i,t , the import channel Ii,mt ãt and the export demand channel gi,t . It is approximated using a flexible
  72 The dependence on the export and import status is indicated by making the function m
                                                                                               i,t firm specific. Strictly
speaking, the production function estimation procedure requires material choices to be made after the other input choices
are made. In our theoretical model we assume for convenience that all inputs are chosen simultaneously so that firms
operate on their long-run marginal cost curve. We have also experimented with material choices to be made after the
other inputs are chosen, leading to very similar results.




                                                                        49
polynomial:
                                   ∗                                                              2
                                                                                                      + ... + λ9 m̃3i,t +
                                              
          Φ ki,t , m̃i,t , DT,t , DT,t , et       = λ0 + λ1 ki,t + λ2 m̃i,t + λ3 ki,t m̃i,t + λ4 ki,t
                                                          J
                                                          X                         J
                                                                                    X
                                                      +         λEXP
                                                                 j   log(eEXP
                                                                          s,t )+          λIM
                                                                                           j
                                                                                              P
                                                                                                log(eIM P
                                                                                                     s,t ) + Dc,t + Ds
                                                          j=1                       j=1


Here, Dc,t are country-time dummies that absorb aggregate demand shocks, the price of domestic
materials, PX,t , and also correct for the fact that output and inputs are measured in nominal terms, while
                                        PJ                          PJ
Ds are sector dummies. The terms j=1 λEXP       j    log(eEXP
                                                          s,t ) and j=1 λIM j
                                                                               P
                                                                                 log(eIM P
                                                                                      s,t ) are interactions
of sector-specific export and import-weighted RERs with dummies for firm-size bins λEXP
                                                                                    j   , λIM
                                                                                           j
                                                                                              P
                                                                                                .
They control for the impact of firms’ export and import decisions on their demand and productivity.
By interacting RERs with dummies for firm size, we allow the impact of RER changes to affect firms
differentially depending on their size.73 Larger firms are much more likely to export and/or import and
should thus be more affected by RER changes. We prefer these firm-size-bin interactions with the RERs
to interactions with export and import status, since the firm-level trade status is not available for around
60% of the observations.74 Since i,t is uncorrelated with the covariates given our timing assumptions,
OLS estimation of (A-1.17) allows us to recover a consistent estimate for the labor coefficient βbl and
                     b ki,t , m̃i,t , DT,t , D∗ , et from the first stage.
                                                    
predicted values for Φ                        T,t

A-1.4.3         Second Stage

In the second stage we obtain consistent estimates for the capital and material coefficients β̃k and β̃m ,
the return to R&D α̃2 and for the stochastic process of TFP. To obtain a better fit, we allow the
Markov-process to be a second-order polynomial of lagged TFP, with parameters α0 , α1 and α3 . To do
                                    b ki,t , m̃i,t , DT,t , D∗ , et into the equation resulting from combining
                                                                   
this, we plug our estimates βbl and Φ                                    T,t
the stochastic process for TFP (14) with (A-1.17).

             ri,t − βbl li,t = β̃0 + β̃k ki,t + β̃m m̃i,t + α̃0 +
                  h                                                                      i
                                                   ∗
                                                             
             +α1 Φ  b ki,t−1 , m̃i,t−1 , DT,t , DT,t   , et−1 − β̃k ki,t−1 − β̃m m̃i,t−1
                  h                                                                      i2
                    b ki,t−1 , m̃i,t−1 , DT,t , D∗ , et−1 − β̃k ki,t−1 − β̃m m̃i,t−1 + α̃2 IiRD,t−1 + i,t + ũi,t .
                                                             
             +α3 Φ                                 T,t


Since E(m̃i,t ũi,t ) 6= 0 we need to instrument for m̃i,t using the 2-period lag of materials. The moment
                           0
conditions are given by E(Zi,t (εi,t + ũit )) = 0, where Zi,t = (m̃i,t−1 , m̃i,t−2 , ki,t−1 , IiRD,t−1 ). We use
a 2-step GMM estimator to obtain consistent estimates of β̃k , β̃m , α̃0 , α1 , α3 and α̃2 .75 We obtain
standard errors using a bootstrap. In some specifications we impose constant returns to scale in the
second stage of the estimation procedure (i.e., given σ = 4, the input coefficients need to sum to 3/4).
Results of the production-function estimation are reported in Table B-4. TFPR is then constructed
using equation (25) and estimates from Table B-4, columns (1) and (2). In the baseline results (all
  73 Inthe estimation we use 4 firm-size bins: ≤ 20 employees; 20 − 50 employees; 50 − 200 employees; ≥ 200 employees.
  74 We  obtain similar results for the first-stage coefficients when instead interacting RERs with export and import status.
  75 For the case of the value added production function materials do not appear on the right-hand side, so the equation

can be consistently estimated by non-linear least squares.



                                                                    50
Tables except Table A-3) we do not impose constant returns to scale (we use estimates from columns
(1) and (2) of Table B-4) and we do not correct for the markup term. We report results for the impact
of RER on firm-level TFPR growth imposing constant returns in Table A-3, columns (3) and (6). We
report results imposing constant returns and multiplying β̃ with (σ − 1)/σ in Table A-3, columns (4)
and (7).


A-1.5        Reduced-form Evidence
In this section, we present detailed reduced-form regression evidence for the relationships between RER
changes and firm-level TFPR growth; innovation activity; and cash flow. We also present separate
estimates of these relationships for exporters and importers. In addition, we provide evidence for the
relation between innovation and cash flow. We use the coefficients of interest from these regressions
either to obtain statistics to be matched in the structural estimation procedure or as untargeted moments
that speak to the specific economic mechanisms that are emphasized in the model. These can be used
to evaluate the model’s external validity.

A-1.5.1      Firm-level outcomes and the RER – Regional Heterogeneity

We regress a number of firm-level variables on the growth rate of the RER, allowing the effect of the
RER to vary by region. Since the aggregate RER is the relative price of the foreign vs. domestic
aggregate goods basket, endogeneity to aggregate shocks may be a concern. Our analysis considers
RER fluctuations as exogenous demand shocks that impact on firms’ export, import and innovation
decisions. The fact that we investigate how firm-level outcomes of manufacturing firms are affected by
RER movements makes reverse causality unlikely. Omitted-variable bias is perhaps more of a concern. In
particular, positive aggregate supply shocks should be positively correlated with the RER, while positive
demand shocks should negatively correlate with it. Therefore, we always control for the aggregate growth
rate of the economy. Alternatively, we (i) pursue an instrumental-variable strategy and (ii) use trade-
weighted exchange rates, which allows us to control for country-year fixed effects that absorb aggregate
shocks. The baseline regression specification is given by:
                                       X
                  ∆ log(Yic,t ) = β0 +     βr ∆ log(ec,t )Ir + β2 Xc,t + δsc + δt + uic,t ,       (A-1.17)
                                              r∈R


where Ir is a dummy for country c belonging to region r, δsc is a 3-digit-sector-country fixed effect
(controlling for the average growth rate in a given sector-country pair) and δt is a time fixed effect. The
vector Xc,t consists of business-cycle controls and includes the real GDP growth rate and the inflation
rate. Controlling for inflation corrects for the fact that our dependent variables are measured in nominal
value of domestic currency.76 We cluster standard errors at the country level since all firms in a given
country are exposed to the same RER shock and RERs are auto-correlated. This choice of clustering
implies that standard errors are robust to arbitrary correlation of the error terms across firms within a
given country-year and over time within a given country.
 76 We   use domestic currency values. Section 7.1 analyzes valuation effects.


                                                            51
    We consider five different firm-level dependent variables ∆ log(Yic,t ): 1) the revenue-based TFP
(TFPR) growth rate, constructed from value added; 2) the revenue-based TFP growth rate, constructed
from gross output [used as a targeted moment]; 3) the growth rate of sales; 4) the growth rate of cash
flow; 5) the change of an indicator variable for R&D.77 We also consider the (log) entry rate into
exporting at the country-time level, defined as the number of new exporters relative to the number of
total exporters, from the World Bank’s Exporter Dynamics Database.
    Table A-1 reports results based on yearly data and aggregate RERs. In emerging Asia, a one-percent
depreciation of the RER increases value-added TFPR growth by 0.24 percentage points, gross-output
TFPR growth by 0.12 percentage points, sales growth by 0.2 percentage points, and cash flow growth
by 0.78 percentage points. The probability of R&D increases by 0.19 percentage points and the export
entry rate increases by 0.55 percentage points. In the other emerging economies, real depreciations are
associated instead with significantly slower TFPR and sales growth, while there is no significant effect on
cash flow, R&D probabilities and export entry. Finally, in industrialized countries, a real depreciation
has no significant effect on firm-level TFPR, sales, R&D probabilities and export entry rates, while the
impact on cash flow is negative. These results are robust to excluding the years of the global financial
crisis from our sample and to using alternative productivity measures. (See Tables A-2 and A-3.)

                       Table A-1: The aggregate RER and firm-level outcomes by region

                                   (1)                (2)               (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)
                            ∆ log TFPRV A,it   ∆ log TFPRGO,it      ∆ log salesit   ∆ log c. f.it   ∆ R&D prob.it    ∆ log exp.
                                                                                                                    entry ratect
  ∆ log ect ×                  0.239***            0.120***             0.195        0.783***           0.191*       0.552***
  emerging Asiac                (0.089)             (0.019)           (0.216)         (0.114)          (0.095)        (0.207)
  ∆ log ect ×                  -0.546***           -0.105**          -0.762***         -0.557             0.16         0.063
  other emergingc               (0.185)            (0.0426)           (0.274)         (0.414)          (0.125)        (0.059)
  ∆ log ect ×                    0.0196              -0.031            -0.282        -0.319**           -0.168         -0.275
  industrializedc               (0.103)            (0.0309)           (0.217)         (0.126)          (0.149)        (0.274)
  Observations                 1,333,986           1,333,986         1,275,606        772,970          148,367          392
  R-squared                       0.057              0.038             0.103            0.024            0.016         0.107
  Country-sector FE               YES                 YES               YES             YES              YES            NO
  Time FE                         YES                 YES               YES             YES              YES            YES
  Business cycle controls         YES                 YES               YES             YES              YES            YES
  Cluster                       Country            Country            Country        Country           Country        Country
Notes: The dependent variable in columns (1)-(5) is the annual log difference in the following firm-level outcomes computed
from Orbis for manufacturing firms for the years 2001-2010: revenue-based TFP computed from value-added (column 1), revenue-
based TFP computed from gross output (column 2), nominal sales (column 3), cash flow (column 4), an indicator for R&D status
(column 5). The construction of TFP is explained in section 4 of the paper. In column (6) the dependent variable is the log
annual change in the export entry rate compute from the Worldbank’s export dynamics database. The main explanatory variable
of interest is the annual log difference in the real exchange rate from the PWT 8.0 interacted with dummies for: emerging Asia;
other emerging economy; industrialized economy. The regressions also control for the real growth rate of GDP in PPP (from
PWT8.0) and the inflation rate (from IMF). Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.


    Alternatively, we also consider an instrumental-variable strategy that exploits exogenous fluctuations
in world commodity prices and world capital flows. Both higher commodity prices and larger world-level
capital flows are plausibly exogenous to domestic shocks and policies and tend to appreciate the RER
through their impact on domestic inflation. Moreover, the domestic effects of these external shocks are
  77 That   is, in the case of R&D status we estimate a linear probability model.


                                                               52
                 Table A-2: The aggregate RER and firm-level outcomes: excluding crisis years
                                              (1)                          (2)                  (3)                 (4)                (5)
                                      ∆ log TFPRV A,it             ∆ log TFPRGO,it          ∆ log salesit      ∆ log c. f.it     ∆ R&D prob.it
  ∆ log ect ×                             0.209***                     0.124***               0.410**           0.660***           0.164***
  emerging Asiac                           (0.062)                      (0.017)               (0.164)            (0.246)            (0.058)
  ∆ log ect ×                              -0.217*                      -0.0438               -0.0828             0.173             0.00822
  other emergingc                          (0.130)                      (0.048)               (0.207)            (0.336)            (0.007)
  ∆ log ect ×                               0.094*                       0.0105                0.162              -0.258             0.0104
  industrializedc                          (0.055)                      (0.022)               (0.105)            (0.326)            (0.023)
  Observations                             871,672                      871,672               816,686            528,152             86,859
  R-squared                                  0.053                        0.031                0.076              0.022              0.012
  Country-sector FE                          YES                          YES                   YES                YES                YES
  Time FE                                    YES                          YES                   YES                YES                YES
  Business cycle controls                    YES                          YES                   YES                YES                YES
  Cluster                                 Country                      Country               Country            Country             Country
Notes: The dependent variable in columns (1)-(5) is the annual log difference in the following firm-level outcomes computed
from Orbis for manufacturing firms for the years 2001-2008: revenue-based TFP computed from value-added (column 1), revenue-
based TFP computed from gross output (column 2), nominal sales (column 3), cash flow (column 4), an indicator for R&D status
(column 5). The construction of TFP is explained in section 4 of the paper. The main explanatory variable of interest is the
annual log difference in the real exchange rate from the PWT 8.0 interacted with dummies for: emerging Asia; other emerging
economy; industrialized economy. The regressions also control for the real growth rate of GDP in PPP (from PWT8.0) and the
inflation rate (from IMF). Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels.




Table A-3: The aggregate RER and firm-level productivity growth: alternative productivity measures
                                  (1)                  (2)                 (3)               (4)                (5)              (6)          (7)
                           ∆ log lab. prod.it   ∆ log TFPRV A,it   ∆ log TFPRV A,it   ∆ log TFPRV A,it   ∆ log TFPRGO,it   ∆ TFPRGO,it   ∆ TFPRGO,it
                                                                          CRS          CRS, markup                              CRS      CRS, markup
 ∆ log ect ×                    0.245*              0.239***            0.242***           0.835**          0.120***            0.106       0.152**
 emerging Asiac                 (0.144)              (0.090)             (0.087)           (0.366)           (0.020)          (0.113)       (0.060)
 ∆ log ect ×                   -0.483**            -0.546***           -0.542***            0.277           -0.105**        -0.376***     -0.234***
 other emergingc                (0.190)              (0.185)             (0.185)           (0.390)           (0.043)          (0.126)       (0.083)
 ∆ log ect ×                     -0.13               0.0196               0.021             0.304             -0.031           -0.118       -0.0773
 industrializedc                (0.139)              (0.103)             (0.102)           (0.245)           (0.031)          (0.109)       (0.063)
 Observations                  1,275,606           1,333,986           1,333,986          1,333,986         1,333,986        1,333,986     1,333,986
 R-squared                       0.052                0.057               0.056             0.012              0.038            0.066        0.058
 Country-sector FE                YES                 YES                 YES                YES               YES              YES           YES
 Time FE                          YES                 YES                 YES                YES               YES              YES           YES
 Business cycle controls          YES                 YES                 YES                YES               YES              YES           YES
 Cluster                       Country              Country             Country           Country           Country          Country       Country

Notes: The dependent variable in columns (1)-(7) is the annual log difference in the following firm-level productivity measures
computed from Orbis for manufacturing firms for the years 2001-2010: labor productivity (sales/employment) (column 1), revenue-
based TFP computed from value-added (column 2), revenue-based TFP computed from value added, imposing constant returns
to scale (column 3), revenue-based TFP computed from value added, imposing constant returns to scale and correcting for
markups (column 4), revenue-based TFP computed from gross output (column 5), revenue-based TFP computed from gross
output, imposing constant returns to scales (column 6), revenue-based TFP computed from gross output, imposing constant
returns to scale and correcting for markups (column 7). The construction of TFP is explained in section 4 of the paper and in
Appendix A-1.2. The main explanatory variable of interest is the annual log difference in the real exchange rate from the PWT
8.0 interacted with dummies for: emerging Asia; other emerging economy; industrialized economy. The regressions also control
for the real growth rate of GDP in PPP (from PWT 8.0) and the inflation rate (from IMF). Standard errors are clustered at the
country level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.




                                                                            53
larger for countries that rely more on commodity trade or have more open financial accounts. In Table
A-4 we show that our results are robust to instrumenting for RER changes with (i) trade-weighted
world commodity prices (using pre-sample trade weights) and (ii) interactions of world gross financial
flows with pre-sample values of the Chinn-Ito index for financial account openness. We construct two
instruments for the RER. The first one is based on a trade-weighted average of world commodity prices (a
fixed set of agricultural commodities, metals, oil). For each country and commodity we compute exports
and imports (using trade data from WITS) in the pre-sample year 2000 to construct trade weights. We
then compute the instrument as a country-specific trade-weighed average of world commodity prices
(using price information from the Worldbank). Our second instrument is based on world capital flows.
We compute world capital flows as the sum of equity and debt inflows across countries (from IMF). We
then interact this variable (which has only time variation), with the value of the Chinn-Ito index (Chinn
and Ito, 2006) for financial openness in the pre-sample year 2000. World commodity prices interacted
with commodity-country-specific trade weights are strongly negatively correlated with RER changes, in
particular for emerging economies. The rationale for the second instrument is that world gross financial
flows should also be independent of local economic conditions and act as a push factor for the RER, in
particular for countries with an open financial account, as measured by the Chinn-Ito index.


                    Table A-4: The aggregate RER and firm-level outcomes: IV estimates

                                            (1)                   (2)                 (3)              (4)               (5)
                                   ∆ log TFPRV A,it       ∆ log TFPRGO,it        ∆ log salesit    ∆ log c. f.it    ∆ R&D prob.it
 ∆ log ect ×                            0.286***              0.140***              0.267          0.895***          0.668***
 emerging Asiac                          (0.078)               (0.023)             (0.190)          (0.060)           (0.245)
 ∆ log ect ×                           -0.922***              -0.337**             -2.114*           -0.906            -4.076
 other emerging                          (0.354)               (0.137)             (1.241)          (0.560)           (2.836)
 ∆ log ect ×                              -0.009                -0.054              -0.353           -0.105            -5.169
 industrializedc                         (0.258)               (0.099)             (0.686)          (0.520)           (5.424)
 Observations                          1,310,509              1,310,509           1,252,483        758,623            142,093
 R-squared                                 0.011                0.011               0.028             0.014            -0.006
 Country-sector FE                         YES                   YES                 YES              YES               YES
 Time FE                                   YES                   YES                 YES              YES               YES
 Business cycle controls                   YES                   YES                 YES              YES               YES
 Cluster                                Country               Country             Country          Country            Country
 Kleibergen-Paap F-Statistic              9.146                 9.146               9.919            4.759             8.304
 Over-identification test                 3.333                  1.88               3.951            2.625             2.642
 (P-value)                               (0.343)               (0.597)             (0.267)          (0.453)           (0.452)
Notes: The dependent variable in columns (1)-(5) is the annual log difference in the following firm-level outcomes computed
from Orbis for manufacturing firms for the years 2001-2010: revenue-based TFP computed from value-added (column 1), revenue-
based TFP computed from gross output (column 2), nominal sales (column 3), cash flow (column 4), an indicator for R&D status
(column 5). The construction of TFP is explained in section 4 of the paper. The main explanatory variable of interest is the
annual log difference in the real exchange rate from the PWT 8.0 interacted with dummies for: emerging Asia; other emerging
economy; industrialized economy. The regressions also control for the real growth rate of GDP in PPP (from PWT8.0) and
the inflation rate (from IMF). The set of excluded instruments consists of: regional dummies interacted with (i) initial-period
trade-weighted world commodity prices and (ii) world capital flows interacted with the initial-period Chinn-Ito index for financial
account openness. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%,
5% and 1% levels.


    Finally, we identify the causal impact of RER fluctuations by using trade-weighted exchange rates.
In this case, we can control for country-time fixed effects, which eliminate any spurious correlation


                                                                54
due to aggregate shocks to the manufacturing sector. We find that our results are robust to using this
alternative RER measures. These results are available in the working paper version (Alfaro et al., 2018).
Moreover, we have also found very similar results using specifications in 3-year annualized differences.
These results are available on request.

A-1.5.2     Firm-level outcomes and the RER – Trade Status

We now provide direct evidence that the effect of RER changes on firm-level outcomes depends on the
firms’ trade status. We run firm-level outcomes on changes in the RER, allowing for differential effects
for exporters (for which we expect the effects of RER depreciations to be positive) and importers (for
which we expect the effects to be negative). Since the interaction of trade status with the RER varies
at the firm-country-time level, this specification allows us to include country-sector-time fixed effects.
In this way we can control for any unobserved shocks to a given country-sector-pair. These fixed effects
absorb the impact on the baseline category (domestic firms which neither export nor import). We also
control for an interaction of RER with a dummy for the multinational status of the firm, which is highly
correlated with trade participation.78 Again, we cluster standard errors at the country level.
                               X       X                                    X       X
        ∆ log(Yic,t ) = β0 +                     βT r ∆ log(ec,t )IT Ir +                     IT Ir + δsct + uic,t   (A-1.18)
                               r∈R, T ∈exp,imp                              r∈R, T ∈exp,imp




    Table A-5 reports the corresponding results. As expected, in emerging Asia the interaction term
of RER changes with export status is positive, highly significant and large, while the interaction with
import status is negative and strongly significant. Similarly, for firms in other emerging countries the
interaction effect with export status is positive and significant and the interaction effect with import
status is negative.79 Finally, for firms in industrialized countries the interaction effects with export
status and import status are small and mostly statistically insignificant.80

A-1.5.3     R&D and Financial Constraints

In order to understand the effect of financial constraints on R&D decisions, we check if the probability
to engage in R&D is affected by the availability of internal cash flow. We run the following regression
for the firms in the Orbis dataset:
              4
              X                                         4
                                                        X
IiRD,t = β0         β1i log(cashf low)i,t × sizei +            β2i log(cashf low)i,t × sizei × f in.dev.c + β4 Xic,t + νi,t ,
              i=1                                        i=1
                                                                                                                     (A-1.19)
where IiRD,t is an indicator that equals one if firm i performs R&D in year t. log(cash flow) i,t is
the firm’s cash flow (in logs), size i is a dummy indicator for the firm-size quartile (measured in terms
of log(employment)) and financial dev is a measure of the country’s financial development (private
  78 To avoid endogeneity of firms’ status, we keep the firms’ trade and multinational status fixed over the sample period

and equal to the status in the first period we observe it.
  79 For related evidence see Brito et al., 2018.
  80 Note that in our sample the average firm engaging in international trade in industrialized countries is much smaller

compared to the other regions and thus we likely observe firms that export and import only a small amount relative to
their sales and change their trade status frequently, which exacerbates measurement error in trade status (we only observe
an indicator for exporting and importing for a small number of years). This makes it harder to detect a significant impact
of exporting or importing on firm-level outcomes.


                                                                 55
Table A-5: The aggregate RER and firm-level outcomes by firm’s trade participation status and region

                                               (1)                  (2)                (3)             (4)              (5)
                                       ∆ log TFPRV A,it     ∆ log TFPRGO,it      ∆ log salesit   ∆ log c. f.it   ∆ R&D prob.it
  ∆ log ect ×                               0.197**                0.030           0.135***        0.243***         0.065***
  emerging Asiac ×exporterf                 (0.075)              (0.019)            (0.036)         (0.035)          (0.011)
  ∆ log ect ×                              -0.157***            -0.016**          -0.099***        -0.123**        -0.101***
  emerging Asiac ×importerf                 (0.041)              (0.008)            (0.024)         (0.049)          (0.012)
  ∆ log ect ×                                -0.005                0.019          -0.088***          -0.096          -0.049*
  emerging Asiac ×multinationalf            (0.045)              (0.019)            (0.015)         (0.059)          (0.024)
  ∆ log ect ×                               0.394**              0.087**           0.333***        1.162***         0.167***
  other emergingc ×exporterf                (0.159)              (0.036)            (0.079)         (0.281)          (0.029)
  ∆ log ect ×                                -0.251               -0.074             0.005        -0.803***           -0.119
  other emergingc ×importerf                (0.177)              (0.046)            (0.102)         (0.203)          (0.072)
  ∆ log ect ×                                -0.027             -0.083**             0.382          0.502*             0.036
  other emergingc ×multinationalf           (0.127)              (0.040)            (0.248)         (0.292)          (0.024)
  ∆ log ect ×                                0.006                -0.004             0.025         0.272***           -0.004
  industrializedc ×exporterf                (0.021)              (0.009)            (0.033)         (0.085)          (0.018)
  ∆ log ect ×                                 0.046             0.012***           0.068***          -0.052         -0.042**
  industrializedc ×importerf                (0.028)              (0.004)            (0.014)         (0.078)          (0.016)
  ∆ log ect ×                                 0.033               0.020*             0.045           0.144            -0.040
  industrializedc ×multinationalf           (0.034)              (0.011)            (0.043)         (0.088)          (0.028)
  Observations                              511,061              511,061            481,733         313,856           35,151
  R-squared                                   0.094                0.076              0.16           0.063             0.116
  Country-sector-time FE                      YES                  YES               YES              YES              YES
  Firm status controls                        YES                  YES               YES              YES              YES
  Cluster                                   Country             Country            Country         Country          Country
Notes: The dependent variable in columns (1)-(5) is the annual log difference in the following firm-level outcomes computed
from Orbis for manufacturing firms for the years 2001-2010: revenue-based TFP computed from value-added (column 1), revenue-
based TFP computed from gross output (column 2), nominal sales (column 3), cash flow (column 4), an indicator for R&D status
(column 5). The construction of TFP is explained in section 4 of the paper. The main explanatory variable of interest is the triple
interaction between the annual log difference in the real exchange rate from the PWT 8.0; firm-level indicators for exporting,
importing and multinational status; and dummies for: emerging Asia; other emerging economy; industrialized economy. The
regressions also control for the firms’ exporter, importer and multinational status. Standard errors are clustered at the country
level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.




                                                                56
credit/GDP). We always include the following set of additional controls: firm-size-bin dummies, capital
stock (in logs), the inflation rate and the real growth rate of GDP. Depending on the specification, we
include different fixed effects (country and sector, or country-sector). Since we are regressing firm-level
variables on each other, endogeneity is of course a concern here; we thus emphasize that these are just
conditional correlations that we replicate with our structural model.81
    We report results for these specifications in Table A-6. The coefficient on (log) cash flow interacted
with the dummy for the smallest firm-size quartile is insignificant, suggesting that for these firms R&D
status is insensitive to cash flow. For medium-size to large firms, cash flow is robustly positively related
to R&D, as indicated by the significantly positive coefficients on the interaction between (log) cash flow
and the dummies for the 3rd and 4th firm-size quartiles. Finally, the triple interaction term between
(log) cash flow, the firm-size-bin dummies and the country’s financial development is negative and
statistically significant for the 3rd and 4th firm-size bin: for these firms the relevance of internal cash
flow for R&D is smaller in countries with more developed capital markets.


   Table A-6: R&D sensitivity to cash flow by firm-size quartiles and level of financial development
                                                                       (1)               (2)
                                                                 R&D prob.it       R&D prob.it
                                   log(cash flow)f t ×                0.015             0.008
                                   size quartile 1f                  (0.019)           (0.019)
                                   log(cash flow)f t ×              0.035**             0.018
                                   size quartile 2f                 (0.0153)           (0.014)
                                   log(cash flow)f t ×             0.052***          0.048***
                                   size quartile 3f                  (0.005)           (0.006)
                                   log(cash flow)f t ×             0.056***          0.059***
                                   size quartile 4f                  (0.003)           (0.003)
                                   log(cash flow)f t ×               -0.0001           -0.0001
                                   size quartile 1f × creditc       (0.0001)          (0.0001)
                                   log(cash flow)f t ×              -0.0002*           -0.0001
                                   size quartile 2f × creditc       (0.0001)          (0.0001)
                                   log(cash flow)f t ×            -0.0002***        -0.0002***
                                   size quartile 3f × creditc      (0.00004)         (0.00004)
                                   log(cash flow)f t ×            -0.0002***        -0.0002***
                                   size quartile 4f × creditc      (0.00002)         (0.00002)
                                   R-squared                          0.347             0.383
                                   Observations                      117,394          117,142
                                   Time FE                            YES               YES
                                   Sector FE                          YES                NO
                                   Country FE                         YES                NO
                                   Sector-country FE                   NO               YES
                                   Firm controls                      YES               YES
                                   Business cycle controls            YES               YES
                                   Cluster                            Firm              Firm
Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator for the firm’s R&D status. Explanatory variables are firm-level cash flow (in logs)
interacted with 4 dummies for the quartiles of (log) firm employment and triple interactions of these variables with financial
development (measured as private credit/GDP). Further controls include (coefficients not reported): dummies for quartiles of
(log) firm employment, capital (in logs), the real GDP growth rate (from PWT 8.0) and the inflation rate (from IMF). Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.
  81 Using lagged cash flow instead of current cash flow mitigates endogeneity concerns and gives very similar results.
More generally, as documented by Lerner and Hall, 2010, there is substantial evidence on the role of internal funds and
cash flowing financing R&D.




                                                                57
A-1.6      Dataset Construction
We have compiled our dataset by combining data from a number of sources. We use firm-level infor-
mation from Orbis (Bureau Van Dijk) and Worldbase (Dunn & Bradstreet). In terms of information
from Orbis, we use data from two CDs (2007 and 2014) and the web version. Orbis provides firm-level
balance sheet data of listed and unlisted firms.
   We drop firm-year observations without firm identifiers, company names, information on revenue or
sales, total assets, employees and observations with missing accounting units. We replace as missing any
negative reported values for sales, revenue, number of employees, total assets, current liabilities, total
liabilities, long-term debt, tangible fixed assets, intangible fixed assets, current assets, material costs,
R&D expenditure. We convert variables into common units (thousands of current local currency). We
compute the capital stock as the sum of tangible fixed assets and intangible fixed assets. We compute
value added as revenue minus material costs. We keep firms with a primary activity in the manufacturing
sector (US SIC 1997 codes 200-399). See Alfaro and Chen, 2018, for further description of the data.
   Dun & Bradstreet’s WorldBase is a database covering millions of public and private companies in
more than 200 countries and territories. The unit of observation in Worldbase is the establishment/plant.
Among other variables, Worldbase reports for each plant the full name of the company, location infor-
mation (country, state, city, and street address) basic operational information (sales and employment),
and most importantly, information on the plant’s trade status (exporting/not exporting/importing/not
importing). See Alfaro et al., 2016, for a detailed description.
   For those manufacturing firms in Orbis that report revenue, number of employees, capital stock and
material costs, we merge by names with the Worldbase datasets for the years 2000, 2005, 2007 and 2009.
When common ids are not provided in the datasets, we use the Jaro-Winkler string distance algorithm
to match the datasets by company names. We condition on the firms being located in the same country
and then match by names and require a match score of at least 0.93, which turns out to provide a very
good match in manual checks. For our main analysis we disregard the year information of the trade
status to maximize sample coverage. We thus assign a fixed trade status to each firm, giving priority
to earlier years.
   We drop outliers, by removing the top and bottom one percent of observations in terms of (log)
capital stock, materials, value added, sales, employment in the TFP estimation. After the production
function coefficients have been estimated on this restricted sample, we expand sample size and compute
TFP also for observations with missing material costs, by proxying for the material cost as (median
material share in revenue)×revenue. Finally, we drop the top and bottom one percent of observations
in terms of TFP growth before running the reduced-form regressions reported in the paper.
   Appendix Table A-1 (Panel B) reports descriptive statistics of firm-level variables (for comparability
across countries in thousands of 2004 US-Dollars).




                                                    58
A-1.7     Numerical Solution Algorithm
This Appendix describes the computational details of the algorithm used in the estimation. Denote Θ
as the vector of parameters to be estimated. The estimation follows the following routine:

 (1) For a given value of Θ, solve the dynamic problem of firms, captured by the Bellman equation
     described in Section 2.7. This step yields the value functions for the firms.
 (2) Simulate the decisions (for a panel of 8000 firms for 80 periods) for a set of firms. Calculate the
     desired moments from the simulated data.
 (3) Update Θ to minimize the (weighted) distance between the simulated statistics and the data
     statistics.

   Step 1 Solving the Bellman equation.
   First we use Tauchen’s method to discretize the state space for the continuous state variables that
include productivity ωit and the RER et . We choose 50 grids for each state variable. The transition
matrix of productivity conditional on doing or not doing R&D is calculated accordingly.
   We first derive the per-period revenue, profit, static export and import choices at each state in the
grid, as described in Section 3. The discrete R&D choice is the only dynamic decision. Each firm
maximizes the sum of its current and discounted future profits. We iterate on the value function until
numerical convergence. We do not get a deterministic R&D decision since only the mean R&D costs
are known to the firms when solving the Bellman equation. However, we can calculate the value of
doing R&D at any given state. In step 2, after firms observe their cost draws, they can then make
deterministic R&D investment decisions.
   Step 2 Simulating firms’ decisions.
   We then simulate the decisions for a panel of 8000 firms and 80 periods. For 20 countries, we
simulate decisions of 400 firms over 80 periods. Each country gets a unique series of exchange rates
shocks simulated following the same AR(1) process and mapped to the grids of the state space. The
shocks in the initial period are drawn from the steady-state distribution implied by the AR(1) process.
All the cost shocks are drawn from their respective distributions.
   With respect to firms’ idiosyncratic productivity shocks, we assume that no firm does R&D in period
1, and draw the initial-period productivity shocks from the steady-state distribution without R&D. In
each subsequent period, given the beginning-of-period productivity and other shocks, each firm then
makes the static export and import decisions, and also the dynamic R&D decisions by comparing their
associated fixed or sunk cost draws with the value of doing R&D computed in step 1 (taking into
account the credit constraint). After knowing each firm’s R&D decision, we simulate its end-of-period
productivity shock following the respective AR(1) process. The moments of interest are then calculated
from the simulated data on exporting, importing, sales, cash flow, etc. The first 10 periods are considered
as burn-in periods and not used to calculate the data moments.
   Step 3 Indirect Inference.
   Steps 1 and 2 together generate the moments of interest for any given Θ. In step 3, Θ is updated to
minimize a weighted distance between the data statistics and the simulated statistics (see below). After

                                                    59
each optimization step, we return to steps 1 and 2 using the updated guess of Θ. The minimization is
performed using the genetic algorithm.
   Let ν be the p×1 vector of data statistics and let ν(Θ) denote the synthetic counterpart of ν with the
statistics computed from artificial data generated by the structural model. Then the indirect-inference
estimator of the q × 1 vector Θ, Θ̃ is the value that solves: minβ (ν − ν(Θ))0 V (ν − ν(Θ)), where V is
the p × p optimal weighting matrix (the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix of the data statistics
ν). Since the data statistics are computed from different datasets, we set the off-diagonal elements of
the variance-covariance matrix to zero. (See Cosar et al., 2016, and Dix-Carneiro, 2014, for a similar
approach.) One can show that under certain regularity conditions, the estimates are consistent and
asymptotically normal. (See Gouriéroux et al., 1993, for details.)


Appendix B: Additional Figures and Tables

Figure B-1: Aggregate effect of an unexpected real depreciation (25%, 12.5%) and appreciation (25%)
for emerging Asia.




                                                   60
Figure B-2: Aggregate effect of an unexpected real depreciation (25%, 12.5%) and appreciation (25%)
for other emerging economies.




Figure B-3: Aggregate effect of an unexpected real depreciation (25%, 12.5%) and appreciation (25%)
for industrialized economies.




                                                61
                                           Table B-1: Panel A - Sample Frame
                     Country       Freq.     Percent     Cum.     Country         Freq.    Percent    Cum
                     ARG*             98        0.01      0.01    KEN*               13          0    88.28
                     AUS+          1,004        0.08      0.08    KOR-          101,267       7.63    95.91
                     AUT+          5,895        0.44      0.53    KWT*               33          0    95.91
                     BEL+         25,908        1.95      2.48    LBN*                1          0    95.91
                     BGD-             36           0      2.48    LKA-              126       0.01    95.92
                     BGR*         24,114        1.82       4.3    LTU*               64          0    95.92
                     BHR*              6           0       4.3    LUX+               38          0    95.93
                     BIH*         15,580        1.17      5.47    LVA*               64          0    95.93
                     BOL*             32           0      5.48    MAR*               15          0    95.93
                     BRA*          2,030        0.15      5.63    MEX*              152       0.01    95.94
                     BRB*              1           0      5.63    MKD*               73       0.01    95.95
                     BWA*              1           0      5.63    MLT*                3          0    95.95
                     CAN+             30           0      5.63    MUS+                8          0    95.95
                     CHE+            538        0.04      5.67    MWI*                1          0    95.95
                     CHL*              5           0      5.67    MYS+            3,210       0.24    96.19
                     CHN-        213,230       16.07     21.74    NAM*                4          0    96.19
                     COL*            125        0.01     21.75    NGA*              168       0.01    96.21
                     CPV*              4           0     21.75    NLD+            4,111       0.31    96.52
                     CRI*              8           0     21.75    NOR+           11,227       0.85    97.36
                     CYP*            204        0.02     21.76    NZL+               41          0    97.36
                     CZE*          5,216        0.39     22.16    OMN*              158       0.01    97.38
                     DEU+        100,801        7.59     29.75    PAK*              134       0.01    97.39
                     DMA*              4           0     29.75    PAN*               14          0    97.39
                     DNK+            915        0.07     29.82    PER*              151       0.01     97.4
                     DOM*              6           0     29.82    PHL-              216       0.02    97.41
                     ECU*             18           0     29.82    POL*           11,174       0.84    98.26
                     EGY*             70        0.01     29.83    PRT+              137       0.01    98.27
                     ESP+        291,219       21.94     51.77    PRY*                8          0    98.27
                     EST*         16,559        1.25     53.02    QAT*               10          0    98.27
                     FIN+         30,996        2.34     55.35    ROU*               27          0    98.27
                     FJI*              3           0     55.35    SAU*               33          0    98.27
                     FRA+        168,756       12.71     68.07    SGP-            1,462       0.11    98.38
                     GBR+         37,491        2.82     70.89    SLV*                4          0    98.38
                     GHA*              4           0     70.89    SRB*                3          0    98.38
                     GRC+         24,076        1.81      72.7    SVK*                9          0    98.38
                     GRD*              1           0     72.71    SVN*               21          0    98.39
                     GTM*              7           0     72.71    SWE+            9,262        0.7    99.08
                     HKG-            351        0.03     72.73    THA-            3,677       0.28    99.36
                     HRV*         35,905        2.71     75.44    TTO*                1          0    99.36
                     HUN*             28           0     75.44    TUN*                3          0    99.36
                     IDN-          1,055        0.08     75.52    TUR*               81       0.01    99.37
                     IND-            303        0.02     75.54    TWN-            7,369       0.56    99.92
                     IRL+          2,120        0.16      75.7    TZA*                4          0    99.92
                     IRN*            126        0.01     75.71    UGA*                1          0    99.92
                     IRQ*             15           0     75.71    UKR*              307       0.02    99.95
                     ISL+             25           0     75.71    URY*                5          0    99.95
                     ISR*            696        0.05     75.77    VEN*                2          0    99.95
                     ITA+        107,685        8.11     83.88    VNM-              528       0.04    99.99
                     JAM*              4           0     83.88    ZAF*              174       0.01      100
                     JOR*            229        0.02      83.9    ZMB*                8          0      100
                     JPN+         58,096        4.38     88.27    ZWE*                3          0      100
                     KAZ*             25           0     88.28    Total       1,333,986        100
Notes: + indicates industrialized economies, - indicates emerging Asia, * indicates other emerging economies. The number of
observations for each country correspond to those of Table 1, columns (1) and (2). These numbers correspond to those observations
included in the estimation that are not absorbed by the fixed effects.




                                                                 62
  Table B-1: Panel B - Firm-level descriptive statistics. Mean values of firm-level variables by trade
                             status (in thousands of constant 2004 Dollars)

                       sales    value added      capital       mat.      empl.        TFPR         R&D prob.        ex. prob.   im. prob.   Firms

 full sample          18.015        5.871         5.960     7.082       110.685       0.406           0.341            n.a.        n.a.     494,652
 with trade data      24.688        8.675        7.889      8.954       123.687       0.540           0.423           0.290       0.221     177,358
 domestic firms       15.439        5.924         4.691     5.842       81.437        0.428           0.327           0.000       0.000     127,943
 exporters            46.459       14.984        15.407    15.948       223.573       0.806           0.551           1.000       0.644      43,766
 importers            47.162       13.534        15.452    15.337       223.240       0.803           0.543           0.847       1.000     32,935



      Table B-1: Panel C - Firm-level descriptive statistics. Growth rates of firm-level outcomes.
                                              Mean     Median         S.D.       Pct. 10      Pct. 90        Observations
                  ∆   log TFPR V A,it         0.062     0.032         0.401      -0.323        0.459          1,333,986
                  ∆   log TFPRGO,it           0.014     0.009         0.149      -0.127        0.155          1,333,986
                  ∆   log salesit             0.083     0.045         0.421      -0.280        0.458          1,275,606
                  ∆   log c. f.it             0.032     0.033         0.810      -0.770        0.835           772,970
                  ∆   R&D prob.it             0.018       0           0.245         0            0             148,367



Table B-1: Panel D - Percentage changes in aggregate/trade-weighted real exchange rates (computed
                                        from PWT 8.0).
                                                  Mean     Median            S.D.    Pct.10        Pct. 90     Observations
              ∆ log(ect ) (sample weights)        -0.022   -0.026            0.077   -0.106         0.069       1,333,986
              ∆ log(eexp
                     sct ) (sample weights)       -0.009   -0.001            0.037   -0.054         0.036       1,285,833
              ∆ log(eimp
                     sct ) (sample weights)       -0.010   -0.001            0.038   -0-061         0.028       1,286,033
              ∆ log(ect ) (unweighted)            -0.034   -0.040            0.119   -0.160         0.086         1,832
              ∆ log(ect ) (5-year differences)    -0.189   -0.211            0.248   -0.478        -0.196          333




Table B-2: Import and export propensity/intensity, manufacturing plants (WB Enterprise Survey 2016)

                                                               emerging Asia         other emerging
                                  Export prob.                     0.20                   0.26

                                  Import prob.                        0.19                  0.33

                                  Avg. export intensity               0.58                  0.25
                                  (exporters)
                                  Avg. import intensity               0.13                  0.14
                                  (importers)
Notes: Emerging Asia is defined as emerging East Asia and South Asia; other emerging economies are defined as Eastern Europe
and Latin America.



                                Table B-3: Estimation of log RER, AR (1) process
                                                                    (1)             (2)
                                              log ec,t−1         0.930***        0.935***
                                                                  (0.015)         (0.015)
                                              Observations         1,832           1,832
                                              R-squared            0.931           0.947
                                              S.D. residuals       0.105          0.0924
                                              Country FE           YES             YES
                                              Time FE               NO             YES
                                              Cluster            Country         Country
Notes: AR (1) process of log RER. The explanatory variable of interest is the 1-year lag of the log RER from the PWT 8.0.
Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.



                                                                 63
                              Table B-4: Production function: coefficient estimates
                                                     (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)
                                                     GO            VA           GO           VA
                                                                               CRS          CRS
                            labor β̃l              0.336***    0.533***      0.336***     0.533***
                                                    (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
                            capital β̃k            0.093***    0.210***      0.051***     0.217***
                                                    (0.018)     (0.010)       (0.008)      (0.002)
                            materials β̃m          0.682***                  0.363***
                                                    (0.022)                   (0.008)
                            R&D return α̃2         0.079***     0.033**      0.060***       0.033**
                                                    (0.013)     (0.016)       (0.009)       (0.016)
                            log(eEXP
                                 sct )×              0.001     -0.149***       0.001      -0.149***
                            λEXP
                              1                     (0.021)     (0.034)       (0.021)       (0.034)
                            log(eEXP
                                 sct )×            0.426***    0.729***      0.426***      0.729***
                            λEXP
                              2                     (0.025)     (0.039)       (0.025)       (0.039)
                            log(eEXP
                                 sct )×            0.345***    0.755***      0.345***      0.755***
                            λEXP
                              3                     (0.027)     (0.046)       (0.027)       (0.046)
                             log(eEXP
                                   sct )×          0.178***    0.445***      0.178***      0.445***
                            λEXP
                              4                     (0.068)     (0.117)       (0.068)       (0.117)
                            log(eIM   P
                                 sct )×           -0.073***    0.110***     -0.073***      0.110***
                            λIM
                              1
                                 P                  (0.020)     (0.032)       (0.020)       (0.032)
                            log(eIM   P
                                 sct )×           -0.561***    -0.838***    -0.561***     -0.838***
                            λ2IM P                  (0.025)     (0.034)       (0.025)       (0.034)
                            log(eIM   P
                                 sct )×           -0.700***    -1.142***     -0.700**     -1.142***
                             λIM
                               3
                                  P                 (0.027)     (0.045)       (0.027)       (0.045)
                            log(eIM   P
                                 sct )×           -0.827***    -1.240***    -0.827***     -1.240***
                            λIM
                              4
                                 P                  (0.066)     (0.117)       (0.066)       (0.117)
                            Country-time FE          YES          YES          YES            YES
                            Sector FE                YES          YES          YES            YES
                            Cluster                  Firm         Firm         Firm          Firm
Notes: Gross-output (GO) and value-added (VA) production-function estimates. Details of the production-function estimation
are explained in Appendix A-1.4. The terms λEXP
                                            j   × log(eEXP
                                                       s,t ) and λIM
                                                                  j
                                                                     P
                                                                       × log(eIM
                                                                              s,t
                                                                                  P
                                                                                    ) are interactions of sector-specific export
and import-weighted RERs with dummies for firm-size bins for ≤ 20 employees; 20 − 50 employees; 50 − 200 employees; ≥ 200
employees. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at the firm level reported in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.




                                                              64
 Table B-5: The aggregate RER and firm-level outcomes: separating depreciations and appreciations
                                                 (1)                    (2)                 (3)              (4)
                                         ∆ log TFPRV A,it       ∆ log TFPRGO,it        ∆ log salesit    ∆ log c. f.it
                             +
             |∆ log ect | × Ict ×            0.740***               0.243***            1.209***         1.580***
             emerging Asiac                   (0.152)                (0.077)             (0.285)          (0.238)
                             −
             |∆ log ect | × Ict ×              0.159                  -0.020             0.657**           0.153
             emerging Asiac                   (0.124)                (0.057)             (0.323)          (0.310)
                             +
             |∆ log ect | × Ict ×              -0.231                  0.020              -0.739           0.136
             other emergingc                  (0.402)                (0.128)             (0.449)          (0.299)
                             −
             |∆ log ect | × Ict ×            0.864***               0.219***             1.039**         1.124**
             other emergingc                  (0.234)                (0.077)             (0.427)          (0.528)
                             +
             |∆ log ect | × Ict ×              -0.056                 -0.072              -0.790           -0.225
             industrializedc                  (0.198)                (0.094)             (0.544)          (0.313)
                             −
             |∆ log ect | × Ict ×              -0.026                  0.011              -0.062            0.430
             industrializedc                  (0.143)                (0.048)             (0.251)          (0.290)
             Observations                    1,333,986              1,333,986           1,275,606         772,970
             R-squared                         0.057                  0.038               0.104            0.024
             Country-sector FE                  YES                    YES                 YES              YES
             Time FE                            YES                    YES                 YES              YES
             Business cycle controls            YES                    YES                 YES              YES
             Cluster                         Country                Country             Country          Country
Notes: The dependent variable in columns (1)-(4) is the annual log difference in the following firm-level outcomes computed from
Orbis for manufacturing firms for the years 2001-2010: revenue-based TFP computed from value-added (column 1), revenue-based
TFP computed from gross output (column 2), nominal sales (column 3), cash flow (column 4). We do not present results for
R&D status, which are not statistically significant. The construction of TFP is explained in section 4 of the paper. The main
explanatory variable of interest is the absolute value of the annual log difference in the real exchange rate from the PWT 8.0
                                           +                       −
interacted with dummies for depreciation (Ict ) and appreciation (Ict ) and dummies for emerging Asia; other emerging economy;
industrialized economy. The regressions also control for the real growth rate of GDP in PPP (from PWT8.0) and the inflation
rate (from IMF). Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%
and 1% levels.




                                                                65
                       Table B-6: Estimated parameters and model fit for model without credit constraints: emerging Asia
     Parameter              Description              Value                             Moments                                 Data    Model
                                                                             (*Cross-sectional moments*)
         fx        log export fixed cost,mean        7.92                          R&D probability                             0.25    0.27
       fRD,0       log R&D sunk cost, mean          18.05                         Export probability                           0.26    0.25
        fRD        log R&D fixed cost, mean         13.67                      Export/sales Ratio, mean                        0.60    0.65
         fm          import fixed cost, mean        8.52                          Import probability                           0.17    0.18
          A       quality of imported intermed.      0.77                         Import/sales ratio                           0.17    0.18
      log(ET )         log domestic demand          5.32                     Mean firm size (log revenue)                       6.6    6.55
      log(ET∗ )         log foreign demand          6.30                      Sd, firm size (log revenue)                      3.23    3.16
         α1         persistence, productivity       0.86                        (*Dynamic moments*)
         σu           sd, productivity shock         0.44                      R&D, continuation prob.                         0.90    0.90
          θ               credit constraint            –                           R&D, start prob.                             0.06    0.03
                                                                                   autocorr. TFPR                               0.91   0.86
                                                                              Elast. of TFPR w.r.t RER                         0.12    0.20
                                                                 Elast. of R&D prob. w.r.t c.f. (4th firm-size quantile)       0.041   0.001
                                                              Elast. of R&D prob. w.r.t c.f. (diff. of 4th and 2nd quantile)   0.030   0.000




66
                  Table B-7: Estimated parameters and model fit for model without credit constraints: other emerging economies
     Parameter              Description              Value                             Moments                                 Data    Model
                                                                             (*Cross-sectional moments*)
         fx         log export fixed cost,mean       4.12                          R&D probability                             0.25    0.28
       fRD,0        log R&D sunk cost, mean         14.89                         Export probability                           0.35    0.31
        fRD         log R&D fixed cost, mean        11.32                      Export/sales Ratio, mean                        0.10    0.12
         fm        log import fixed cost, mean      5.82                          Import probability                           0.39    0.36
          A       quality of imported intermed.     0.97                          Import/sales ratio                           0.24    0.24
      log(ET )         log domestic demand          4.79                     Mean firm size (log revenue)                      5.97    5.95
      log(ET∗ )         log foreign demand          2.92                      Sd, firm size (log revenue)                      2.63    2.68
         α1          persistence, productivity      0.84                        (*Dynamic moments*)
         σu           sd, productivity shock         0.41                      R&D, continuation prob.                         0.90    0.86
          θ               credit constraint            –                           R&D, start prob.                             0.06    0.05
                                                                                   autocorr. TFPR                               0.84    0.85
                                                                              Elast. of TFPR w.r.t RER                         -0.10   -0.16
                                                                 Elast. of R&D prob. w.r.t c.f. (4th firm-size quantile)       0.048   0.010
                                                              Elast. of R&D prob. w.r.t c.f. (diff. of 4th and 2nd quantile)   0.035   0.001
                  Table B-8: Estimated parameters and model fit for model without credit constraints: industrialized countries


     Parameter           Description             Value                              Moments                                  Data       Model
                                                                          (*Cross-sectional moments*)
         fx        log export fixed cost,mean     6.82                          R&D probability                                  0.56   0.42
       fRD,0       log R&D sunk cost, mean       15.51                         Export probability                                0.23   0.24
        fRD        log R&D fixed cost, mean      12.25                      Export/sales Ratio, mean                             0.17   0.15
         fm       log import fixed cost, mean    8.43                          Import probability                                0.20   0.19
          A       quality imported intermed.     0.69                          Import/sales ratio                                0.14   0.13




67
      log(ET )        log domestic demand         6.66                    Mean firm size (log revenue)                           7.64   7.66
      log(ET∗ )        log foreign demand         4.99                       Sd, firm size (revenue)                             2.91   2.89
         α1         persistence, productivity     0.79                       (*Dynamic moments*)
         σu          sd, productivity shock       0.54                      R&D, continuation prob.                           0.90       0.90
          θ              credit constraint         53                           R&D, start prob.                              0.06       0.08
                                                                                autocorr. TFPR                                0.90       0.80
                                                                           Elast. of TFPR w.r.t RER                          -0.03      -0.016
                                                              Elast. of R&D prob. w.r.t c.f.(4th firm-size quantile)         0.027      0.013
                                                          Elast. of R&D prob. w.r.t c.f. (diff. of 4th and 2nd quantile)     0.022      0.000
                                                        Table B-9: Sensitivity analysis: Emerging Asia
     Parameter     Value     Value   Value    Value                             Moments                              Data     Model     Model   Model    Model
                  Baseline   σ=6      ε=6    α2 =0.04                                                                        Baseline   σ=6      =6    α2 =0.04
                                                                       (Cross-sectional moments)
         fx         7.99     7.57     7.99     7.84                          R&D probability                         0.26      0.19     0.20    0.20      0.22
       fRD,0       13.38     12.75   13.38    12.63                         Export probability                       0.26      0.26     0.25    0.26      0.26
        fRD        9.07      9.07    9.07      9.07                     Export/Sales ratio, mean                     0.60      0.64     0.65    0.64      0.60
         fm        7.99      8.23    7.35      8.12                         Import probability                       0.17      0.19     0.18    0.19      0.17
          A        0.72      0.68    0.78      0.70                     Import/Sales ratio, mean                     0.13      0.14     0.14    0.12      0.13
      log(ET )      5.56     5.35     5.56    5.59                     Mean firm size (log revenue)                  6.60      6.69     6.78    6.71      6.64
      log(ET∗ )     6.53     6.48     6.53    6.38                      Sd, firm size (log revenue)                  3.23      3.19     3.26    3.27      3.20
         α1        0.86      0.86    0.87      0.87                       (Dynamic moments)
         σu        0.44      0.25    0.44      0.44                   R&D, continuation probability                  0.90      0.86     0.85    0.87      0.84
          θ        15.11     15.12   15.08    15.09                      R&D, start probability                      0.06      0.03     0.04    0.03      0.05
                                                                             autocorr. TFPR                          0.91      0.86     0.87    0.88      0.87
                                                                       Elast. of TFPR w.r.t RER                      0.12      0.21     0.21    0.20      0.20
                                                            Elast. of R&D w.r.t c. f. (4th firm-size quantile)       0.03      0.03     0.04    0.03      0.04
                                                         Elast. of R&D w.r.t c. f. (diff. of 4th and 2nd quantile)   0.04      0.05     0.06    0.05      0.07




68
                                                Table B-10: Sensitivity analysis: other emerging economies
     Parameter     Value     Value   Value    Value                             Moments                              Data     Model     Model   Model    Model
                  Baseline   σ=6      ε=6    α2 =0.04                                                                        Baseline   σ=6      =6    α2 =0.04
                                                                       (Cross-sectional moments)
         fx         4.17     2.92     3.97     3.74                          R&D probability                         0.25      0.22     0.22    0.24      0.25
       fRD,0       11.24     11.03   11.18    10.78                         Export probability                       0.35      0.30     0.36    0.33      0.35
        fRD        7.84      7.72    7.76      7.84                     Export/Sales ratio, mean                     0.10      0.12     0.14    0.13      0.12
         fm        5.88      5.88    5.29      5.70                         Import probability                       0.39      0.35     0.35    0.37      0.37
          A        0.97      0.98    1.03      0.97                     Import/Sales ratio, mean                     0.24      0.24     0.28    0.27      0.24
      log(ET )      4.88     4.36     4.87    4.90                     Mean firm size (log revenue)                  5.97      5.98     5.92    5.97      5.96
      log(ET∗ )     3.02     2.55     3.03    3.02                      Sd, firm size (log revenue)                  2.63      2.67     2.65    2.63      2.63
         α1        0.84      0.84    0.84      0.84                       (Dynamic moments)
         σu        0.40      0.20    0.40      0.40                   R&D, continuation probability                   0.90    0.83      0.84     0.83     0.80
          θ        11.02     14.03   12.02    11.02                      R&D, start probability                      0.06     0.05      0.04    0.05     0.06
                                                                             autocorr. TFPR                           0.87     0.85      0.85    0.85     0.84
                                                                       Elast. of TFPR w.r.t RER                      -0.11    -0.15     -0.20   -0.19    -0.16
                                                            Elast. of R&D w.r.t c. f. (4th firm-size quantile)       0.04     0.04       0.04   0.03     0.04
                                                         Elast. of R&D w.r.t c. f. (diff. of 4th and 2nd quantile)   0.05     0.07      0.07    0.07     0.08
                                                Table B-11: Sensitivity analysis: industrialized economies
     Parameter     Value     Value   Value    Value                            Moments                              Data     Model     Model   Model    Model
                  Baseline   σ=6      ε=6    α2 =0.04                                                                       Baseline   σ=6      =6    α2 =0.04
                                                                      (Cross-sectional moments)
         fx         6.82     6.04     6.82     6.90                         R&D probability                         0.56      0.40     0.41    0.40      0.45
       fRD,0       13.76     13.38   13.76    12.95                        Export probability                       0.23      0.24     0.23    0.24      0.24
        fRD        9.12      8.54    9.12      9.12                    Export/Sales ratio, mean                     0.17      0.15     0.16    0.15      0.17
         fm        8.43      8.38    7.85      8.28                        Import probability                       0.20      0.19     0.20    0.20      0.21
          A        0.69      0.68    0.79      0.69                    Import/Sales ratio, mean                     0.14      0.13     0.14    0.13      0.13
      log(ET )      6.66     6.31     6.66    6.73                    Mean firm size (log revenue)                  7.64      7.64     7.65    7.63      7.64
      log(ET∗ )     4.99     4.43     4.99    5.21                     Sd, firm size (log revenue)                  2.91      2.91     2.88    2.89      2.93
         α1        0.79      0.79    0.79      0.79                      (Dynamic moments)
         σu        0.54      0.30    0.54      0.55                  R&D, continuation probability                   0.90    0.90      0.91     0.90     0.88
          θ        53.05     53.05   53.17    53.05                     R&D, start probability                      0.06     0.07      0.06    0.07     0.10
                                                                            autocorr. TFPR                           0.91     0.81      0.82    0.81     0.80
                                                                      Elast. of TFPR w.r.t RER                      -0.03    -0.02     -0.03   -0.03    -0.01
                                                           Elast. of R&D w.r.t c. f. (4th firm-size quantile)       0.02     0.00       0.00   0.00     -0.01
                                                        Elast. of R&D w.r.t c. f. (diff. of 4th and 2nd quantile)   0.03     0.05      0.04    0.05     0.05




69
