                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DO 'ALL-AGE' BICYCLE HELMET LAWS WORK? EVIDENCE FROM CANADA

                                    Christopher S. Carpenter
                                        Casey Warman

                                      Working Paper 24644
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24644


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2018




We are grateful to Hope Corman and seminar participants at the 2018 NBER Spring Health
Economics Program meeting, the Canadian Economic Association, the Southern Economic
Association, Dalhousie University, Georgia State University, McMaster University, St. Francis
Xavier University and Saint Mary’s University for very valuable comments. The results in this
paper are based on confidential versions of the National Population Health Surveys and the
Canadian Community Health Surveys. Readers interested in obtaining access can contact the
authors for directions. The analysis presented in this paper was mainly conducted at the Atlantic
Research Data Centre which is part of the Canadian Research Data Centre Network (CRDCN).
The services and activities provided by the Atlantic Research Data Centre are made possible by
the financial or in-kind support of the SSHRC, the CIHR, the CFI, Statistics Canada and
Dalhousie University. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily represent the
CRDCN or those of its partners. We are also grateful to RDC analyst Heather Hobson for her
assistance, as well as Yasmine Amirkhalkhali and Min Hu. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Christopher S. Carpenter and Casey Warman. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do 'All-Age' Bicycle Helmet Laws Work? Evidence from Canada
Christopher S. Carpenter and Casey Warman
NBER Working Paper No. 24644
May 2018
JEL No. I1,I12,I18,Z18,Z2

                                          ABSTRACT

Twenty-one states and the District of Columbia require youths to wear helmets when riding a
bicycle, and there has been a push to extend such laws to adults. We provide new evidence on
helmet laws by studying Canada using difference-in-differences models and restricted area-
identified public health survey data with information on cycling and helmet use for nearly
800,000 individuals from 1994-2014. We first confirm prior patterns from the US that laws
requiring youths to wear helmets significantly increased youth helmet use. We then provide the
literature’s first comprehensive evidence that ‘all-age’ bicycle helmet laws significantly increased
both adult and youth helmet use by 50 to 190 percent relative to pre-reform levels, with larger
effects for younger adults, and less-educated adults. All-age helmet laws had modest effects at
reducing cycling and increasing in-home exercise during winter months among adults but did not
meaningfully affect weight. Finally, we find larger effects of helmet laws at increasing helmet
use for adults with children in the household, consistent with role-modeling behavior. Overall
our findings confirm that all-age helmet laws can be effective at increasing population helmet use
without significant unintended adverse health consequences.


Christopher S. Carpenter
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B, Box #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235
and NBER
christopher.s.carpenter@vanderbilt.edu

Casey Warman
Department of Economics
Dalhousie University
6214 University Avenue, Room A23
Halifax, NS B3H 4R2
CANADA
and NBER
warmanc@dal.ca
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


1. Introduction

Bicycling is enjoyed by over 66 million adults in the United States (Statista 2018) but is also

associated with substantial health risks: according to the American Association of Neurological

Surgeons, cycling is the sport that accounts for the largest number of head injuries for individuals

seen in emergency rooms, nearly double the number of the next closest sporting activity (85,389

in 2009, compared to 46,948 for football) (AANS 2018). In response to medical evidence that

properly worn bicycle helmets dramatically reduce the likelihood and severity of serious head

trauma in bicycle accidents, governments have increasingly adopted laws requiring children to

wear helmets when riding a bicycle. Previous quasi-experimental research using the staggered

timing of adoption of mandatory youth helmet laws across US states has shown that these laws

had robust effects at reducing bicycle-related deaths (Grant and Rutner 2004) and injuries

(Chatterji and Markowitz 2015) among youths. Moreover, research shows that these policy-

induced health improvements occurred not only through significantly greater helmet wearing by

youths but also through significantly reduced youth bicycling participation (Carpenter and Stehr

2011).1

          In part based on the evidence that youth bicycle helmet laws reduce fatalities, local and

state governments in the US have debated extending helmet laws to apply to all individuals,

including adults. These ‘all-age’ helmet laws have been met with strong opposition from cycling

activists, and thus far these policies have not been adopted by any US state2, though a handful of

places outside the US have adopted them, including Australia and New Zealand. As public bike-



1
  This type of substitution has a long history in economics, beginning with Peltzman (1975).
2
  Foss and Bierness (2000) report that 20 communities in the United States have all-age helmet requirements. For
example, Dallas, Texas has had such a policy since 1996. The Washington State Department of Transportation lists
20 cities and counties in the state that have all-age helmet laws, including Seattle, Spokane, and Tacoma
(Washington does not have a state bicycle helmet law). State legislators considered all-age helmet laws in Maryland
in 2013 (Halsey 2013) and in California in 2015 (San Francisco Chronicle 2015), but neither was adopted.

                                                        1
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


share programs proliferate across North America and Europe, there is growing concern that

policies requiring adults to wear helmets would substantially limit their popularity and

effectiveness (Fucoloro 2011).

        Would all-age helmet laws affect adults differently than youths, and relatedly, would

adults comply with requirements to wear helmets while cycling? There are many possible

considerations. For example, we know from descriptive public health surveys that there are large

differences in helmet use and cycling behaviors for children and adults even in places without

any helmet legislation, so it is not obvious that helmet laws would affect these two groups

similarly. Figure 1 makes this point explicitly by showing the age profile from our public health

data (described in detail below) for each single year of age from 12 to 64; it shows clear

differences across the life course in cycling and helmet use behaviors. Also, adults are more

likely to have resources to be able to obtain helmets compared to youths. The strong social

pressures against wearing helmets are also likely to be less salient for adults compared to

children, and adults may also be more able than youths to comprehend the health risks from not

wearing helmets. Adults are likely to have much more experience cycling than youths, however,

and this may cause them to wear helmets less, reasoning that they are more able to avoid

accidents due to their greater cycling skills. With respect to cycling behavior, children are likely

to have fewer alternative transportation options available to them compared to adults (because of

minimum driving ages), so we might expect helmet laws to depress cycling more among adults

than children due to their greater ability to substitute. Finally, we are interested in whether

helmet law effects on adults differ between those with children and those without children to test

for possible role model effects in helmet wearing behavior and responsiveness to public health

regulations.



                                                 2
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


        We provide the first quasi-experimental evidence on the effects of ‘all-age’ helmet laws

by examining Canada where four provinces have adopted these policies over the past two

decades.3    Canada provides a useful point of comparison to the United States due to its

geographic proximity and broadly similar policy landscape. Moreover, Canada’s health surveys

(the National Population Health Surveys, NPHS, and the Canadian Community Health Surveys,

CCHS) contain far more detailed information on helmet use and bicycling than comparable US

surveys. These factors allow us to fill important knowledge gaps in the previous literature and

provide new evidence on the effects of all-age helmet laws on helmet use, bicycle riding, and

related health behaviors and health outcomes. The very large samples of the Canadian survey

data (we observe over 775,000 respondents) also allow us to meaningfully test for treatment

effect heterogeneity. We use the staggered timing of adoption of the provincial helmet laws to

estimate difference-in-differences models of the effects of laws on outcomes.

        To preview, our two-way fixed effects models with controls for province and year fixed

effects, individual characteristics, and other potentially relevant public policies confirm prior

research from the United States that youth-targeted helmet laws in Canada were associated with

at most modest estimated declines in youth cycling and extremely large increases in youth

helmet use. When we examine the effects of all-age helmet laws, we find no relationship with

youth cycling. All-age helmet laws did, however, significantly increase youth helmet use by

around 30 percentage points or nearly 200 percent. We also find that all-age helmet laws were

unrelated to adult cycling participation or intensity. We do find, however, that all-age helmet

laws significantly increased the probability that adults report always wearing helmets while

bicycling by around 19.7-24 percentage points, or about 50-65 percent relative to the average

3
  Newfoundland and Labrador adopted an all-age law after the CCHS redesign that changed the reference window of
the exercise and helmet use variables. As well, some large towns in Newfoundland adopted all-age helmet laws
during the period covered as well as a few small towns in other provinces and territories.

                                                      3
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


helmet use prior to adoption.4 These effects of all-age helmet laws on adult helmet use are

highly robust and are larger for younger adults (age 18-35), and less educated adults. We also

examine helmet law effects on other exercise behaviors, and we uncover some evidence that

during the winter months in Canada all-age helmet laws are associated with reductions in cycling

and substitution toward in-home exercise.

         Finally, we employ a variety of tests for role-modeling effects, asking whether adults

with children in the household are particularly responsive to helmet laws because they want to

set good examples for their children.                 We find some evidence in favor of role-modeling

behaviors: the effect of all-age helmet laws on adult helmet use are larger in both absolute and

proportional terms (relative to pre-reform levels) for individuals with children age 0-11 in the

household compared to individuals without children age 0-11 in the household. Overall our

findings suggest that all-age helmet laws can be effective at increasing population helmet use –

even among adults – with little or no adverse effects on cycling and related health behaviors.

         The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 discusses the relevant literature and institutions

on bicycle helmet laws, Section 3 describes the data and research design, Section 4 presents the

results, and Section 5 offers a discussion and concludes.



2. Institutional Background and Relevant Literature

The types of laws we study here generally require individuals to wear a helmet when cycling on

public roadways. Table 1 provides a list of the provinces and cities in Canada that adopted

different types of helmet laws. Unlike the United States which has no statewide all-age helmet

laws, most bicycle helmet laws in Canada apply to individuals regardless of age.                                    Three


4
  If we do not restrict attention to cyclists, we still estimate that all-age helmet laws were associated with statistically
significant increases in population helmet use rates on the order of 35 percent relative to pre-reform levels.

                                                             4
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


provinces – Ontario, Manitoba, and Alberta – adopted youth-only helmet laws over our sample

period. Fines vary across provinces and range from $21 per offense in New Brunswick and $29

in British Columbia to $175 in Prince Edward Island. Enforcement varies across location, but

there is evidence that police do write tickets for violations: for example, between 2006 and 2011

Vancouver police issued 7,871 tickets for violations of the province’s all-age helmet law

(Vancouver Sun 2012).5

        We are not aware of any previous quasi-experimental economics research on the effects

of all-age helmet laws. Even for youth helmet laws, however, we are aware of only three studies

in economics that use explicitly quasi-experimental approaches to examine the effects of youth

bicycle helmet laws on various cycling-related outcomes. Grant and Rutner (2004) use data on

bicycle-related fatalities from the FARS and a two-way fixed effects empirical approach. Their

models indicate that state helmet laws applying to youths in the United States significantly

reduced youth bicycling fatalities by about 11 percent over the period 1990-2000. Carpenter and

Stehr (2011) replicate and update Grant and Rutner’s basic finding that youth bicycling fatalities

fell by about 9 percent from 1991-2005. Carpenter and Stehr also use data on parental reports of

child helmet use and cycling behaviors and high school youths’ self-reports of helmet use and

cycling behaviors in a triple differences framework (taking advantage of the fact that youths just

above a state’s helmet law age threshold are not subject to the law) to show that youth-targeted

helmet laws in the United States increased helmet use by youths but also significantly reduced

cycling participation by 3 to 4 percent. Finally, Chatterji and Markowitz (2015) use hospital-

level panel data and estimate that helmet laws are associated with reductions in bicycle-related



5
  There are active enforcement and education campaigns in various locations (e.g., PEI issues hundreds of tickets in
a month-long campaign called ‘Operation Headway’), but we do not have comprehensive information on their
timing or extent.

                                                         5
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


head injuries among children but increases in head injuries from other wheeled sports, also

pointing to likely substitution toward other unregulated activities.

        In contrast to the small number of studies in economics on the effects of bicycle helmet

laws, there are large public health and medical literatures that have examined the effects of

bicycle helmet laws – including several studies that have examined Canada. These studies are

too numerous to review individually here (see, for example, Hagel et al. 2006, LeBlanc et al.

2002, Karkhaneh et al. 2011, and others), but a few merit further discussion. For example, two

recent public health studies in Canada related provincial legislation to bicycle-related injury rates

using data on inpatient hospital stays. Dennis et al. (2013) find no independent effect of helmet

legislation on the rate of hospital admissions for cycling-related head injuries using data from

1994-2008. Teschke et al. (2015) similarly find that helmet legislation was not associated with

hospitalization rates for brain, head, scalp, skull, face, or neck injuries using data from 2006-

2011. Neither of these studies directly examines the underlying mechanisms (i.e., cycling and

helmet use behaviors).

        Foss and Bierness (2000) evaluated the effects of the British Columbia all-ages helmet

law in September 1996. They studied 17 communities in the summer of 1995 and 12 of those 17

communities in 1999 (i.e., 3 years after law adoption) and, using the physical observation

method, they found large increases in helmet use. Foss and Bierness also estimate that the

increases in helmet use increased to a similar degree across the (visually inferred) age

distribution, with possibly larger increases for adults estimated to be greater than 50 years of age.

An obvious limitation of physical observation studies is that estimates of characteristics like age

are likely to be imperfect, while other relevant characteristics such as education and the presence




                                                 6
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


of children in the person’s household are impossible to observe in this way. Our use of detailed

survey data helps us address these key questions.

        Finally, a recent study estimated the relationship between provincial helmet laws and

both helmet use and cycling in Canada using some of the same CCHS data we use below

(Dennis et al. 2010). They use one wave of CCHS helmet use data and find in that single cross-

section that mandatory all-age helmet laws and mandatory youth-only helmet laws were both

associated with increased helmet use among adults. They also use multiple waves of CCHS data

and find no evidence of cycling reductions in either cross-province comparisons or when

examining within-province policy changes.

        Our work complements and extends the prior literature in several key ways. First, and

most importantly, we provide the most comprehensive analysis of all-age and youth-targeted

helmet laws by taking an explicitly quasi-experimental approach for all cycling and helmet use

outcomes by relying on within-area adoptions of helmet laws to examine both helmet use and

cycling throughout the entire population of Canada over a two decade period. Second, we

incorporate earlier NPHS data that begins in 1994 in order to take advantage of a key provincial

helmet law adoption applying to all ages in September 1996 in the highly populated province of

British Columbia and another in Ontario in October 1995 that applied to youth only. Third, we

use our large sample sizes to separately examine whether helmet laws have heterogeneous

effects across demographic groups. Fourth, we examine more dimensions of cycling than in

prior work (e.g., intensive margin of cycling, participation in other types of exercise, and body

weight). Finally, we examine possible role-modeling effects by explicitly accounting for the role

of children in the household.




                                                7
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


3. Data Description and Research Design

We use two data sources to estimate the effects of mandatory helmet laws on helmet use and

bicycle riding behaviors. Our first data are restricted use versions of the National Population

Health Surveys (NPHS) from 1994 to 1999.6 The NPHS data are akin to the National Health

Interview Surveys in the United States and include information on demographic characteristics

and questions about a variety of health behaviors, including bicycling. We complement the

NPHS with data from the Canadian Community Health Surveys (CCHS) from 2000 to 2014.7

The NPHS provided both longitudinal and cross-sectional information in its first 3 cycles, but the

cross-sectional component of the NPHS was replaced by the CCHS. We use the NPHS in its

repeated cross-section form to take advantage of the fact that there were large provincial ‘buy-

ins’ in the 1996-97 NPHS that substantially increase sample size in key provinces such as

Ontario. Previous work has used the NPHS in a similar fashion (see, for example, Stabile et al.

2006 and Carpenter and Eisenberg 2009).

        The NPHS and CCHS contain several questions about helmet use, bicycle riding, and

other types of exercise that we use to create key outcome variables. Specifically, the surveys

include a section on Physical Activities in which respondents are asked: “Now I’d like to ask you

about some of your physical activities. To begin with, I’ll be dealing with physical activities not

related to work, that is, leisure time activities. Have you done any of the following in the past 3

months?” The interviewer then reads a list that includes several activities such as “walking for

exercise”, “gardening, yard work”, “swimming”, “bicycling”, “popular or social dance”, “home



6
  This period reflects three waves of data: 1994-1995, 1996-1997, and 1998-1999.
7
  This period reflects multiple waves: Cycle 1.1 (fielded in 2000-2001), Cycle 1.2 (fielded in 2002), Cycle 2.1
(fielded in 2003), Cycle 3.1 (fielded in 2005), CCHS 2007-2008, CCHS 2009-2010, CCHS 2011-2012 and CCHS
2013-2014. Unfortunately, there was a major redesign of the CCHS in 2015 and the reference window for the
exercise questions was change from “previous 3 months” to “previous year”. Subsequently, the reference window
for the helmet use question was also impacted. Therefore, we do not use the 2015-2016 CCHS for our analysis.

                                                      8
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


exercises”, “jogging/running”, and others; the interviewer is instructed to mark all that apply to

the respondent. For each activity the respondent indicates “yes” to, the interviewer asks two

follow up questions: “In the past 3 months, how many times did you participate in [the

activity]?” and “About how much time did you usually spend on each occasion?” No response

options are read aloud, but the interviewer is instructed to record responses in the following

categories: “1 to 15 minutes”, “16 to 30 minutes”, “31 to 60 minutes”, and “more than an hour”.

Importantly, respondents are asked only to list activities for this first set of outcomes that were

explicitly for leisure-related purposes.          Regarding helmet use, if the respondent indicated

“bicycling” as a leisure time activity in the first set of physical activity questions, the individual

was then asked: “When riding a bicycle how often did you wear a helmet?” The following

response options are read aloud: “Always”, “Most of the time”, “Rarely”, and “Never”.8

        We create several bicycling outcomes based on these questions. First, we create an

indicator variable called Any Past 3 Month Cycling which equals one if the respondent reported

any leisure cycling in the past 3 months (and zero otherwise). We then combine the information

from the questions about the number of times of leisure cycling and the length of cycling on each

occasion (using midpoints of ranges and assigning a value of 1.5 hours to respondents who say

they cycle for more than an hour on each occasion) to create an outcome variable representing

cycling intensity called Total # Minutes Leisure Cycling Past 3 Months. We also create two

helmet use outcomes based on responses to the question about frequency of helmet use. The first

is Frequent Helmet Use that equals one if the respondent reported wearing a helmet “always” or



8
  Individuals in some survey waves were also asked about non-leisure cycling such as cycling to school or work.
Unfortunately, the wording of these questions changed over time in ways that prohibit us from analyzing them in a
quasi-experimental framework. For the survey waves where the number of minutes of non-leisure cycling are
calculated using the analogous questions used for the number of minutes of leisure cycling (CCHS 2007 to 2014),
we estimate that approximately 89 and 96 percent of total minutes cycled for adults and youth respectively are
leisure-related. Thus, leisure cycling represents the vast majority of total cycling.

                                                       9
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


“most of the time” when riding a bicycle (and zero otherwise). The second is Always Helmet

Use that equals one if the respondent reported always wearing a helmet (and zero otherwise).

Throughout, we restrict attention to individuals in the NPHS and CCHS with no missing data on

the demographic characteristics or key helmet use and cycling questions.9 We also drop a small

number of individuals interviewed within the first three months of the law being in effect since

the law would fall partway through the reference window for cycling and helmet use.

        The CCHS and NPHS data also allow us direct measures of the possible unintended

adverse consequences of mandatory helmet laws, as prior work has found that youth helmet laws

reduced youth cycling in the US. In addition to the cycling outcomes, we also examine other

exercise, weight, and obesity outcomes as further tests of these possible unintended

consequences. We discuss the exercise outcomes below, but we construct them in an identical

fashion to the extensive and intensive margins of cycling as described above. For body weight

we use the standard body mass index variable (which equals weight in kilograms divided by

height in meters, squared).10

        Over the NPHS survey period (1994-1999) three Canadian provinces instituted all-age

mandatory bicycle helmet laws (New Brunswick on December 15, 1995; British Columbia on

September 3, 1996; and Nova Scotia on July 1, 1997). Over the CCHS survey period (2000 to

2014) one Canadian province adopted a mandatory bicycle helmet law for all ages (Prince

Edward Island on July 5, 2003). A few towns in Newfoundland and Labrador adopted all-age

9
  In the NPHS, individuals age 0 to 11 are sampled but are dropped from our analysis since they are not asked
several key questions. Individuals age 0 to 11 are not sampled in the CCHS. In the CCHS 1.2, individuals 12 to 14
are also not sampled.
10
   If the helmet law did discourage someone from cycling completely (and assuming no equivalent substitution to
another exercise), there could be a substantial decrease in calories expended over the year. For example, calculating
a few hypothetical figures for calories burned (https://www.bicycling.com/health-nutrition/a20046377/cycling-
calories-burned-calculator/) using the mean number of minutes cycled for an adult cyclist from Table 2, for a 160
pound individual, this would suggest that depending on the pace, they could see a decline in annual calories
expended by 17,013 (slow pace/<10 MPH), 25,520 (medium pace/10-12 MPH), 42,592 (fast pace/14-16 MPH) or
68,112 (very fast pace/>20 MPH).

                                                        10
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


helmet laws, with the provincial capital city St John’s in June 1994, Corner Brook in May 2008

and Conception Bay South in June 2010.11 We account for these local laws in the policy coding.

As well, while the Yukon does not have a law, the capital city, Whitehorse adopted an all-age

law in July 2003.12

        Three provinces over our sample period also adopted youth-only helmet laws similar to

those adopted more commonly in the United States: Ontario did so in 1995, Alberta adopted a

youth-only helmet law in 2002, and Manitoba’s youth-only helmet law came into effect in 2013

(see Table 1).13      Our confidential NPHS and CCHS data provide us information on exact

interview date (which we need to precisely match the timing of provincial helmet legislation) and

respondent age in years. This within-province variation allows us to evaluate the effects of all-

age bicycle helmet laws in Canada in the same basic framework as for previous US analyses.

        We begin by estimating two-way fixed effects models separately for youths age 12-17

and for adults ages 18-64. This amounts to the following linear probability model for binary

outcomes and OLS for continuous outcomes:

     (1) Yipt = β0 + β1Xipt + β2(All-Age Bicycle Helmet Law)pt + β3(Youth-Only Bicycle Helmet

        Law)pt + β4Zpt +β5Pp + β6Tt + εipt

where Yipt are the outcomes of interest for individual i in province p in year t. Xipt is a vector of

individual characteristics that includes: age, sex, race, education, and marital status. Zpt is a

vector of province/time varying covariates including the provincial unemployment rate and an


11
   In April 2015, just after the period covered by our analysis, Newfoundland and Labrador adopted a provincial
wide all-age helmet law.
12
   Yorkton, Saskatchewan also has had an all-age helmet law since 1995, and North Battleford, Saskatchewan also
has had an all-age helmet law since October 14, 2003.
13
   Yellowknife (the capital city of the Northwest Territories) introduced a youth helmet law at the end of the period
covered by our data (July 2014) but provided a 6-month grace period, so we do not include this law. St. Albert,
Alberta and Côte Saint-Luc, Quebec are the only locations that went from a youth law to an all-age law. We do not
include Westmount or Côte Saint-Luc as having helmet laws in the estimates presented since they are subdivisions
in the core of Montreal. The overall estimates are not impacted by this restriction.

                                                        11
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


indicator for whether the individual lives in a place that adopted a public bike-share program

such as Bixi14 and when a provincial graduated license policy came into effect. Pp and Tt are a

full set of province and year dummies, respectively. Though not reported in equation (1), we

also include month of interview dummies in all models to account for seasonality in bicycling

and other physical activities. In some models we also allow for province-specific linear time

trends. All-Age Bicycle Helmet Law is an indicator variable equal to one if the respondent lives

in a province that had a mandatory helmet law covering individuals of all ages over the previous

3 months, and Youth-Only Bicycle Helmet Law is defined analogously.15 The coefficient of

interest, β2, captures the relative effect of the mandatory all-age helmet law on outcomes use by

comparing within-province changes in outcomes for individuals in helmet adopting provinces

coinciding with the law taking effect to the associated changes in outcomes for individuals in

provinces that did not experience a policy change in that year. β3 shows the corresponding effect

of the Youth-Only Bicycle Helmet Law.16 Note that the All-Age and Youth-Only law indicators

are mutually exclusive. We report two p-values for each core estimate: one reflecting provincial

level clustering and one using the Wild bootstrap procedure with Rademacher weights with 1499

bootstraps to account for the small number of clusters (Cameron et al. 2008; MacKinnon and

Webb 2017).




14
   These include: Montreal (Bixi in operation since May 12, 2009), Toronto (BikeShare in operation from 2001 to
2006; Bixi in operation since May 3, 2011), Edmonton (Peoples’ Pedal in operation from 2005 to 2008), and
Ottawa-Gatineau (Bixi in operation since June 2009 with a temporary stoppage in service). Hamilton began a bike-
share program in 2015, and Vancouver began one in 2016.
15
   This time window is chosen to account for the wording of the question.
16
   Unfortunately given the timing of the policy variation relative to the timing of our data and the small number of
provinces adopting helmet laws, a more flexible event study specification is not informative in this context. We do
explore robustness to controlling for leads of the helmet law policy variable, however, and we describe those
analyses below.

                                                        12
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


4. Results

a. Descriptive Patterns

Figure 1 presents the age profile of cycling and helmet use in Canada from our NPHS and CCHS

data. It shows that cycling declines with age, while the likelihood adults report always wearing a

helmet while cycling is low (around or below ten percent) and relatively stable across the adult

population. Figure 2 shows trends in these same key outcomes over time from 1994 to 2014 for

12-17 and 18-64 year olds.        It also indicates that population rates of leisure cycling have

remained relatively flat over the sample period while the proportion of children and adults who

report always wearing helmet while cycling has increased.

        Table 2 presents means of key variables for the NPHS and CCHS, respectively. About

23 percent of adults and 49 percent of children age 12-17 report leisure cycling. On average,

adults report about 203 minutes of cycling (i.e., about 3.5 hours) in the past three months, while

children report 625 minutes; among cyclists, the average number of minutes cycled is 880

minutes for adults and 1268 minutes for children. Among cyclists, 49 percent of adults and 35

percent of children report never wearing a helmet when they rode a bike, while only around 35

percent of adult and child cyclists report that they always wore a helmet. About 18 percent of

individuals live in a province that had an all-age helmet law, while about 47 percent live in a

province that had a youth-only helmet law.

        Figures 3a and 3b show the provincial specific trends for bicycling participation and

helmet use among cyclists for the four most populous provinces that adopted laws. Three of the

provinces adopted the youth-only bicycle helmet law (Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario), while

British Columbia adopted an all-age law. The dashed line presents the results for the 12 to 17




                                                13
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


year olds while the solid lines present the results for 18 to 64 year olds. We include a vertical

line to indicate when the given provincial specific helmet law was put in place.

        From Figure 3a, there does not appear to be any evidence that either the youth-only or

all-age helmet laws reduced cycling participation.17 Conversely, Figure 3b shows a large change

in helmet use among cyclists when a law comes into effect that impacts cyclists for the targeted

age group. While there is a general upward trend in helmet use among adults in places where no

all-age helmet laws are implemented, there is a large discrete increase in British Columbia when

the all-age law comes into effect and not much subsequent increase in helmet use after the law

comes into effect. The increase in helmet in the few months just prior to the helmet law for

adults in British Columbia may be due to people purchasing (and using) helmets in response to

the law coming into effect.18

b. Main Effects on Cycling and Helmet Use, Robustness, and Heterogeneity

In Table 3 we present the basic difference-in-differences results regarding the effects of all-age

and youth-only bicycle helmet laws on cycling and helmet use of 12-17 year olds in Canada

using the NPHS and CCHS data. In the presence of year and province dummies (and linear

province trends in some models), we are effectively identifying the effects of helmet laws from

the various provinces that adopted helmet laws over our sample period: Alberta, British

Columbia, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Ontario, and Prince Edward Island. The

format of Table 3 is as follows. Each column is a separate regression and shows the coefficient

estimates on the All-Age Bicycle Helmet Law and Youth-Only Bicycle Helmet Law indicators



17
   For Manitoba, given the timing of the youth-only law, we split the 2013 CCHS and code the first four months
with 2012 and the remaining relevant months as 2013.
18
   Note that the all-age law in British Columbia came into effect during the second cycle of the NPHS. For adults,
the sample size was large enough to code a separate mean in the months just prior to the law coming into place.
Conversely, for youth, the sample size was too small so we include these observations with the first cycle NPHS
mean.

                                                       14
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


in a difference-in-differences model. In the odd numbered columns we show estimates from

models that include all the demographic characteristics (i.e., the X vector), the province-time

varying controls (e.g., Bixi, provincial unemployment rates), and the province and year

dummies, and in the even numbered columns we add linear province-specific time trends. We

also report above the relevant coefficient estimate the mean of the outcome in the three years

prior to helmet law adoption, and below the coefficient estimate we report the implied

percentage change as a proportion of the pre-reform mean. As noted above, we report p-values

using province-level clustering of the standard errors in parentheses and p-values using the wild

bootstrap with 2-point Rademacher weights and 1,499 replications in brackets.19 For the first

two tables with regressions estimates (Tables 3 and 4) we also show the p-values using the wild

bootstrap with 6-point weights in curly braces to demonstrate how similar they are to the p-

values from the wild bootstrap with 2-point Rademacher weights (see Webb 2014). However, to

conserve space, we do not present them in subsequent tables. We examine cycling outcomes in

columns 1-4 and helmet use outcomes in columns 5-8.

        The results in columns 1-4 of Table 3 for youths indicate that helmet laws in Canada had

at most modest effects on cycling behaviors of youths. Specifically, we estimate in columns 1

and 2 that all-age helmet laws are not significantly related to leisure cycling participation of 12-

17 year olds, and in fact the point estimate is positive in sign, suggesting the all-age helmet laws

are associated with more youth cycling, though neither estimate is statistically significant. In

contrast, there is some evidence that the youth-targeted helmet laws reduced youth cycling by

about 2.4 percentage points – consistent with prior work on similarly policies in the United

States (Carpenter and Stehr 2011) – but the statistical significance of the estimate is sensitive to


19
  We also present p-values from F-tests for the main youth estimates to test if the All-Age Bicycle Helmet Laws
and Youth-Only Bicycle Helmet Laws have similar impacts on youth cycling and helmet use.

                                                      15
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


clustering on province versus implementing the wild bootstrap procedure and to the inclusion of

linear province trends.      The point estimate suggests a five percent reduction in cycling

participation for youths relative to the pre-reform mean, which is nearly identical to prior

estimates for the United States (Carpenter and Stehr 2011). Turning to cycling intensity for 12-

17 year olds in columns 3 and 4 we find no evidence that all-age helmet laws were associated

with statistically or economically significant reductions in youth cycling.         As with cycling

participation, we do find some evidence that youth-targeted helmet laws were associated with

modest reductions in cycling (a 14 percent effect relative to the pre-reform mean for the youth-

only helmet law in column 4 with linear provincial trends), though none of the estimates are

statistically significant. Overall, we find in columns 1-4 of Table 3 that all-age helmet laws did

not adversely affect youth cycling and that youth-only helmet laws may have been associated

with modest declines in youth cycling, though those estimates are not precise.

        Turning to youth helmet use in columns 5-8 of Table 3 we find a more consistent story.

Given the lack of systematic reductions in cycling in columns 1-4, the models in columns 5-8

restrict attention to youths who report any past three month leisure cycling, though results are

qualitatively similar if we include non-cyclists and examine effects on population helmet use

behaviors (see Appendix Table 1). Specifically, we estimate that both types of helmet laws were

associated with statistically significant increases in the likelihood that youths in Canada age 12-

17 reported wearing helmets when cycling. These effects obtained for both types of helmet laws,

are not sensitive to using the wild bootstrap, and are not sensitive to inclusion of linear provincial

trends. Moreover, the effects are large: all-age helmet laws in column 6 with provincial linear

trends are associated with a 31.6 percentage point increase in the likelihood a youth age 12-17

reports always wearing a helmet when cycling. Relative to the pre-reform mean of 17.6 percent,



                                                 16
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


this is a 180 percent effect. For youth-only laws in the same specification we estimate that the

helmet requirements are associated with a statistically significant 24.3 percentage point increase.

Relative to a pre-reform mean for this policy of 23.9 percent, this is a 100 percent effect.

Overall, the patterns in Table 3 confirm prior work using data from the US: youth-targeted

helmet laws might modestly reduce youth cycling, but they also induce very large increases in

youth helmet use.20 Moreover, the patterns in Table 3 uncover new evidence about how all-age

helmet laws affect youths: those policies have no effects on youth cycling and also induce very

large increases in youth helmet use.

        We turn to the main results for adult cycling and helmet use behaviors in Table 4, the

format of which follows Table 3 exactly. The results in columns 1-4 for cycling behavior of

adults return no systematic evidence that all-age or youth-targeted helmet laws reduced adult

cycling participation or intensity.21 While one of the estimates is statistically significant using

province-level clustered standard errors (also suggesting a modest five percent reduction in

cycling relative to the pre-reform mean), it is not robust to the treatment of linear provincial

trends or to the wild bootstrap. We similarly find no evidence of decreases in cycling intensity –

defined as the total number of minutes the person reported cycling for leisure in the past 3

months – in either column 3 or column 4. Thus, we conclude that helmet laws in Canada did not

greatly affect population cycling behaviors.

        In columns 5-8 of Table 4 we present results for adult helmet use. We find that all-age

helmet laws significantly increased the likelihood an adult age 18-64 reports always wearing a


20
   The p-values in Table 3 from the F-test for the All-Age and Youth-only laws coefficients being equal indicate that
we cannot reject the null hypothesis.
21
   Although our primarily focus in the models predicting adult behaviors is on the all-age helmet laws, it is not
implausible that a youth-targeted helmet law could also meaningfully affect adult cycling if parents and children
enjoy bicycle riding together and youth-targeted helmet laws reduce youth cycling (i.e., if the cycling effects
observed in Table 3 are real). Again, however, we primarily expect that adult cycling and helmet use behaviors will
primarily respond to all-age helmet laws as opposed to youth-targeted helmet laws.

                                                        17
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


helmet while cycling by about 19.7 percentage points, or about 52 percent relative to pre-reform

levels. Appendix Table 2 shows that including non-cyclists to examine effects on population

helmet use returns qualitatively similar patterns. For youth-only helmet laws, we find smaller

effects at increasing adult helmet use (possibly consistent with role modeling behavior, which we

return to below), though these results are generally not robust to inclusion of linear provincial

trends. In columns 7-8 for Frequent Helmet Use we find very similar patterns. Taken together,

the results in Table 4 indicate that Canada’s ‘all-age’ helmet laws significantly increased adult

helmet use without causing major reductions in cycling.

         In Tables 5 and 6 (for youths and adults, respectively) we investigate the robustness of

the main findings from Tables 3 and 4 for the primary outcome Always Wears Helmet. We

reprint the baseline estimate from the model without provincial linear trends in column 1 of

Tables 5 and 6; we choose the model without trends as our preferred baseline specification

because those estimates on helmet use were smaller in magnitude (i.e., more conservative). In

column 2 of Tables 5 and 6 we report estimates from an augmented variant of equation (1) in

which we add a control for an indicator variable for one year prior to the all-age helmet law that

is intended to test for policy endogeneity and the validity of the parallel trends assumption.

Column 3 of Tables 5 and 6 add linear province trends to the model with the one-year policy

lead. Columns 4 to 6 of Tables 5 and 6 report results from models where we drop each of the

three highly populated provinces that adopted helmet laws over our sample period: Alberta,

British Columbia, and Ontario.22



22
   Results where we drop the less populated provinces were also very similar and are available upon request.
Similar robustness analyses for the findings on youth and adult cycling behaviors are provided in Appendix Tables 3
and 4, respectively. Those analyses show some evidence that the modest reduction in youth cycling associated with
youth helmet laws do not survive the exclusion of some of the highly populated provinces. Moreover, we estimate
statistical significance on some of the policy lead indicators, suggesting potential violation of the parallel trends
assumption required for identification in these models.

                                                         18
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


        The results in Table 5 for youth helmet use confirm that the effects of both types of

helmet laws at increasing youth helmet use are highly robust. In column 2 of Table 5 we find

that the one-year lead coefficients are both very small in magnitude relative to the main policy

effects of all-age and youth-only helmet laws, which remain large and statistically significant.

Column 3 of Table 5 shows that this same pattern is unaffected by the inclusion of linear

province time trends. Columns 4 to 6 of Table 5 show that the baseline estimates are not

appreciably changed when we drop Alberta, British Columbia, or Ontario from the models.

Turning to the robustness of the helmet use effects for adults in Table 6 we find qualitatively

identical patterns to those in Table 5 for youths, further demonstrating that the effects of all-age

helmet laws at increasing adult helmet use in Canada are robust.

        In Tables 7 and 8 for youths and adults, respectively, we explore treatment effect

heterogeneity. We again present results from the two-way fixed effects specification without

provincial trends, as these estimates for helmet use increases were smaller (i.e., more

conservative) in Tables 3 and 4.23 Each column is from a separate regression where the outcome

is Always Helmet Use. For youths we examine males vs. females in columns 1 and 2, urban vs.

rural residents in columns 3-4, and winter versus summer months in columns 5-6. The results

indicate that helmet laws had broad-based effects at increasing helmet use among youths, with

somewhat larger effects during the winter months.

        For adults in Table 8 we examine more sources of heterogeneity. Specifically, we

examine 18-35 vs. 36-64 year olds in columns 1 and 2; males vs. females in columns 3 and 4;

adults with at least a university (bachelor’s) degree vs. some postsecondary education but less

than a university (bachelor’s) degree vs. high school degree or less in columns 5 to 7; urban vs.


23
  Appendix Tables 5 and 6 for youths and adults, respectively, present heterogeneity analyses for the cycling
outcomes which are generally null, with one notable exception we discuss below.

                                                     19
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


rural residents in columns 8 and 9, and winter vs. summer months in columns 10 and 11. We

find that helmet use increases induced by all-age helmet laws were much larger for 18-35 year

olds than for 36-64 year olds in columns 1 and 2. This could partly reflect an effect of cohort (as

opposed to age) since the older people faced fewer public health and safety regulations when

they were younger, and thus it may be more difficult to get them to comply with policies such as

mandatory all-age helmet laws.           We find very similar estimated effect sizes by gender in

columns 3 and 4. Results by education in columns 5 to 7 reveal clear evidence of a gradient in

the effects of helmet laws: all-age helmet laws had effects that are larger for less-educated adults.

Columns 8 and 9 reveal similar estimated effects by urban vs. rural status, though in proportional

terms the helmet law effects are larger for rural residents where helmet use rates were lower in

the pre-reform period. Finally, columns 10 and 11 reveal noticeably larger increases in helmet

use in the winter months compared to the summer months in response to helmet laws. Appendix

Table 6, however, also reveals that the one source of treatment effect heterogeneity that returns

economically and statistically meaningful evidence of cycling reductions in response to all-age

helmet laws is the winter vs. summer distinction: all-age helmet laws are estimated to reduce the

probability adults report leisure cycling in the winter months by nearly two percentage points off

a base of 17.8 percent, or an 11 percent effect. In results not reported we continued to find

helmet use increases were larger in the winter months even when we examined effects on

population-wide helmet use (i.e., when we coded non-cyclists as zero for Always Helmet Use

and added them back into the regression model in column 10 of Table 8).

c. Effects on other activities and weight

In Tables 9 and 10 for youths and adults, respectively, we investigate possible substitution

effects to other types of leisure-related activities such as walking, jogging/running, and/or home



                                                   20
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


exercise, as well as population weight. For youths in Table 9 we find relatively consistent

evidence that youth helmet laws were associated with significant reductions in recent

participation in both walking and jogging. These patterns are somewhat surprising since they

suggest that youths did not substitute toward walking or jogging in response to the reduced

cycling induced by helmet laws. Instead, the patterns are more consistent with overall reductions

in these types of physical activities and/or that youth cycling and other types of youth exercise

are complements.      Despite this, we do not estimate meaningful changes in youth weight

associated with youth helmet laws.

        For adults in Table 10 we present a slightly different set of results. Specifically, we show

the intensive margin (i.e., # minutes) of various exercise activities separately for the winter

months (October to March) and for the summer months (April to September). The motivation

for doing so is that the cycling heterogeneity effects in Appendix Table 6 revealed fairly strong

evidence that adult cycling participation fell in the winter months in response to all-age helmet

laws. Columns 1-2 of Table 10 show that this same pattern observed for cycling participation

also obtains for cycling intensity for adults: all-age helmet laws are associated with significant

reductions in the number of minutes adults report leisure cycling during the winter months by

about fifteen minutes in the past three months, or about 11 percent relative to the pre-reform

mean. In contrast, the estimated coefficient for the summer months is positive and sizable

(which might indicate cross-year substitution in activity type), but it is not statistically

significant. In the later columns of Table 10 we present the associated intensive margin effects

by winter/summer months for walking (columns 3 and 4), jogging (columns 5 and 6), and home

exercise (columns 7 and 8). Notably, there is some evidence that all-age helmet laws are

associated with significantly more jogging minutes during the summer months but not during the



                                                21
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


winter months. There is also evidence that all-age helmet laws are associated with significantly

more home exercise minutes during the winter months but not the summer months. This pattern

is consistent with cycling and home exercise being substitutes. Finally, when we examine

population weight in columns 9 and 10 we estimate that all-age helmet laws were not associated

with meaningful changes in weight during the winter months but were associated with significant

reductions in weight during the summer months. Again, this could reflect cross-year substitution

of types of physical activity in response to helmet laws.

        Overall, the patterns in Tables 9 and 10 do not suggest there were major unintended

adverse consequences of helmet laws with respect to objective measures of health, though there

is modest evidence of changes in related activities: youths seem to do less of many types of

exercise activities in response to youth helmet laws, while adults engage in some cross-activity

(and possibly cross-year) substitution in response to all-age helmet laws.

d. Role-modeling effects

Finally, in Table 11 we investigate whether there is evidence for role-modeling effects by

examining whether the effects of helmet laws vary by the presence of children in the household.

One reason for investigating the role of children is the well-documented correlation between

adult and child helmet use. If these correlations reflect role model effects, then it would be

interesting to know whether all-age or youth-targeted helmet laws induce larger effects for adults

with kids in the household relative to adults without kids in the household. Of particular interest

to us is the fact that three provinces – Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario – adopted youth-only

helmet laws over our sample period (Alberta in May 2002, Manitoba in May 2013 and Ontario in

October 1995). In the presence of strong role model effects we might expect that parents’ helmet

use behaviors improve even when they are not directly targeted by the helmet law policy in



                                                22
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


question in order to set positive examples for children about the importance of helmet use,

compliance with the law, or both.

         The format of Table 11 is as follows: each column is from a separate regression, and we

focus on the Always Helmet Use outcome in all models. Because of our focus on adults with

children in Table 11, we restrict attention to 25-50 year olds (reasoning that few 50-64 year olds

will have children in the targeted age group). Column 1 reports results for this restricted sample

(25-50 year olds) and confirms that this sample restriction has no meaningful effect on the

bottom line conclusion from Table 4 that all-age helmet laws significantly increased helmet use.

Columns 2 and 3 of Table 11 examine the role of children directly by presenting estimates for

25-50 year olds separately by whether the respondent has no children age 0-11 in the household

(column 2) or has any children age 0-11 in the household (column 3).24 Columns 4 and 5 take

the sample from column 3 and separate it into adult respondents with only younger children in

the household (any children age 0-5) versus adult respondents with only older children in the

household (any children age 6-11). Finally, columns 6 and 7 report results for adults with any

children age 0-11 in the household separately for male respondents who are likely to be fathers

(column 6) and female respondents who are likely to be mothers (column 7).25

         The results in Table 11 offer mixed evidence on the possibility of role model effects in

the effects of helmet laws. Perhaps the strongest evidence in favor of role model effects would

be that adults with children in the household wear helmets more frequently when their children

are required to do so but they are not (i.e., youth-only helmet laws would significantly increase


24
   Due to data limitations, we cannot separately identify people with children age 12-17 in the household. However,
the ‘no children age 0-11 in the household’ results are similar to estimates if we drop households with anyone
younger than 25 in the household.
25
   A limitation of this analysis is that although we observe the age-profile of cycling starting at age 12 (see Figure 1),
we do not observe the age-profile of cycling for 0-11 year olds. Thus, the 0-5 versus 6-11 year old heterogeneity
should primarily be thought of as descriptive. We also do not observe the gender of the children in the household,
which precludes us from analyzing interesting parent gender-by-child gender interactions.

                                                           23
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


helmet use for parents but not childless adults). We do not see strong evidence for this pattern in

Table 11: while there is some evidence that 25-50 year olds are more likely to report always

wearing a helmet while cycling after youth-only laws are adopted, the effect sizes do not differ

meaningfully by presence of children age 0-11 in the household. We do, however, observe in

columns 2 and 3 of Table 11 that all-age helmet laws are associated with larger estimated

increases in helmet use for adults with children in the household than for adults without children

in the household: a 42 percent effect for the former group versus a 32 percent effect for the latter

group. That is, the effects of all-age laws are a third larger for adults with children age 0-11 in

the household than for adults without children age 0-11 in the household.26                         Finally, the

remaining columns of Table 11 show that there is not meaningful heterogeneity by the age of the

child in the household (since helmet use estimates for adults with children age 0-5 in the

household versus age 6-11 in the household are similar in size), nor is there a consistent story for

differences between male and female adult respondents (i.e., likely fathers versus likely

mothers).



5. Discussion and Conclusion

The results above show that laws requiring mandatory helmet use for individuals of all ages in

Canadian provinces significantly increased helmet use among adults. To our knowledge, these

are the first quasi-experimental results showing that all-age helmet laws can be effective at

increasing helmet use.         We estimate that all-age helmet laws significantly increased the

probability that adults report always wearing helmets while bicycling by about 20 percentage


26
   Note that due to data limitations we cannot directly observe whether there are children age 12-17 in the
household, so the ‘no children age 0-11 in the household’ sample could include adults with children age 12-17 but
not 0-11 in the household, which would bias us against finding role model effects if they also existed for slightly
older children age 12-17.

                                                        24
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


points, or by about 50 to 65 percent relative to pre-reform means. These effects on helmet use

are larger for 18-35 year olds, less educated adults, and adults with children in the household.

We find little systematic evidence that all-age helmet laws in Canada induced population-wide

reductions in cycling. We find no effects on other potentially related leisure-related physical

activities, nor do we find adverse effects on population weight. Overall our findings suggest that

all-age helmet laws can be effective at increasing population helmet use with relatively little

adverse effects on cycling.

        There are some important limitations to the current study that should be noted. First, we

did not control for the arguably important effects of enforcement, outreach, or media campaigns

because we could not find objective measures of such efforts by province and year. The concern

with, say, outreach is that adoption of a mandatory helmet law could be correlated with other

state efforts to increase helmet use such as “helmet giveaways”. Although this is a limitation

shared by nearly all the other papers in this literature as well, we cannot rule out that the effects

of helmet laws on use are upward biased by failing to control for outreach efforts by provinces

with helmet laws, or downward bias if provinces that do not have helmet laws carry out other

efforts to increase helmet use. Second, our outcomes are based on self-reports, and it is plausible

that the true behavioral responses are smaller than the estimated effect we estimate here due to

desirability bias. We do find some differences in the effects of helmet use across demographic

groups, however, and we do not have strong reason to believe that the misreporting should vary

by, say, season (where we find quite large differences in helmet use effects). Third, there may be

slippage between the respondent’s province of residence and the province where her cycling

takes place. All of the maritime provinces (New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward

Island) have all-age helmet laws, and these are popular summer vacation destinations for



                                                 25
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


residents of other provinces.      This may lead to measurement error, particularly during the

summer months.

        Despite these limitations, our results provide the literature’s first evidence that all-age

helmet laws can significantly increase helmet use among adults.         As more places actively

consider adopting all-age bicycle helmet laws, our findings provide important new evidence that

these public health improvements can be obtained with little adverse health effects.




                                                26
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


REFERENCES

American Association of Neurological Surgeons (2018). “Sports-related Head Injury.”
      http://www.aans.org/en/Patients/Neurosurgical-Conditions-and-Treatments/Sports-
      related-Head-Injury. Last accessed May 10, 2018.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller (2008). “Bootstrap-based improvements
      for inference with clustered errors,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 414-427.

Carpenter, C. and D. Eisenberg (2009). “The Effects of Sunday Sales Restrictions on Overall
      and Day-Specific Alcohol Consumption: Evidence from Canada,” Journal of Studies on
      Alcohol and Drugs, 70(1): 126-133.

Carpenter, C. and M. Stehr (2011). “Intended and Unintended Consequences of Youth Bicycle
      Helmet Laws,” Journal of Law and Economics, 54(2): 305-324.

Chatterji, Pinka and Sara Markowitz (2015). “Effects of Bicycle Helmet Laws on Children’s
       Injuries,” Health Economics, 24(1): 26-40.

Dennis, J., B. Potter, T. Ramsay, and R. Zarychanski (2010). “The effects of provincial bicycle
       helmet legislation on helmet use and bicycle ridership in Canada,” Injury Prevention, 16:
       219-224.

Dennis, Jessica, Tim Ramsay, Alexis F. Turgeon, and Ryan Zarychanski (2013). “Helmet
       legislation and admissions to hospital for cycling related head injuries in Canadian
       provinces and territories: interrupted time series analysis,” BMJ 2013; 346: f2674.

Foss, Robert D. and Douglas J. Bierness (2000). “Bicycle Helmet Use in British Columbia:
       Effects of the Helmet Use Law,” working paper of the UNC Highway Safety Research
       Center and the Traffic Injury Research Foundation.                    Available at:
       http://www.hsrc.unc.edu/pdf/2000/bc_rpt.pdf. Last accessed September 19, 2013.

Fucoloro, Tom (2011). “With bike share on the horizon, it’s time to rethink King County’s adult
       helmet         law,”       Seattle        Bike        Blog,        available       here:
       http://www.seattlebikeblog.com/2011/08/24/bike-sharing-is-coming-to-the-northwest-
       but-seattles-helmet-laws-get-in-the-way/. Accessed May 9, 2014.

Grant, D. and S. Rutner (2004). “The Effect of Bicycle Helmet Legislation on Bicycling
       Fatalities,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 23(3): 595-611.

Hagel, B., J. Rizkallah, A. Lamy, K. Belton, G. Jhangri, N. Cherry, and B. Rowe (2006).
       “Bicycle helmet prevalence two years after the introduction of mandatory use legislation
       for under 18 year olds in Alberta, Canada,” Injury Prevention, 12: 262-265.

Halsey, Ashley (2013). “Md. proposal mandating bike helmets gets a cold shoulder from
       cyclists.” The Washington Post February 7, 2013.

                                              27
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


Karkhaneh, Mohammad, Brian H. Rowe, L. Duncan Saunders, Don Voaklander, and Brent
      Hagel (2011). “Bicycle helmet use after the introduction of all ages helmet legislation in
      an urban community in Alberta, Canada,” Canadian Journal of Public Health, 102(2):
      134-138.

LeBlanc, John C, Tricia L Beattie, and Christopher Culligan (2002). “Effect of legislation on the
      use of bicycle helmets,” CMAJ, 166(5): 592-595.

MacKinnon, J. and M. Webb (2017). “Wild Bootstrap Inference for Wildly Different Cluster
     Sizes,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 32, 233-254.

Peltzman, S. (1975). “The effects of automobile safety regulations,” Journal of Political
      Economy, 83: 677-725.

San Francisco Chronicle (2015). “Bill to require bike helmets intrigues but needs work.” San
       Francisco Chronicle Editorial, February 17, 2015.

Stabile, M., Laporte, A., and P. Coyte (2006). “Household responses to public home care
        programs,” Journal of Health Economics, 25: 674-701.

Statista (2018). “Number of cyclists/bike riders within the last 12 months in the United States
        from       spring       2008         to      spring      2017       (in       millions).”
        https://www.statista.com/statistics/227415/number-of-cyclists-and-bike-riders-usa/. Last
        accessed May 10, 2018.

Teschke, K., M Koehoom, H Shun and J. Dennis (2015). “Bicycling injury hospitalization rates
      in Canadian jurisdictions: analyses examining associations with helmet legislation and
      mode share,” British Medical Journal Open, 5(11).

Vancouver Sun (2012). “Helmet law may hamper bike plan,” June 22, 2012.

Webb, M. (2014). “Reworking Wild Bootstrap Based Inference for Clustered Errors,” QED
      Working Paper 1315.




                                               28
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


Figure 1: Age profile of bicycling participation for leisure and helmet use, 12 to 64 year
olds NPHS and CCHS 1994 to 2014




Notes: Conditions on province of residence, with Ontario as the default category.




                                               29
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


Figure 2: Trends in bicycling participation and helmet use, 12 to 17 and 18 to 64 year olds
NPHS and CCHS, 1994 to 2014




Note: With controls for province of residence. Default category Ontario.




                                               30
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


Figure 3a: Provincial trends in bicycling participation, 12 to 17 and 18 to 64 year olds
NPHS and CCHS, 1994 to 2014




                                             31
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


Figure 3b: Provincial trends in helmet use, 12 to 17 and 18 to 64 year olds NPHS and
CCHS, 1994 to 2014




                                            32
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


                                               Table 1:
                                    Bicycle Helmet Laws in Canada
Province or City                           Ages Covered                        Effective Date
Newfoundlanda                                   All                             April 1, 2015
  Channel-Port aux Basquesb,f                  <=12                            October 1, 1996
  Conception Bay Southc                         All                             June 16, 2010
  City of Corner Brooke                         All                              May 5, 2008
  Grand Falls-Windsord,g                        All                             June 15, 2002
  Holyroodd,g                                   All                           December 1, 1994
  Mount Pearld,g                               <=12                                  1994
  Paradised                                     All                                  1992
  St. John’sd,h                                 All                             April 25, 1994
Prince Edward Islandi                           All                              July 5, 2003
Nova Scotiaj                                    All                              July 1, 1997
New Brunswickj                                  All                           December 15, 1995
Quebec                                          No
  Westmountk*                              Not Enforced                              1994

 Côte Saint-Lucl*                              <=16                             June 14, 1993
 Côte Saint-Lucm*                               All                             October, 1997
Ontarion                                        <18                            October 1, 1995
Manitobao                                       <18                              May 1, 2013
Saskatchewan                                    No
 Yorktonp,q,r                                   All                                  1995
 North Battlefords                              All                            October 14, 2003
Albertat                                        <18                             May 1, 2002
 St. Albertu                                    All                              July 1, 2006
British Columbiav                               All                           September 3, 1996
Yukon                                           No
 Whitehorsew                                    All                                July 2003
Northwest Territories                           No
 Fort Smithx                                    All                              June 23, 2011
 Inuviky                                        All                               Nov 9, 2011
 Yellowknifez**                                 <18                    July 1, 2014 (with 6 months grace
                                                                        period before tickets handed out)
Nunavut                                           No
Source:
a. Highway Traffic Act, Chapter H-3, last accessed 2018-03-17
b. PortauxBasques (1996) Section 246, Municipalities Act 1990, last accessed 2018-03-04
c. Conception Bay South Bicycle Helmet Regulations, Chapter M-24, Section 414(2), June 16th, 2010, last accessed
2018-03-04
d. Mandatory Bicycle Helmet Use in Newfoundland and Labrador, Association of Registered Nurses of
Newfoundland and Labrador (2006), http://www.nlma.nl.ca/documents/position_papers/position_paper_4.pdf, last
accessed 2018-03-04
e. City of Corner Brook Bicycle Helmet Regulations Section 270, April 21, 2008, last accessed 2013-05-13
f. Municipalities Newfoundland and Labrador : By-Laws and Regulations May 13, 2013, last accessed 2013-05-13
g. ThinkFirst, January 2010, last accessed 2013-05-13
h. Email correspondence.
i. Royal Gazette Prince Edward Island VOL. CXXIX - NO. 27, pg 114-117, July 5, 2003. Last accessed 2018-03-18.
j. Parachute www.parachutecanada.org/downloads/policy/Bike%20Helmet%20Legislation%20Chart-2014.pdf. Last
accessed 2018-03-18.
k. Andy Riga “Mixed messages on bike helmets; Westmount won’t enforce bylaw” Montreal Gazette June 6, 2011,
2018-02-22.
l. City of Cote Saint-Luc BY-LAW NO. 2103, June 16, 1992,

                                                      33
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


http://www.cotesaintluc.org/files/u1/city_clerk/bylaws/Bicycle_helmets/bl_2160.pdf last assessed 2018-03-18.
m. “All-Ages Helmet Laws for Bicycle Riders “ https://www.helmets.org/allageshelmetlaws.htm, last accessed
2018-03-18.
n. “Helmet laws: Ontario” http://www.cyclehelmets.org/1102.html, last accessed 2018-03-19.
o. “Manitoba’s teen bicycle helmet law takes effect May 1” http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/manitoba-s-
teen-bicycle-helmet-law-takes-effect-may-1-1.1379819, last accessed 2018-03-19.
p. Municipal Bicycle Bylaw Development Guide, Saskatchewan Coalition on Bicycle Safety, 2002, last accessed
2018-02-21.
q. “Mandatory bike helmet laws need revision in Saskatchewan” Amber Rockliffe, May 12, 2013
 https://globalnews.ca/news/555108/mandatory-bike-helmet-laws-need-revision-in-saskatchewan/, last accessed
2018-04-16.
r. Operation of Bicycles in the City of Yorkton: Yorkton Traffic Bylaw No. 18/2016, last accessed 2018-02-21.
s. Bylaw No. 1716 City of North Battleford Saskatchewan
t. “Helmet laws: Alberta” http://www.cyclehelmets.org/1032.html, last access 2018-04-15.
u. “Wear a bike helmet or risk $100 fine in St. Albert” CBC News Posted: Jul 04, 2006, last accessed 2018-02-27.
v. “British Columbia Bicycle Helmet Law Summary: The mandatory bike helmet law passed by British Columbia in
1995.” Motor Vehicle Amendment Act (No.2), 1995
w. Minutes of the Meeting of the TOURISM & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE, June 09, 2003, last
accessed 2018-04-15.
x. Bylaw 827 Bicycle Helmet Bylaw
“Niels Konge says no to ‘nanny-state’ Yellowknife helmet law” CBC first posted May 27, 2014, last accessed 2018-
03-05.
y. Town of Inuvik By-Law #2515/TR/11
z. Helmets to be mandatory for Yellowknife youth, Northern Journal, June 2, 2014. Last accessed 2018-02-22.
* Law not used in results presented.




                                                      34
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


                                                 Table 2:
                                 Descriptive Statistics, NPHS and CCHS
                                                                       Children           Adults
Variable                                                          (age 12 to 17)   (age 18 to 64)

Rode a bike for leisure (past 3 months)                                    0.493           0.232
Minutes rode a bike                                                       624.69          203.91
Minutes rode a bike, among cyclists                                      1267.77          880.29

How often wore a helmet, among cyclists:
 Always                                                                    34.24           36.97
 Most of the time                                                          15.36             7.3
 Rarely                                                                    15.35            6.84
 Never                                                                     35.05           48.89

Lives in a province that currently has an All-Age Helmet Law               0.176           0.180
Lives in a province that currently has a Youth Helmet Law                  0.475           0.466

Female                                                                    0.500            0.505

Married                                                                    N.A.            0.523

High school or less                                                        N.A.            0.317
Some university                                                            N.A.            0.456
At least a BA                                                              N.A.            0.227

Has any 0-5 year old children in the household                             N.A.            0.165
Has any 6-11 year old children in the household                            N.A.            0.174

12-17                                                                      100.0             0.0
18-35                                                                        0.0           0.379
36-54                                                                        0.0           0.447
55 and older                                                                 0.0           0.174

Observations                                                              85,436        692,551
Weighted means, NPHS and CCHS, author calculations.




                                                       35
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


       Table 3: Youth-Only and All-Age Helmet Laws Did Not Reduce Cycling and Increased Helmet Use Among Youths
             Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models NPHS and CCHS 1994-2014, Youths Age 12-17
                                    (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)           (5)            (6)              (7)             (8)
                                 Any past 3      Any past 3      # minutes         # minutes       Always         Always         Always or      Always or
                                  month           month         cycled past 3     cycled past 3     wears          wears         most of the    most of the
                                  cycling         cycling         months            months         helmet,        helmet,        time wears     time wears
                                                                                                   among          among            helmet,         helmet,
                                                                                                   cyclists       cyclists          among          among
                                                                                                                                   cyclists        cyclists
Mean in 3 years prior               0.481           0.481           745.0            745.0          0.176          0.176            0.260           0.260
All-Age Helmet Law                 0.0074          0.0154           -28.6            -27.3          0.278          0.316            0.292           0.322
                                   (0.799)         (0.690)         (0.710)          (0.772)       (0.000)**      (0.001)**        (0.000)**      (0.001)**
                                   [0.845]         [0.692]         [0.748]          [0.740]       [0.001]**      [0.000]**        [0.005]**       [0.012]*
                                   {0.828}         {0.692}         {0.774}          {0.773}       {0.003}**       {0.020}*        {0.009}**       {0.017}*
Percent Effect, All-Age Law          1.5             3.2             -3.8             -3.7          158.2          179.8            112.4           123.6

Mean in 3 years prior                0.496          0.496           618.4            618.4          0.239          0.239           0.385           0.385
Youth-Only Helmet Law              -0.0236        -0.0253           -51.65          -85.87          0.237          0.243           0.237           0.260
                                  (0.083)+        (0.128)          (0.338)          (0.157)       (0.000)**      (0.000)**       (0.000)**       (0.000)**
                                    [0.171]        [0.202]         [0.584]          [0.551]        [0.014]*       [0.035]*        [0.014]*        [0.021]*
                                   {0.165}        {0.199}          {0.580}          {0.538}       {0.009}**       {0.017}*        {0.012}*        {0.011}*
Percent effect, Youth Law             -4.8           -5.1            -8.4            -13.9           99.0          101.4            61.6            67.6

F-test
 All Age = Youth only              (0.194)        (0.174)          (0.749)          (0.544)           (0.410)         (0.234)     (0.298)          (0.351)
                                   [0.253]        [0.261]          [0.823]          [0.696]           [0.472]         [0.378]     [0.478]          [0.440]
                                   {0.252}        {0.247}          {0.802}          {0.668}           {0.483}         {0.392}     {0.470}          {0.453}
N                                  85,436         85,436           85,436           85,436            25,524          25,524      25,524           25,524
R-squared                           0.168          0.169            0.112            0.113             0.152           0.153       0.191            0.192
Year dummies?                         Y               Y                Y                Y                Y                Y           Y               Y
Province dummies?                     Y               Y                Y                Y                Y                Y           Y               Y
Linear province trends?                               Y                                 Y                                 Y                           Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age, race dummies, the provincial
unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban dummy, a dummy for presence of a graduated license
program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on province in parenthesis, Wild-t bootstrap P-values with
Rademacher weights in brackets and 6-Point weights in braces. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                             36
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


                  Table 4: All-Age Helmet Laws Did Not Reduce Cycling and Increased Helmet Use Among Adults
                 Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models NPHS and CCHS 1994-2014, Adults Age 18-64
                                    (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)              (7)             (8)
                                 Any past 3      Any past 3     # minutes        # minutes      Always wears        Always        Always or      Always or
                                  month           month        cycled past 3    cycled past 3   helmet, among        wears        most of the    most of the
                                  cycling         cycling        months           months           cyclists         helmet,       time wears     time wears
                                                                                                                    among           helmet,         helmet,
                                                                                                                    cyclists         among          among
                                                                                                                                    cyclists        cyclists
Mean in 3 years prior              0.245           0.245           195.6             195.6          0.377           0.377            0.434           0.434
All-Age Helmet Law                -0.0062         -0.0159          14.96             -3.310         0.197           0.240            0.196           0.221
                                  (0.340)         (0.050)         (0.269)           (0.733)       (0.000)**       (0.000)**        (0.000)**      (0.000)**
                                  [0.454]         [0.210]         [0.335]           [0.805]       [0.007]**       [0.087]+         [0.007]**      [0.075]+
                                  {0.436}         {0.188}         {0.384}           {0.807}       {0.007}**        {0.045}*        {0.010}**       {0.028}*
Percent Effect                      -2.5            -6.5            7.6               -1.7           52.2            63.7             45.1            50.8

Mean in 3 years prior              0.239            0.239            193.4           193.4            0.309          0.309           0.369         0.369
Youth-Only Helmet Law             -0.0129          -0.0089           -14.39          -7.531           0.0391        0.0212           0.0533       0.0244
                                 (0.077)+          (0.390)          (0.264)         (0.674)         (0.020)*        (0.110)        (0.001)**     (0.031)*
                                  [0.356]          [0.588]          [0.507]         [0.778]          [0.019]*       [0.321]         [0.045]*      [0.136]
                                  {0.402}          {0.628}          {0.529}         {0.787}         {0.045}*        {0.318}        {0.051}+       {0.147}
Percent effect                      -5.4             -3.7             -7.4            -3.9             12.6           6.9             14.4           6.6
N                                692,551          692,551          692,551         692,551            89,496        89,496           89,496       89,496
R-squared                          0.089            0.089            0.037           0.037            0.144          0.145           0.152         0.153
Year dummies?                        Y                Y                Y                Y                Y             Y                Y             Y
Province dummies?                    Y                Y                Y                Y                Y             Y                Y             Y
Linear province trends?                               Y                                 Y                              Y                              Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age, education dummies, marital status
dummies, race dummies, the provincial unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban dummy, a dummy
for presence of a graduated license program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on province in
parenthesis, Wild-t bootstrap P-values with Rademacher weights in brackets and 6-Point weights in braces. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%.




                                                                               37
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


    Table 5: Effects of Helmet Laws on Youth Helmet Use Are Robust: Outcome is Always Wears Helmet, Among Cyclists
            Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models NPHS and CCHS 1994-2014, Youths Age 12-17
                                              (1)                  (2)                  (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)
                                            Baseline          Control for          Control for           Drop            Drop British      Drop Ontario
                                                            Lead of Helmet       Lead of Helmet         Alberta           Columbia
                                                                  Law                  Law
Mean in 3 years prior                         0.176              0.176                0.176              0.178              0.327              0.180
One Year Lead of All-Age Law                                    0.0326               0.0119
                                                                (0.811)              (0.923)
                                                                [0.840]              [0.914]
All-Age Helmet Law                            0.278              0.295                0.328              0.230              0.239              0.275
                                            (0.000)**          (0.003)**            (0.007)**          (0.001)**           (0.017)*          (0.002)**
                                            [0.001]**          [0.000]**            [0.002]**           [0.029]*           [0.020]*          [0.003]**
Percent effect, All-age law                   158.2              167.6                186.2              129.4               73.1              152.8

Mean 3 years prior                            0.239               0.239               0.239              0.155              0.239              0.262
One Year Lead of Youth Law                                        0.0765             0.0691
                                                                (0.000)**           (0.000)*
                                                                [0.008]**           [0.084]+
Youth Helmet Law                              0.237               0.265               0.274              0.193              0.237              0.257
                                            (0.000)**            (0.000)*           (0.000)*           (0.003)**          (0.000)**          (0.000)**
                                             [0.014]*            [0.011]*           [0.063]+           {0.096}+            [0.026]*          {0.001}**
Percent effect, Youth Law                      99.0               111.0               114.7              124.5               99.1               98.3

N                                              25,524             25,524              25,524                21,385               24,168              12,645
R-squared                                       0.152              0.153              0.154                  0.136                0.152               0.214
Year dummies?                                     Y                  Y                   Y                     Y                    Y                    Y
Province dummies?                                 Y                  Y                   Y                     Y                    Y                    Y
Linear province trends?                                                                  Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age dummies, education dummies,
marital status dummies, race dummies, the provincial unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban
dummy, a dummy for presence of a graduated license program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on
province in parenthesis and Wild-t bootstrap P-values with Rademacher weights in brackets. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                            38
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


     Table 6: Effects of Helmet Laws on Adult Helmet Use Are Robust: Outcome is Always Wears Helmet, Among Cyclists
             Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models NPHS and CCHS 1994-2014, Adults Age 18-64
                                              (1)                   (2)                 (3)              (4)                 (5)               (6)
                                            Baseline          Control for          Control for       Drop Alberta        Drop British      Drop Ontario
                                                            Lead of Helmet       Lead of Helmet                           Columbia
                                                                   Law                 Law
Mean in 3 years prior                         0.377               0.377               0.377              0.372              0.330              0.370
One Year Lead of All-Age Law                                     0.0375              0.0040
                                                                (0.274)              (0.905)
                                                                 [0.342]             [0.931]
All-Age Helmet Law                            0.197               0.219               0.245              0.191              0.221              0.174
                                            (0.000)**          (0.000)**            (0.001)**          (0.000)**          (0.000)**          (0.000)**
                                            [0.007]**           [0.015]*            [0.083]+           [0.061]+            [0.036]*          [0.003]**
Percent effect, All-Age Law                    52.2                58.1                64.9               51.2               66.9               47.0

Mean 3 years prior                            0.309                0.309              0.309              0.240              0.310              0.352
One Year Lead of Youth Law                                        0.0483             0.0274
                                                                (0.000)**           (0.015)*
                                                                 [0.020]*            [0.273]
Youth Helmet Law                             0.0391               0.0557             0.0329             0.0144               0.0280            0.0592
                                            (0.020)*             (0.011)*           (0.096)+            (0.434)             (0.001)*          (0.086)+
                                            [0.019]*             [0.040]*            [0.379]            [0.458]            [0.009]**           [0.171]
Percent effect, Youth Law                     12.6                 18.0               10.6                6.0                  9.0               16.8

N                                              89,496             89,496              89,496                74,484               83,670              46,659
R-squared                                       0.144              0.144              0.145                  0.151                0.120               0.184
Year dummies?                                     Y                  Y                   Y                     Y                    Y                    Y
Province dummies?                                 Y                  Y                   Y                     Y                    Y                    Y
Linear province trends?                                                                  Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age dummies, education dummies,
marital status dummies, race dummies, the provincial unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban
dummy, a dummy for presence of a graduated license program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on
province in parenthesis and Wild-t bootstrap P-values with Rademacher weights in brackets. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                            39
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


 Table 7: Heterogeneity in Effects of Helmet Laws on Youth Helmet Use: Outcome is Always Wears Helmet, Among Cyclists
                          Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models, Youths Age 12-17
                                       (1)                (2)                     (3)                (4)                 (5)                  (6)
                                      Males             Females                  Urban              Rural              Oct-Mar              Apr-Sep
Mean 3 yrs prior                      0.160               0.200                0.141                0.239                0.314                0.079
All-Age Law                           0.287               0.277                0.315                0.186                0.223                0.317
                                    (0.003)**           (0.001)**            (0.000)**            (0.001)**            (0.004)**            (0.000)**
                                     [0.019]*           [0.000]**            [0.002]**            [0.001]**            [0.001]**            [0.000]**
Percent effect, All-Age Law           179.2               138.4                223.3                 77.9                 71.3                399.1

Mean 3 yrs prior                      0.227               0.255                0.266                0.122                0.228                0.247
Youth Law                             0.235               0.240                0.240                0.256                0.263                0.211
                                    (0.000)**           (0.000)**            (0.000)**            (0.000)**            (0.000)**            (0.000)**
                                     [0.014]*            [0.018]*             [0.016]*            [0.009]**             [0.019]*             [0.019]*
Percent effect, Youth Law             103.5                94.1                 90.0                209.4                115.1                 85.5

 N                                     14,974               10,550             18,495                  7,029                 10,532                14,992
 R-squared                              0.152                0.160              0.160                  0.134                  0.151                 0.158
 Year dummies?                            Y                    Y                   Y                      Y                     Y                      Y
 Province dummies?                        Y                    Y                   Y                      Y                     Y                      Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age dummies, education dummies,
marital status dummies, race dummies, the provincial unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban
dummy, a dummy for presence of a graduated license program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on
province in parenthesis and Wild-t bootstrap P-values with Rademacher weights in brackets. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                            40
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


  Table 8: Heterogeneity in Effects of Helmet Laws on Adult Helmet Use: Outcome is Always Wears Helmet, Among Cyclists
                           Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models, Adults Age 18-64
                          (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)        (10)         (11)
                         18-35       36-64       Males      Females       >=BA         Post       HS or <      Urban        Rural      Oct-Mar     Apr-Sep
                                                                           (Age      Sec.<BA       (Age
                                                                          25-64)     (Age 25-     25-64)
                                                                                        64)
 Mean 3 yrs prior        0.329       0.429        0.361       0.398        0.600       0.446       0.231       0.398        0.298       0.319        0.392
 All-Age Law             0.212       0.177        0.194       0.207        0.084       0.197       0.228       0.191        0.195       0.242        0.165
                       (0.000)**   (0.000)**    (0.000)**   (0.000)**    (0.021)*    (0.000)**   (0.000)**   (0.000)**    (0.000)**   (0.000)**    (0.000)**
                        [0.019]*   [0.003]**     [0.017]*   [0.001]**     [0.119]    [0.009]**    [0.020]*    [0.029]*    [0.001]**    [0.031]*    [0.001]**
 Percent effect,
 All-Age Law             64.3         41.1        53.6        52.0         14.0        44.2         98.7        48.0        65.4         75.7        42.2

 Mean 3 yrs prior        0.264       0.358        0.296       0.328       0.516        0.309       0.201        0.330       0.143        0.326       0.299
 Youth Law              0.0676      0.0139       0.0373      0.0431      -0.0232      0.0436      0.0417       0.0345      0.0537       0.0760      0.0120
                       (0.019)*    (0.055)+     (0.018)*    (0.071)+     (0.130)     (0.087)+    (0.084)+     (0.038)*    (0.027)*     (0.030)*     (0.198)
                       [0.079]+    [0.019]*     [0.021]*     [0.189]     [0.256]      [0.285]     [0.326]     [0.034]*     [0.258]     [0.089]+     [0.380]
 Percent effect,
 Youth Law               25.6         3.9         12.6        13.1         -4.5        14.1         20.8        10.5        37.5         23.3         4.0

 N                       39,956      49,540       48,159      41,337     21,381       33,995       18,155       69,703       19,793       35,040        54,456
 R-squared                0.133       0.137        0.146      0.139       0.077       0.091         0.097        0.140        0.141        0.143         0.145
 Year dummies?              Y           Y            Y           Y          Y            Y            Y            Y             Y           Y             Y
 Province                   Y           Y            Y           Y          Y            Y            Y            Y             Y           Y             Y
 dummies?
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age dummies, education dummies,
marital status dummies, race dummies, the provincial unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban
dummy, a dummy for presence of a graduated license program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on
province in parenthesis and Wild-t bootstrap P-values with Rademacher weights in brackets. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                             41
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


 Table 9: Youth Helmet Laws Associated with General Reduction in Exercise Participation but No Effect on Weight, Youths
                        Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models, Youths Age 12-17
                                  (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)              (5)               (6)                (7)
                              Any past 3        # minutes          Any past 3         # minutes        Any past 3         # minutes         Body Mass
                            month walking       walking for      month jogging       jogging for      month home        home exercise         Index
                             for exercise        exercise         for exercise         exercise         exercise
Mean 3 years prior               0.640             977.1              0.532              382.7            0.409              417.5              21.6
All-Age Law                    -0.0076            -79.89            -0.0287              9.556          -0.0499              -36.19           -0.0072
                               (0.769)           (0.441)            (0.146)            (0.869)          (0.263)             (0.209)           (0.949)
                                [0.740]           [0.620]            [0.159]            [0.876]          [0.330]            [0.330]            [0.947]
Percent effect, All-Age
Law                              -1.2               -8.2              -5.4               2.5              -12.2              -8.7               0.0

Mean 3 years prior              0.671               853.3             0.572              422.0            0.410               446.4             21.3
Youth Law                      -0.0420             -41.02           -0.0448             -23.00           -0.0591             -52.72           0.0130
                              (0.001)**           (0.252)           (0.003)*           (0.198)          (0.009)**           (0.141)           (0.848)
                               [0.050]*           [0.407]           [0.095]+           [0.318]          [0.0139]*           [0.556]           [0.871]
Percent effect, Youth
Law                              -6.3               -4.8              -7.8              -5.4              -14.4              -11.8              0.1

 N                               85,436             84,542           85,436             84,757               85,436              85,005              79,604
 R-squared                        0.066              0.027            0.058              0.022                0.034               0.025               0.079
 Year dummies?                      Y                  Y                Y                   Y                   Y                   Y                   Y
 Province dummies?                  Y                  Y                Y                   Y                   Y                   Y                   Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age dummies, education dummies,
marital status dummies, race dummies, the provincial unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban
dummy, a dummy for presence of a graduated license program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on
province in parenthesis and Wild-t bootstrap P-values with Rademacher weights in brackets. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                             42
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


                        Table 10: Helmet Laws Induced Substitution Toward Home Exercise in Winter, Adults
                               Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models, Adults Age 18-64
                        (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)         (10)
                     # minutes     # minutes     # minutes     # minutes    # minutes     # minutes     # minutes     # minutes         Body        Body
                      cycled,       cycled,       walking,      walking,     jogging,      jogging,        home         home            Mass        Mass
                      Oct-Mar       Apr-Sep       Oct-Mar       Apr-Sep      Oct-Mar       Apr-Sep      exercise,     exercise,        Index,      Index,
                                                                                                         Oct-Mar       Apr-Sep       Oct-Mar      Apr-Sep
Mean 3 yrs prior        134.8        224.6        1067.4        1329.0         156.6         144.0         294.3        317.6          26.09        25.59
All-Age Law            -15.26        37.68         26.19         84.08         5.953         26.95         43.10        -11.59       -0.0739       -0.333
                      (0.083)+      (0.149)       (0.667)       (0.187)       (0.745)      (0.003)**    (0.004)**      (0.488)       (0.374)      (0.003)**
                      [0.099]+      [0.281]       [0.777]       [0.417]       [0.727]      [0.009]**     [0.095]+      [0.498]        [0.444]     [0.095]+
Percent effect,
All-Age Law            -11.3          16.8          2.5           6.3             3.8        18.7          14.6          -3.6          -0.3          -1.3

Mean 3 yrs prior       137.5         244.2        1015. 4       1196.9         158.5         153.0         391.3         343.8         25.9          26.0
Youth Law             -16.72        -10.10         20.43        -4.196         0.562         11.92        -25.92         16.13        0.119        -0.0874
                      (0.399)       (0.268)       (0.455)       (0.764)       (0.915)       (0.104)      (0.009)**     (0.082)+      (0.376)       (0.285)
                      [0.607]       [0.394]       [0.478]       [0.722]       [0.913]       [0.583]       [0.438]       [0.438]      [0.827]       [0.506]
Percent effect,
Youth Law              -12.2          -4.1          2.0           -0.4            0.4         7.8          -6.6           4.7           0.5          -0.3

N                      322,711      369,840        321,050      368,064      322,378       369,442         321,907       369,016        310,866        356,593
R-squared               0.036         0.034         0.027         0.024       0.042          0.046           0.018         0.017         0.093           0.091
Year dummies?             Y             Y             Y             Y            Y              Y              Y             Y              Y              Y
Prov dummies?             Y             Y             Y             Y            Y              Y              Y             Y              Y              Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age dummies, education dummies,
marital status dummies, race dummies, the provincial unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban
dummy, a dummy for presence of a graduated license program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on
province in parenthesis and Wild-t bootstrap P-values with Rademacher weights in brackets. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                             43
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


    Table 11: Evidence on Role Model Effects of Helmet Laws on Adult Helmet Use, by Presence of Children in Household
            Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models NPHS and CCHS 1994-2014, Adults Age 25-50
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)                (6)               (7)
                                    All adults in   No kids age 0-    Any kids age     Any kids age      Any kids age     Any kids age      Any kids age
                                   this age group     11 in HH        0-11 in HH        0-5 in HH        6-11 in HH        0-11 in HH,      0-11 in HH,
                                       (25-50)                                                                                 male             female
                                                                                                                            respondent       respondent
                                                                                                                         (likely fathers)       (likely
                                                                                                                                               mothers)
 Mean in 3 years prior                 0.450            0.449            0.451             0.450            0.403            0.500              0.393
 All-Age Helmet Law                    0.166            0.143            0.189             0.184            0.208            0.168              0.206
                                     (0.000)**        (0.000)**        (0.000)**         (0.000)**        (0.000)**        (0.000)**          (0.000)**
                                      [0.011]*         [0.043]*        [0.001]**         [0.003]**        [0.005]**        [0.009]**          [0.002]**
 Percent effect, All-Age Law            36.9             31.9            42.0              40.8              51.6             33.7               52.3

 Mean 3 years prior                    0.349            0.314            0.389            0.402             0.398            0.371             0.407
 Youth Helmet Law                     0.0362            0.0342          0.0407            0.0696           0.0034           0.0560            0.0236
                                     (0.002)**         (0.049)*        (0.004)**         (0.024)*          (0.894)         (0.001)**          (0.207)
 Percent effect, Youth Law              10.4             10.9             10.5             17.3              0.9              15.1              5.8

 N                                     54,651            29,203          25,448             14,678             17,704             12,426            13,022
 R-squared                              0.137             0.132           0.148              0.153             0.146               0.153             0.147
 Province dummies?                         Y                Y               Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
 Year dummies?                             Y                Y               Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age dummies, education dummies,
marital status dummies, race dummies, the provincial unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban
dummy, a dummy for presence of a graduated license program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on
province in parenthesis and Wild-t bootstrap P-values with Rademacher weights in brackets. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                            44
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


 Appendix Table 1: Youth-Only and All-Age Helmet Laws Did Not Reduce Cycling and Increased Helmet Use Among Youths
           Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models NPHS and CCHS 1994-2014, Youths Age 12-17
                                               Full Helmet module sample
                                    (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)           (5)           (6)               (7)             (8)
                                 Any past 3      Any past 3     # minutes         # minutes       Always        Always         Always or       Always or
                                   month           month       cycled past 3     cycled past 3     wears         wears         most of the     most of the
                                  cycling,        cycling,       months,           months,        helmet,       helmet,        time wears      time wears
                                  Helmet          Helmet         Helmet            Helmet        population    population         helmet,         helmet,
                                  module          module         module            module                                      population      population
Mean in 3 years prior              0.485           0.485          759.5             759.5          0.094          0.094           0.139           0.139
All-Age Helmet Law                0.0283          0.0703          -32.94            -47.95         0.142          0.190           0.151           0.203
                                  (0.430)         (0.313)        (0.704)           (0.693)        (0.013)*       (0.015)*       (0.018)*        (0.028)*
                                  [0.471]         [0.452]        [0.743]           [0.706]       [0.007]**      [0.006]**        [0.033]*        [0.026]*
Percent Effect, All-Age Law         5.8             14.5           -4.3              -6.3          150.9          201.8           108.2           145.6

Mean in 3 years prior               0.508           0.508          659.3            659.3          0.129          0.129            0.207         0.207
Youth-Only Helmet Law             -0.0247         -0.0168         -42.12           -78.44          0.101          0.114           0.0959         0.119
                                  (0.167)         (0.348)         (0.398)          (0.193)       (0.000)**      (0.000)**       (0.001)**      (0.000)**
                                   [0.237]         [0.332]        [0.582]          [0.486]        [0.017]*       [0.037]*        [0.014]*       [0.034]*
Percent effect, Youth Law            -4.9            -3.3           -6.4            -11.9           78.6           88.8             46.3          57.4
F-test
 All Age = Youth only             (0.040)*        (0.115)         (0.901)          (0.770)        (0.327)        (0.202)        (0.236)         (0.248)
                                   [0.208]        [0.298]         [0.927]          [0.803]        [0.463]        [0.359]        [0.439]         [0.402]

N                                  48,322           48,322           48,322          48,322           48,322      48,322         48,322          48,322
R-squared                           0.166            0.167            0.109           0.110            0.102       0.104          0.133           0.135
Year dummies?                         Y                Y                Y               Y                Y           Y              Y               Y
Province dummies?                     Y                Y                Y               Y                Y           Y              Y               Y
Linear province trends?                                Y                                Y                            Y                              Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age, race dummies, the provincial
unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban dummy, a dummy for presence of a graduated license
program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on province in parenthesis and Wild-t bootstrap P-values
with Rademacher weights in brackets. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                            45
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


           Appendix Table 2: All-Age Helmet Laws Did Not Reduce Cycling and Increased Helmet Use Among Adults
             Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models NPHS and CCHS 1994-2014, Adults Age 18-64
                                                Full Helmet Module Sample
                                     (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)           (5)             (6)              (7)              (8)
                                  Any past 3      Any past 3      # minutes        # minutes       Always          Always        Always or       Always or
                                    month           month        cycled past 3    cycled past 3     wears           wears        most of the     most of the
                                   cycling,        cycling,         months,         months,        helmet,         helmet,       time wears      time wears
                                   Helmet          Helmet           Helmet          Helmet        population      population       helmet,          helmet,
                                   module          module           module          module                                       population      population
Mean in 3 years prior               0.255           0.255            202.6           202.6           0.101           0.101          0.116            0.116
All-Age Helmet Law                 0.0040          0.0079            34.53           20.35          0.0334          0.0354         0.0326           0.0310
                                   (0.517)         (0.526)         (0.029)*         (0.231)       (0.001)**       (0.010)**       (0.001)**       (0.009)**
                                   [0.464]         [0.626]          [0.133]         [0.354]        [0.013]*        [0.036]*       [0.007]**        [0.026]*
Percent Effect, All-Age Law          1.6             3.1              17.0            10.0            33.0            35.0           28.0             26.7

Mean in 3 years prior                0.235           0.235          189.2            189.2          0.076           0.076           0.090           0.090
Youth-Only Helmet Law              -0.0144         -0.0100         -10.84            5.251         0.0002          0.0005          0.0023          0.0002
                                   (0.027)*        (0.220)         (0.284)          (0.671)        (0.952)         (0.900)         (0.277)         (0.941)
                                    [0.262]         [0.405]        [0.498]          [0.680]        [0.965]         [0.921]         [0.237]         [0.956]
Percent effect, Youth Law             -6.1            -4.3           -5.7             2.8            0.2             0.6             2.5             0.2

N                                   392,677        392,677          392,677          392,677         392,677          392,677         392,677    392,677
R-squared                            0.091           0.091           0.036            0.036           0.053            0.053           0.059       0.059
Year dummies?                           Y              Y               Y                Y               Y                Y                Y          Y
Province dummies?                      Y               Y               Y                Y               Y                Y                Y          Y
Linear province trends?                                Y                                Y                                Y                           Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age, education dummies, marital status
dummies, race dummies, the provincial unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban dummy, a dummy
for presence of a graduated license program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on province in
parenthesis and Wild-t bootstrap P-values with Rademacher weights in brackets. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                             46
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


                   Appendix Table 3: Robustness of Helmet Law Effects on Any Past 3 Month Cycling, Youths
               Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models NPHS and CCHS 1994-2014, Youths Age 12-17
                                              (1)                   (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)               (6)
                                            Baseline           Control for         Control for        Drop Alberta        Drop British      Drop Ontario
                                                              Lead of Law         Lead of Law                              Columbia
Mean in 3 years prior                         0.481               0.481               0.481              0.482               0.419              0.485
One Year Lead of All-Age Law                                    -0.0299             -0.0458
                                                                (0.234)             (0.157)
                                                                 [0.356]             [0.317]
All-Age Helmet Law                           0.0074             -0.0035              0.0001             -0.00539            -0.0058            0.0074
                                             (0.799)            (0.901)             (0.997)              (0.851)            (0.865)            (0.814)
                                             [0.845]             [0.930]             [0.999]             [0.863]             [0.839]           [0.855]
Percent effect, All-Age Law                    1.5                 -0.7                0.0                 -1.1                -1.4              1.5

Mean 3 years prior                            0.496                0.496               0.496             0.487               0.496              0.481
One Year Lead of Youth Law                                       -0.0548             -0.0427
                                                                 (0.049)*           (0.080)+
                                                                  [0.361]             [0.410]
Youth Helmet Law                             -0.0236             -0.0418             -0.0434             -0.0520            -0.0348            -0.0178
                                            (0.083)+             (0.013)*           (0.014)*            (0.001)**          (0.000)**           (0.166)
                                              [0.171]             [0.122]             [0.107]             [0.136]          [0.095]+             [0.330]
Percent effect, Youth Law                       -4.8                -8.4                -8.7               -10.7              -7.0                -3.7

N                                              85,436              85,436             85,436                 76,154               76,306              56,608
R-squared                                       0.168               0.168              0.169                  0.172                0.186               0.171
Year dummies?                                     Y                   Y                  Y                      Y                    Y                   Y
Province dummies?                                 Y                   Y                  Y                      Y                    Y                   Y
Linear province trends?                                                                  Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age dummies, education dummies,
marital status dummies, race dummies, the provincial unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban
dummy, a dummy for presence of a graduated license program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on
province in parenthesis and Wild-t bootstrap P-values with Rademacher weights in brackets. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                             47
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


                   Appendix Table 4: Robustness of Helmet Law Effects on Any Past 3 Month Cycling, Youths
               Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models NPHS and CCHS 1994-2014, Adults Age 18-64
                                              (1)                   (2)                  (3)              (4)                 (5)               (6)
                                            Baseline           Control for         Control for        Drop Alberta        Drop British      Drop Ontario
                                                              Lead of Law         Lead of Law                              Columbia
Mean in 3 years prior                         0.245               0.245                0.245             0.242               0.153              0.239
One Year Lead of All-Age Law                                    -0.0089              -0.0102
                                                                (0.432)              (0.425)
                                                                 [0.490]              [0.526]
All-Age Helmet Law                           -0.0062            -0.0103              -0.0202            -0.0066             0.0006             -0.0067
                                             (0.340)            (0.324)             (0.092)+            (0.378)             (0.949)            (0.432)
                                              [0.454]            [0.454]              [0.337]            [0.492]            [0.947]             [0.496]
Percent effect, All-Age Law                     -2.5               -4.2                 -8.2               -2.7               0.4                 -2.8

Mean 3 years prior                            0.239                0.239               0.239             0.250               0.239              0.240
One Year Lead of Youth Law                                       -0.0164             -0.0094
                                                                 (0.128)             (0.369)
                                                                  [0.570]             [0.790]
Youth Helmet Law                             -0.0129             -0.0180             -0.0129             0.0042             -0.0177            -0.0145
                                            (0.077)+            (0.058)+             (0.294)             (0.579)            (0.013)*           (0.023)*
                                              [0.356]             [0.584]             [0.797]            [0.714]             [0.312]            [0.388]
Percent effect, Youth Law                       -5.4                -7.5                -5.4               1.7                 -7.4               -6.0

N                                             692,551             692,551            692,551                618,914              615,505             459,051
R-squared                                       0.089              0.089              0.089                  0.090                 0.095               0.093
Year dummies?                                     Y                  Y                   Y                     Y                     Y                   Y
Province dummies?                                 Y                  Y                   Y                     Y                     Y                   Y
Linear province trends?                                                                  Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age dummies, education dummies,
marital status dummies, race dummies, the provincial unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban
dummy, a dummy for presence of a graduated license program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on
province in parenthesis and Wild-t bootstrap P-values with Rademacher weights in brackets. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                             48
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


                             Appendix Table 5: Heterogeneity in Effects of Helmet Laws on Youth Cycling
                               Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models, Youths Age 12-17
                                               Outcome is Any Past 3 Month Cycling
                                      (1)                 (2)                     (3)                (4)                 (5)                  (6)
                                     Males              Females                  Urban              Rural              Oct-Mar              Apr-Sep
Mean 3 yrs prior                     0.573                0.382                0.459                0.522                0.428                0.524
All-Age Law                         -0.0038              0.0100               0.0260               -0.0273              -0.0106              0.0166
                                    (0.930)              (0.670)              (0.443)              (0.339)              (0.671)              (0.665)
                                    [0.906]              [0.700]              [0.490]              [0.452]              [0.817]              [0.691]
                                    {0.926}              {0.709}              {0.504}              {0.462}              {0.805}              {0.702}
Percent effect, All-Age
Law                                   -0.7                 2.6                    5.7                -5.2                 -2.5                 3.2

Mean 3 yrs prior                     0.567                0.423                0.490                0.520                0.443                0.556
Youth Law                           -0.0120              -0.0356              -0.0202              -0.0198              -0.0353              -0.0118
                                    (0.616)             (0.060)+              (0.299)              (0.255)             (0.064)+              (0.475)
                                    [0.678]              [0.276]              [0.346]              [0.862]              [0.217]              [0.517]
Percent effect, Youth Law             -2.1                 -8.4                 -4.1                 -3.8                 -8.0                 -2.1

 N                                    43,305                42,131             61,645                 23,791                 40,671                44,765
 R-squared                             0.153                 0.143              0.159                  0.209                  0.170                 0.123
 Year dummies?                           Y                     Y                   Y                      Y                     Y                      Y
 Province dummies?                       Y                     Y                   Y                      Y                     Y                      Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age dummies, education dummies,
marital status dummies, race dummies, the provincial unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban
dummy, a dummy for presence of a graduated license program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on
province in parenthesis and Wild-t bootstrap P-values with Rademacher weights in brackets. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                            49
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


                            Appendix Table 6: Heterogeneity in the Effects of Helmet Laws on Adult Cycling
                               Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models, Adults Age 18-64
                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)        (10)         (11)
                          18-35       36-64       Males      Females      >=BA         Post       HS or <      Urban        Rural      Oct-Mar     Apr-Sep
                                                                           (Age        Sec.<       (Age
                                                                          25-64)        BA        25-64)
                                                                                     (Age 25-
                                                                                        64)
 Mean 3 years prior       0.322       0.196       0.290        0.203        0.346      0.242       0.144        0.263       0.190       0.178        0.276
 All-Age Law             -0.0107     -0.0040     -0.0174      0.0040      -0.0212     0.0028      0.0100       -0.0115     0.0124      -0.0197     -0.0011
                         (0.194)     (0.750)     (0.319)      (0.679)    (0.087)+     (0.801)     (0.316)     (0.094)+     (0.223)    (0.051)+     (0.928)
                         [0.215]     [0.852]     [0.665]      [0.670]      [0.262]    [0.831]     [0.347]      [0.285]     [0.322]    [0.071]+      [0.933]
 Percent effect, All-
 Age Law                   -3.3        -2.0        -6.0         2.0         -6.1        1.2          7.0        -4.4         6.5        -11.1        -0.4

 Mean 3 years prior        0.285       0.206       0.276       0.204       0.305        0.231       0.171       0.245       0.204        0.195       0.279
 Youth Law               -0.0150     -0.0109     -0.0258      0.0006     -0.0150      -0.0177     -0.0027     -0.0198      0.0196      -0.0160     -0.0087
                         (0.224)    (0.009)**    (0.023)*     (0.878)    (0.023)*     (0.039)*    (0.759)     (0.032)*    (0.049)*     (0.268)     (0.170)
                          [0.486]     [0.190]     [0.334]     [0.889]     [0.150]      [0.310]     [0.858]     [0.378]     [0.294]      [0.554]     [0.340]
 Percent effect,
 Youth Law                 -5.3        -5.3        -9.3         0.3         -4.9        -7.7        -1.6        -8.1         9.6         -8.2        -3.1

 N                       244,473 448,078 319,374 373,177 128,025 279,510 198,912 513,604 178,947 322,711 369,840
 R-squared                 0.077       0.093       0.086       0.081      0.094        0.077         0.075       0.089        0.092        0.089         0.077
 Province                    Y           Y            Y          Y          Y            Y             Y           Y             Y           Y             Y
 dummies?
 Year dummies?               Y           Y            Y          Y          Y            Y             Y           Y             Y           Y             Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age dummies, education dummies,
marital status dummies, race dummies, the provincial unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban
dummy, a dummy for presence of a graduated license program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on
province in parenthesis and Wild-t bootstrap P-values with Rademacher weights in brackets. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                             50
Do ‘All-Age’ Bicycle Helmet Laws Work?


 Appendix Table 7: Evidence on Role Model Effects of Helmet Laws on Adult Cycling, by Presence of Children in Household
           Regression Adjusted Difference in Differences Models NPHS and CCHS 1994-2014, Adults Age 25-50
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)                (6)              (7)
                                    All adults in   No kids age 0-    Any kids age     Any kids age      Any kids age     Any kids age     Any kids age
                                   this age group     11 in HH        0-11 in HH        0-5 in HH        6-11 in HH       0-11 in HH,      0-11 in HH,
                                       (25-50)                                                                                 male            female
                                                                                                                           respondent       respondent
                                                                                                                            (fathers)        (mothers)
 Mean in 3 years prior                 0.273            0.252            0.297             0.275             0.331            0.358            0.247
 All-Age Helmet Law                  -0.0011           0.0000           0.0004            0.0089           -0.0189          -0.0116           0.0107
                                     (0.902)           (0.998)          (0.981)           (0.492)          (0.341)           (0.685)          (0.451)
                                      [0.927]          [0.998]          [0.975]           [0.518]           [0.560]          [0.901]          [0.475]
 Percent effect, All-Age Law            -0.4             0.0              0.1               3.2               -5.7             -3.2              4.3

 Mean 3 years prior                    0.253             0.241            0.268            0.248            0.293            0.290             0.250
 Youth Helmet Law                    -0.0114           -0.0119          -0.0097          -0.0056           -0.0188          -0.0232           0.0027
                                     (0.103)           (0.145)          (0.040)*         (0.418)          (0.001)**        (0.008)**          (0.602)
                                      [0.419]           [0.496]          [0.220]          [0.446]          [0.019]*        [0.086]+           [0.596]
 Percent effect, Youth Law              -4.5              -5.0             -3.6             -2.3             -6.4             -8.0              1.1

 N                                    385,777            224,647        161,130            100,026            101,251             67,341            93,789
 R-squared                              0.088             0.080           0.110              0.100             0.125               0.110             0.102
 Province dummies?                         Y                Y               Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
 Year dummies?                             Y                Y               Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
Each entry represents a separate regression. Other variables in the models but not reported here include: a male dummy, age dummies, education dummies,
marital status dummies, race dummies, the provincial unemployment rate, month dummies, interviewed alone dummy, interviewed in person dummy, urban
dummy, a dummy for presence of a graduated license program, and a dummy variable for the presence of a local bike-sharing program. P-values clustered on
province in parenthesis and Wild-t bootstrap P-values with Rademacher weights in brackets. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                            51
