NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATE SYSTEM:
EXPERIENCE AND ALTERNATIVES

Rudiger Dornbusch
Jeffrey Frankel

Working Paper No. 2464

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1987

This paper was written for a conference on "Survival and Growth in a Polycentric
World Economy,' Basle, Switzerland, October 14-17, 1987. It is forthcoming in
a book of the International Economic Association (Macmillan: London). The authors
Charles Goodhart and Alan
would like to thank Charles Engel, Kenneth Froot,
second
author would like to
MacArthur for comments on an earlier draft. The
Research
Fellowship.
The research
acknowledge support under an Alfred P. Sloan
research
program
in
International
Studies.
reported here is part of the NBER's
the authors and not those of the National
Any opinions expressed are those of
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2464
December 1987

The Flexible Exchange Rate System:
Experience and Alternatives
ABSTRACT

We review ten aspects of how floating exchange rates have worked in
practice, contrasted with ten characteristics that the system was supposed

to have in theory. We conclude that the foreign exchange market is
characterized by high transactions-volume, short-term horizons, and an

absence of stabilizing speculation. As a result, the exchange rate at
times strays from the equilibrium level dictated by fundamentals, contrary
to theory.

We then look at ten proposed alternatives to the current system. Four
entail decentralized policy rules: new classical macroeconomics, a gold
standard, monetarism, and nominal income targetting. Four foresee enhanced
international coordination: G—7 "objective indicators,' Williamson target

zones, McKinnon uworid monetarism," and a "Hosomi Fund." Two propose
enhanced independence: a "Tobin tax" on transactions, and a dual exchange
rate. We conclude that one might build a case for intervention from the
observed failure of international financial markets to behave as in the
theoretical ideal, but that government intervention in practice is just as
likely to fall short of the theoretical ideal.

Rudiger Dornbusch
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of
Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
(617) 253-3648

Jeffrey Frankel
Department of Economics
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720
(415) 642-8084

2

The experience with exchange rates over the last fifteen years has in
many ways differed from what was anticipated in 1 973 when the major

industrialized countries abandoned the effort to keep the values of their
currencies fixed. There is a widespread feeling that exchange rates have turned
out to be more volatile than they were expected to be, than they should be, and

perhaps than they need be. Many practitioners believe that exchange rates are
driven by psychological factors and other irrelevant market dynamics, rather than

by economic fundamentals. Support has grown in the 1 980s for some sort of
government action to stabilize currencies, perhaps a reform of the world monetary
system.
In this paper we consider the record with the current flexible exchange

rate system, and then different alternatives that have been proposed. We will
begin with (I) ten characteristics that economists expected floating exchange rates
to have in theory, as of the start of the floating rate era; and then (II) contrast

ten aspects of how they have turned out to work in practice. The paper concludes
with (Ill) an analysis of ten proposed alternatives, including (1) proposals for
decentralized rules ("new classical" nihilism, gold standard, monetarism, and
nominal income targeting), (2) proposals for enhanced coordination of policy-making
(setting of "objective indicators" a Ia G-7, target zones a Ia John Williamson,

"world monetarism" a a Ronald McKinnon, and a supranational fund for foreign
exchange intervention a a Takashi Hosomi), and (3) proposals to enhance
independence (a "sand in the wheels" tax on foreign exchange transactions, a Ia
James Tobin, and a dual exchange rate a Ia Dornbusch).

I. HOW THE SYSTEM WAS SUPPOSED TO WORK IN THEORY

When we recall how economists expected floating exchange rates to

3

operate, we must take care not to paint an over-simplified caricature of the state

of the art as of 1973. The large effect that international capital flows would
have on exchange rates was recognized in the literature of that time. As we go
through the ten attributes that the system was supposed to have, we will note
discrepancies with caricature views that may appear in the press and other popular
accounts, but that have not in fact been widely held by economists for many years.

1. Exchange rates were supposed to be as stable as macroeconomic fundamentals.
This is not the same thing as saying that exchange rates were supposed to be

stable. Milton Friedman (1953) and other early proponents explicitly recognized
that if countries followed divergent monetary policies, it would show up in their

exchange rates.

2. Countries would likely have divergent policies and divergent inflation rates. A
system of truly fixed exchange rates forces countries to keep their price levels in
line, and therefore to keep their macroeconomic policies in line. The penalty of

following a more expansionary policy than one's neighbors is a trade deficit. This
penalty would be smaller under floating exchange rates, so governments would

presumably be more likely to follow divergent policies. But decentralization of
policy-making was considered a virtue, not a drawback, of the system. The logic
here is similar to that for a domestic economy: letting each individual actor act
independently in his own self-interest is more likely to give the best outcome for
the largest number as compared to putting all under the control of a more
centralized political process in which the most unreliable actors have as much vote

as the reliable. [For a recent statement of this viewpoint, see Corden (1983).]

4

3. There would be smaller trade imbalances, and therefore less political pressure
for protectionism. Nobody claimed that trade balances would be zero under
floating exchange rates. While it is true that when the central bank follows a
policy of refraining from intervening in the foreign exchange market the overall
balance of payments is by definition zero, in the presence of international capital
flows this is not the same thing as saying that the trade balance is zero.
Nevertheless, from the standpoint of the United States in the closing years of the
Bretton Woods regime, the deteriorating trade balance seemed to force a clear

tradeoff between downward flexibility of the value of the dollar on the one hand,
versus the imposition of trade restrictions on the other. [In 1 971, the U.S. trade

balance went into deficit for the first time in the postwar period. In response to
the deficit, and to a corresponding loss in international reserves, President Richard
Nixon simultaneously placed a tariff surcharge on imports, devalued the dollar
unilaterally in terms of gold and foreign currencies, and ended the U.S.
government's commitment to sell gold for dollars to foreign central banks.]
The argument that a move to floating exchange rates would reduce
protectionism was made generally, as Dunn (1983, p.6) reminds us:

In addition to gains for macroeconomic policy, flexible exchange
rates also promised to eliminate mercantilism as an argument for

tariffs and other protectionist devices, thus producing an era of

free or at least more liberal trade. Harry Johnson noted that a
tariff merely causes an appreciation of the local currency which
taxes export and unprotected import competing industries without
improving the trade account or increasing aggregate demand. ..The

expectation that protectionism can improve the balance of

5

payments and generate an increase in aggregate demand obviously
makes no sense if the exchange rate adjusts to maintain payments
equilibrium with most of the payments adjustment to the
exchange rate occurring in the current account.

4. There would be less transmission of disturbances internationally. (A corollary is
that there would be less need for international coordination of those policies;
enhancing independence was considered one of the chief virtues of the system, as

mentioned above.)
Floating exchange rates would not give complete insulation from foreign

disturbances. At least as far back as Laursen and Metzler (1950), economists had
demonstrated a variety of channels of transmission that hold even when the overall

balance of payments is set equal to zero by a central bank policy of not
intervening in the foreign exchange market. The most important channel is
international capital flows, which have become even more important in the 1 970s
and 1 980s than in the 1 960s. A foreign fiscal expansion, for example, would raise

the demand for domestic goods through a foreign trade deficit and domestic trade
surplus; the non-zero trade balance is matched by a flow of capital to the country
initiating the expansion. But it still seemed that the magnitude of the transmission
should be smaller than under fixed exchange rates, at least for monetary policy. A
foreign monetary expansion would cause the foreign currency to depreciate, thereby

mitigating the deterioration in the foreign trade balance. In fact, in the model of
Mundell (1 963, 1 964) and Fleming (1 962), the currency effect actually reversed the

direction of movement of the trade balance and therefore of the international
transmission: domestic output would, if anything, fall when the foreign country
expanded.

6

5. Central banks would have less need to hold foreign exchange reserves, because

they would have less need to use them. In the 1960s, those who pondered reform
of the monetary system were concerned about insuring an adequate supply of
reserves for the world economic system as a whole, as much as with adjustment of

imbalances among countries. Hence the proposals to raise the price of gold, create

Special Drawing Rights, etc.. It was believed that moving to a system of floating
exchange rates would be one, at least partial, solution. If the primary reason for
holding reserves, to intervene in the foreign exchange market, were removed, then
the demand for reserves would fall.

6. There would be a general tendency for exchange rates in the long run to be
determined by relative price levels, that is, by purchasing power parity (PPP).
Not many argued before 1973 that the tendency to return to PPP would be

instantaneous and complete. There were still plenty of unreconstructed Keynesians
who believed that prices adjusted extremely slowly to conditions of excess supply,
if at all. Even Friedman recognized the importance of short-run adjustment costs

in prices. And everyone recognized that the long-run real exchange rate could be
shifted by real trends, for example a faster rate of productivity growth in traded

goods than in non-traded goods (e.g., Balassa (1964)). But the general consensus
was that monetary trends probably dominated supply factors as determinants of the

nominal exchange rate. So when economists said that exchange rates would be as
stable as fundamentals (point 1 above), they meant observable macroeconomic

fundamentals like Ml, not unobservable tautologically-defined shocks to the
equilibrium real exchange rate.

7

7. The stickiness of goods prices implies that the return of the real exchange rate

to long-run eguilibrium would not in fact be rapid. The slow adjustment of goods
prices was of course emphasized in models such as that of Mundell and Fleming, as

opposed to the world view of the monetarists. The resulting conflict over
exchange rate determination was mirrored in conflicting interpretations of the

interest rate. In the Mundell-Fleming view, a high interest rate was a signal of
tight monetary policy; as a consequence, there would be increased demand for the

country's assets and the currency would appreciate. In the monetarist view, a high
nominal interest rate was a signal of inflationary monetary policy; as a
consequence, there would be decreased demand for the country's assets and the

currency would depreciate. The conflict was reconciled by the overshooting model
of Dornbusch (1976).1 An increase in the interest rate, to the extent that it is an
increase in the real interest rate, signifies a tight monetary policy, and thus will

appreciate the currency in the short run. But the tight monetary policy and
resulting excess supply of goods will then cause the price level to fall gradually
over time, eventually restoring the real money supply, the real interest rate, and

the real exchange rate, to their original levels. The term "overshooting' is
applied to the property that after the initial appreciation, the currency can be
expected to depreciate over time. The overshooting model's synthesis of the
Mundell-Fleming and monetarist views had become widely accepted by the late
1970s.

8. "Speculation" should be stabilizing rather than destabilizing. The argument
originated with Friedman's claim that any class of speculators who added to the

variance in the exchange rate must be buying when the price is already high and
selling when the price is already low; this is a sure-fire recipe for losing money

8

and such speculators should disappear from the market over time. Speculation was
also stabilizing in the Dornbusch overshooting model, though this was not always
recognized by some who focussed simplistically on the model's implication of high

exchange rate volatility. (Define speculation as investors acting on the basis of

their expectations of changes in the exchange rate.) The high volatility is a
result of sticky prices in goods markets combined with instantaneous adjustment in

asset markets, not of speculation. When the currency appreciates in the short-run
overshooting equilibrium, the investors recognize that it will depreciate in the

future toward long-run equilibrium; in response, they sell the currency and
dampen the original appreciation. The movement in the exchange rate turns out to
be smaller than it would have been in the absence of speculation.

9. Expectations are rational, implying that (a) exchange rates should not jump
except in response to unforecastable information regarding economic fundamentals
("news"), and that (b) any systematic patterns of movement in exchange rates
should be incorporated into investors' expectations as reflected, for example, in the

forward discount (perhaps adjusted for an exchange risk premium). In the context
of the Dornbusch and other monetary models, this means that (a) exchange rates
should not jump discontinuously except in response to news about current money
supplies, expected future money growth rates, and real output, and (b) the forward
discount or interest differential should be a conditionally unbiased forecast of the

future change in the exchange rate. It does not mean, as is often asserted, that
exchange rate changes should be completely unforecastable, i.e., that the exchange
rate should follow a random walk. Under rational expectations, we should be able
to predict that part of exchange rate changes that is correctly predicted by
participants in the foreign exchange market, as reflected in the forward discount.

9

For example, a country that has a record of high money growth and inflation
should have a currency that can be predicted to depreciate, at a rate that is
appropriately reflected in the expectations of market participants, in the forward

discount, and in the interest rate. Another example arises in the overshooting
equilibrium; the regressive parameter in investors' equation of expectations
formation should be equal to the actual speed of return to long-run equilibrium in

the absence of future disturbances.

10. Markets in forward exchange and other instruments for hedging exchange risk
should develop, offering the importer, exporter, or international investor an
antidote to the increase in foreign exchange risk that would accompany the move

to a floating exchange rate system. The cost of short-term uncertainty was one of
the major concerns of Kindleberger (1969), McKinnon (1976), and the few other
original holdouts against floating rates. They thought that the absence of a single
international money would retard trade and investment. The standard
counterargument was that one could hedge risk on the forward exchange market.
Such markets already existed in major currencies in 1 973. But it was predicted

that the transactions costs would fall and the trading volume would increase, in
response to the increased demand under floating exchange rates.

II. HOW THE SYSTEM HAS APPEARED TO WORK IN PRACTICE

1. Exchange rates move inexplicably. As noted, the fact that exchange rates have
turned out to be highly variable, which they have, is not in itself contrary to

theory. They were supposed to have been as variable as macroeconomic
fundamentals. This did not mean that if the standard deviation of countries'
money supply changes is on the order of 5 per cent per year, then the exchange

10

rate changes should also have a standard deviation of 5 per cent per year. The
overshooting theory says that the latter should be a multiple of the former. The
multiple can be quite large, if the expected speed of adjustment to long-run
equilibrium is slow. The difficulty is that regression studies of the existing
macroeconomic models show poor results by standard statistical criteria (incorrectly

signed coefficients, insignificant magnitudes, low R-squared, poor out-of-sample

forecasting performance).2
Most of these problems could be explained by small time samples,

simultaneity bias and other problems in the estimation of the parameters. (For
example, the positive relationship between the money supply and the exchange rate,
which exists in all theories, often does not show up econometrically because the

central bank is reacting endogenously to the exchange rate.) But these problems

can be addressed. Meese and Rogoff (1983b) tried an entire grid of possible
combinations of parameter values, as an alternative to estimating the parameters
in-sample. While many plausible combinations of parameter estimates did give

predictions that beat a random walk, many other combinations did not; most
importantly, for present purposes, in no case was the predictive performance

impressive compared to the total variation in the exchange rate. The clear
conclusion is that exchange rates are moved largely by factors other than the

obvious, observable, macroeconomic fundamentals. Econometrically, most of the
"action" is in the error term.
This conclusion tends to undermine any defense of exchange rate
variability made on the grounds that it is appropriate given changes in monetary

policy. If exchange rate changes were in truth explainable by changes in money
supplies, either contemporaneous or anticipated, we would have much better results

in our regressions than we do. (Note that this conclusion holds regardless of

11

sophisticated theories of rational stochastic speculative bubbles, etc., that can be
built for the expectations term in the equation.)
Saying that there are large unknown factors contributing to movement in
the exchange rate is not quite the same thing as saying that these factors make it

more variable than it would otherwise be. The error term could in theory be
negatively correlated with the macroeconomic fundamentals.
There is a widespread impression that the variance-bounds tests which
have been proposed in recent years are the way to show excessive volatility.
Testing whether exchange rates are more volatile than observable macroeconomic
variables has both intuitive appeal, and the appearance of being on less restrictive

ground econometrically than the traditional regression tests. However this
appearance is illusory. In the context of the foreign exchange market, there are

two kinds of variance-bounds tests: those that check to see if the variability of
expectations is too large given the variability of the future spot rate, and those
that check to see if the variability of the spot rate is too large given the
variability of macroeconomic determinants (taking account of the rationally

expected future spot rate as one of the determinants).3 The first sort of
variance-bounds test, of which Huang (1 984) is an example, is criticized in an

Appendix to this paper. The second sort of variance-bounds test is crippled by
our ignorance as to the correct macroeconomic determinants, let alone the precise

parameter values of their coefficients. For example, Diba (1987) points out that
the calculation is sufficiently sensitive to the semi-elasticity of money demand

with respect to the interest rate, that an error made by Huang (1981) and Vander
Kraats and Booth (1 983) in expressing this parameter is entirely responsible for

their finding that the spot rate is more volatile than would be expected from the

fundamentals. The conclusion is that, for either sort of variance-bounds test,

12

there exists a more traditional regression equation that tests the identical
condition (rational expectations, jointly with other conditions such as the absence

of an exchange risk premium). The variance-bounds tests give up the power to
reject the null hypothesis gratuitously, with a gain in nothing but complexity. The
regression tests in themselves give adequate ground for concluding that exchange
rate movements cannot be explained by fundamentals.

2. The trend in rhetoric is toward greater coordination of policies, rather than the

reverse. Until now, countries have wanted to follow independent policies, and
floating exchange rates have helped achieve some of that independence, as they

promised to do. True, the 1974 recession struck across countries, but it was
attributable to the common supply shock faced by all oil-importing countries. In
the 1970s, countries followed increasingly divergent rates of money growth and

inflation, as one might expect under a floating-rate system. Germany and
Switzerland were said to be in virtuous cycles of firm monetary policies, low
inflation rates, and appreciating currencies. Italy, France, the United Kingdom and
-- to a lesser extent -- the United States (and -- to a much greater extent -many LDCs) were said to be in vicious circles of loose monetary policies, high

inflation rates, and depreciating currencies. Subsequently, the United Kingdom in
1979 and the United States in 1980 decided to tighten monetary policy in order to

reduce inflation. This represented a sharp change in policy in these countries,
with no change in Germany. The consequent appreciation of their currencies
helped reduce inflation much faster than would have been possible under fixed

exchange rates. The floating exchange rate system facilitated their independent
shifts in policy priorities, just as it was supposed to. But by 1 986 the shifts had
also brought about a striking convergence of inflation rates, around the German

13

level, suggesting the possibility of a return to stable exchange rates, maintained by
convergent policies, if it is desired.

The mb of macroeconomic policies, as opposed to the overall degree of
expansion, remains widely divergent among the G-5 countries in the 1 980s, with

the United States having shifted to a massive structural budget deficit
unaccommodated by either monetary policy or private saving, and with Japan,
Germany, and some other European countries having shifted in the opposite

direction. This policy divergence has given us large trade imbalances (the next
point to follow) and widespread sentiment for institutional reform to enhance
policy coordination (the point after that).

3. Although variation in national saving rates across countries has on the whole
been reflected in variation in current accounts to as great an extent since 1973 as
before, the United States has financed its increased budget deficit in the 1 980s in

part by borrowing from abroad on an unprecedented scale. The resulting record
U.S. trade deficit has given rise to new protectionist pressures in the United

States, which in turn put the entire world trading system in jeopardy. If it is
accepted that the occurrence of large trade imbalances gives rise to protectionist
pressures, then the question is whether this occurrence is more likely under fixed

exchange rates or under floating exchange rates. The dollar overvaluation of the
early 1970s arose because the exchange rate was not free to move to offset U.S.
inflation; the dollar overvaluation of the early 1980s arose precisely because the
exchange rate did move.

The tendency for variation in national saving rates among most countries
to be reflected in investment rates more than in current accounts, to an even
greater extent after 1973 than before 1973, has been documented by Feldstein

14

(1983) and Frankel and MacArthur (1987), among many others. [Obstfeld (1986)
and Frankel (1986) find that U.S. behavior in the 1 980s is an exception in this

regard.] Similarly, real interest rates have diverged across countries to a greater
extent since 1973. If one thinks of such statistics as tests of the degree of
international capital mobility, then the finding appears surprising because many

barriers to capital movement have been removed over the latter period. But if one
thinks of the greater scope for divergent macroeconomic policies and divergent real

interest rates that is possible under a regime of variable nominal and real

exchange rates, then this finding is not surprising: even if capital mobility
enforces parity among interest rates when expressed in terms of a common
currency, a country that suffers a shortfall in national saving can still drive its
real interest rate above world levels and thus crowd out domestic investment. In
other words, the observed tendency for financial policies to have their major real
interest rate effects within the country originating them, rather than abroad, is
precisely the sort of enhanced independence that floating exchange rates were

supposed to give us.4

4. Despite the widespreadly professed sentiment for increased coordination of
monetary policies, there is no agreement on the nature of international
transmission; therefore there is no agreement on whether coordination means
cooperative monetary expansion, or something quite different.
International macroeconomic policy coordination has been the most

popular topic for research in the field in recent years.5 Agreements at the G-7
Summit Meetings in Tokyo in 1986 and Venice in 1987, and at various ministerial

meetings in between, purportedly support an increased degree of coordination. It
would appear that there has been a reduction in the desire for increased

15

independence of national policy-making that accompanied the move to floating
rates in the 1970s.

But absent is a consensus on precisely what coordinated package of policy

changes is called for under current circumstances. Since 1985, the U.S. Secretary
of the Treasury, James Baker, has called for more expansionary policy in Germany
and Japan, including monetary policy, under the reasonable-sounding assumption
that this would have a positive impact on the U.S. trade balance and on U.S.

growth. The Mundell-Fleming model, on the other hand, says that the effect of a
depreciated mark and yen would dominate, and that the impact on U.S. trade and

growth would be negative. Of twelve leading international econometric models,
half show a positive effect (in the second year after a monetary expansion by the

non-U.S. OECD), and half show a negative effect. In part because policy-makers
subscribe to different beliefs as to how the economy works, they are likely to be
unable to come to an agreement as to the desirable coordinated package of policy
changes, even when they find it attractive to agree in principle that coordination

is desirable.6

5. Central banks continue to hold and use foreign exchange reserves on a large

scale. Frenkel (1983) found that there was no downward shift in central banks'
demand for reserves in 1973-79 relative to the preceding period, despite the

abandonment of the commitment to intervene in the foreign exchange market. The
magnitude of intervention, though not sufficiently large to prevent large changes
in exchange rates, has from time to time been larger in absolute terms than under
the Bretton Woods system. In 1 977 and 1978, central banks in Europe and Japan,

in an attempt to resist the appreciation of their own currencies, bought up dollars
in greater quantities than they had in the final years of defense of fixed exchange

16

rates. Intervention became smaller in the 1 980s, particularly because the U.S.
government renounced it altogether, but this changed with the Baker initiative to

bring down the dollar in 1985. By 1986-87, central banks in Europe, and especially
Japan, were once again intervening on a very large scale to dampen the
appreciation of their currencies against the dollar.
It is clear why central banks might still intervene in substantial

magnitudes even assuming they are willing to allow a greater degree of flexibility

in their exchange rates now than before 1973. A given quantity of intervention
that might have been sufficient to limit exchange rate movement to a certain

range in the 1960s is no longer sufficient to do so. The likely explanations are a
higher degree of international capital mobility (investors' asset holdings are highly
sensitive to expected rates of return) and a higher "elasticity' of expectations
(investors' expectations as to the future level of the spot rate are far more
sensitive to the current level of the spot rate than to any notion of fundamental
long-run equilibrium).

6. Not only does purchasing power parity clearly fail in the short run, but it is

difficult to disprove the claim that it also fails in the long run. By the mid-i 970s,
it had become an academic orthodoxy that PPP was a realistic assumption, even in

the short run, and that this constituted empirical support for the 'equilibrium"
view of the economy; that prices were flexible enough to equilibrate supply and
demand rapidly, not only in the markets for foreign exchange and other assets, but

in the markets for goods and labor as well. But under the weight of overwhelming
empirical evidence, of which Krugman (1978) and Kravis and Lipsey (1983) were

just two examples, the pendulum rapidly began to swing back the other way. It
helped that the large nominal appreciation of the dollar in 1981-85 was almost

17

entirely reflected as a real appreciation as well. In the 1 980s there is no longer
support for the proposition that the speed of adjustment to PPP is infinite, or
even that it is high.7
Ironically, some proponents of the equilibrium view have now swung to the

opposite extreme. They claim that the speed of adjustment to PPP is zero. It is
true that most statistical studies on post-i 973 data fail to reject the proposition

that the real exchange rate follows a random walk.8 What is surprising is that
anyone considers this evidence supportive of the equilibrium theory of exchange

rate determination or, for that matter, of y economic theory.9
The argument that a random walk supports the equilibrium theory, which
appears often in modern macroeconometrics, is a sort of extrapolation of the

rational expectations revolution. In the "bad old days," economists were the
omniscient model-builders, who understood the complete model while the actors

within the model did not. As a useful correction to this sometimes-arrogant
perspective, the theory of rational expectations argued that if there were any
empirical regularities that were well-established among economists, then rational
profit-maximizing individuals would soon take them into account.
The ultimate extrapolation of the argument occurs when the modern
macroeconomist derives pride from his failure to explain any movement in the
macroeconomic variable in question, in this case the real exchange rate.
Theoretical models are derived in which investor behavior is rigorously derived

from principles of optimization. Changes in the exchange rate are attributed to
shifts in technology and tastes that, though known to all the agents in the

economy, are not known to the economist. Thus, as far as the economist is
concerned, the exchange rate could move up as easily as down; the theory -which is admitted to be in its infancy -- as yet contains no information that could

18

be used to explain specific changes in the real exchange rate. He then goes to
"test" his theory "empirically" by seeing whether he can statistically reject the

hypothesis that the real exchange rate follows a random walk. Rather than being
humbled or embarrassed about his statistical failure to explain any movement in the

macroeconomic variable that he has been investigating, he proudly proclaims it as
confirming his theory, on the grounds that the theory too did not explain any
movement in the variable(10

7. While the overshooting theory does seem to explain gross movements in the
real exchange rate, better at least than competinQ theories, shorter-term

movements remain completely unexplained. At times it seems that the exchange
rate "overshoots the overshooting equilibrium."
In some ways the relationship between the real exchange rate and the
real interest differential is clearer in the 1 980s than it was in the 1 970s, perhaps

as a consequence of the movements being larger. By various measures, the longterm real interest differential between the United States and its trading partners
increased by about 5 points from 1980 to mid-1984, which would explain a large

increase in demand for U.S. assets. The estimate in footnote 7 suggests that the
real exchange rate regresses about 14 per cent of the way to long-run equilibrium
per year, on average.1

1

If this estimate is right, and if the real interest

differential is assumed equal to the expected rate of real depreciation (no risk
premium), then it follows that between 1980 and 1 984 the dollar appreciated by

about 35 per cent (=5/.14) relative to its perceived long-run equilibrium. This
matches fairly well the real appreciation of the dollar between 1 980 and 1984, as

can be seen in Figure 1. No large shift in the long-run equilibrium real exchange
rate need necessarily have taken place. Subsequently, in 1985-87, the real

Figure 1

10

P.rc.nta. points
Th. Dollar and the Long Term

Index, 1973 01.100

160

Interest Rat. Differential

Real

ISO

a

CPI—Adjustsd Dollar (GiG)
(Right Scale)

140

6

130
120

4

Long—Term Real Interest

2

, -...—

I

Rat. DIff.r.ntlel

a...tt

Scale)

I

/
100

a

90

80

2

70

4
1973

1975

1977

1979

1961

Source: Peter Hooper, U.S. Federal Reserve Board

60
1963

1986

1987

19

interest differential fell, and the dollar followed suit.12
The chief problem with the overshooting theory, and indeed with the

more general rational expectations approach, is that it does not explain well the

shorter-term dynamics. In the first place, the entire increase in the real interest
differential and in the value of the dollar should have occurred in one (or two or
three) big jumps, for example when it was discovered that monetary policy was

going to be tighter than previously expected, or fiscal policy looser. Yet the
appreciation in fact took place month-by-month, over four years (with investor
expectations, as reflected in the forward discount, interest differential, or survey

data, all the while forecasting a depreciation). It is no good to utter the words
"peso problem," and argue that the market was forecasting a correction of

macroeconomic policy that happened not to occur in the sample period. If the
market systematically mis-predicts the direction of policy, that itself is a violation

of the rational expectations hypothesis.
In the second place, it is particularly difficult to explain the rapid last 20
per cent of the appreciation that took place between July 1984 and February 1985.

(See Figure 1.) During this period all measurable fundamentals -- not only real
interest differentials, but also money growth rates, real growth rates, the current
account, and the country risk premium versus the Eurodollar market -- were, if

anything, moving the wrong direction. It appears that the dollar overshot the
overshooting equilibrium. Some have suggested that this episode may have been an
example of a speculative bubble, one that does not conform to rational
expectations.13

8. It appears that little of the speculation that takes place is stabilizing. The
arguments come from several directions. In the first place, expectations may not

20

be rational. Studies show that expected exchange rate changes -- as reflected in
either the forward discount or surveys of market participants -- are biased

forecasts of actual exchange rate changes. In the case of the forward market,
these findings could in theory be attributed to an exchange risk premium, but in

the case of the survey data they cannot. (See, for example, Frankel and Froot,
1987.)

In the second place, even if speculation is rational, rational speculation

may not in fact be stabilizing. All the random-walk, or "near random-walk",
results imply that it would be rational for investors to base their expectations as

to the future spot rate almost entirely on the current spot rate, and not at all on
an estimate of fundamentals equilibrium. If "expected depreciation" is a variable
that is always equal to zero, then it cannot have a stabilizing effect on investor
behavior. Furthermore, the modern theory of rational stochastic speculative
bubbles has all but demolished Friedman's claim that investors who bet on

destabilizing expectations will lose money. In a rational speculative bubble,
investors lose money if they don't go along with the trend.
In the third place, there is direct evidence that most market
participants pay scant attention to fundamentals. By 1 985, most of the forecasting
services that appear in an annual survey by Euromoney were described as using

technical analysis. "In the early 1980s, the surveys appeared to have convinced
many readers that forecasts could be used profitably and that the most profitable

forex forecasters were technical rather than those who focused on economic

fundamentals." (August, 1987, p. 121) The 1987 survey of services reported that
none offered pure fundamentals forecasts, 5 offered fundamentals forecasts at
longer horizons and technical analysis at shorter horizons, 3 offered forecasts
combining the two techniques, 13 offered only technical analysis, and 4 did not

21

specify a technique (these last firms often show their clients how to hedge risk,
rather than trying to outguess the market)1 4
In Frankel and Froot (1986), if technical analysts or "chartists," who rely
on time-series extrapolation, make better predictions month after month for four
years than "fundamentalists," who forecast a return to macroeconomic equilibrium,

then Bayesian portfolio-managers will gradually pay more attention to the chartists
and less to the fundamentalists, even though the latter may prove to be correct in

the long run. This is only one of a recent group of models with heterogeneous
investor expectations. De Long, Shleifer, Summers and Waldmann (1987) construct
a model in which there exists a class of traders who follow irrelevant noise, and

yet who prosper over time1 , contrary to Friedman's argument that destabilizing
speculators would be driven out of the market.

9. Most short-term variability seems unrelated to news. To summarize, there are
two serious empirical problems with the standard theory. First the proportion of
exchange rate changes that are forecastable in any manner -- by the forward
discount, interest differential, survey data, or models based on macroeconomic

fundamentals -- appears to be not just low, but almost zero. Second, the
proportion of exchange rate changes that we can explain ex post, after we have
observed the contemporaneous macroeconomic determinants -- also appears to be

low. Exchange rates must be reacting to something else, either economic variables
that are unknown to the economist, as the equilibrium theorists would have it, or
to irrelevant noise.
One kind of evidence that prices in financial markets are reacting to

noise more than news comes from French and Roll (1986). They looked at days
when the New York stock market happened to be closed, but business was

22

otherwise conducted normally; they found that stock prices moved much less during
such periods compared with periods of equal length when the stock market was
open. The implication is that movement in stock market prices comes out of the
dynamics of trader interaction within the marketplace, rather than primarily from

the processing of new information from the outside. Because foreign exchange
markets tend to be open wherever people are awake, it has not been possible to

apply the French-Roll test to them.16 But this isa promising area for future
research.

10. Trading volume in foreign exchange markets has become enormous; most of it
seems unrelated to trade in goods, as well as to long-term or medium-term

investment. In March 1986, transactions in the U.S. foreign exchange market
(eliminating double-counting) averaged $50 billion a day among banks (up 92 %
from 1983), and $34.4 billion a day among brokers and other financial institutions.
Most importantly, only 11 .5 per cent of the trading reported by banks was with

non-bank customers (of which 4.6 per cent was with nonfinancial customers), only
14.3 per cent of brokers' transactions involved a non-bank, and only 19.2 per cent
of trading reported by other financial institutions was with customers (of which 7.7
per cent were nonfinancial institutions)1 7 In London the total was $90 billion a

day. Only 9 per cent of the banks' transactions were directly with customers.18

Tokyo was counted at $48 billion. The rest of the Pacific has been estimated at
$29 to 37 billion, and Zurich and Frankfurt together have been estimated as big as
New York. These totals are not only many times greater than the volume of
international trade in goods and services; they are also many times greater than
the volume of international trade in long-term capital.19
The prediction that the forward market would become more developed in

23
response to demand for hedging under floating exchange rates has in some ways
been borne out (number of currencies traded, number of markets, volume of

trading). But the U.S. banks reported that only 4.7 per cent of their foreign
exchange transactions in March 1986 were in the forward market, as compared to

63.2 per cent in the spot market. (Swaps were 29.8 per cent and futures and
options accounted for the rest.) Though the volume of trade does not appear to
have suffered from exposure to exchange risk, only a small proportion of

international trade is in fact hedged on the forward market. In both the forward
and spot markets, the prediction that the bid-ask spot spread would decline has

not been borne out. When volatility is high, so that taking an open position, even
if only briefly, is risky for a bank, the bid-ask spread widens. The evidence is
surveyed in Levich (1985, pp. 997-999).
Clearly, trading among themselves is a major economic activity for banks

and other financial institutions. Schulmeister (1987, p.24) has found that in 1985,
twelve large U.S. banks earned a foreign exchange trading income of $1,165

million. Every single bank reported a profit from its foreign exchange business in
every single year that he examined. Goodhart (1987, p.25 and Appendix D) has
surveyed banks that specialize in the London foreign exchange market: "Traders,
so it is claimed, consistently make profits from their position-taking (and those

who do not, get fired), over and above their return from straight dealing, owing to

the bid/ask spread" (p.59). The banks report that their speculation (that is, taking
an open position) does not take place in the forward market [and only 4-5 per
cent of their large corporate customers were prepared to take open positions in

the forward market]. Rather the banks take very short-term open positions in the

spot market. Apparently they consider the taking of long-term open positions
based on fundamentals, or of any sort of position in the forward exchange market,

24

as too "speculative" and risky. But the banks are willing to trust their spot
exchange traders to take large open positions, provided they close most of them
out by the end of the day, because these operations are profitable in the

aggregate. In the description of Goodhart, and others as well, a typical spot
trader does not buy and sell on the basis of

model, but rather trades on the

basis of knowledge as to which other traders are offering what deals at a given
time, and a feel for what their behavior is likely to be later in the day.
The reported profits are not so large that, when divided by the volume of
"real" transactions for customers, they need necessarily lie outside the normal

(relatively small) band of the bid-ask spread. In other words, the profits
represent the transactions cost for the outside customers. One might expect that
this large volume of trading therefore cannot be relevant from a larger
macroeconomic perspective, i.e., for understanding the movement of the exchange

rate (except perhaps on an intra-daily basis). But putting together these emerging
characteristics of the actual dynamics of trading, it is possible to come up with

the loose outlines of an unconventional model of endogenous bubbles in the foreign
exchange market.

In the first place, the large volume of trading, which most finance models
have absolutely nothing to say about, in itself suggests that market participants

are not identical agents who share the same, rational, expectation. Participants
are heterogeneous, with respect to both the portfolios they hold and the

expectations they hold. (In the expectations survey data, the high-low range of
responses averages 15.2 per cent.20) In the second place, most trading is

motivated by a very short-term horizon.21 There were few investors, as of 1984,
anxious to buy and hold long-term mark or yen securities merely because the

dollar was overvalued according to the fundamentals. This is what McKinnon

25

(1 976) refers to as "an absence of stabilizing speculation". In the third place,

there is for some reason a breakdown of the economists' rule of rationality that
the long run is the sum of a series of expected short runs.22 The result is that
economic fundamentals do not enter into most traders' behavior, even if
fundamentals must win out in the long run. Indeed, most traders are so young,
and have been at their current job so short a time, that they may not even
remember the preceding major upswing or downswing four years earlier! This
short-term perspective need not be irrational from the viewpoint of the individual

bank. Allowing its traders to take a sequence of many short-term open positions
in the spot market may be the bank's only way of learning which traders can make
money at it and which cannot.

The high volume of trading arises both when those with pessimistic
expectations sell to those with optimistic expectations, and when those who find

themselves with too-large open positions in a given currency sell to those without.
The high volume of such intraday trading will in itself create movement -- within

(the small band of) the bid-ask spread -- that is not related to fundamentals. If
there existed significant numbers of other investors in the market who were
willing to bet on fundamentals, then the intraday trading could not push the spot

rate far from its appropriate value. But if most of the other investors in the
market ignore fundamentals, and instead use technical analysis, or form
expectations in any other way so that small exchange rate movements become selfconfirming, then the rate may drift far away from its appropriate level. As with
any other bubble, it does a single investor little good to recognize that the market
is incorrectly valuing the currency, if the market is likely to be making the same

mistake six months later when he wants to sell. Even though such a model may
deviate from the rational expectations norm in that the market is not taking

26
adequate account of the fact that the exchange rate must return to equilibrium
eventually, there is no easy way for an investor to make expected profits from
this mistake, unless he has sufficient patience, and sufficiently low risk-aversion,
to wait through the high short-term volatility.23

III. ALTERNATIVES
Discussion of reform of the international monetary system is at least 120

years old. In the second part of the 19th century international monetary
conferences chased one another. The topic of that time was bimetallism and the
role of silver. Later, in the early 1 920s silver was largely out and the dollar was

in. The Genoa conference moved for a gold exchange standard, with dollars doing
the work and gold keeping the system honest. By the 1 930s the complete
breakdown of the international system made international monetary reforms a
non-starter. Roosevelt sank the London Conference in 1933 when he argued:

"The sound internal economic system of a nation is a greater factor
in its well-being than the price of its currency in changing terms of the
currencies of other nations" (Quoted Pasvolsky (1933)).

The Bretton Woods reconstruction was built on very pragmatic pillars:
capital mobility was not even in the minds of the architects of the new system,

pervasive exchange control being the rule. Exchange rate policies were narrowly
circumscribed to leave room for adjustment only in case of 'fundamental
disequilibrium"-- for any other grief the system provided liquidity.
Gold was still around, but the role of the dollar was even more central.
The system lasted until the late 1 950s; throughout the 1 970s European

convertibility for capital account transactions and the growing disparity in current

27

account imbalances raised issues about a system where European currencies were
kept undervalued (enhanced by a trade diverting Common market) while central

banks accumulated ever larger-dollar balances. The background to international
monetary reform was the European complaint about a system that gave the U.S.
both seigniorage and an almost exclusive voice in setting the trend of world
monetary policy.
The transition to floating rates in the early 1 970s was not an amicable

divorce. But a postmortem of the fixed rate system left little doubt that it could
not work: the incompatibility of inflation targets put all the burden on surplus
countries: they could chose between inflation and appreciation, but they could not
force the center deficit country into adjustment.
In the present discussion no easy agreement can be achieved because

different parties in the discussion have in mind very different problems. They
hold widely differing beliefs about the scope of alternative arrangements and see
different aspects of the present exchange rate experience as the chief problem as
we already saw in the preceding part.
Some argue that one must see exchange rate regimes in the wider
context of economic and social arrangements that set an institutional structure for
free market forces to play themselves out in the most unimpaired fashion.
Foremost among these rules should be a firm circumscription of the role of
government and the arbitrary power of government to interfere with, modify or
dissolve private contracts by changing the value of money.
G Others argue that rates move as much because of underlying lack of
synchronization in policies, a synchronization which might have been more

substantial under a regime of more nearly fixed rates. But that leaves the
question whether the latter system merely substitutes more acute crises for

28
extended, massive swings.

• An increasing number of participants in the debate accept that large,
persistent exchange rate swings appear almost unrelated to fundamentals (policies
and economic trends) and seem more nearly the result of the peculiar operation of

speculative, short-horizon markets. Like stock markets, markets for long term
bonds or for precious metals may simply take trips away from fundamentals because
they do not have an umbilical cord.
O For some observers economic nationalism, and the independence of
monetary and fiscal policies are the pillars of successful national economic

performance. But there are rare opportunities where ad hoc collaboration can
enhance each participant's performance. Unwinding of large disequilibria is such
an instance because controlled action avoids hard-landing scenarios that might
accompany the bursting of a bubble.

• A large number of participants in the debate express concern about the
serious risk of trade conflicts induced by large swings in exchange rates. They
are therefore concerned to limit exchange rate fluctuations so as to avoid
reinforcing protectionist sentiment.
Discussion of monetary reform of the 1 980s has participants holding at

least one of these issues to be the central problem of international monetary
reform. But since these concerns are very different and vary over a wide field, it

is no surprise that proposals pass each other like ships in the fog. In the
meantime policy makers flirt with the idea of reform and hence keep the debate

going.
In the remainder of this part we impose a structure on the discussion by

highlighting ten important directions of search for solutions. We organize them
under three headings: proposals focusing on decentralized national rules, proposals

29

that make enhanced cooperation their central feature and finally proposals to
reduce interdependence.

A. Decentralized, National Rules
A return to the gold standard, Friedman-monetarism or its modern version

of nominal income targeting are all in the class of decentralized, national rules.
But so is the nihilism of the rational expectations market clearing school. We
start with the latter view.

1. Rational Expectations, Market Clearing:
The new classical reconstruction of macroeconomics has not stopped at the

borders of the closed economy. Research by Stockman, Helpman and Razin and
others has explored what role the choice of exchange rate regime can play in
macroeconomics.24
Not surprisingly the literature concludes that the exchange rate regime

plays little role. Monetary policy (other than for unanticipated changes) has no
effects on the real equilibrium except when money is used as an instrument of

public finance. The welfare economics of exchange rate regimes does not offer
much other than prescriptions about monetary policy in a model of optimal
taxation.
The literature is important in imposing uncompromising maximizing

standards in the discussion, assessing alternative arrangements in terms of welfare

criteria. But at the same time the literature is also uncompromisingly
uninteresting because theirs is a world without problems. Accordingly the
exchange rate regime can make no difference.

30
2. The Gold Standard Proposal:
Mundell (1968, p.15) once said "dollars are money, gold is not." No doubt

he would find a way of rationalizing the remark. But it is a straining experience
to witness the continued advocacy of gold as the center of the international
monetary system. Lewis Lehrman, Congressmen Paul and Kemp, and now Secretary
Baker all share a surprising confidence in what gold could do for macroeconomic

stability. Paul and Lehrman conclude their case arguing (1982, p.200): "Either we
must move to a gold standard and monetary freedom, with longrun stability of
prices and business, rapid economic growth and prosperity, and the maintenance of
a sound currency for every American; or we will continue with irredeemable paper,
with accelerating core rates of inflation and unemployment, the punishment of
thrift, and eventually the horror of runaway inflation and the total destruction of

the dollar. The failure of irredeemable money nostrums is becoming increasingly
evident to everyone--even to the economists."
But it would certainly be a mistake to believe that support of the gold

standard is a common conservative front. A conservative case against the gold
standard was already made in Simon (l948,p.262) where he writes: "The place of
gold in the monetary system is hard to discuss quite seriously. All talk about
currencies based on gold is a bit silly.. .We may hitch gold to the dollar if and as

we choose. To think of hitching the dollar to gold is almost not to think at all;
one does not hitch a train to a caboose!"
The gold commission, appointed as a result of President Reagan campaign
commitments, came down with a resounding condemnation of gold as a serious part

of the world monetary system. Anna Schwartz, who had served as secretary of the
gold commission, wrote a particularly forceful survey of the role of gold in

monetary history, indicating the absence of magic or sterling performance. She

31

(in Bordo and Schwartz (1985, p.20)) summarized her findings on the gold standard
in the following terms: "... the objective factors that served to promote the

international gold standard in the past are no longer favorable to such an

institution. And, as noted, the psychological factor of reverence for the standard
has all but vanished except among a minority of faithful believers. Like Miniver
Cheevy, they probably were born too late."
The continued support (not only from cranks, but even from scholarly

monetary economists such as Robert Mundell or the late Jacques Rueff) is best
explained by Henry Simons' (1948,p.168) observation: "The worship of gold, among
obviously sophisticated people, seems explicable only in terms of our lack of
success in formulating specifications for a satisfactory, independent national
currency -- and certainly not in terms of the need for stable exchange rates for

orderly international currency. Indeed, it indicates how little progress liberals
have made in showing, by way of answer to revolutionists, what kind of money
rules might be adopted to make capitalism a more workable system."
We now turn to such an alternative system, monetary rules.

3. National Monetarism:
Milton Friedman's proposal for a monetary rule was an unusual idea at the

time it was proposed.25 Keynesian economics was in vogue and money had
virtually disappeared from academic circulation. But in the aftermath of the
inflation shocks of the 1 970s monetary targeting has become an integral party of

central bank jargon and even of operations. For the strict monetarist a monetary
rule, the quantity theory, purchasing power, and flexible rates represent the
four-leaved clover that grows at the end of the rainbow.
A monetary rule, given the quantity theory, PPP and flexible rates, would

32
be expected to isolate a country from unwelcome world inflation trends without the

need to adjust the domestic wage price structure. Serious discussion of the costs
and benefits of flexible rates, and the possible lack of an anchor is brushed aside
in this discussion by a double argument: the price level (and hence the exchange

rate) cannot run off unless authorities accommodate the inflation. Second,
speculation is stabilizing. Nurkse (1937) had challenged flexible rates with the
argument that expectations and speculation can become self-fulfilling: speculation
could set off depreciation which, via the budget and passive money, leads to

inflation and thus becomes self-fulfilling. The argument is turned around,
mistakenly, by pointing out that speculators simply anticipate the money creation

and inflation, failing to note that without the speculation the inflation would not
have occurred in the first place.
Here is an important field of research in the area of multiple equilibria (in

policies) that has not even started to be opened up. We owe to simplistic
national monetarism the insight into these problems because only the stark
assumption of a constant, exogenous growth rate of money (come hell or high
water) can highlight that such a thing will not, in practice be easy to implement.
And if money is not exogenous then expectations and policies have strategic
interaction which robs national monetarism of its attractive simplicity and
simplistic claims.

4. National Nominal Income Targeting:
The idea of national nominal income targeting as a decentralized rule for
operations under flexible exchange rate system is on the surface not far away from
simple monetarism. But the essence of the proposal, making allowance for velocity
shocks, is crucial. This point is altogether obvious when we consider the massive

33

changes in velocity that occurred in the U.S., and in other industrialized

economies, in the early 1 980s. Of course, recognition of the velocity problem
has been part of the more sophisticated monetarist tradition since Henry Simons
first assessed monetary rules. Simons (1 948) writes: "With all its merits, however,

this rule cannot now be recommended as a basis for monetary reform. The obvious
weakness of fixed quantity, as a sole rule of monetary policy, lies in the danger of
sharp changes on the velocity side..."
Nominal income targeting, as first proposed by Hicks, Meade and Tobin,

would solve the chief problem of a strict monetary rule, namely changes in

velocity which happen randomly or, in disinflation, systematically. By
automatically accommodating velocity changes the system would avoid, for example,
the Mundell problem -- high real interest rates during periods of disinflation.
(See Mundell,1971.)
In the closed economy nominal income targeting takes the simple form of

an aggregate demand equation:

(1)

y+p=x

where x denotes the policy determined level of nominal income. Aggregate
supply will depend on wages (which may be a proxy for price level expectations in
the past) and on supply shocks:

(2)

y=a(p-w)+u

where y, p, and w denote output, the price level and the wage all in logs and
u denotes supply shocks. The behavior of this system can then be contrasted to

34
one where the authorities follow a constant money rule which yields an aggregate

demand equation: (see, for example, Blanchard et al (1985)).

(la)

y=g(m-p)+v

where v denotes aggregate demand shocks, for example, shifts in velocity. It is
immediately apparent that the constant nominal income rule accommodates
aggregate demand shocks (whether stemming from velocity or animal spirits). In
the case of aggregate supply shocks it does not necessarily dominate the constant

money rule. But even here a case can be made for the nominal income rule, for
example, if preferences weigh inflation and output equally.
The open economy version of such a model is considerably more

complicated. In the open economy there are some fine points to clarify about
nominal income targeting: should the government stabilize nominal spending or
nominal income? The difference is important not only because of the implied shifts

in the current account but also because of the difference in reaction to terms of
trade shocks. Assuming, to keep matters simple, the same aggregate supply
equation as in (2), the aggregate demand equation is:26

(3)

y = f(e-p) - gi + v

where e is the exchange rate and i the world rate of interest. Once again
the nominal income rule is

(4)

x=y+p

35

Combining (2) and (4) yields

(5)

x=(1+a)p-aw+u

and from (2) and (3) we obtain:

(6)

p = [f/(a+f)]e + (vugi*)/(a+f) + [aI(a+f)]w

It is apparent from the equations that demand shocks or foreign interest rate

shocks (v,i*) only change the exchange rate, leaving output and prices unchanged.
Supply shocks (w,u) affect both output and prices. Specifically a wage shock
increases prices and lowers output. The exchange rate appreciates!
In this simplest case, nominal income targets are unequivocaUy superior

when movements in velocity are the dominant disturbance. When disturbances to
aggregate demand and to aggregate supply are also at issue the nominal income
rule may still be preferred, but now that case rests on preferences, parameters

and relative variability. In a closed economy the 1:1 tradeoff between output and
prices implied by (4) might appear as striking a prudent balance. But in the open
economy the variability of the real exchange rate, is also an issue. The nominal
income rule has a problem in this respect since in the face of a demand shock it
immunizes output and prices, shifting the entire burden of adjustment on the
exchange rate and the current account.
An entirely different consideration is how decentralized nominal income

targeting works out in an interdependent world economy. We noted above that
demand shocks translate into real exchange rates and changes in the current

account, leaving output and prices unaffected. Such a pattern of adjustment does

36
not have attractive adding-up properties in the world economy unless there is an
explicit coordination agreement that renders the targets compatible.27
We now turn to a radically different approach, focussing on a cooperative
rather than national perspective on the exchange rate system.

B. Enhanced Coordination of Policy-Making
There is, of course, a wide variety of proposals for a more integrated

world economy. These proposals flourished in the 1 960s, when the fixed rate
system was breaking down, and they have been springing up once again in
response to dissatisfaction with the present flexible rate system. We review here

four directions of change: coordination by policy-makers, target zones, world
monetansm and an independent intervention fund.

5. Coordination:
The various summit meetings have, at least in their language, converged on
the agreement to consider closer forms of coordination. Coordination presumably
already includes the exchange of information, although one is not certain whether
the exchange does not consist mostly of disinformation or of explanations why
reasonable policy measures cannot be undertaken.

But coordination discussions have also in the more recent past focussed
on developing a set of "objective indicators" which could be triggering policy

actions or at least meetings at which pressures for action could be applied. The
initial list of indicators designed to prompt cooperation measures included ten
items, running from growth and unemployment to budgets, reserves, money growth,

exchange rates, inflation and current account balances. The list has been trimmed
since and the IMF is charged with monitoring the surviving indicators.

37

The last three years have a virtual explosion of talk about cooperation.
But that is not unlike the talk about world monetary reform in the late 1 960s.

The reason is the fundamental problem of dollar overvaluation and differences of

opinion about who should do what. There is certainly no reason to believe that
there is an actual advance in cooperation, except perhaps in the foreign exchange

market where intervention has become massive and talking down of the dollar less
frequent.
At the academic level, recent research has deprived cooperation of much

of its former glamour. The Mundell-Fleming model of the 1 960s (as, indeed, the
much earlier writings of Modigliani and Neisser) had stressed international

interdependence. International macroeconometric models such as Project Link
developed the quantitative patterns and research by Cooper (1986) had built a

strong case for cooperation. But that literature took a very different direction
when Hamada (1985) and others approached interdependence from a game-theoretic

point of view. This approach pointed out the difference between cooperative and
Nash equilibria. Work by Oudiz and Sachs (1 984,1985) reached the surprising
conclusion that the benefits from cooperation might be quantitatively minor.
Rogoff (1985) showed that cooperative monetary policy might be
counterproductive.

The case for collaboration has been further weakened by an analysis of

various complications in the coordination game. The game runs into obstacles
before it has even begun, at the stage where policy-makers within each country
must decide what they want the other country to do (e.g., expand or contract).
(See Frankel (1987b).)

• Policy makers may not diagnose the existing economic situation in the
same fashion (Germans think there is no unemployment in any relevant

38
macroeconomic sense in their country).

o They may have different objective functions in that they differ in the
relative weights they assign to such variables as inflation and unemployment.

• They may disagree on which is the model of the world economy, and
even if they can agree on a model, it may differ from the true model. The
combination of all these differences, if they could be considered jointly, makes it

doubtful that cooperation could come out ahead.
One starting point of this questioning of cooperation is the recognition

that we do not, in fact, know which quantitative model is the correct model for
the world economy, or even the one most closely resembling it. Policy makers
must therefore pick a model, or a number of models, to pursue their individual

policy decisions and their cooperative exercises. Analyzing the predictions of 12
world macroeconometric models, Frankel (1 987a) concludes: "There turns out to be

relatively little disagreement as to the effects on output, prices and the exchange

rate. The greatest disagreement is rather over the question whether a monetary
expansion worsens or improves the current account and accordingly whether it is
transmitted positively or negatively to the rest of the world."
The model difference is the point of departure for another issue: what if
policy makers cooperate, each having in mind a model, but not necessarily the

right model. Analyzing the possibilities (with two countries and ten models),
Frankel and Rockett (1986) conclude that the United States would be ahead as a
result of monetary cooperation only 55% of the time; it loses 32 percent of the

time and cooperation makes no difference in 13 per cent of the cases. For the
rest of the OECD, monetary cooperation results in gains slightly less often.

This kind of finding supports skepticism about the fruits of cooperation.

But it is in fact only the tip of an iceberg. The problems go even further

39
because of perceived or actual constraints on policy and because side constraints
on policies and preferences over instruments vastly complicate actual bargaining.
If that were not enough, there is also an important time dimension coming from

the political business cycle and from the differing lead times of policies.
The conclusion then is that grand concerted fine tuning is unlikely to
become reality, but that this may not even be a loss.

6. Tarcet Zones
Williamson (1985) made the case that countries should agree on target
zones for exchange rates, limiting the extraordinary rate swings and fluctuations
(see Figure 1) by adopting suitable exchange rate-oriented monetary policies and by
making intervention commitments.
The Williamson proposal has fared well in practice since there is evidence
of massive central bank intervention and of implicit target zones in a gradual

unwinding of the dollar overvaluation. Figure 2 shows the actual monthly average
of the yen since January 1985 as well as a band of plus 5 and minus ten percent

of the average exchange rate over the preceding three months. Since late 1985,
following the Plaza agreement the Yen lies roughly in these bands. Of course, this
is a very weak form of target zones, controlling only the rate at which the dollar
overvaluation is undone.
The gradual unwinding of the dollar overvaluation has an interesting

aspect, quite independent of the target zone issue. One would have thought that
policy makers would be eager to announce publicly a target zone arrangement to

enlist the support of stabilizing speculation. But that is not possible when there is
an agreement for a gradual (though steep as measured by existing interest

differentials) depreciation. The explanation for the secrecy maintained regarding

THE YEN
(YEN R DOLLAR)
280
270
260

250

230

220
210
200
1

0

180

170
160

150
140
130
120

1985

1987

FIGURE 2

1988

40
the bands in the Louvre Accord and the other G-7 agreements, assuming they have
in fact been serious agreements, is that the authorities were consciously fooling
the market. Moreover, looking ahead, if the dollar is to decline another 30
percent, as many observers predict, why does the dollar not collapse in the
absence of a compensating differential? The most plausible explanation draws on
the absence of long term stabilizing speculation already discussed in part Il.
In the absence of long term speculation, central banks can reduce the

extent of speculation by increasing uncertainty. Moderate changes in interest
rates can bring about appreciation as likely as depreciation in the very near term.
Speculation is reduced by the elimination of the one-way only option, Intervention
(on a massive scale) becomes a plausible counterweight for the limited amount of

long-term speculation. It is of the essence in carrying out this kind of policy that
the public should not understand whether authorities truly believe that the dollar
is already in the right place or whether they have a firm agreement to bring about
another 20 or 30 percent depreciation in a controlled fashion over a year or two.
Only if the market is sufficiently uncertain can the depreciation be managed
without matching interest differentials.
There is a quite separate question of whether this gradual depreciation is

desirable in comparison with a rapid, once-and-for-all drop. The hard-landing
discussion, particularly by Marris (1985, 1987) emphasizes the potential inflationary
upsurge accompanying a steep dollar decline and the risk that the Federal Reserve

may have to stop the spreading of depreciation to wages by extra high interest

rates. On the other side of the argument is the real economy. Here an argument
can be made the other way: rapid depreciation gives the best chance to reverse

the effects of overvaluation on resource allocation. It provides an effective way
of exterminating hysteresis effects by depriving foreign companies in the U.S. of

41

adjustment time to reinforce their beachheads. It is perhaps not surprising that
policy makers favor the controlled descent since the real resource costs appear
small relative to the fear of sharp inflationary pressure, especially in politically
sensitive times.
Returning to the Williamson proposal, it is interesting how much it has

evolved over the past four years. Initially, exchange rate-oriented monetary policy
was the cornerstone of the proposal. In its most recent form (See Williamson and
Miller (1987)) the original proposal is barely recognizable. Here are the main
policy principles and prescriptions in their current "blueprint":

o The real exchange rate will not deviate more than 10 percent from the
agreed "fundamental equilibrium exchange rate".

• The average level of world real interest rates should be set with a view
to achieving a target growth of nominal world demand.

o Short-term interest rates in individual countries should supplement
intervention in achieving the exchange rate target.

o National fiscal policies should be managed to hold the growth of
domestic demand to the target path.

O The rules are implemented subject to the condition that real interest
rates stay in their historically normal range and that increasing or excessive ratios
of debt to GDP be avoided.

The explicit introduction of real interest rates and fiscal policy takes into
account many of the criticisms of the earlier, simplistic proposal. But in taking
these issues into account, it is also clear that the very plausibility of such
cooperation is challenged. Few seriously argue that the large exchange rate swings
are altogether unrelated to the extravagant monetary or fiscal policies of the past

years. Without these policies, exchange rates might not exhibit the same volatility

42

they now show. If this is correct, the "blueprint" has less to do with exchange
rates than with imposing limits on the national policy mix. Moreover, since in
practice we are talking of currency blocks, the main issue is, as always, the

question whether key currency countries can be persuaded to sacrifice some of
their national preferences to make the "world" features of this proposal come off.
There is no reason to believe that any change in the unwillingness to
sacrifice autonomy has occurred since the 1 960s. On the contrary, were it not for
the risk of dollar collapse and protection we might not see the little collaboration

that is there. A system that does not have teeth is unlikely to generate
collaboration which is perceived as inconvenient if not costly.
A major, if not overwhelming, difficulty in the Williamson scheme is the

notion of the fundamental equilibrium exchange rate. The need for U.S. budget
correction requires acceptance by Europe and Japan of smaller trade surpluses.
Much of the adjustment will come from correction of U.S. macro policies, but
there are inevitable repercussions abroad as foreign trade surpluses shrink and

dollar depreciation sustains U.S. employment. There are also questions about
worldwide real exchange rate adjustments necessitated by the emergence of the
NICs who seem to sell in the U.S. and buy in Japan.

7. World Monetarism
For over ten years McKinnon has advocated a new monetary system
centered on fixed exchange rates between the Yen, the DM and the U.S. dollar.

Already in 1974 he argued for new monetary arrangements based on rigidly fixed
rates but built on stronger foundations -- world monetarism rather than national

monetary discretion. (See McKinnon (1974)). Since then he has refined his plan
for monetary integration under rigidly fixed exchange rates--"a gold standard

43

without gold" as he recently called it (See McKin non (1 987c)).

His proposal has fallen on fertile soil because the dramatic exchange rate
volatility makes the financial press and the business community grasp for ready

answers. Although the scheme seems to solve the problem of currency instability,
there is little theoretical or empirical basis for his standard. McKinnon's analysis
has become even more controversial since he has added to world monetarism the
claim that the dollar is undervalued and the yen is substantially overvalued.
The basic proposition of McKinnon is this: World monetary growth should

be targeted to achieve price level stability. Countries should follow an assigned
domestic credit target and use symmetric, unsterilized intervention to stabilize

exchange rates. The proper level of the dollar is 170-190 Yen/$ and 2.0-2.2 DM/$.
(See McKinnon (1987d)).

The question of PPP has already been discussed in Part II, when we
discussed short run deviations and the question of whether the exchange rate has a
tendency to revert. We add here the problems posed by trend in the equilibrium

real exchange rate due to real changes. Specifically, in a context of cumulative
productivity growth or major shifts in the budget there is absolutely no
presumption that PPP should hold over time, either absolutely nor even relatively.

In the case of the U.S. and Japan, for example, there is an obvious
Ricardo-Kravis-Balassa trend real appreciation due to the much higher productivity
growth.
In earlier work McKinnon has more strongly advocated the view that

exchange rate movements are caused predominantly by money demand shifts

between different currencies.28 More recently he recognizes that portfolio
disturbances involve dominantly shifts between interest bearing assets. But the
basic emphasis on an Mi-disturbance view of exchange rates is still lingering.

44
This narrow view of exchange rates determinants leaves out two important

explanations for exchange rate movements. Exchange rates can move for any of a
number of reasons. But what is the evidence that would support the view that
money demand disturbances are the dominant source? If exchange rate movements
are not caused primarily by shifts in money demand from one country's Ml to
another's, there is no basis for preferring fixed exchange rates over flexible rates.
Moreover, there certainly is no presumption for using unsterilized intervention as

the rule.
If uncoordinated, large fiscal swings are a possibility there is no

presumption that fixed rates with unsterilized intervention are the best kind of

monetary policy. A fiscal expansion would now lead to an expansion of home
credit and to a contraction abroad. World interest rates would rise and our
trading partners risk falling into recession. Neither the fixed rate nor the
monetary rule seems in this context a very attractive feature. Of course, that
brings out precisely the problems of the past five years.
If a choice must be made among rules, either so central banks can
establish more credible commitments vis-à-vis their domestic constituents not to

inflate, or so national governments can establish more credible commitment vis-avis each other not to "cheat" on joint bargains (such as coordinated expansions or
contractions), then nominal income targeting seems a much more sturdy possibility

then Ml monetarism. Any rule will turn out to have difficulties for certain
disturbances, and within a given period would be dominated by discretion. But
discretion itself has become suspect because of time consistency problems. With
this point in mind nominal income targets surely dominate commitments to fix the
stock of money (not to mention the price of gold).

45

8. An Independent Intervention Fund
The previous directions of change focused on governments agreeing to

more active cooperation. An alternative is to create an institution which,
independently, plays the role of achieving the results cooperative policies would

otherwise bring about. Such a scheme has been advanced by Hosomi (1985).
The Hosomi plan envisages a fund which is endowed with the main
currencies on a sufficient scale to be able to conduct effective intervention policy.
The fund would develop criteria for appropriate exchange rates, would announce

them and intervene to move markets in the direction of these rates. Decisions
would presumably be voted by a board of governors representing the largest
central banks, along the lines of the Bank for International Settlements. Individual
governments would remain free to pursue their own policies, possibly intervening

against the fund, but at least they would be known to be out of line and would
have some competition.

The chances of seeing such a fund are, of course remote. Governments
have been extraordinarily slow in giving a major mandate for surveillance to the
IMF, for example, and even in the EMS intervention remains a highly politicized

issue. On the world level it is doubtful that Germany or the U.S. Treasury would
allow themselves to be outspeculated with their own money. But one can advance

a different line of argument. Which is more likely to come about: abandoning
monetary sovereignty in a Williamson-Miller coordination agreement, or allowing

the emergence of a new institution that competes but not necessarily out-competes
the national authorities? If institution- building is the point a Hosomi fund may be
a good strategy to progress. It is a dimension along which the system realistically
could move halfway from the noncooperative solution to the cooperative solution
(or however far there is sufficient political support; the less strong the consensus

46

for ceding monetary sovereignty, the smaller would the fund be).

C. More Independence for National Policies
In this final section we review a very different strand of proposals

emphasizing segmentation of capital markets. This literature takes its
respectability from Nurkse, Modigliani and Tobin who each have noted that
excessively mobile capital interferes with policy independence without
commensurate gains in terms of resource allocation. The implication for policy is
that if hot money flows could be cooled, policy-makers would have more

instruments at e disposal to get on with the task of achieving noninflationary growth.

9. Tax Deterrents to Hot Money
The best known proposal to interdict hot money flows is Tobin's

suggestion to "'put some sand in the wheels of international finance'. Tobin
observes (1978): "I believe the basic problem today is not the exchange rate

system, whether fixed or floating. Debate on the regime evades and obscures the
essential problem...The basic problems are these. Prices in goods and labor markets
move more sluggishly, in response to excess supply or demand, than the prices of

financial assets, including exchange rates. ...There are two ways to go. One is
toward a common currency, common monetary and fiscal policy, and economic

integration. The other is toward greater financial segmentation between nations or
currency areas, permitting their central banks and governments greater

autonomy..."
The Tobin scheme is a moderate, worldwide transactions tax on foreign

exchange. The disincentives for trade would be negligible, and so would be the

*

47

disincentives for long-term capital movements. But the profitability of short-term
round trips would be dramatically curtailed. Suppose the rate of return at home is

I per year. The required rate of return abroad (including tax evasion and

exchange gains,) i depends on the Tobin tax, t, and on the duration of the
investment f (measured as the fraction of years for which a foreign position is
held):

(6)

i = (if + t)If(1 —t)

It is apparent that the Tobin tax penalizes speculative investments more the

shorter the horizon. For example, with a home interest rate of 10 percent, a 2
percent tax and a 6 month investment horizon the foreign yield would have to be

14 percent. If the horizon were only 1 month the foreign yield would need to be
34 percent per annum.

There are several objections to such a tax. One is that the taxation of
all foreign exchange transactions acts as a disincentive to trade. The effective
counterargument is that hot money flows, by misaligning exchange rates create
macroeconomic costs far in excess of moderate trade taxation and, over and above,
may invite protectionism.

The second concern, expressed for example by Marston (1987, p.53), is
that the system would fail to stem the influence of capital flows driven by longrun

fundamentals. This is really not an objection but rather a reinforcement of the

Tobin argument. The proposal is specifically designed to strengthen the role of
long-term speculation which now is dominated entirely by short horizon round

tripping, It is possible to slip into the mistake of thinking that if a Tobin tax
discourages only short-term capital investments, rather than long-term investments,

48

then it can reduce only short-term exchange rate volatility, not long-term

misalignment. But we argued in Part II that, in a market where speculators fully
adjust their expectations of the future rate to reflect the latest fluctuation in the
current spot rate, and few investors take positions based on long-term

fundamentals, the short-term movements become self-confirming, and can cumulate
into long-term misalignment.

There are other tax variants that seek the same objective. Specifically
Liviatan (1980) and Dornbusch (1986a,1986b) have argued tora real interest
equalization tax. Such a tax, levied cooperatively would reduce the incentives for
short-term money movements and thus remove their dominant influence from
exchange rate determination.
A third and common objection to the Tobin tax, or to an interest
equalization tax, is that they are impractical because they are difficult or
impossible to enforce. There is certainly merit to this objection, particularly when
the tax is implemented by an individual country leaving scope for off-shore

evasion. When implemented as an international system, the chances are more
nearly like those of collecting the corporate income tax from multinationals. No
doubt, since the vast majority gross capital flows have to do with minimizing,

avoiding or outright evading taxes, there won't be massive support for such a
policy on the part of financial institutions. But the proposals compete with
alternatives that are no more persuasive: a world central bank, coordinated fiscal

policy, etc. The key point of these proposals, in the end, is to highlight that
short-term capital flows may be a major destabilizing factor in the world macro
economy.

49

10. Dual Exchange Rates
We conclude with a proposal that, just as the preceding tax proposals,
draws its inspiration from the problem of volatile (and often unproductive) short-

term capital flows. The proposal envisages instituting a dual exchange rate system.
Governments of the main industrialized countries would establish a fixed (or rigid

crawling peg with trend) exchange rate for commercial transactions. But for all
capital account transactions the exchange rate would be flexible.
A possible macroeconomic advantage of this system is that real exchange
rates relevant for trade flows would be more stable, even when fiscal polices get

far out of line. Of course budget deficits that are prevented from showing up as
trade deficits will show up elsewhere instead, for example as crowding out of

investment. If elements other than fundamentals are important in asset markets,
then goods markets are fully sheltered from their influence.
Dual exchange rates are known from the experience of a number of
developing countries, specifically Mexico, but also from Belgium, France and Italy

at various times. Would they work between major currencies? If one takes the
view that flexible rates today are dominated by speculation based on considerations
other than fundamentals, the shift to another system can be viewed as an

advantage. If the speculative influence is only an overlay on real factors then
detaching the asset market rate may make it much more volatile. But where is the
cost of that volatility?

Concluding Remarks

This essay has taken a broad view at the experience with flexible rates
and at alternatives. We do not suffer from a dogmatic commitment to flexible
rates per Se, nor do we feel that interference with speculative capital flows is

50

ethically unacceptable. Finally, we dont preclude the possibility of enlightened
cooperation, sometime in the future. Where then is the bottom line on proposals
for change?
The basic question seems to be whether exchange markets are dominated

by speculation that drives the price away from fundamentals. If that is not the
case, the mere pursuit of more reasonable macroeconomic policies, without much
cooperation, will assure that exchange rates fluctuate much more moderately.
Reasonable policies under current circumstances mean first and foremost a
correction of the U.S. budget deficit.
But if asset markets are dominated by speculation unrelated to market
fundamentals then there may also be a potential for improvement from basic

policy reform, If such speculation dominates, then taxation or decoupling of asset
markets theoretically becomes a possible step to enhance microeconomic efficiency.
Whether this is best done by a Tobin tax or by dual exchange rates is largely an

administrative question. The interesting point of nearly fifteen years with flexible

rates is the suspicion that speculation might do more harm then good. The
possibility is an active part of the research agenda in many areas of finance.29
On the other hand, to establish a case for government intervention it is
not sufficient to show that the international financial system as it works in
practice is a flawed version of the optimal efficient-markets equilibrium of theory.
Nor would it even be sufficient to show theoretically that optimal intervention
might improve world economic welfare. It must be recognized that government

intervention historically has been every bit as flawed a version of the theoretical
optimum as have been the results given by the market.
In the meantime serious professional discussion of these issues in October
1987 has been set back by Secretary Baker's pronouncement at the IMF Annual

51

Meeting:

"Accordingly, the United States is prepared to consider utilizing, as an
additional indicator in the coordination process, the relationship among our
currencies and a basket of commodities, including gold..."

52

APPENDIX ON VARIANCE-BOUNDS TESTS

Two different methodologies are in use to test whether expectations are
excessively volatile: regression tests and the newer variance-bounds tests.
The traditional regression test of rational expectations uses the equation:

Dst÷i =a+(b) Dse+ Ut+l,
where the lefthand-side variable is the ex post change in the (log) spot rate and
the righthand-side variable is investors' expected rate of depreciation as
measured, for example, by the forward discount (which requires the assumption

that no risk premium separates the two). We reject the hypothesis of rational
expectations if the estimate of the coefficient is significantly less than 1, which is

the usual finding. We could choose to describe a finding that b < 1 as a finding
that expected depreciation (D Se) is excessively volatile (which is how Bilson

(1981) originally described it: speculators would do better to reduce their
expectations toward zero). This would be just another way of saying that
expected depreciation is a biased predictor.

Huang (1984, p.159, eq. 11) applies the variance-bounds test by computing the
variance of the prediction error, and arguing that expectations are excessively

volatile if it exceeds the variance of the changes in the spot rate. This is a true
statement, because

Var(D 5÷i - D Set) > Var(D t+i) implies
Var(D St+i) + Var(D Set) - 2 Covar(D seD St+l) > Var(D t+i)

1/2 > Covar(D Se,D st+i)Nar(D set)

53

This last ratio is simply our regression coefficient b, so it is certainly true that if
it is statistically less than 1/2, then it is also statistically less than 1, and we can

reject rational expectations. But this would be a foolish way of doing the test,
because it needlessly throws away the ability to reject the null hypothesis if b

happens to fall into the range between 1/2 and 1. Indeed, Huang is able to reject
the null hypothesis for fewer currencies when he applies his variance-bounds test

than when he applies the traditional regression test to the same currencies. The
variance-bounds test adds absolutely nothing to our understanding in this context.
This point is generalized in Frankel and Stock (1987) and Froot (1987).)

54
REFERENCES

Adler, M., and Lehmann, B. (1983) 'Deviations from Purchasing Power Parity,'
Journal of Finance, vol. 38, no.5, December, pp.1471 -87.

Arrow, K. (1982) 'Risk Perception in Psychology and Economics,' Economic InQuiry

vol. 20, January, pp.1-9.

Backus, D. (1984) 'Empirical Models of the Exchange Rate: Separating the Wheat
from the Chaff,' Canadian Journal of Economics, vol. 17, pp.824-26.

Balassa, B. (1964) 'The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,' Journal of
Political Economy, pp.584-96.

Bank of England (1986) 'The Market in Foreign Exchange in London,' press notice,

August.

Bilson, J. (1981) 'Profitability and Stability in International Currency Markets,'
NBER Working Paper No. 664, April.

Blake, D., Beenstock, M., and Brasse, V. (1986) 'The Performance of UK Exchange
Rate Forecasters.' The Economic Journal, December.

Blanchard, 0., Dornbusch, R. and Layard, R. (1985) Restorinci Europe's Prosperity
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

55

Bordo, M. and Schwartz, A. (eds.) (1985) A Retrospective on the Gold Standard
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Buiter, W. and Miller, M. (1982) 'Real Exchange Rate Overshooting and the Output
Cost of Bringing Down Inflation,' European Economic Review, vol. 18, May/June,

pp.85-123.

Buiter, W., and Marston, R. (eds.) (1985) International Economic Policy

Coordination (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Cooper, A. N. (1982) 'The Gold Standard: Historical Facts and Future Prospects,'
BrookinQs Papers on Economic Activity, No.1, pp.1-45.

Cooper, R. N. (1986) Economic Policy in an Interdependent World (Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press).

Corden, W. Maxwell (1983) 'The Logic of the International Monetary NonSystem,' in Machlup, F., Fels, G. and MOller-Groeling, H., (eds.), Reflections on a

Troubled World Economy: Essays in Honour of Herbert Giersch (London), pp.59-74.

Cuddington, J. (1983) 'Currency Substitution, Capital Mobility and Money Demand,'

Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 2, pp.111-33.

De Long, J.B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L., and Waldmann, R. (1987) 'The Economic
Consequences of Noise Traders,' NBER Summer Institute, Cambridge, MA., July.
(Also CRSP Working Paper 218, University of Chicago.)

56

Diba, B. (1987) 'A Critique of Variance Bounds Tests for Monetary Exchange Rate

Models,' Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 19, pp.104-il.

Dornbusch, R. (1976) 'Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics,' Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 84, December, pp.1161 -74.

Dornbusch, R. (1980) 'Exchange Rate Economics: Where Do We Stand?' Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp. 143-84.

Dornbusch, R. (1982) 'Equilibrium and Disequilibrium Exchange Rates,' Zeitschrift

fur Wirtschafts- and Sozialwissenshaften vol. 102, no. 6, pp.573-99. Reprinted in
Dornbusch, R., Dollars, Debts, and Deficits (Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press) 1986.

Dornbusch, R. (1985) 'Purchasing Power Parity,' National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 1591. Forthcoming in The New Palcirave Dictionary of
Economics.

Dornbusch, R. (1986a) 'Flexible Exchange Rates and Excess Capital Mobility,'
BrookinQs Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp.209-26.

Dornbusch, R. (1986b) Dollars, Debts and Deficits (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

Dornbusch, A. (1986c) 'Special Exchange Rates for Capital Account Transactions,'
World Bank Economic Review, vol. 1, no.1., pp.3-33.

57
Dornbusch, ft (1987a) 'External Balance Correction: Depreciation or Protection?'
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp.249-69.

Dornbusch, R. (1 987b) 'Flexible Exchange Rates 1986, Economic Journal, vol. 1,

pp.1-18.

Dornbusch, R. (1987c) 'Some Doubts About the McKinnon Standard,' Economic
Perspectives, forthcoming.

Dunn, R. (1983) 'The Many Disappointments of Flexible Exchange Rates,' Essays in
International Finance, No. 154, (Princeton: Princeton University).

Edison, H. (1987) 'Purchasing Power Parity in the Long Run: A Test of the
Dollar/Pound Exchange Rate (1890-1978),' Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,

vol. 19, no. 3, August, pp.376-87.

Eichengreen, B. (ed.), (1986) The Gold Standard in Theory and History, (New York:
Methuen, 1986).

Federal Reserve Bank of New York (1986) 'Summary of Results of U.S. Foreign
Exchange Market Turnover Survey Conducted in March 1986,' Press Release No.
1690, August.

Feldstein, M. (1983) 'Domestic Saving and International Capital Movements in the
Long Run and the Short Run,' European Economic Review, vol.21, pp.129-51.

58

Feldstein, M. (1985) 'The Budget Deficit and the Dollar,' NBER Macroeconomic
Annual 1986, September.

Fleming, J. M. (1962) 'Domestic Financial Policies under Fixed and under Floating
Exchange Rates,' IMF Staff Papers, vol. 9, no. 3, pp.369-79.

Frankel, J. (1979) 'on the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based on
Real Interest Differentials,' American Economic Review.

Fran kel, J. (1984) 'Tests of Monetary and Portfolio-Balance Models of Exchange

Rate Determination,' in Bilson, J., and Marston, R., (eds.), Exchange Rate Theory
and Practice, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Frankel, J. (1986) 'International Capital Mobility and Crowding-out in the U.S.
Economy: Imperfect Integration of Financial Markets or of Goods Markets?' in
Hafer, R. (ed.), How Open is the U.S. Economy?, (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books).

Frankel, J. (1987a) 'Ambiguous Macroeconomic Policy Multipliers, in Theory and in
Twelve Econometric Models,' Working Paper 8725, University of California,

Berkeley. Forthcoming in Bryant, R. et al, (eds.), Empirical Macroeconomics for
Interdependent Economies (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institute).

Frankel, J. (1987b) 'Obstacles to International Macroeconomic Policy Coordination,'

Working Paper 87/29, International Monetary Fund.

59

Frankel, J., and Froot, K. (1986) 'Explaining the Demand for Dollars: International
Rates of Return and the Expectations of Chartists and Fundamentalists,'

Economics Working Paper 8603, U.C. Berkeley. In Chambers, R., and Paarlberg, P.,
(eds.) Agriculture, Macroeconomics and the Exchange Rate, forthcoming.

Frankel, J., and Froot, K. (1987) 'Using Survey Data to Test Standard Propositions
Regarding Exchange Rate Expectations,' American Economic Review, vol. 77,
March, pp. 133-53.

Frankel, J., and MacArthur, A. (1987) 'Political vs. Currency Premia in
International Real Interest Differentials: A Study of Forward Rates for 24
Countries,' NBER Working Paper No. 2309, European Economic Review,

forthcoming.

Frankel, J., and Meese, R. (1987) 'Are Exchange Rates Excessively Variable?' in
Fischer, S., (ed.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1987.

Frankef, J. and Rockett, K. (1986) 'International Macroeconomic Policy
Coordination when Policy-Makers Disagree on the model,' NBER Working Paper No.

2059, October. Revised, UC Berkeley, November 1987.

Frankel, J., and Stock, J. (1987) 'Regression vs. Volatility Tests of Foreign

Exchange Markets,' Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 6, pp.49-56.

French, K., and Roll, R. (1986) 'Stock Return Variances: The Arrival of
Information and the Reaction of Traders,' Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 1 7,

60

pp.5-26.

Frenkel, J. (1983) 'International Liquidity and Monetary Control,' in von
Fursternberg, G. (ed.), International Money and Credit: The Policy Roles,
(Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Frenkel, J. (1987) The International Monetary System: Should It Be Reformed?'
NBER Working Paper No. 2163, February.

Frenkel, J. and Goldstein, M. (1986) 'A Guide to Target Zones,' NBER Working
Paper No. 2113, December.

Friedman, M. (1953) 'The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates,' in Friedman, M.,
Essays in Positive Economics, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Froot, K. (1987) 'Tests of Excess Forecast Volatility in the Foreign Exchange and
Stock Markets,' Sloan School, M.I.T.

Golub, S., et at (1985) 'Exchange Rates and Real Long-term Interest-rate

Differentials: Evidence for Eighteen OECD Countries,' Economics and Statistics
Department Working Papers, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development.

Goodhart, C. (1987) 'The Foreign Exchange Market: A Random Walk with a
Dragging Anchor,' London School of Economics.

61

Goodman, S. (1979) 'Foreign Exchange Forecasting Techniques: Implications for
Business and Policy,' Journal of Finance, vol. 34, May, pp.415-27.

Haache, G. and Townend, J. (1981) 'Exchange Rates and Monetary PoTicy:
Modelling Sterling's Effective Exchange Rate, 1972-1 980,' in Eltis, W. A., and

Sinclair, P. J. N. (eds.), The Money Supply and the Exchange Rate, (Oxford:
Clarendon Press).

Hamada, K. (1985) The Political Economy of International Monetary
Interdependence (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

Helpman, E. (1981) 'An Exploration in the Theory of Exchange Rates,' Journal of
Political Economy, 89, pp.865-90.

Helpman, E. and Razin, A. (1979) 'A Consistent Comparison of Alternative

Exchange Rate Regimes,' Canadian Journal of Economics, vol. 12, pp.394-409.

Helpman, E. and Razin. A. (1982) 'A Comparison of Exchange Rate Regimes in the
Presence of Imperfect Capital Markets,' International Economic Review, vol. 23, pp.

365-88.

Hogarth, R. and Reder, M. (eds.) (1986) Rational Choice (Chicago: The University
of Chicago Press).

Hosomi, T. (1985) 'Toward a More Stable International Monetary System,' in

Hosomi, 1., and Fukao, M., A Second Look at Foreign Exchange Market

62

Interventions (Tokyo: Japan Center for International Finance).

Huang, R. (1981) 'The Monetary Approach to Exchange Rates in an Efficient
Foreign Exchange Market: Tests Based on Volatility,' Journal of Finance, vol. 36,

pp.31-41.

Huang, R. (1984) 'Some Alternative Tests of Forward Exchange Rates as Predictors

of Future Spot Rates,' Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 3, no. 2,
August, pp.153-67.

Hutchison, M., and Throop, A. (1985) 'U.S. Budget Deficits and the Real Value of
the Dollar,' Economic Review, vol. 4, Fall, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
pp.26-43.

Ito, T., and Roley, V. (1987) 'News from the U.S. and Japan: Which Moves the
Yen/Dollar Exchange Rate?' Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 19, pp.255-77.

Johnson, H. (1969) 'The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates 1969,' Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis Review, vol. 51, no. 6, June, pp. 12-24.

Kareken, J. and Wallace, N. (1981) 'On the Indeterminacy of Equilibrium Exchange
Rates,' The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 156, pp.207-22.

Kindleberger, C. (1969) 'The Case for Fixed Exchange Rates 1969,' in The
International Adjustment Mechanism, (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston).

63

Kravis, I. and Lipsey, R. (1983) 'Toward an Explanation of National Price Levels,'
International Finance Section, Princeton University, Princeton Studies in
International Finance, No. 52.

Krugman, P. (1978) 'Purchasing Power Parity and Exchange Rates: Another Look
at the Evidence,' Journal of International Economics, 8, 3, August, pp.397-407.

Krugman, P. (1985) 'Is the Strong Dollar Sustainable?' The U.S. Dollar -- Recent
Developments, Outlook, and Policy Options. (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City), pp.1003-32.

Laursen, S., and Metzter, L. (1950) 'Flexible Exchange Rates for the Theory of
Employment,' Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 32, November, pp.281-99.

Levich, R. (1985) 'Empirical Studies of Exchange Rates: Price Behavior, Rate
Determination, and Market Efficiency,' in Jones, A., and Kenen, P. (eds.),
Handbook of International Economics, vol. II (Elsevier Science Publishers).

Liviatan, N. (1980) 'Anti-inflationary Monetary Policy and the Capital Import Tax,'
Warwick Economic Research Papers No. 1 71.

Marris, S. (1985) 'Deficits and the Dollar: The World Economy at Risk,' Policy
Analyses in International Economics No. 14, (Washington, D.C.: Institute for
International Economics), December.

64

Marris, S. (1 987) 'Deficits and the Dollar Revisited,' Institute for International

Economics.

Marston, R. (1987) 'Exchange Rate Policy Reconsidered,' NBER Working Paper No.

2310, July.

McKinnon, R. (1974) 'A New Tripartite Monetary System or a Limping Dollar
Standard,' International Finance Section, Princeton University, Princeton Essays in
International Finance, No. 106.

McKinnon, R. (1976) 'Floating Exchange Rates 1973-74: The Emperor's New
Clothes,' Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy No. 3, (Elsevier
Science Publishers), pp.79-114.

McKinnon, R. (1984a) 'An International Standard for Monetary Stabilization,'
Policy Analyses in International Economics, No.8 (Washington, D.C.: Institute for
International Economics).

McKinnon, R. (1 984b) 'How to Coordinate Central Bank Policies,' New York Times,
July 12.

McKinnon, R. (1987a) 'Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies for International
Financial Stability: A Proposal,' Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.

McKinnon, R. (1 987b) 'Currency Protectionism: Parity Lost,' Wall Street Journal,

February 2.

65

McKinnon, R. (1987c) 'A Gold Standard Without Gold. Putting a Stop to Rapid
Currency Swings,' New York Times, April 12.

McKinnon, R. (1 987d) 'A Model for Currency Cooperation,' Wall Street Journal,

September 21.

Meese, R., and Rogoff, K. (1 983a) 'Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the

Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample?' Journal of International Economics, vol.
14, February, pp.3-24.

Meese, R., and Rogoff, K. (1983b) 'The Out-of-Sample Failure of Empirical

Exchange Rate Models: Sampling Error or Misspecification?' in Frenkel, Jacob
(ed.), ExchanQe Rates and International Macroeconomics (Chicago: University of

Chicago Press).

Miller, P. J. and Wallace, N. (1985) 'International Coordination of Macroeconomic
Policies: A Welfare Analysis,' Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Quarterly
Review, vol. 9, pp.14-32.

Mundell, R. A. (1963) 'Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and

Flexible Exchange Rates,' Canadian Journal of Economics, November.

Mundell, R. A. (1964) 'A Reply; Capital Mobility and Size,' Canadian Journal of
Economics, vol. 30, 1964.

66
Mundell, A. A. (1968) 'Towards a Better International Monetary System,'
unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.

Mundell, A. A. (1971) Monetary Theory (Pacific Palisades: Goodyear).

Nurkse, R. (1937) International Currency Experience in the Interwar Period,

(Geneva: League of Nations). Reprinted by Arno Press (1946).

Obstfeld, M. (1986) 'Capital Mobility in the World Economy: Theory and
Measurement,' Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 24

(Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers), pp.55-103.

Oudiz, G. and Sachs, J. (1984) 'Macroeconomic Policy Coordination Among the
Industrialized Economies,' Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1.

Oudiz, G. and Sachs, J. (1985) 'International Policy Coordination in Dynamic
Macroeconomies,' in W. Buiter and Marston, R. (eds.) International Economic Policy
Coordination (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Paul R. and Lehrman, L. (1982) The Case for Gold (Washington, D.C.: Cato
Institute).

Pavolsky, L. (1 933) Current Monetary Issues (Washington D.C.: Brookings Institute).

Reszat, B. (1987) 'Technical Analysis and Computer Trading,' Intereconomics,

May/June, pp.107-il.

67

Rogoff, K. (1985) 'Can International Monetary Policy Coordination be

Counterproductive?' Journal of International Economies, vol. 18, no. 3-4, pp.199-

217.

Roll, R. (1979) 'Violations of Purchasing Power Parity and their Implications for
Efficient International Commodity Markets,' in Sarnat, M., and Szego, G., (eds.),
International Finance and Trade, (Cambridge, Ma.: Ballinger).

Sachs, J. (1985) 'The Dollar and the Policy Mix: 1985,' Brookinis Papers on
Economic Activity 1.

Schulmeister, S. (1987) An Essay on Exchanie Rate Dynamics, Austrian Institute of
Economic Research.

Shafer, J., and Loopesko, B. (1983) 'Floating Exchange Rates after Ten Years,'
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp.1-70.

Simons, H. (1948) Economic Policy for a Competitive Society (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press).

Stockman, A. (1979) 'Monetary Control and Sterilization under Pegged Exchange
Rates,' unpublished paper, University of Rochester.

Stockman, A. (1980) 'A Theory of Exchange Rate Determination,' Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 88, pp.673-98.

68

Stockman, A. (1983) 'Real Exchange Rate Under Alternative Nominal Exchange Rate
Systems,' Journal of International, Money and Finance, vol. 2, pp.147-66.

Stockman, A. (1 987) 'The Equilibrium Approach to Exchange Rates,' Economic
Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, March/April, pp.12-30.

Summers, L. (1986) 'Does the Stock Market Rationally Reflect Fundamental

Values?' Journal of Finance, vol. 41, no. 3, July, pp.591-601.

Tobin, J. (1978) 'A Proposal for International Monetary Reform,' Eastern Economic
Journal, vol. 3, no. 3-4, July/October reprinted in his Essays in Economics. Theory
and Policy (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. (1981) 'The Framing of Decisions and the

Psychology of Choice,' Science, vol. 211, January, pp.453-58.

Vander Kraats, R. H., and Booth, L.D. (1983) 'Empirical Tests of the Monetary
Approach to Exchange Rate Determination,' Journal of International Money and
Finance, vol. 2, pp.255-78.

Williamson, J. (1985) 'The Exchange Rate System,' Policy Analyses in International
Economics, No.5 (Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics).

Williamson, J. and Miller, M. (1987) 'Targets and Indicators: A Blueprint for the
International Coordination of Economic Policy,' Policy Analyses in International

69

Economics, No.22, (Washington, D.C.: Institute of International Economics).

70

ENDNOTES

1. Steady-state inflation was introduced into the Dornbusch model in Frankel
(1979) and Buiter and Miller (1982).

2. Dornbusch (1980), Frankel (1984), Haache and Townend (1981), Backus (1984)
and Meese and Rogoff (1 983a).

3. The criticisms made here are spelled out in Frankel and Meese (1987) and
Froot (1987).

4. This point is elaborated in Frankel (1986) and Frankel and MacArthur (1987).

5. The literature began with Hamada (1985). A number of contributions appear
in Buiter and Marston (1985).

6. The consequences of coordination when policy-makers subscribe to conflicting

models such as the 12 in question are explored in Frankel and Rockett(1986). A
related point, which emerges also in Oudiz and Sachs (1984) and other empirical
studies of coordination, is that the magnitude of the transmission effects, whatever
their sign, is in any case so small that it is difficult to see how coordination could
be important.

7. For a survey, see Dornbusch (1985).
8. On the other hand, a statistically significant tendency for the real exchange
rate to regress to PPP is more apparent when 116 years of U.S.-U.K. data are

used. The speed of adjustment is estimated at 15 per cent a year in Frankel
(1986) and 9 per cent a year in Edison (1987). Given parameters so small in size,
and given the large magnitude of the disturbances to the real exchange rate in the

71

floating-rate data, it is not surprising that most studies on the short post-i 973
period have been statistically unable to reject zero.

9. Examples where a statistical failure to reject a random walk on the real
exchange rate is claimed as evidence in favor of an equilibrium theory include
RoIl (1979), Adler and Lehmann (1983), and Stockman (1987).

10. This disturbing trend in modern macroeconometrics is an extreme case of the
old problem that a statistical failure to reject a null hypothesis does not entitle

one to claim an interesting finding. The failure to reject may simply be due to
low power in the test, especially if the null hypothesis is a weak one, as Summers
(1986, p. 593-594) reminds us in the context of testing for efficient financial

markets. Traditionally in econometrics, the goal is supposed to be to succeed in
statistically rejecting one economically interesting hypothesis in favor of another,
i.e., to get results that are statistically significant at the 95 per cent level,N

rather than the reverse. What makes the trend away from this principle so
remarkable is that the popular null hypothesis of a random walk is so weak that a
failure to reject it is nothing other than a failure to explain any movement in the
variable of interest.

ii. Survey data on the expectations of market participants suggest that they
expect the exchange rate to regress to PPP at a rate of 12 to 17 per cent per
year. (Frankel and Froot, 1986, 1987.)

12. Of course one or two empirical observation does not constitute a statistical
test. A number of recent studies on monthly data claim a degree of success using
the long-term real interest differential to explain the real exchange rate:
Shafer and Loopesko (1983), Sachs (1985), Hutchison and Throop (1985), Golub et al

72

(1985), and Feldstein (1985). But it must be remembered that repeatedly in the past
a version of the monetary approach that has appeared to work well for the
sample period on which it was estimated has subsequently gone awry.

13. Krugman (1985), Marris (1985), and Frankel and Froot (1986).
14. Schulmeister (1987) offers a useful description of the various rules of
technical analysis that are in widest use, calculates that many of the rules would
have made money over the period 1 980-86 (p.9), cites a 1985 statistic from the

Group of 30 that 97 per cent of banks and 87 per cent of securities houses report
the belief that "the use of technical models has had an increasingly significant
impact on the market" (p.14), and expresses disapproval that economists have not
seriously studied such rules that are actually used by traders. Reszat (1 987) also

reports that technical analysis is in widespread use. Goodman (1979) finds that
the forecasts of technical analysts perform relatively well (for example, beating
the forward rate), but Blake, Beenstock and Brasse (1986) find the reverse.
15.

In their model there exists a riskier asset, which must pay a higher expected

return to compensate the rational investors to hold it. The "noise traders" hold
more of this asset because they have a mistaken idea of the risk-return tradeoff
(they "rush in where wise men fear to tread"), and so their share of wealth can
grow over time.

16. See Ito and Roley (1987).
1 7. Federal Reserve Bank of New York (1986).

18. The source is Bank of England (1986). See also Goodhart (1987, p.59).

73

19. 59 times greater, for the case of Germany, according to an estimate by
Schulmeister (1987, p.8).

20. The survey was conducted by the Economist, at a six-month horizon, for five
exchange rates, June 1981-December 1985.

21. According to Euromoney, August 1987, p. 113 one forecasting service makes
forecasts every 15 minutes. Another gives its customers beepers so they can be
contacted at short notice. Many of the services refused to give Euromoney
forecasts at a horizon as long as six months, saying their systems "'were

orientated [sic] towards a shorter-term horizon'" (p. 119). De Long et al call this
the "Wojnilower problem."

22. The survey data suggest that investors, while expecting a gradual return to
equilibrium at 6 or 12 month horizons, tend to extrapolate at 1 week or 1 month

horizons. This pattern is itself a violation of the principle of rationality that the
long run is the sum of iterated short runs; it is as if each trader thinks he can
ride the current trend a little longer, and at the first sign of a reversal will be

quick enough to get out before everyone else does. (At any horizon, a comparison
with actual ex post changes suggests that a rational expectation would be closer to
zero depreciation.)

23. Summers (1986) argues that, because variability is so great, neither the
econometrician nor the investor can tell if there are expected excess profits to be
made from buying an asset whose market price appears to exceed its fundamental

price due to a slow-disappearing 'fad.' Arrow (1982) argues similarly. Both cite
the work of Tversky and Kahneman (1981) that individuals overreact to current,

visible information, which in this context means putting too much weight on the

74

current spot price in forming their expectations, and not enough weight on long-

term fundamentals. Dornbusch (1982) shows how investors' extraneous beliefs,
such as an imagined future influence of the current account on the exchange rate,
can cause the spot rate to deviate far from the fundamentals rate; yet if the
current account changes slowly over time, again, neither the investor nor the
econometrician could detect the deviation except in very large samples.

24. See Helpman (1981), Helpman and Razin (1979, 1982), Stockman (1979, 1980,
1983, 1987), Miller and Wallace (1985) for some of the most influential

papers in this tradition.

25. The 1936 article by Simons "Rules versus Authorities in Monetary Policy"
reproduced in Simons (1948) already advances a sophisticated discussion of a
proposal for constant money.

26. We abstract entirely from dynamics and expectations. For a different
formulation see Dombusch (1 987a).

27. We noted above the need to decide whether income or spending should be
targeted. The point is significant for world consistency since an individual country
can achieve a nominal income target by an improvement in the external balance
thus possibly using beggar-thy-neighbor policy.

28. See the discussion in Cuddington (1983), Dornbusch (1986b, 1987a), and
McKinnon (1 984a,b).

29. For a recent assessment of apparent deviations from full market fundamentals
see the collection of essays in Hogarth and Reder (1986).

