                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                GENETIC ENDOWMENTS AND WEALTH INEQUALITY

                                       Daniel Barth
                                  Nicholas W. Papageorge
                                       Kevin Thom

                                    Working Paper 24642
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w24642


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 2018


We thank Aysu Okbay for constructing and sharing the polygenic scores used for
HRS respondents. We are also grateful for helpful comments from Robert Barbera, Daniel
Belsky, Lee Benham, Jess Benhabib, Daniel Benjamin, Daniel Bennett, Alberto Bisin,
Christopher Carroll, David Cesarini, Gabriella Conti, Stephanie DeLuca, Manasi Deshpande,
Weili Ding, Benjamin Domingue, Steven Durlauf, Jon Faust, Titus Galama, Barton Hamilton,
Bruce Hamilton, Joseph Hotz, Steven Lehrer, George-Levi Gayle, Robin Lumsdaine, Shelly
Lundberg, Luigi Pistaferri, Robert Pollak, Paul Romer, Simone Schaner, Stephan Siegel,
Matthew Shapiro, Dan Silverman, Jonathan Skinner, Rachel Thornton, Robert Topel, Jasmin
Wertz, Robert Willis, Jonathan Wright, and Basit Zafar, along with seminar participants at
CESR, Clemson, CUNY-Baruch College, Dartmouth, Duke, Johns Hopkins, Michigan, Penn
State, Rochester, UCSB, UNC-Chapel Hill, UW-Milwaukee, William and Mary, Bates White,
the 2016 HCEO Conference on Genetics and Social Science, the 2nd Annual Empirical
Microeconomics Conference at ASU, the 2017 NBER Cohort Studies meetings, the 2017
North American summer meetings of the Econometric Society, 2017 NBER Institute
(Aging), and the 2017 PAA Meetings. We acknowledge excellent research assistance from
Andrew Gray. Finally, the authors would like to note that a previous version of this paper
was circulated with the title “Genetic Ability, Wealth and Financial Decision-Making.”
The usual caveats apply. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Daniel Barth, Nicholas W. Papageorge, and Kevin Thom. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Genetic Endowments and Wealth Inequality
Daniel Barth, Nicholas W. Papageorge, and Kevin Thom
NBER Working Paper No. 24642
May 2018
JEL No. D14,D31,G11,H55,I24,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

We show that genetic endowments linked to educational attainment strongly and robustly predict
wealth at retirement. The estimated relationship is not fully explained by flexibly controlling for
education and labor income. We therefore investigate a host of additional mechanisms that could
help to explain the gene-wealth gradient, including inheritances, mortality, savings, risk
preferences, portfolio decisions, beliefs about the probabilities of macroeconomic events, and
planning horizons. The associations we report provide preliminary evidence that genetic
endowments related to human capital accumulation are associated with wealth not only through
educational attainment and labor income, but also through a facility with complex financial
decision-making. Our study illustrates how economic research seeking to understand sources of
inequality can benefit from recent advances in behavioral genetics linking specific observed
genetic endowments to economic outcomes.

Daniel Barth                                           Kevin Thom
Center for Economic and Social Research                New York University
University of Southern California                      19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor
dannybarth@gmail.com                                   New York, NY 10012-1119
                                                       kevin.thom@nyu.edu
Nicholas W. Papageorge
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
papageorge@jhu.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24642
1       Introduction
Wealth inequality in the United States and many other countries is large and growing (Saez
and Zucman, 2014; Jones, 2015). An extensive literature attempts to explain wealth inequal-
ity through variation in the earnings process, entrepreneurial talent, bequests, risk aversion,
and time-discounting. While these factors can generate a skewed wealth distribution, they
fail to reproduce other key empirical features including the thickness of the tail.1
    A new wave of theoretical work argues that cross-sectional heterogeneity in the returns
to wealth is required to match the basic features of the wealth distribution (Benhabib,
Bisin, and Zhu, 2011; Benhabib and Bisin, 2016). This argument is supported by a growing
empirical literature that finds substantial heterogeneity in such returns (Fagereng et al.,
2016; Benhabib, Bisin, and Luo, 2015; Bach, Thiemann, and Zucco, 2015). Much of this
heterogeneity persists over time, with some individuals earning consistently higher returns
to wealth (Fagereng et al., 2016).2 Despite its theoretical and empirical importance, little is
known about what drives such persistence. However, policy responses to wealth inequality
are likely to have different effects depending on the mechanisms through which persistent
heterogeneity operates — for example, whether this heterogeneity comes from variation in
preferences (e.g. risk aversion) or variation in skills (e.g. financial decision-making).
    In this paper, we identify a biological basis for heterogeneity in wealth: genetic endow-
ments related to human capital accumulation. In particular, we make use of molecular genetic
data in the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) along with recently estimated associations
between genetic markers and educational attainment. We show that the same observed ge-
netic markers that predict education also predict household wealth in the HRS. Importantly,
the estimated association between these markers and wealth is economically large and sta-
tistically significant after controlling for education and labor market income, suggesting that
these variants operate through additional channels. Indeed, we show that these markers pre-
dict parental transfers such as inheritances, mortality, and risk preferences. We also find they
are related to dimensions of financial decision-making, including stock market participation,
business ownership, the financial planning horizon, and macroeconomic expectations.
    While we do not observe returns directly, our results provide a possible genetic micro-
foundation for the persistent differences in returns to wealth needed to explain existing wealth
    1
      Some models can match the thickness of the tail, but only under implausible assumptions about the
level of heterogeneity in the earnings process. For example, Kindermann and Krueger (2014) require the top
0.25% of earners to earn 400-600 times more than the median earner. Empirically, this number is closer to
33.
    2
      In an earlier contribution, Yitzhaki (1987) finds that individuals with higher labor market income invest
in better performing assets. Because higher income is associated with higher wealth, this offers indirect
evidence of a positive correlation between wealth and the returns to wealth.


                                                      1
distributions. The genetic transmission of traits related to returns to wealth may thus provide
another source for the well-documented intergenerational persistence of wealth (Charles and
Hurst, 2003; De Nardi, 2004; Benhabib, Bisin, and Zhu, 2011). An understanding of the
intergenerational transmission of economic outcomes that does not account for the role of
genetics is likely to be incomplete, placing too much weight on other factors such as parental
investments and financial transfers.3 Moreover, because financial decisions and beliefs about
the macroeconomy play a role in explaining this gradient, relatively straightforward policy
tools such as stronger public pension schemes may help to reduce wealth inequality stemming
from genetic variation. This is especially relevant given the dramatic shift away from defined-
benefit retirement plans towards options that give individuals greater financial autonomy
(Poterba and Wise, 1998).
    Our work contributes to an existing literature on endowments, economic traits, and
household wealth. One strand of this work examines how various measures of “ability,” such
as IQ or cognitive test scores, predict household wealth and similar outcomes (Grinblatt,
Keloharju, and Linnainmaa, 2011; Grinblatt et al., 2015; Lillard and Willis, 2001).4 However,
parental investments and other environmental factors can directly affect test performance,
making it difficult to separate the effects of endowed traits from endogenous human capital
investments. A second strand of this literature focuses on genetic endowments, and seeks
to estimate their collective importance using twin studies. Twin studies have shown that
genetics play a non-trivial role in explaining financial behavior such as savings and portfolio
choices (Cronqvist and Siegel, 2014, 2015; Cesarini et al., 2010).5 However, while twin studies
can decompose the variance of an outcome into genetic and non-genetic contributions, they
do not identify which particular markers influence economic outcomes.6 Moreover, it is
typically impossible to apply twin methods to large and nationally representative longitudinal
studies, such as the HRS, which offer some of the richest data on household wealth and related
   3
     On the importance of inter-generational transmission of economic outcomes, a key contribution is Black,
Devereux, and Salvanes (2005).
   4
     As we discuss in greater detail in Section 2, when describing the genetic endowments examined in this
paper we purposefully avoid the term “ability” because it is likely overly simplistic and imprecise. For
example, the term does not emphasize multidimensionality of skill. The genetic endowments we study,
which predict educational attainment, may capture some types of cognitive skill, but may also capture a
host of other factors, such as personality or socio-emotional skills.
   5
     For example, using the Swedish Twin Registry, Cesarini et al. (2010) demonstrate that about 25% of
individual variation in portfolio risk is attributable to genetic variation while Cronqvist and Siegel (2015)
show that 35% of variation in propensity to save has a genetic basis. It is worth mentioning, however,
that these estimates may be biased upward if identical twins face more similar family environments than do
non-identical twins (Fagereng et al., 2015).
   6
     Variance decomposition exercises such as twins studies treat genes as unobserved factors. Testing hy-
potheses about specific mechanisms is conceptually possible using information on twins. In practice, learning
about interactions between observed and unobserved factors is generally difficult and relies on modeling as-
sumptions and requires large amounts of data to permit stratification by each potential mediating factor.


                                                     2
behavioral traits.
    The development of polygenic scores — predictive indices that aggregate many genetic
markers — offers a new approach to studying endowments that overcomes some of the
limitations of test scores and twin methods. Results from the state of the art in this literature
(Okbay et al., 2016; Lee and et al, 2018) allow for the construction of a polygenic score that
robustly predicts education, including in the HRS (Papageorge and Thom, 2016). Unlike
traditional proxies such as cognitive test sores (e.g. IQ), genetic measures are predetermined
if not exogenous, and are not causally affected by endogenous investments. Moreover, directly
observing these traits as an observable index in the HRS greatly eases the process of assessing
the mechanisms through which these endowments operate and estimating how they interact
with policies and macroeconomic conditions.
    We first establish a robust relationship between household wealth in retirement and the
average household polygenic score for educational attainment.7 A one-standard-deviation
increase in the score is associated with a 33.1 percent increase in household wealth (approx-
imately $144,000 in 2010 dollars). The relationship between the polygenic score and wealth
is present across time and education groups. Measures of educational attainment, including
years of education and completed degrees, explain over half of this relationship. Using de-
tailed income data from the Social Security Administration (SSA) as well as self-reported
labor earnings from the HRS, we find that labor income can explain only a small part of the
gene-wealth gradient that remains after controlling for education.8 These results indicate
that while education and labor market earnings are important sources of variation in house-
hold wealth, they explain only a portion of the relationship between genetic endowments
and wealth.9
    Next, we explore additional mechanisms that may explain the gene-wealth gradient. We
first examine intergenerational transfers and motivations for higher savings. We show that
the polygenic score is positively related to the probability of receiving an inheritance, but
not the size of the inheritance conditional on receiving one. We also find that individual
polygenic scores predict the objective probability of death as well as subjective beliefs about
mortality. Because higher expected longevity may lead to higher savings rates, we then test
   7
     In Section 3, we explain why we use a average household score and also discuss robustness to alternative
specifications.
   8
     As we explain in greater detail below when describing the measure of genetic endowments used in this
paper and when presenting results, all variables we use are measured with error, which means care must be
taken in how we interpret estimates. While controlling for income and earnings variables available for HRS
respondents does not fully explain the gene-wealth gradient, it is possible that less noisy measures of both
would fully explain the gradient.
   9
     Though higher lifetime-income households save more (Dynan, Skinner, and Zeldes, 2004), as Venti and
Wise (1998) demonstrate using HRS data, lifetime income does not fully explain wealth inequality.



                                                     3
whether higher polygenic score households save more, but we find no empirical evidence of
such a mechanism.10
    While we find no relationship between the polygenic score and savings rates, we do find a
relationship with how households invest and save. We first document an association between
the polygenic score and measures of risk tolerance constructed from responses to hypotheti-
cal income and wealth gambles.11 Higher polygenic score households are also more likely to
own businesses and invest in the stock market. Motivated by the findings on stock market
participation, we next analyze aspects of financial decision-making. We show that lower
polygenic scores predict the reporting of beliefs about the probabilities of macroeconomic
events that are at odds with objectively correct probabilities and that are heaped on prob-
abilities of 0 percent or 100 percent (a phenomenon we refer to as “extreme beliefs”). Large
deviations between subjective and objective probabilities may reflect difficulty with proba-
bilistic thinking. We also find that higher polygenic score households report longer planning
horizons for financial decisions. This may indicate that these households are more patient, or
that they are more comfortable with complex and abstract decision problems and therefore
adopt longer planning horizons.
    We end our study by examining how the polygenic score interacts with a policy relevant
variable: pensions. Because defined-benefit pensions offer recipients a guaranteed stream
of income without requiring them to make choices about contribution rates or asset com-
position, such plans should reduce differences in wealth that arise from skill in financial
decision-making. We find that the gene-wealth gradient is over five times as large for the
subset of households who do not participate in defined-benefit pension plans. This exercise
is useful for two reasons. First, it offers compelling support for the hypothesis that financial
decisions may be a source of the gene-wealth gradient. Second, it also highlights a poten-
tially important policy consideration. While more flexible plans like 401(k) accounts grant
individuals greater freedom in planning for retirement, they may also reduce the welfare of
those who find it more difficult to navigate complex financial choices.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides details on the
genetic index used in this paper, as well as its use in economics. Section 3 introduces the
data and provides details on key variables used in this study. Section 4 presents our main
results on the relationship between the average household polygenic score and household
wealth. Section 5 explores a host of possible mechanisms that can explain the gene-wealth
  10
     This is related to the findings of Cronqvist and Siegel (2015), who use a twins design to study a genetic
basis for savings behavior. However, they find that genes related to savings do not operate through genes
related to education, but instead through time preference and self control because of genetic correlations
between savings, smoking, and obesity.
  11
     Previous research suggests that risk aversion has a genetic basis (Cesarini et al., 2009).


                                                      4
gradient, including standard factors established in the literature along with measures of
financial decision-making. Section 6 concludes.


2       Molecular Genetic Data and Economic Analysis
Following recent developments in the genetics literature, we summarize the genetic factors
related to educational attainment using a linear index known as a polygenic score. In this
section, we first provide details on the construction of the particular polygenic score that we
use. We then discuss what this approach can add to economic analysis.


2.1     Constructing the Polygenic Score
2.1.1    The Human Genome

The human genome consists of approximately 3 billion nucleotide pairs spread out over
23 chromosomes.12 A DNA molecule is often thought of as double-helix ladder, with the
nucleotide base pairs forming the “rungs” of the ladder. Each rung can either be an adenine-
thymine (AT) pair, or a guanine-cytosine (GC) pair. Thus, the human genome can be
thought of as a series of 3 billion genetic addresses, each of which contains a particular base
pair molecule in a particular position.13 Furthermore, each individual possesses two copies
of each chromosome, one from each parent. A gene refers to a particular subsequence of base
pairs within a chromosome which contain instructions for a particular enzyme or functional
molecule. Genes vary in length and may consist of thousands of base pairs.
    At the vast majority of locations in the genome (about 99%), there is no variation across
individuals in the nucleotide pair that is present. At the remaining locations (less than
1%), the base pair may differ across individuals.14 Such locations are referred to as single-
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs, pronounced “snips”). Particular SNPs are referred to by
  12
      Much of the background information presented here on the human genome follows Beauchamp et al.
(2011) and Benjamin et al. (2012).
   13
      If the DNA strand can be thought of as a ladder with the nucleotide pairs being the rungs, then the rails
or sides of the ladder are formed by phosphate and sugar molecules. These rails can be distinguished as either
the positive (+) or negative (−) strands. At a particular location, it will matter which nucleotide molecule
is attached to which strand. For example, if there is an adenine-thymine pair in a particular position where
the adenine molecule is attached to the positive strand, this would be denoted by an A. However, if instead
the thymine molecule were attached to the positive strand, this would be denoted by a T. This means that
four possible variants could exist at a given address: A, T, G, or C, depending on which nucleotide pair
is present, and the position of that pair relative to the positive strand. However, most SNPs are biallelic,
meaning that there are only two observed alleles at a particular location.
   14
      We also note that other forms of genetic variation exist. Such variation is typically referred to as
structural variation and may include deletions, insertions, and copy-number variations. (Feuk, Carson, and
Scherer, 2006).


                                                      5
a name (e.g. rs7937), which indicates its position in the genome. For each individual and at
each SNP location, we can typically record an individual’s genotype by counting the number
of copies of a reference molecule (also called an allele, either AT or GC) that an individual
possesses at a particular location. Since each individual has two copies of each chromosome,
an individual can either have zero, one, or two instances of the reference allele. Molecular
genetic data thus most commonly take the form of a series of count variables indicating
the number of copies of the reference allele possessed by an individual at a particular SNP
(e.g. rs7937i ∈ {0, 1, 2}). The maximum value of 2 reflects the fact that an individual can
have at most two copies of the reference allele — one from each parent. A major task of
behavioral genetics involves determining which, if any, of these SNP variables are associated
with behavioral outcomes.

2.1.2   Genetic Studies, GWAS, and Polygenic Scores

Twins studies account for much of the existing literature on genetics and economic behaviors.
A standard twins methodology estimates the fraction of the variance of a particular outcome
due to genetic factors by comparing the outcomes of monozygotic (identical) twins and
dizygotic (fraternal) twins. While monozygotic twins share nearly all SNPs in common,
dizygotic twins will share only about 50 percent of SNPs. Twins studies often assume the
following data generating process for an outcome of interest, Yif for individual i in family f :

                                       Yif = Ai + Cf + Ei                                       (1)

Here Ai represents an additive genetic component, Cf represents common environmental
factors affecting all individuals in family f , and Ei represents unique environmental factors
affecting individual i. Differences in the covariance of Yif between monozygotic and dizygotic
twins allows one to identify the heritability of this outcome, which is the fraction of the
variance of Yif accounted for by genetic differences: VV ar(Y
                                                           ar(Ai )
                                                               if )
                                                                    . Existing twins studies deliver
heritability estimates of around 40% for education (Branigan, McCallum, and Freese, 2013).
    While twins studies provide an estimate of how much genetic factors collectively matter
for explaining variation in a given trait, they do not reveal which specific SNPs are relevant.
By contrast, Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) scan the entire genome and estimate
associations between individual SNPs and outcomes of interest. A GWAS typically proceeds
by gathering genotypic data on J observable SNPs {SN Pij }Jj=1 and estimating J separate
regressions similar to the following:

                                   Yi = µXi0 + βj SN Pij + ij                                  (2)

                                                 6
Here SN Pij measures the number of copies of the reference allele possessed by individual
i for SNP j, and Xi is a vector of control variables.15 A standard practice is to include
several principal components of the full matrix of SNP data {SN Pij }Jj=1 as essential controls.
One concern is that associations between a SNP and an outcome could reflect population
stratification. For example, if a particular SNP is more common in a specific ancestry
group (e.g. Southern Europeans), then an observed association between this SNP and the
outcome of interest might reflect a combination of the biological function of the SNP and the
common environment shared by this ancestry group. Variation in the principal components
captures variation in genetic ancestry groups, so controlling for these factors helps account
for population stratification (Price et al., 2006). In this sense, the principal components help
to control for ethnic background factors that would be absorbed by family fixed effects in
research designs exploiting within-family variation. Unless otherwise noted, the principal
components are always included in our regression specifications.
                                                                                   n oJ
    The J individual regressions in a GWAS produce a set of coefficients, βbj              , with
                                                                                       j=1
associated standard errors and p-values. Researchers interested in studying individual genetic
markers typically focus on those SNPs exhibiting the strongest GWAS associations.16 Since
traits like education are influenced by a large number of genetic markers with small influences,
GWAS results are often used to construct polygenic scores — predictive indices formed by
linear combinations of SNPs. A polygenic score for a trait or outcome of interest is therefore
given by:
                                                      J
                                                      X
                                            P GSi =         βej SN Pi                                     (3)
                                                      j=1
                       n       oJ
Here, the weights        βej          represent transformations of the original GWAS coefficients,
                                j=1
n        oJ
  βbj     . This predictive index can be thought of as the best SNP-based linear predictor
      j=1
of the common genetic component Ai from the linear model specified in Equation (1). Using
the unadjusted coefficients as the PGS weights could reduce the accuracy of the index in the
presence of correlation between SNPs (called linkage disequilibrium, or LD in the genetics
literature), or if the coefficients are imprecisely estimated. One method for adjusting these
    15
      Separate regressions for each SNP are estimated because in practice, one typically has many more
genotyped SNPs than observations in a discovery sample.
   16
      Given the large number of regression equations being estimated, correction for multiple hypothesis
testing has been a key concern in this literature. For the purposes of determining whether an individual
SNP-outcome association is statistically significant, the literature has adopted stringent p-value thresholds.
A benchmark threshold for genome wide significance is p < 5 × 10−8 . Stringent thresholds were developed in
part as a response to earlier methods used to measure gene-outcome associations using so-called candidate
genes, which are genes that the researcher believes may be implicated in an outcome arising from knowledge
of biological processes. This approach suffered from false positives due to an uncorrected multiple-hypothesis
testing problem (Benjamin et al., 2012).


                                                      7
coefficients and constructing PGS weights — the one used to construct the score that we
study — is the LDpred procedure of Vilhjalmsson (2015). LDpred weights are constructed
                                                                        n oJ
through a Bayesian approach that updates a prior given the GWAS results βbj     and the
                                                                                                 j=1
                                                           17
covariance matrix of the SNPs (the LD matrix).                  The LDpred weight βej is the expected
value of the resulting posterior distribution.
    GWAS results, and gene discovery studies more generally, have largely focused on med-
ical or health-related outcomes including smoking (Bierut, 2010; Thorgeirsson et al., 2010)
and obesity (Locke et al., 2015). However, the increasing availability of molecular genetic
data has made it possible to perform well-powered GWAS for behavioral traits with more
distant relationships to underlying biological mechanisms. In particular, a series of landmark
studies have delivered the first GWAS associations between individual SNPs and educational
attainment (Rietveld et al. (2013); Okbay et al. (2016); Lee and et al (2018)). Existing work
shows that polygenic scores for educational attainment based on these GWAS predict labor
market outcomes including earnings (Papageorge and Thom, 2016), and other measures of
adult success (Belsky et al., 2016), even after controlling for completed education.
    In this paper, we study a polygenic score based on the educational attainment GWAS
results from Lee and et al (2018), which featured a discovery sample of over 1.1 million
people. The score is constructed with the LDpred method, using parameters outlined in
Okbay, Benjamin, and Visscher (2018).18 We use a score based on the LDpred method
because it has been shown to increase out of sample predictive power relative to alternate
approaches such as pruning and trimming (Okbay et al., 2016).19 Importantly, HRS data
  17
    The prior used for LDpred puts probability p on the event that any SNP has a non-zero association with
the outcome, and conditional on
                              having a non-zero association, it is assumed that the true SNP coefficients
                            h2
                       
are distributed βj ∼ N 0, Mgp , where the variance depends on the heritability of the trait, h2g , the number
of SNPs used in the score, M , and the assumed probability that a SNP has a non-zero association, p.
  18
     Specifically, the score is based on GWAS associations for 1,104,681 SNPs that pass the inclusion criteria
documented in Okbay, Benjamin, and Visscher (2018). The LD matrix is estimated using 8,353 geneti-
cally European individuals in the HRS passing certain quality control measures for the genetic data. When
correcting a SNP association for possible correlation with other SNPs, one considers possible correlations
between the SNP and other SNPs within a particular neighborhood of that SNPs. The size of this neigh-
borhood (number of adjacent SNPs considered in either direction of the SNP) is given by the LD window.
The score we use is constructed with an LD window of M/3000, where M is the number of included SNPs.
The prior used to construct the score assumes that there is a probability p = 1 that a SNP is has a non-zero
association. It is assumed that non-zero associations are distributed normally with mean zero, and a variance
         h2
equal to Mgp , where h2g is a heritability estimate derived from the GWAS summary statistics for each SNP
(Vilhjalmsson, 2015), p is the assumed probability of a non-zero association, and M is the number of SNPs
included in the analysis.
  19
     We note that there are several alternative methods for constructing the weights used for polygenic scores.
One common strategy for adjusting these coefficients, called pruning and trimming, sets βej = 0 for SNPs
that are highly correlated with other SNPs, as well as those with high p-values. We discuss robustness to
alternative methods to construct scores in the Appendix.



                                                      8
                                                          n   oJ
are not used to estimate the GWAS associations βbj          for this score, so every analysis in
                                                       j=1
this study is an out-of-sample exercise. Prediction results from Lee and et al (2018) suggest
that this score explains approximately 10.6 percent of the variation of years of schooling in
the Health and Retirement Study. In what follows, we refer to this score as the Educational
Attainment or EA score.20

2.1.3    Interpreting Variation in the EA Score

In the absence of measurement error or gene-environment correlations, we could interpret
variation in the EA score as reflecting differences across individuals in genetic endowments
that influence personal traits that promote educational attainment. Due to measurement
error, one cannot use the EA score to draw conclusions about the total amount of variation
in an outcome that is attributable to genetic endowments. This is one drawback of the use
of polygenic scores relative to twin studies.
    It is reasonable to suspect that genetic endowments related to educational attainment
may affect biological processes related to cognition that facilitate learning. Indeed, pathway
analyses suggest that several of the SNPs most heavily tied to educational attainment are
linked to biological processes known to be involved in brain development and cognitive
processes (Lee and et al, 2018; Okbay et al., 2016). Moreover, results from Belsky et al.
(2016) suggest that an earlier polygenic score for educational attainment predicts cognitive
test scores for children in elementary school. However, it is important to note that the
GWAS associations can reflect a range of traits — both cognitive and non-cognitive — that
affect educational attainment through diverse mechanisms. The EA score may very well
reflect personality traits and other attributes in addition to cognition.
    One of the largest challenges in interpreting variation in the EA score comes from gene-
environment correlations. In particular, because individuals inherit their genetic material
from their parents, and those parents shape childhood environments, differences in the EA
score could reflect not only differences in biological traits that promote educational attain-
ment but also environmental factors that affect education and other outcomes regardless of
one’s biology. Lee and et al (2018) find that associations between SNPs and educational
attainment tend to be smaller using only within-family variation as opposed to within and
across family variation. The SNPs that enter the EA score may therefore operate partially
through environmental channels such as parental resources and sibling spill-overs. While
some of our empirical specifications include controls for parental education, this is likely an
  20
     We maintain this nomenclature to distinguish this polygenic score from others that have been constructed
to summarize genetic endowments related to different outcomes, such as depression, smoking or subjective
well-being.


                                                     9
incomplete measure of investments or rearing environments. Thus, an important limitation
of our analyses is that we are not able to cleanly separate the association between the EA
score and wealth into biological and environmental components.
    Finally, we caution against interpreting variation in the EA score across ethnic ancestry
groups. When computing the polygenic score in the HRS sample, we only consider indi-
viduals of genetic European ancestry as categorized by the HRS.21 The EA score we study
was constructed using results from a sample of individuals of European ancestry.22 Previous
work has shown that polygenic scores based on GWAS of genetic Europeans lack predictive
power and in some cases can generate bizarre predictions when applied to non-European
sub-samples. For example, applying a polygenic score for height discovered on a sample of
individuals of European descent predicts very low average height relative to the observed
distribution if applied to individuals of African descent (Martin et al., 2017).23 It would thus
be misleading and irresponsible to use a polygenic score for education to make predictions
about individuals who are not of European descent.

2.1.4    Polygenic Scores and Economic Analysis

Polygenic scores like the EA score described here have many potentially useful applications
in economic analysis. As Beauchamp et al. (2011) note, such scores could be used to control
for traditionally unobserved characteristics when estimating the effects of an intervention.
These could improve the precision of an estimated effect, or reduce bias in the case of
non-experimental studies. The scores could also be useful in uncovering treatment effect
heterogeneity on the basis of biological factors. Schmitz and Conley (2017) offer a useful
example, demonstrating that the effect of Vietnam conscription on educational attainment
varied on the basis of an earlier EA score.
    Our approach is to view the polygenic score as providing information about the struc-
ture of heterogeneity in the economy, and therefore as an important economic object in its
own right. Our goal in studying the EA score and its relationship with wealth is to bet-
ter understand whether previously unobserved biological factors influence household wealth
accumulation, and to learn about which economic mechanisms (e.g. income, risk-aversion,
decision-making, etc.) may link these factors with household outcomes.
  21
     As part of the genetic data release, the HRS also released a file flagging 8,652 individuals as being of
European descent based on their genetic markers. The HRS defines such individuals as “... all self-reported
non-Hispanic whites that had [principal component] loadings within ± one standard deviations of the mean
for eigenvectors 1 and 2 in the [principal components] analysis of all unrelated study subjects.”
  22
     It is worth mentioning that our results are virtually unchanged if we instead restrict our attention to
any HRS individuals who self-identify as being of European descent.
  23
     The authors write, “the African populations sampled are genetically predicted to be considerably shorter
than all Europeans and minimally taller than East Asians, which contradicts empirical observations (p. 7)”

                                                     10
    Our use of the EA score as a measure of biological traits linked to human capital is
related to previous attempts in the literature to measure ability through the use of tests
scores such as IQ or the AFQT. Ability is often interpreted as the innate (pre-investment)
characteristics of an individual that influence human capital accumulation and the returns
to human capital investments (Becker, 1964). We note two important differences between
the EA score and a measure like IQ that make it valuable to study polygenic scores. First,
a polygenic score like the EA score can overcome some interpretational challenges related
to IQ and other cognitive test scores. Environmental factors have been found to influence
intelligence test results and to moderate genetic influences on IQ (Tucker-Drob and Bates,
2015). It is true that differences in the EA score may reflect differences in environments
or investments because parents with high EA scores may also be more likely to invest in
their children. However, the EA score is fixed at conception, which means that post-birth
investments cannot causally change the value of the score. A measure like IQ suffers from
both of these interpretational challenges. High IQ parents might have high IQ children
because of the genes that they pass on, but also because of the positive investments that
they make. That is, since IQ is not determined at conception, it reflects a) individual
biological traits, b) correlations between these biological traits and environments, and c)
the direct influence of parental investments on IQ test performance. This third channel
represents a source of endogeneity bias that is not present in the use of the EA score.
    Compared to a cognitive test score like IQ, the EA score may also measure a wider variety
of relevant endowments. This is especially important given research, including relatively
recent papers in economics, emphasizing the importance of both cognitive and non-cognitive
skills in shaping life-cycle outcomes (Heckman and Rubinstein, 2001). Existing evidence
suggests a correlation of approximately 0.20 between a cognitive test score available for
HRS respondents and the EA score (Papageorge and Thom, 2016). This relatively modest
correlation could arise if both variables measure the same underlying cognitive traits with
error, or if they measure different traits. However, Papageorge and Thom (2016) find that
the relationship between the EA score and income differs substantially from the relationship
between later-life cognition scores and income, suggesting that the EA score contains unique
information.24
    In light of the issues discussed in the section, we interpret the EA score as measuring
a basket of genetic factors that influence traits relevant for human capital accumulation.
They could relate to the type of cognitive function captured by test scores, but may also
  24
     The cognitive test administered to HRS respondents was designed to measure cognitive decline among
aging adults, which underscores the point that it measures different factors than the EA score. We discuss
this point more in Section 5 when we discuss mechanisms explaining the gene-wealth gradient.



                                                   11
include socio-emotional skills and other personality traits. Learning more about how these
endowments are linked to economic behavior helps us to understand more about the genetic
factors that are important for education. Moreover, understanding how these endowments
operate, including their associations with other economic behavior and outcomes, sheds light
on the structure of heterogeneity in the economy. The fact that these endowments are genetic
matters because their transmission will account for some of the intergenerational persistence
of inequality in outcomes, including wealth.


3      The HRS Sample and Key Economic Variables
In this section we introduce data on the key economic variables we study, including demo-
graphics and family structure, wealth, and income, among others. We also discuss our unit of
analysis (the household) and provide summary statistics for relevant variables. Descriptive
statistics for the genetic data are provided in Section 4.


3.1     Sample Construction
The Health and Retirement Study (HRS) is a longitudinal panel study that follows Americans
over age 50 and their partners. Surveys began in 1992 and occur every two years. The HRS
collected genetic samples from just under 20,000 individuals over the course of four waves
(2006, 2008, 2010, 2012). Our sample includes only those genotyped in the 2006 and 2008
waves, since the 2012 wave is not currently available, and the polygenic score we use has not
yet been constructed for the 2010 wave.25 Individuals in the genotyped sample tend to be
born in younger birth cohorts because survival until at least 2006 is required for inclusion.
Moreover, women and individuals with more education were more likely to agree to the
collection of genetic data.26
    We construct our main analysis sample by first considering all households in which we
observe at least one individual who is classified as a genetic European by the Health and
Retirement Study. We drop households in which any member self-identifies as non-white.27
We further restrict our sample to include only retired households in years 1996, 1998, and
  25
      A less powerful score based on the results of Okbay et al. (2016) is available for respondents in the
2006-2010 waves. In Appendix B, we show that the main association between this earlier score and wealth
is robust to the inclusion of the 2010 sample (see Table S11).
   26
      In Appendix A we provide summary statistics on differences between genotyped versus non-genotyped
HRS respondents.
   27
      We also exclude from the sample male-male and female-female households, as well as households with
more than two members, because these households comprise very few observations and may indicate unique
circumstances that are not adequately captured by our empirical analysis.



                                                    12
2002-2010.28 This restriction aims to balance concerns about measurement error in wealth
with concerns about selection biases that arise if we drop too many observations from the
analysis. Further details on wealth data, including measurement problems, are found in
the following section.29 The resulting analytic sample includes 4,297 households and 15,670
household-year observations, with responses supplied for an average of 3.6 waves.30


3.2     Unit of Analysis: Retired Households
Wealth in the HRS is reported at the household level, as are other economic variables of
interest such as home ownership and stock market participation. Therefore, our main unit of
analysis is the household. Of the 4,297 households we examine, there are three types: 3,026
households that are “coupled,” which means both a male and a female are present in at least
one wave of the sample, 306 households with only a female member present for all sample
observations of that household, and 957 households with only a male member present for all
sample observations of that household.
    However, our measure of genetic endowments is calculated for individuals rather than
households. How best to aggregate EA scores within two-person households is not straight-
forward. In the empirical analysis, our approach is to take the simple average of EA scores
within the household (that is, the average of the two household member scores), but to
include individual-level covariates (separately for male and female household members) as
controls in the regressions. This is only one of many possible approaches, such as including
separate EA scores (for each gender or for both the financial respondent and the non-financial
respondent), or using the maximum or minimum score within the household. In Appendix
B, we repeat our main specification using each of these alternative approaches and show
that our results are qualitatively unchanged across specifications. For the remainder of our
  28
     A household is categorized as “retired” if every member of the household is either not working for pay
or reports that they are retired. This raises the possibility that some households are included in the sample
because they are unemployed, even if they are not retired. This is unlikely to affect our sample given the
age of the HRS respondents.
  29
     In a series of robustness checks, discussed in greater detail below, we assess the robustness of our main
results to alternative definitions of wealth and to alternative sample construction restrictions. In general,
we find that our main results are robust to these alternatives. Results from robustness checks are available
in Appendix B.
  30
     We use household to refer to sets of individuals who cohabitate and report common household-level
wealth information. We note, however, that households in the HRS could be connected if, for example, one
household splits as the result of divorce to become two separate households with distinct finances. We refer
to a family as a set of households that are linked in this way. For example in the event of a divorce, a
once-married couple would be observed as one household before the divorce, but would be observed as two
separate households after the divorce. Together we consider these households as one family, though they
would contribute three separate households to our data set. In subsequent analyses we cluster standard
errors at the family level. Of the 4,297 households in our analytical sample, there are 4,182 distinct families.


                                                      13
analysis, unless otherwise noted, the EA score refers to the average household EA score.
    Family structure could affect our outcomes of interest, either mechanically through
household composition or through selection on unobservables. As a robustness check, we
re-estimate our main wealth results including only households that had two members at
some point in the sample. Our main results are unchanged by including only two-member
households, and we therefore choose to use the full sample of households in our primary
specifications. A related issue arises when only one member of the household is genotyped.
In such cases, we simply use that household member’s genetic information. In Appendix B,
we show that these households can be excluded without changing results.
    Finally, our main specifications include only retired households. Defined benefit pension
income, which can be an important source of household resources at retirement, is poorly
measured for individuals who are still working and not drawing pension income. However, we
show in a robustness test that our results are robust to including both retired and non-retired
households, and we discuss the details of our wealth measures below.


3.3     Description of Key Economic Variables
3.3.1   Summary Statistics for Basic Controls

Table 1 offers summary statistics for four groups of households: (1) all households, regardless
of household structure, (2) coupled households, i.e., those with both a male and a female
present in at least one wave of the sample, (3) households with only a female member present
for all sample observations of that household, and (4) households with only a male member
present for all sample observations of that household.
    The first two rows of Table 1 show male and female birth years, respectively. Average birth
years in the sample range between 1931 and 1935 across the different household structures,
with standard deviations between 8.7 and 10.7 years. The next two rows show the mean
and standard deviations of years of schooling for males and females, respectively. Across
households structures, average years of schooling are between 12.5-12.8 years. The remaining
rows report the fraction of males and females that comprise each degree category: no degree,
GED, high school, two-year, four-year, masters, professional, unknown/some college. Across
household structures, roughly 21% of females and 27% of males attain at least some post-
secondary education.




                                              14
3.3.2    Household Income

Our primary source of earned income data comes from the Respondent Cross-Year Sum-
mary Earnings data set in the HRS. This file links individuals in the HRS with income
data available through the Master Earnings File (MEF) maintained by the Social Security
Administration (SSA). The MEF is constructed using data from employers’ reports as well
as Internal Revenue Service records including W-2 forms and other annual tax figures. The
data include “regular wages and salaries, tips, self-employment income, and deferred com-
pensation” (Olsen and Hudson, 2009).31 The Respondent Cross-Year Summary Earnings
provides annual MEF income totals for individuals over the period 1951-2013. Our baseline
income measure is the sum of all earned income in the MEF associated with a household for
all available years through 2010. This may include earnings from deceased spouses that are
not directly observed in the HRS.32
    The SSA data contain earnings information for the entirety of respondents’ working
lives. This offers a clear advantage relative to the self-reported income measures in the
HRS, which only cover older ages. However, an important limitation of the SSA data is
that they are top-coded at the taxable maximum amount for Social Security payroll taxes.
This taxable maximum has changed substantially over time. In some years, especially in
the 1960s and 1970s, a substantial portion of households fall into this category since the
maximum was fairly low. For example, in 1965 the maximum was $4,800 (which is about
$38,000 in 2018 dollars). In our sample, the average number of person-years during which
one income observation was top-coded is 12. Less than one-third (29%) of households are
never top-coded. To partially correct for top-coding, we use Current Population Survey
(CPS) data to calculate mean income for people earning at least the top-coded level in each
year over the period 1961-2010. We then replace a top coded amount in the SSA data with
the conditional mean from the CPS data for each of these years.33 This is admittedly an
imperfect solution. As we discuss below, our main results are robust to different ways of
treating top-coded income observations.
  31
      Olsen and Hudson (2009) offer a detailed discussion of the evolution of the MEF, including the variety
of records used to construct annual income in the file, as well as an account of how the kinds of income
included in the MEF changed over time.
   32
      For each year, we add observed earnings for an individual with any earnings reported for a deceased
spouse in the Deceased Spouse Cross-Year Summary Earnings data set. After converting annual totals to
real 2010 dollars, we then sum up all person-year income observations for each person in a household up
through 2010.
   33
      For example, if an individual earned $10,000 (nominal) in 1965, we would observe a top-coded income
amount of $4,800 in the SSA file. The mean CPS income for those earning at least $4,800 in 1965 is $8,103
so we would replace this individuals’ income (any 1965 SSA amount of at least $4,800) with $8,103, which
is approximately $56,096 in 2010 dollars.



                                                    15
    Summary statistics on the income measure are found in Table 2. The first row records the
proportion of households with non-missing income data, which is 90%. The second row shows
the proportion of households with zero reported taxable income, which is approximately 1%,
driven mostly by female-only and male-only households. The third and fourth rows of Panel
A show the extent of top-coding in the SSA data. Across all households, the average number
of top-coded years is 12.19. For coupled households, the average is 15.06, while for female-
only and male-only households, the average is 3.5 and 10.8, respectively, which reflects that
female-only household exhibit substantially lower income. A similar patten emerges in the
fourth row of Panel A, which reports the fraction of households that are never observed with
a top-coded year.
    The last row of Panel A of Table 2 reports the mean and standard deviation of total
lifetime SSA income for the household. Average total lifetime income in 2010 dollars is about
$2,171,000 for all households and about $2,476,000 for coupled households. Corresponding
means for female-only and male-only households are $1,301,000 and $1,863,000, respectively.
In Panel B of Table 2 we report the distribution of total SSA income by household structure.
The first row reports quantiles for all households, with remaining rows doing so by household
type. The tenth percentile is just over $429,000. At the 25th percentile, household income
is about $1,122,000 in total over the lifecycle. The median is $2,066,000 and the top 10%
earned at least $3,941,000. Patterns of differences across households are similar across the
distribution, with coupled households earning the most followed by male-only and then
female-only households.

3.3.3   Household Wealth

The HRS contains rich and detailed information on household wealth. Unfortunately, data
related to household retirement wealth and stock market participation pose various chal-
lenges. Values of defined contribution plans from previous jobs are not asked in every wave;
stock allocations in defined contribution plans are only asked in certain waves and only for
plans associated with the current employer; and expected defined-benefit pension income is
asked only of plans at the current employer. In some cases, such issues may be relatively
unimportant. However, because this paper studies heterogeneity in wealth for elderly house-
holds, having a complete picture of retirement assets is of fundamental importance. While
some data issues have no hope of being resolved, our sample comprises households for whom
wealth data are most likely to be both accurate and comprehensive.
    Our measure of total wealth is designed to encompass all components of household wealth.
Our data include the present value of all pension, annuity, and social security income, which


                                             16
come from the RAND HRS income files, as well as the net value of housing (including primary
and secondary residences as well as investment property), the net value of private businesses
and vehicles, all financial assets including cash, checking accounts, savings accounts, CDs,
stocks and stock mutual funds, bonds and bond mutual funds, trusts, and other financial
assets, less the net value of non-housing debt. Each of these are taken from the RAND HRS
wealth files.34 Further, we include the account value of all defined contribution retirement
plans.35 We exclude from our wealth measure values of insurance.36 All monetary values
are measured in 2010 dollars. We winsorize the log of real total household wealth at the 1st ,
and 99th percentiles.
     We note that our measure of wealth includes both marketable securities, such as stocks
which can be easily sold at publicly available prices, and non-marketable assets such as
social security income. Our measure of wealth is therefore intended to capture the overall
financial security of households rather than the market value of household assets. Our results
are qualitatively unchanged if we limit household wealth to exclude retirement income and
housing, which can be interpreted as the market value of households’ pure financial assets.
Further details on wealth, including possible reasons for mismeasurement and alternative
subsamples, are found in Appendix A.
     Table 3 shows the 10th , 25th , 50th , 75th , and 90th percentiles of our various wealth mea-
sures, as well as the mean. The first row of Table 3 shows total wealth winsorized at the 1st
and 99th percentiles, including both housing and the present value of all retirement income.
The average for our sample is $563,060. However, the median individual has total wealth of
roughly $321,040, which is substantially lower. This is due to high levels of wealth among
individuals in the upper tail; the 10th percentile of wealth is $40,730, whereas wealth at
the 90th percentile is $1,311,970. The second through fourth rows of Table 3 show wealth
excluding the values of housing, account balances in defined contribution plans and the
present value of retirement income (social security and defined-benefit pensions), and both
housing and retirement income. A few interesting patterns emerge. First, housing makes
up a larger portion of total wealth at the lower end of the distribution. For example, at
the 10th percentile housing wealth is nearly half of total wealth, whereas it accounts for a
little less than one-fourth of total wealth at the 90th percentile. A similar result applies to
  34
     When calculating the present discounted value of annuity, social security, and defined-benefit pension
income, we follow Yogo (2016) and assume a 1.5% guaranteed rate of return, discounted by the probability
of death in each year conditional on age, cohort and gender of the financial respondent as determined by the
Social Security life tables.
  35
     Plans that are maintained either at previous employers for working households, or are still maintained
by the previous employer for retired households, are referred to by the HRS as “dormant plans.”
  36
     Without further details on the structure or terms of specific insurance products it is difficult to estimate
a market value for these items.


                                                       17
retirement wealth. In fact, for individuals at the 10th percentile, housing and retirement
wealth comprise the entirety of household wealth.37


4      The EA Score and Wealth
4.1     EA Score in the HRS Sample
Figure 1 plots the smoothed distribution of the EA score for our analytic sample. The EA
score is normalized to have mean zero and variance of one, and is approximately normally
distributed.
    The first four columns of Panel A of Table 4 report average values of our basic demo-
graphic variables for each quartile of the individual EA score distribution. Note that we have
non-missing EA scores for 5,692 distinct individuals and here we divide them into quartiles
based on their individual EA scores, not the average EA score in their household. Column
[5] reports p-values from a test of mean differences comparing the fourth and first quartiles.
Individuals in the highest EA score quartile tend to be older, are more likely to be male, have
higher values for both mother’s and father’s years of schooling, have more years of schooling
themselves, and are more likely to be members of a two-person household.
    Importantly, because the SNPs associated with the EA score are not found on sex chro-
mosomes, the slightly higher representation of men in the fourth quartile of the EA score
must result from selection.38 This is likely because higher EA score people live longer on
average (see Section 5 below), and men have higher average mortality rates than women.
Combined with the fact that one must have survived until at least 2006 to be genotyped, it
is unsurprising that higher EA score people tend to be slightly over-represented by men.39
    Panel B of Table 4 shifts attention to the household and divides households into quartiles
based on the average EA score. The panel reports average values of demographic variables for
men and women separately. The same patterns emerge in Panel B as in Panel A; higher EA
score households tend to consist of younger, more educated individuals with more educated
parents. Women tend to be younger than men, and have slightly lower years of schooling.
  37
     In Appendix A, we show summary statistics for wealth at a more disaggregated set of sources, including
IRAs, stock holdings, cash, and CDs. For wealthier households, wealth is further diversified, including items
such as secondary homes and real estate.
  38
     Recall from our discussion in Section 2 that the polygenic score does not reflect variants on sex chromo-
somes, so its distribution is identical in men and women.
  39
     To explicitly test whether this is true, in results available from the authors, we show that restricting
attention to individuals born during or after 1928 (the first quartile of birth year in the sample) eliminates
gender differences in EA score, suggesting that differences are driven by older birth cohorts, where survival
selection plays a role.



                                                     18
    The gender differences apparent in Table 4 raise the more general concern of selection
into being genotyped. The 5,692 genotyped individuals in our sample comprise roughly 15
percent of HRS respondents. In Appendix A, we compare genotyped and non-genotyped
individuals. We find substantial differences, particularly in education, income, and wealth.
These differences raise the possibility that our results might be different among individuals
choosing not to be genotyped. We can only speculate about the external validity of our
results, though several empirical patterns are reassuring in this regard. First, as additional
individuals in the HRS are genotyped our results remain largely unchanged.40 Second, the
relationship between the EA score and education is robust across data sets (Okbay et al.,
2016). Third, the relationship between education and wealth is similar in the genotyped and
the non-genotyped sample.41
    Because the household is our main unit of observation, another important consideration
is potential assortative mating on individuals’ EA scores. For example, individuals with
high EA scores may be in households with other high EA score individuals. This could arise
due to similarities in schools, neighborhoods, or other environments where social activity is
correlated with socioeconomic status, or because high EA score individuals are more likely
to meet their partner through post-secondary education.
    We explore the extent of assortative mating in Table 5, where we restrict attention
to the 1,477 households in which both members have non-missing EA scores. First, we
calculate the quartiles of the distribution of individual EA scores for all individuals in these
households. Each column focuses on women in a different quartile of the individual EA score
distribution, with the rows indicating the distribution of their partners’ scores across the
quartiles of the EA distribution.42 Panel A reports these distributions for individuals sorted
by the raw, unadjusted value of their individual EA scores; Panel B reports distributions
where individuals have been sorted based on the residual in a regression of their individual
EA score on degree dummies and years of schooling. With perfect assortative mating, the
matrices reported in Table 6 would be diagonal matrices, with 100% populating the diagonal
entries and 0% populating the off-diagonal entries. Alternatively, random assignment would
generate matrices with 25% for each entry.
    We find some evidence of assortative mating, especially among the highest and lowest
  40
      In Appendix B, we compare results from an older version of the EA score with and without information
from HRS respondents who were genotyped in 2010. Results do not change when we add individuals
genotyped in 2010.
   41
      In Appendix B, we also show robustness of main results to the use of HRS sampling weights, which
provides some evidence that findings are not driven by selection on variables in the HRS not included in our
analyses.
   42
      This exercise closely follows Charles, Hurst, and Killewald (2013) (see their Table 5 on p. 61), who
examine assortative mating on parents’ wealth.


                                                    19
EA score quartiles. We find that 29.2% of females in the lowest individual EA score quartile
are coupled with males in the lowest individual EA score quartile, compared to 28.2% with
males in the second quartile, 24.7% with males in the third quartile, and 18.0% with males
in the fourth quartile. Columns for women in the second and third quartiles of the individual
EA score distribution show less assortative mating, with values ranging from 22-27%. The
column corresponding to women in the fourth quartile of the score distribution once again
shows stronger evidence of assortative mating, with only 20.3% of the highest EA quartile
females coupled with the lowest EA-quartile males, compared to 32.9% with the highest EA
quartile males. Although we are able to reject the random-assignment null hypothesis that
all entries are equal to 25% (p < 0.001), the degree of assortative mating appears modest
relative to the counterfactual of perfect sorting. Indeed, while the within-couple correlation
of years of schooling is around 0.51, the within-couple correlation of the individual EA score
is only around 0.13. Moreover, in Panel B, where we adjust for highest degree attained and
years of education, we find less evidence of assortative mating and fail to reject the null
hypothesis of random sorting (p = 0.21).
    Because individuals’ EA scores appear to vary considerably within two-person house-
holds, our analyses relating average household EA score to household wealth may miss
important dimensions of decision-making by using the average score as our primary mea-
sure. For example, if the highest EA score individual in a household is the primary decision
maker, our results may be attenuated by using the average score, as a household including
two moderate-score individuals will be treated the same as a low-high score household. For
this reason, we provide a host of robustness checks based on alternative specifications of the
household EA score. These are shown in Appendix B. All of our main results are robust to
these alternative specifications.


4.2     The EA Score and Wealth
4.2.1   Main Association

Figure 2 presents the main association we study in this paper. The top panel plots the un-
conditional, nonparametric (Lowess) relationship between the log of total household wealth
and the average household EA score. The results are striking. The relationship between the
EA score and wealth is increasing for normalized values of the EA score between -2 and 1
(over 80% of the sample), although it flattens and even declines somewhat after an EA score
of 1. The size of the wealth differences are economically large; moving from an EA score
of -1 to 1 implies a percentage change in wealth of approximately 72%, or the equivalent of
just under $196,000.

                                             20
    In the second and third panels of Figure 2, we examine whether the economically signif-
icant relationship between the EA score and wealth holds in different subsamples. In the
second panel, we look only at households where all members have a high school degree or less,
and plot the relationship between wealth and the EA score for all wealth-year observations
for two separate time periods: 1992-2006 and 2008-2012, which comprise years before and
after the financial crisis. The third panel repeats this exercise for households where at least
one member has a college degree or more. In each of the four subsamples, the relationship
between the EA score and wealth is positive and substantial for EA scores between -2 and
1. For values of the EA score greater than 1 the relationship becomes flat (or even slightly
negative).43
    Figure 2 offers compelling evidence that the EA score and wealth are positively associated.
We examine this relationship more formally in Table 6, which reports results from regressing
log household wealth on the EA score for specifications with various sets of controls. Standard
errors are clustered at the family level.44 Column [1] shows the unconditional relationship
between the EA score and the log of household wealth with no additional covariates. A one
standard deviation increase in the EA score is associated with 33.1% greater wealth. This
result is highly statistically significant, with a t-statistic greater than 14. In Column [2],
we add basic controls for age (separately for males and females), birth year (separately for
males and females), sex of the financial respondent, calendar time, and family structure.45
Henceforth, including in tables, we refer to this set as “standard controls.” The inclusion of
standard controls has only a marginal effect on the coefficient on the EA score, which remains
large and highly significant. In Column [3], we include the first 10 principal components of
the genetic data separately for the male and female household members.46 These variables
   43
      One possible concern is that households with relatively more observations, e.g., due to low mortality
rates, exhibit different relationships between the EA score and wealth and are over-represented in these
figures and in subsequent analysis. In Appendix B, we show that main results are unchanged if we only use
one observation per household.
   44
      Multiple households could be linked in our data if a once-married couple divorces or separates to become
two distinct households. In such a case, the individuals in the divorced household would belong to three
distinct households in our data, but just one family.
   45
      Specifically, we add the following: a set of dummies for every possible age for the male household member,
interacted with an indicator for a male only household, a complete set of dummies for every possible age
for the female household member, interacted with an indicator for female only households, complete sets
of dummies for male and female birth years, also interacted with indicators for male only and female only
households respectively, dummies for calendar year, an indicator for male financial respondent, and dummies
for a male only household and female only household.
   46
      Specifically, we include the first 10 principal components for the male household respondent, along with
interactions with a dummy for being in a male only household, the first 10 principal components for the
female household, along with interactions with a dummy variable for being in a female only household,
separate dummies indicating missing genetic data for the male and female household members, respectively,
an interaction between the missing male genetic data indicator and a dummy for a male only household, and
an interaction between the missing female genetic data indicator and a dummy for female only household.


                                                      21
are intended to approximate family fixed-effects as explained in Section 2 (Benjamin et al.,
2012). The principal components reduce the EA score coefficient from 0.319 to 0.305, and
it remains statistically significant.
    In Column [4] of Table 6 we add controls for years of schooling for each member of the
household. Including years of schooling significantly reduces the size of the gene-wealth gra-
dient, decreasing the coefficient to 0.141. This is unsurprising; the EA score was developed
based on years of schooling, and education undoubtedly affects income and wealth accu-
mulation over the life cycle. It is important to note, however, that the coefficient remains
economically important and statistically significant even after controlling for years of school-
ing. A coefficient of 0.141 suggests a one standard deviation increase in the genetic score
is associated with 14.1% greater wealth during retirement. In Column [5], we include more
flexible measures of education. Instead of the simple count of years of schooling for each
member, we include the following: a complete set of dummy variables for every possible
number of years of schooling for the male household member, a complete set of dummies for
every possible completed degree for the male household member, interactions between all
male education dummies and an indicator for male-only households, a complete set of years
of schooling dummies for the female household member, a complete set of degree dummies
for the female household member, interactions between all female dummies and an indicator
for female-only households, a full set of interactions between the male and female years of
schooling dummies, and a full set of interactions between the male and female degree dum-
mies. We refer to this set as “full education controls” in our subsequent analyses, including
in tables reporting estimates. Including the full set of education controls reduces the EA
score coefficient to 0.124. Even in this specification the coefficient remains highly statistically
significant.
    In Column [6], we exclude the education controls included in Columns [4] and [5] and
add controls for labor income. In particular, we include the total of lifetime earnings for
the household from the SSA data described in Section 3. Controlling for income reduces the
coefficient on the EA score from 0.305 to 0.291, which remains statistically significant. In
Column [7], we add the full set of education variables along with income and other controls.
The results are consistent with Columns [5] and [6]. The coefficient on the EA score is 0.115,
(p-value < .00001), suggesting that a one standard deviation increase in the EA score is
associated with 11.5% greater wealth.
    Table 6 indicates that the EA score is associated with wealth even after controlling flexibly
for completed schooling and degree type. One interpretation of this result is that the score
measures biological traits that promote wealth independently of any effects on the acquisition
The principal components for individuals who are not genotyped are set to zero.


                                                   22
of human capital. However, it could also be the case that the education variables in the HRS
are measured with error, or do not fully reflect the educational investments associated with
genetic factors. If this is true, then the remaining genetic gradient in Column [7] may
simply stem from the effects of unobserved human capital investments rather than biological
traits. In particular, our control set does not include measures of school quality, which has
been studied as a potentially important dimension of educational investment (Behrman and
Birdsall, 1983).47
    Measurement error in the HRS education variables could explain some of the remaining
coefficient on the EA score. However, given results linking higher quality teachers to higher
adult earnings (Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff, 2014), we would reasonably expect that if
unobserved school quality were playing a major role, controlling for lifetime earnings should
substantially alter the relationship between the EA score and wealth. Our results suggest
that controlling for lifetime income does little to reduce the genetic gradient in wealth.
Consistent with our results, Smith-Woolley et al. (2018) fail to find evidence of a relationship
between school quality and national exam results in the U.K. after controlling for an earlier
version of the EA score.
    Nonetheless, measurement error in income is still a concern. It may be that complete
measures of income that do not suffer from top-coding or reporting biases fully account for the
gene-wealth gradient once education (even improperly measured) is included. Unfortunately,
there is no perfect way to address these issues. One approach we pursue is to include self-
reported contemporaneous labor income from the HRS as an additional measure of household
income. Results from this exercise are discussed in greater detail below. We find that even
after controlling for HRS income, or both HRS and SSA income data simultaneously, the
gene-wealth gradient remains economically large and statistically significant. Regardless, the
reader should interpret our results with these potential measurement issues in mind. These
issues may be particularly salient when we address other potential mechanisms linking the
EA score to wealth in Section 5. For this reason, the results in Section 5 should be viewed
only as suggestive.
  47
     Recent evidence on school quality is mixed. Some papers show evidence that charter schools and schools
with more funding improve outcomes on test scores and post-secondary educational outcomes (Deming
et al., 2014; Jackson, Johnson, and Persico, 2015; Angrist et al., 2016) and reducing racial achievement gaps
(Dobbie and Fryer Jr, 2011). Other work shows that the impact of higher school quality is very small once
selection into more prestigious schools is accounted for (Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, and Pathak, 2014). See
Card and Krueger (1996) for a survey of earlier literature on school quality effects.




                                                     23
4.2.2   Robustness

Figure 2 and Table 6 show a strong, economically large relationship between the average
household EA score and household wealth. In Table 7, we provide results from three alter-
native specifications with potentially important differences. Each column includes the same
controls as the corresponding column in Table 6. An expanded set of robustness tests are
found in Appendix B. In Panel A, we replace the average household EA score with separate
individual scores for the financial respondent (FR) and non-financial respondent (NFR). The
financial respondent answers financial questions on behalf of the household. If, for example,
the financial respondent has sole responsibility for the financial decisions of the household,
this respondent’s EA score may have a larger association with wealth accumulation than the
household average score. It may also be that conditional on the financial respondent’s EA
score, a higher EA score of the non-financial respondent could also associate with greater
wealth, a result that would also be obscured by the average.48 The average individual EA
score for the FR is 0.07, while for the non-FR it is -0.01. About 65 percent of financial
respondents are male. These differences suggest two possibly countervailing effects. First,
some households delegate financial decisions to the member with a higher EA score. Second,
in some households the male makes financial decisions despite having a lower EA score.
    The first three columns of Panel A in Table 7 show that the coefficient on the individual
EA score for the FR is substantially larger than the coefficient on the NFR score (0.255 vs.
0.156), though both are statistically significant. Once we control for education in Columns
[4] and [5], the size of the coefficient on the NFR score shrinks and it is only marginally sig-
nificant. When income is included (but not years of schooling) in Column [6], the coefficients
remain similar to the estimates in Column [3]. In Column [7], we include both income and
our full set of education controls, and find that the coefficient on the FR EA score remains
large and statistically significant, while the coefficient on the non-FR score again shrinks and
is only significant at the 10% level. In general, these results suggest that the FR score plays
a more important role than that of the NFR, though both contain explanatory information.
    In Panel B of Table 7, we re-estimate all seven specifications while including both re-
tired and non-retired households. For non-retired households with defined-benefit pensions,
economic resources are understated since we do not include expectations of future defined-
benefit income. Compared to individuals in our main analytic sample, individuals added for
this analysis are younger (financial respondents have an average age of 73 in the baseline
sample as opposed to 61 in the added household-year observations). The households that are
  48
   This could occur if partners exchange information, a point made in Benham (1974) who studies the
benefits of women’s education for the household.



                                                24
added to this sample tend to be more highly educated than the baseline (by roughly a full
year of schooling for both men and women) and exhibit higher lifetime income ($2,695,255
versus $2,122,583 for our baseline sample). Estimates in Panel B are highly similar to the
results from our main specifications in Table 6, which suggests our restriction to retired
households is not an important factor driving the relationship between the EA score and
wealth. We note that in Column [7], the coefficient on the EA score in Panel B is 0.104
compared to 0.115 in Column [7] of Table 6, so including non-retired households reduces the
coefficient slightly, but the coefficient remains highly significant.
    Finally, in Panel C of Table 7, we include as an additional control the log of the average
of the household’s self-reported labor income streams from the HRS.49 In this specification
we include only the years in which the household has at least one working member. The
self-reported income data in the HRS avoids the top-coding issues of the SSA data. However,
because income in the HRS is only reported for years in which the household is working,
and because the HRS is a sample of elderly Americans, this necessarily means that HRS
labor income is observed toward the end of the life-cycle or not at all. These differences are
meaningful. Average annual household income using HRS data is $62,535 and the correlation
coefficient between the log of this HRS average and the log of total income using SSA data
is 0.31. Indeed, Panel C reveals that both measures of income independently predict wealth.
Nevertheless, the estimated coefficient on the EA score is 0.108 when both income measures
are included — virtually identical to our baseline estimate.50


5      Mechanisms
This section considers possible channels beyond income and education through which the
EA score may relate to wealth. The evidence in this section is only suggestive, and may
highlight potential areas for future research. Specifically, we investigate parental education
and inheritances, mortality and savings rates, and investment decisions such as stock market
participation, home ownership, and business ownership. We also consider how the EA score
relates to different dimensions of financial decision-making, including beliefs about the stock
market and reported planning horizons. Finally, we show differences in the gene-wealth
gradient depending on whether individuals receive income from defined-benefit pensions.
  49
     Specifically, for each member of the household, we consider only years in which they are not retired and
report working for pay. We add up real income for each observation within a particular household-year, and
average across available years in the HRS up through 2010.
  50
     In Appendix B, we estimate additional specifications which include various quantiles of the income data
along with a specification that only uses HRS income data. In each specification, we find that our results
remain quantitatively unchanged.


                                                     25
Summary statistics for each potential mechanism are provided in Table 8. Similarly to Table
1, we report means and standard deviations for all households and for different household
structures separately. We discuss these variables when analyzing each potential mechanism
below.


5.1    Transfers and Parental Education
First, we investigate whether higher EA scores predict higher wealth due to transfers from
parents. This is a particularly important channel given that children also inherit their genes
from their parents. Summary statistics on the relevant variables are found in Panel A of Table
8, which includes an indicator for whether the household ever receives an inheritance, real
total inheritance amounts among those who receive one, and the within-household average of
parental years of schooling. Among other things, parental education proxies for the resources
parents could provide to their children. About 34% of households report direct transfers in
the form of an inheritance and, among those who do, the average amount is $143,200 (2010
dollars). The average level of fathers’ education is 9.6 years of schooling, while the average
level of mothers’ education is 10.1 years.
    In Table 9, we relate the EA score to inheritances. All regressions include our standard
controls and full education controls, unless otherwise noted. In Column [1] of Table 9, we
estimated a cross-sectional regression where the dependent variable is an indicator variable
equal to one if the household has ever received an inheritance over the span of the sample.
The estimated coefficient on the EA score suggests that a one standard deviation increase is
associated with a 2.1 percentage point increase in the probability of receiving an inheritance.
In Column [2] we estimate a cross-sectional regression where the dependent variable is the
log of the real dollar value of all inheritances received over the sample. Because the log of
total inheritances is defined only for values greater than zero, this specification is equivalent
to a regression of inheritance values conditional on receiving an inheritance. We find no
relationship between the EA score and the size of inheritance wealth conditional on receiving
an inheritance. This suggests that the EA score is related to inheritances at the extensive
margin but not the intensive margin.
    Next, we regress different measures of parental education on the household’s average EA
score. In Column [3], the dependent variable is the average education of the fathers of both
household members, and we include our standard controls but no measures of respondent
education. Results suggest that a one standard deviation increase in the EA score is asso-
ciated with over 0.84 more years of average fathers’ schooling, and the coefficient is highly
statistically significant. Column [4] presents the same specification but with the average of


                                               26
mothers’ education as the dependent variable. The coefficient suggests an increase in 0.66
years of schooling of mothers for one standard deviation higher household EA scores. In
columns [5] and [6], we investigate whether the relationship between parental education and
the EA score is entirely explained by household members’ own education. In Column [5] the
dependent variable is again average fathers’ education, but we now include the full set of
household education controls. Column [6] reports analogous coefficients with average moth-
ers’ education as the dependent variable. The estimated coefficients on the EA score are
reduced dramatically in these specifications, from 0.84 to 0.33 for fathers’ education and from
0.66 to 0.19 for mothers’ education. This is unsurprising given the intergenerational persis-
tence of education (Black, Devereux, and Salvanes, 2005). However, the coefficients remain
statistically significant, which indicates that household environments and other investments
could play a role in wealth accumulation beyond just educational attainment.
    In summary, the results in Table 9 suggest that the EA score is highly correlated with
parents’ education, although the magnitude of this association decreases substantially when
household members’ own education is included. Further, a higher EA score does appear to
be associated with a greater likelihood of receiving an inheritance, although the size of the
inheritance conditional on receiving one is not related to the score.


5.2    Mortality and Savings
Another way in which wealth may be related to genetic endowments is through longevity. If
individuals with higher individual EA scores expect to live longer, they may endogenously
save more to finance these additional years of consumption. Furthermore, longer expected
lives may lead to longer investment horizons, which may affect the mix of assets in household
portfolios. Panel B of Table 8 contains summary statistics on annual mortality rates for years
after being genotyped and the subjective expectation of living to 75 years old, for individuals
in our analytic sample.
    We begin our analyses by directly estimating the empirical relationship between the
individual’s EA score and mortality. We construct an indicator variable equal to one if the
individual dies in the next year, and estimate a linear probability model of the likelihood
of dying in a particular year as a function of the individual’s own personal EA score, the
principal components, and dummy variables for age, birth year, years of schooling, and
degree. We restrict this regression to person-years in which an individual was between the
ages of 50 and 90, and we drop years before an individual was genotyped. Panel A of Table
10 provides the results of this regression. In Column [1] we include both females and males
in the sample, and find that the individual’s EA score is associated with a 0.3 percentage


                                              27
point decline in mortality. Columns [2] and [3] consider females and males, respectively. The
estimated association for females is the same as in the pooled sample, but it is both smaller
and statistically indistinguishable from zero for males.
    We also consider beliefs about mortality. In principle, objective mortality should only
affect behavior if individuals expect to live longer. In this sense, beliefs about mortality
are perhaps the more relevant mechanism linking genetic endowments to wealth. The HRS
repeatedly asks individuals to provide their subjective beliefs for the probability that they
will live to the age of 75. In Column [4], we regress this subjective belief on the individual EA
score, our standard controls, and the full set of education controls in a sample of individuals
aged 50-65. We do not find a significant association between the EA score and the level of this
subjective probability. We also estimate this regression for females and males separately in
Columns [5] and [6], and find that for females a one standard deviation rise is the individual’s
EA score predicts a 0.66 percentage point rise in reported beliefs about living to age 75. For
males, the relationship is negative and statistically insignificant.51
    Next, we explore whether the average household EA score predicts higher savings rates.
One way in which the EA score may relate to wealth is through greater precautionary saving,
either due to lower expected mortality as discussed earlier, or due to better financial planning.
Unfortunately, the nature of the HRS data makes this a difficult exercise. Ideally, we would
like to observe household savings rates over the life-cycle, particularly during the early years
in which savings benefit the most from compounded interest. However, the HRS contains
individuals who are either at the very end of their working lives or have already retired. A
further complication is that such households are likely to consume out of accumulated wealth
rather than labor earnings, making standard measures of savings rates less informative.
    In Panel B of Table 10 we estimate whether the EA score is empirically related to spending
in the HRS. Our measure of spending comes from the RAND files derived from the Consump-
tion and Activities Mail Survey (CAMS), collected by the HRS in off-wave years beginning
in 2001 and which include data on household expenditures on nondurables, durables, hous-
ing, and transportation.52 We include only households that have at least one member still
working (not retired), and aggregate SSA labor income in that year at the household level.
Column [1] shows results from a regression of total household expenditures on indicator vari-
ables for each labor income quintile in addition to the EA score and our standard controls.
In Column [2], we restrict to households in which both members are less than 60 years old
  51
     The important question of whether the EA score predicts incorrect beliefs about mortality risk, and
whether such deviations could differ by gender, is left for future study.
  52
     In results available from the authors, we show that our results are unchanged if we use the consumption
variable in the RAND HRS data, which attempts to measure the consumption flow of spending on durable
goods rather than the simple dollar amount of expenditures.


                                                    28
in order to capture households that are likely still in the high-earning years of their careers.
In both Columns [1] and [2], households in the highest income quintile spend considerably
more than households who earn less. However, in each case the coefficient on the EA score is
small and statistically insignificant, which suggests that after controlling for earnings, higher
EA score households spend the same amount as low EA score households.
    One concern may be that, despite the restriction to households with all members less than
60, we are still capturing households with low labor earnings who are consuming primarily
out of wealth. We first address this concern in Column [3] by dropping households in the first
quintile of income (less than or equal to $11,732 in 2010 dollars). In this specification, the
coefficient on the highest income quintile becomes smaller and less statistically significant,
but the coefficient on the EA score is unchanged from Column [2] and remains statistically
insignificant. To more explicitly address the concern that individuals in their later working
lives consume primarily out of savings rather than labor income, in Columns [4]-[6] we
repeat the specifications in [1]-[3], but include wealth in the previous wave as an additional
control. In each specification, the coefficient on wealth is highly statistically significant and
economically large. In each, the coefficient on the EA score drops in magnitude and remains
statistically insignificant.
    Results in Table 10 show that, while both expected and realized mortality are related
to the individual EA score, measures of spending are unrelated to the EA score conditional
on income or wealth. This raises doubts about their potential importance as a mechanism
linking the EA score and wealth. This finding is consistent with results using twins data
that suggest the genes implicated in savings are not related to education (but are nega-
tively related to genes implicated in smoking and obesity, suggesting a relationship between
self control and savings (Cronqvist and Siegel, 2015)). However, an important caveat to
our findings is that the expenditure data in the HRS have a variety of shortcomings. A
stronger conclusion about savings as a potential mechanism would require a better test of
the relationship between savings and the EA score from data on younger households.


5.3    Risk Aversion
While we find no empirical evidence that the EA score is related to the level of savings,
we next examine if the EA score is associated with differences in how households save. A
well-established source of heterogeneity in household wealth are returns to risky endeavors,
such as participation in risky asset markets or business ownership. One mechanism that
may therefore relate the EA score to wealth is aversion to risk. To examine the relationship
between risk aversion and the EA score, we use questions in the HRS designed to elicit


                                               29
measures of risk tolerance based on hypothetical income and wealth gambles. Generally,
these questions pose hypothetical scenarios in which the respondent faces a choice between
a guaranteed endowment of wealth or stream of income, or a 50-50 gamble that will result
in a permanent increase or decrease in that endowment or income. Specifically, respondents
are asked to choose between two jobs: “The first would guarantee your current total family
income for life. The second is possibly better paying, but the income is also less certain.
There is a 50-50 chance the second job would double your total lifetime income and a 50-
50 chance that it would cut it by X.” The series replaces X with a set of possible income
losses: ten percent, twenty percent, one-third, one-half, seventy five percent. Additionally,
respondents are asked one of two hypothetical wealth gambles with a similar structure. One
is based on an inherited business worth one million dollars today, or that may be sold in
one month with a 50-50 chance of being worth two million dollars or X. The other is based
on an immediate inheritance worth one million dollars, with the potential to participate in
a risky business venture that has a 50-50 chance of doubling in value or falling in value by
X. In each case, X varies by the same proportions as the hypothetical income gamble.
    Based on the responses to these hypothetical gambles, each respondent can be grouped
by the smallest downside for which they still reject the gamble. We also create a dummy
variable for each gamble that takes a value of one if an individual always responds with a
preference for the guaranteed wealth or income.53 A value equal to one for this variable
indicates the highest degree of risk aversion permitted with this set of questions. Summary
statistics on the risk aversion parameters are found in Panel C of Table 8.54 According to
Table 8, 39% of respondents would not take a gamble that would double their income with
50% probability and cut it by 10% with 50%. These are the individuals assigned to the
highest degree of risk aversion for this question. On the other extreme, 5% of respondents
would take a 50-50 gamble where the downside is a 75% reduction in income.
    In Column [1] of Table 11, the dependent variable is our binary indicator for the highest
degree of risk aversion based on the labor income gamble. We find a negative association be-
tween the average household EA score and risk aversion — a one standard deviation increase
in the score is associated with a reduction in the probability of the most risk averse response
by 2.2 percentage points. In Columns [2] and [3], we use indicators for least willingness to
take the gamble using the inheritance and business risk questions to construct the depen-
dent variables. We find no statistically significant relationship between the EA score and
risk aversion for the inheritance question, but do find that the probability of a respondent
  53
      One possibility for future research is to follow Kimball, Sahm, and Shapiro (2009), who suggest ways to
improve measures of risk aversion in large data sets with noisy measures.
   54
      We only include answers for the income gambles. Summary statistics for variables from the two other
risk aversion questions are found in in Appendix A.


                                                     30
giving the most risk averse response for the business risk question is 2.6 percentage points
lower for a one standard deviation increase in the EA score, which is significant at the 0.05
level.
    In Columns [4]-[6], we allow the outcome variable to be an ordered categorical variable
indicating the riskiest gamble that a respondent accepts. This variables can take one of
six values, with higher values corresponding to higher degrees of risk aversion. We esti-
mate an ordered probit model in these specifications, and report coefficients for the latent
index. Column [4] shows that the EA score is associated with a significant decrease in the
latent index for risk aversion. Columns [5] and [6] repeat the ordered probit estimation for
the inheritance and business wealth gambles, respectively. Again, we find no statistically
significant relationship between the EA score and risk aversion based on the hypothetical
inheritance wealth gambles, but do find a significant relationship with risk aversion for the
business wealth gamble.


5.4    Stocks, Housing, and Business Ownership
Continuing with our examination of how households save, we next examine whether the
EA score is related to stock market participation, business ownership, and owning a home.
Each of these asset classes is the subject of a well-established literature highlighting their
importance as a source of heterogeneity in wealth accumulation over the life-cycle. Panel
D of Table 8 provides summary statistics on these portfolio decisions. For example, 82% of
households own a house, while 8% own a business and 44% own stocks.
    Panel A of Table 12 regresses indicator variables for stock market participation, business
ownership, and home ownership on the average household EA score and our full set of
standard controls, including education variables. Columns [1]-[3] also include the log of total
lifetime household income from the SSA data as an additional control. In Column [1] we find
no statistically significant relationship between home ownership and the EA score, but we
do find a significant relationship between home ownership and lifetime earnings. In Column
[2] of Panel A, the dependent variable is business ownership, and we find a positive but
statistically marginal relationship with the EA score, and no relationship between business
ownership and lifetime labor income. Column [3] shows a strong positive association between
the EA score and stock market participation. A one standard deviation increase in the EA
score is associated with a 4.8 percentage point increase in the probability of owning stocks,
and this coefficient is statistically significant at the 1% level. Compared to an average rate
of stock ownership of 44%, the coefficient suggests this predicted increase in participation is
also economically meaningful.


                                              31
    Of course, stock market participation and business ownership are likely affected by ac-
cumulated wealth, and we have already found the EA score is associated with wealth. This
means that the relationships between the EA score and stock market participation and busi-
ness ownership could be operating purely through wealth (Charles and Hurst, 2003). We
address this in Columns [4]-[6], which repeat the specifications in Columns [1]-[3] but also
include the log of financial wealth from the previous wave. Consistent with the existing lit-
erature, we find that the coefficient on lagged wealth is large and statistically significant in
all three specifications. For home ownership, the coefficient is now negative and statistically
significant, which is not the expected result. It suggests that conditional on lagged wealth,
a higher EA score is associated with a lower likelihood of home ownership, which could re-
flect a higher probability of divesting homes after retirement among higher score households.
We find no evidence for a relationship between the EA score and business ownership after
controlling for lagged wealth. However, the relationship between the EA score and stock
ownership remains significant and economically meaningful. A one standard deviation in-
crease in the EA score is associated with a 3.5 percentage point higher likelihood of owning
stocks, with statistical significance at the 0.01 level. Because stocks have traditionally of-
fered substantially higher returns than other liquid securities such as money-market funds
or bonds, this may be an important factor for explaining the gene-wealth gradient, and may
also suggest that these genetic endowments provide a microfoundation for the persistent
differences in returns to wealth.
    To examine the extent to which the important components of household saving — home,
business, and stock ownership — can be possible explanations for the association between
the EA score and wealth, we include each as controls in regressions of wealth on the EA
score and our standard controls. Column [1] of Panel B in Table 12 establishes the baseline
coefficient by repeating the final specification in Table 6, but restricting the sample to those
households with non-missing values of the portfolio and parental variables. In Column [2]
of Panel B, we also include controls for various measures of parental transfers, including an
indicator for whether the household has ever received an inheritance, the log of the sum of all
inheritances received (with this value set to zero for households not receiving inheritances),
and controls for mothers’ and fathers’ education. In this specification, the coefficient on the
EA score decreases from 0.124 to 0.114, but remains statistically significant. In Columns [3]
and [4], we include indicator variables for whether the household owns their home or has ever
owned a business during the sample. In each case, the coefficient on the EA score decreases
slightly, to 0.117 and 0.116, respectively, but remains statistically significant. In Column [5],
we include an indicator for stock ownership. This reduces the coefficient on the EA score
substantially, from 0.124 to 0.072, a reduction of roughly 40%.

                                               32
    Finally, in Column [6], we include controls for all four potential mechanisms. Together,
these controls reduce the coefficient on the EA score to 0.066. In other words, the full set
of investment controls — home, business, and stock ownership — reduce the coefficient to
0.066 from 0.114 (from the specification that includes only parental transfers). This offers
preliminary evidence that investment decisions over the life-cycle, broadly defined, may be
an important mediator of the gene-wealth gradient.
    However, we caution that these results should be interpreted with care. The mediation
exercise performed in Panel B of Table 12 may be biased if measurement error in the right-
hand-side variables leads to the incorrect interpretation of the coefficients. We reiterate
that the results in this section are suggestive of possible mechanisms, but are not definitive.
Motivated by these findings, in the next section we evaluate the extent to which the EA score
is related to financial decision-making. In particular, we study the empirical relationships
among the EA score, beliefs about macroeconomic events and the financial planning horizon.


5.5     Extreme Beliefs and Planning Horizons
An important element of financial decision-making is an assessment of the risks and uncer-
tainties associated with the macroeconomy and the payoffs to alternative financial choices.
Yet, inferring the likelihood of uncertain events can be difficult. Despite the typical as-
sumption of rational expectations, it has long been recognized that individuals may have
trouble forming accurate beliefs about probabilistic outcomes (Savage, 1954; Kahneman and
Tversky, 1972). Further, a well-documented challenge for prudent savings and investment
decisions is the complexity associated with intertemporal choices. Thinking about the dis-
tant future is difficult; as the planning horizon increases so too does the uncertainty around
financial needs, investment and employment opportunities, family composition, and a host
of other important considerations. In this section, we evaluate whether the EA score is
associated with an aptitude for abstract and complicated financial decisions.55
    Recent literature examines the role of subjective expectations in economic decisions such
as human capital investments (Wiswall and Zafar, 2015) and stock market participation
(Arrondel, Calvo Pardo, and Tas, 2014). Another set of papers demonstrates links between
subjective beliefs and investment behaviors that impact household wealth (Lillard and Willis,
  55
     An alternative would be to use the cognitive test score administered to HRS respondents to evaluate
whether the gene-wealth gradient works through cognition. In Appendix B, we include the test score as an
additional control and find that it does little to mediate the gene-wealth gradient. This is not surprising
given why and how the test is constructed: to capture cognitive decline by asking very simple and factual
questions. As discussed earlier, the correlation between the cognitive test score and the EA score is roughly
0.20 (Papageorge and Thom, 2016). Further, our results on macroeconomic beliefs remain after controlling
for the cognitive test score.


                                                     33
2001; Dominitz and Manski, 2007; Hudomiet, Kézdi, and Willis, 2011).56 Lumsdaine and
Potter van Loon (2017) study differences in how individuals report beliefs about stock market
returns, arguing that their findings reflect heterogeneity in individuals’ understanding of the
laws of probability. In related work Lusardi, Michaud, and Mitchell (2017) demonstrate that
heterogeneity in returns to savings, which are plausibly determined by financial knowledge,
can explain a substantial proportion of wealth inequality.
    We begin this section by investigating whether the average household EA score is asso-
ciated with differences in beliefs about macroeconomic events that are relevant for financial
choices. The HRS data are uniquely well-suited for this analysis, as most respondents are
repeatedly asked to provide subjective probabilities of a range of events. Individuals are
asked to provide a probability on a scale of 0 to 100 for the following three macroeconomic
events:

    ◦ Stock Market Goes Up: “By next year at this time, what is the percent chance that
      mutual fund shares invested in blue chip stocks like those in the Dow Jones Industrial
      Average will be worth more than they are today?”

    ◦ Economic Depression: “What do you think are the chances that the U.S.economy
      will experience a major depression sometime during the next 10 years or so?”

    ◦ Double Digit Inflation: “And how about the chances that the U.S. economy will
      experience double- digit inflation sometime during the next 10 years or so?”

   First, we construct one (of possibly many) measures of “objectively correct” responses
to these questions. Our objective benchmark probability for the stock market going up
in a single year is 74 percent, which is the probability the S&P 500 increases in value
in a given year for the period 1963-2010. There is no common definition of an economic
depression, but clearly this refers to an unusually severe period of economic contraction. We
use data from the Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis on annual real GDP growth over
the period 1948-2016, and define an unusually severe contraction as a year with growth less
than or equal to -0.73 percent, which is the 25th percentile of the distribution of growth
rates for negative-growth years. Based on this metric, the unconditional probability of a
severe contraction is 4.4 percent per year, which implies a 36 percent probability for such an
event over a 10 year period. Finally, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports two years with
  56
     Hurd (2009) provides a review of subjective probabilities reported in household surveys such as the
HRS. A number of researchers have used the HRS to study cognition, probabilistic thinking and investment
decisions (Lillard and Willis, 2001; Kézdi and Willis, 2009, 2003). Another set of related studies focuses on
cognitive decline and retirement decisions (Rohwedder and Willis, 2010; Kézdi and Willis, 2013; Delavande
et al., 2006; Delavande, Rohwedder, and Willis, 2008).

                                                     34
double digit inflation (1980, 1981) over the period 1958-2015. This implies an approximate
probability of 3.4 percent for double digit inflation in any year, or about a 29 percent
chance for double digit inflation over a 10 year period.57 In Panel E of Table 8, we provide
summary statistics for expectations about stock market performance, including raw reported
probabilities, deviations from objective probabilities, and heaping on focal probabilities.
    Panel A of Table 13 provides estimates of the association between the average household
EA score and individual beliefs about the probabilities of these macroeconomic events. We
use the average household score rather than the individual EA score so as to be consistent
with our analysis in Section 5.4, and to avoid decisions about intra-household information
transfers. Our first measure is the absolute value of the deviation between the respondent’s
subjective probability and the objective probability. We regress this deviation on our stan-
dard controls and the EA score in Column [1]. For all three events, higher values of the
polygenic score are associated with a statistically significant reduction in the deviation be-
tween the respondent’s subjective probability and the objective probability. For example,
in Column [1] of Panel A, the coefficient estimate of -0.572 suggests that a one standard
deviation increase in the EA score is associated with a reduction in the deviation from the
objective stock market increase probability of over one half of one percentage point. Co-
efficients of -0.537 and -1.047 are estimated for the depression and double-digit inflation
questions, respectively.
    Columns [2]-[4] of Panel A in Table 13 examine binary outcomes indicating whether
respondents answered with specific focal probabilities (0, 50, and 100, respectively). Using
linear probability models, we relate these binary outcomes to the EA score. For all three
events, we observe the same pattern of association: the EA score is negatively associated
with providing a subjective probability indicating complete certainty (0 or 100), and is
largely uncorrelated with providing a focal probability of 50 percent. The magnitudes of
these associations are substantial. For example, Column [2] of Panel B suggests that a
one standard deviation increase in the EA score is associated with a 0.4 percentage point
reduction in the probability of reporting a 0% probability that the economy will suffer a
major depression in the next 10 years. For comparison, according to Panel E in Table 8,
5% of individuals a 0% probability for this event. While we find no statistically significant
association between the EA score and reporting a 100% probability that the stock market
will increase, we do find a relationship between 100% beliefs about economic recessions and
double-digit inflation.
  57
    In results available from the authors, we show that main results relating the EA score to deviations
from objective probabilities remain qualitatively similar for reasonably large intervals around the objective
probabilities we use.



                                                     35
    These results suggest that individuals with lower genetic scores report beliefs that are
at odds with objective probabilities and, moreover, tend to heap on “extreme” beliefs. It
is possible, however, that these reported beliefs are not related to individual behavior in
a meaningful way, making these results interesting but not particularly useful for under-
standing the potential underlying mechanisms linking the EA score to financial decisions.
This would be the case if either the HRS expectations questions do a poor job of eliciting
true beliefs about these economic events, or if the events themselves were not relevant for
the household’s choice problem. In Appendix B, we show that these elicited beliefs do in-
deed predict relevant behaviors such as stock market participation, and are associated with
wealth. Further, excessive optimism about the stock market is actually associated with
greater wealth, likely due to an increase in participation. This suggests that the direction of
incorrect beliefs is important for their overall impact on wealth.
    We next investigate whether the EA score is associated with the length of the financial
planning horizon. The complexity of economic decisions increases with their scope, and
households may be heterogeneous in the costliness of thinking about increasingly distant
future periods. Those for whom such considerations are relatively low-cost will endogenously
consider longer horizons. The HRS asks respondents about their planning horizons for
spending and saving: “In deciding how much of their (family) income to spend or save, people
are likely to think about different financial planning periods. In planning your (family’s)
saving and spending, which of the following time periods is most important to you (and your
husband/wife/partner): the next few months, the next year, the next few years, the next
5-10 years, or longer than 10 years?” Summary statistics for planning horizons are found in
Panel E of Table 8 for mutually exclusive categories. 13% of respondents report planning
horizons of less than 1 year. 29% have a planning horizon of a few years, 34% indicate
horizons in the range of 5-10 years, and 11% have planning horizons of more than 10 years.
    In Panel B of Table 13, we test whether the EA score predicts planning horizon responses.
The dependent variable in Column [1] is a dummy variable equal to one if the planning
horizon is greater than a few months. The estimated coefficient is statistically significant,
and suggests that a one standard deviation in the EA score is associated with a 0.8 percentage
point increase in the probability of reporting a planning horizon longer than a few months.
Columns [2]-[4] repeat this exercise, but with dummies equal to one for increasingly longer
horizons. The dummy dependent variable in Column [2] is equal to one if the reported
horizon is “a few years”, in [3] if “5-10 years”, and in [4] if “longer than 10 years”. In all but
Column [4], the coefficient on the EA score is positive and significant at the 1% level. This
suggests that the EA score is predictive of longer planning horizons for all but the longest
horizon.

                                               36
    The results linking the length of the planning horizon to the EA score are consistent with
an interpretation that higher EA score households are better able to think about complex and
abstract decision problems. Alternatively, these results could be interpreted as an association
between the EA score and patience. However, in results available from the authors and
using the HRS questions designed to elicit patience parameters, we find little variation
between households that report the shortest and longest planning horizons. This suggests
it is unlikely the planning horizon results are due to patience. Gabaix and Laibson (2017)
provide a theoretical foundation for our interpretation. They demonstrate that infinitely
patient, Bayesian households that receive noisy, unbiased signals about future events will
behave as if they are impatient. A consequence of their model is that households that
receive more precise signals will appear to behave as if they are more patient than others,
even though all households are equally (infinitely) patient.


5.6     Pensions
One consequence of the apparent relationship between genetic endowments and financial
decisions is that individuals with low EA scores may benefit from outsourcing certain eco-
nomic choices, such as saving and investment decisions. Defined benefit pensions, which
may be provided by one’s employer, offer one form of outsourcing by providing an employee
a guaranteed stream of income in retirement without requiring the individual to choose the
contribution rate or underlying investment allocations. Defined benefit plans effectively re-
duce the impact of the household’s financial decisions on accumulated wealth by ensuring
a minimal level of resources at retirement. We investigate whether the reduced autonomy
associated with defined-benefit pensions alters the relationship between genetic ability and
wealth.
    According to Panel F of Table 8, 56% of households have a defined-benefit pension
with an average present discounted value of $45,000. One primary concern is that pen-
sion participation is not randomly assigned. As a first step, we regress an indicator for
defined-benefit pension participation on the average household EA score.58 Column [1] of
Table 14 shows that after including our standard set of controls, there is no economically or
statistically significant relationship between the EA score and defined-benefit pension par-
ticipation. Column [2] shows that, conditional on participation in a defined-benefit pension
plan, defined-benefit pension wealth (the present value of pension income) is also unrelated
to the EA score.59 In general, selection into careers based on defined-benefit pension benefits
  58
    Because we focus only on retired households, our definition of defined-benefit plan participation is
whether the household reports receiving income from a defined-benefit pension in that household-year.
 59
    We winsorize defined-benefit pension wealth at the 1st , and 99th percentiles.


                                                  37
appears to be uncorrelated with the EA score after controlling for education.
    Columns [3]-[4] in Table 14 investigate whether participation in a defined-benefit plan
mitigates the role of the EA score in wealth accumulation. Column [3] shows that partici-
pation in a defined-benefit plan is associated with a 39 percent increase in wealth. This is
unsurprising given the inadequacy of retirement savings for many households. In Column [4],
we also include an interaction between the EA score and the pension-participation dummy.60
The results are striking. The coefficient on the interaction is negative and statistically sig-
nificant, and is economically large. For households that participate in a defined-benefit plan,
the coefficient on the EA score is 0.038, compared to 0.207 for households that do not par-
ticipate in a defined-benefit plan. Put differently, the relationship between the EA score and
wealth is over five times as large for households that have more autonomy over their savings
and investment choices. This offers strong evidence in support of the hypothesis that the
gene-wealth association documented in this paper is in part determined by a household’s
difficulty in making wise financial choices.


6      Conclusions
We study the genetic endowments linked to educational attainment, summarized as a linear
index called a polygenic score (EA score). Using data from the HRS, we demonstrate that
the average EA score in a household strongly and robustly predicts wealth at retirement.
The estimated gene-wealth gradient is not fully explained by flexibly controlling for the edu-
cation and income variables available for HRS respondents. We explore a host of additional
mechanisms, including transfers from parents, risk preferences, and savings. We provide
evidence that some of these factors, such as risk preferences, are related to the EA score. We
fail to find evidence of a link to others, such as savings. However, we do find a strong rela-
tionship between the EA score and portfolio choices, with higher EA scores being associated
with greater probabilities of business and stock ownership. Lower EA scores predict beliefs
that are at odds with objective information and probabilistic thinking, as well as shorter
planning horizons. Finally, the EA score is much more strongly related to wealth within a
subsample of individuals — those without defined-benefit pensions — who presumably have
greater autonomy over their financial decisions. Together, the associations we report provide
preliminary evidence that endowments related to human capital accumulation are associated
with financial wealth in part through a facility with complex dynamic decision-making.
    Economic research using information on genetic endowments is useful for understanding
  60
    We also include interactions between the pension-participation dummy and all principal components
variables to account for possible population stratification in obtaining defined-benefit pensions.


                                                 38
what has heretofore been a form of unobserved heterogeneity that persists across generations,
since parents provide genetic material for their children. Studies that ignore this type of
heterogeneity when studying the intergenerational persistence of economic outcomes, such
as income or wealth, could place too much weight on other mechanisms such as attained
education or direct monetary transfers between parents and children. The use of observed
genetic information helps economists to develop a more accurate and complete understanding
of inequality across generations.
    Moreover, studying how genetic endowments implicated in one outcome, in this case
education, relate to other outcomes, such as wealth, leads to a more complete picture of
how these endowments function, including how they relate to policy-relevant environmental
factors (often known as “G by E” interactions). Our results on pensions and the gene-
wealth gradient are an illustration of how environmental factors can modify the relationship
between genetic endowments and key economic outcomes. Moreover, our results suggest that
the genes implicated in educational attainment function at least in part through differences
in probabilistic thinking, planning horizons and decision-making under uncertainty, all of
which could also help to explain why individuals with these endowments attain more years
of schooling.
    In short, our study illustrates how economists can benefit from results in behavioral
genetics that link specific genetic endowments to economic outcomes. The results presented
here also highlight some promising next steps for research in behavioral genetics by pointing
to some specific behavioral mechanisms that may link genetic endowments to economic
outcomes.


References
Abdulkadiroğlu, Atila, Joshua Angrist, and Parag Pathak. 2014. “The Elite Illusion:
 Achievement Effects at Boston and New York Exam Schools.” Econometrica 82 (1):137–
 196.

Angrist, Joshua D, Sarah R Cohodes, Susan M Dynarski, Parag A Pathak, and Christopher R
 Walters. 2016. “Stand and Deliver: Effects of Boston’s Charter High Schools on College
 Preparation, Entry, and Choice.” Journal of Labor Economics 34 (2):275–318.

Arrondel, Luc, Hector F Calvo Pardo, and Derya Tas. 2014. “Subjective Return Expec-
  tations, Information and Stock Market Participation: Evidence from France.” Mimeo,
  University of Southampton.


                                             39
Bach, Stefan, Andreas Thiemann, and Aline Zucco. 2015. “The Top Tail of the Wealth
  Distribution in Germany, France, Spain, and Greece.” DIW Berlin Discussion Paper.

Beauchamp, Jonathan P., David Cesarini, Magnus Johannesson, Matthijs J. H. M. van der
  Loos, Philipp D. Koellinger, Patrick J.F. Groenen, James H. Fowler, J. Niels Rosenquist,
  A. Roy Thurik, and Nicholas A. Christakis. 2011. “Molecular Genetics and Economics.”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (4):57–82.

Becker, G.S. 1964. Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis with Special Reference to Edu-
  cation. Columbia University Press.

Behrman, Jere R and Nancy Birdsall. 1983. “The Quality of Schooling: Quantity Alone is
  Misleading.” American Economic Review 73 (5):928–946.

Belsky, Daniel W., Terrie E. Moffitt, David L. Corcoran, Benjamin Domingue, HonaLee
  Harrington, Sean Hogan, Renate Houts, Sandhya Ramrakha, Karen Sugden, Benjamin S.
  Williams, Richie Poulton, and Avshalom Caspi. 2016. “The Genetics of Success: How
  Single-Nucleotide Polymorphisms Associated with Educational Attainment Relate to Life-
  Course Development.” Psychological Science 27:957–972.

Benhabib, Jess and Alberto Bisin. 2016. “Skewed Wealth Distributions: Theory and Empir-
  ics.” NBER Working Paper.

Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Mi Luo. 2015. “Wealth Distribution and Social Mobility
  in the US: A Quantitative Approach.” NBER Working Paper.

Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Shenghao Zhu. 2011. “The Distribution of Wealth and
  Fiscal Policy in Economies with Finitely Lived Agents.” Econometrica 79 (1):123–157.

Benham, Lee. 1974. “Benefits of Women’s Education within Marriage.” Journal of Political
  Economy 82 (2, Part 2):S57–S71.

Benjamin, Daniel J, David Cesarini, Christopher F Chabris, Edward L Glaeser, David I
  Laibson, Vilmundur Guðnason, Tamara B Harris, Lenore J Launer, Shaun Purcell, Al-
  bert Vernon Smith et al. 2012. “The Promises and Pitfalls of Genoeconomics.” Annual
  Review of Economics 4:627–662.

Bierut, Laura Jean. 2010. “Convergence of Genetic Findings for Nicotine Dependence and
  Smoking Related Diseases with Chromosome 15q24-25.” Trends in Pharmacological Sci-
  ences 31 (1):46–51.


                                           40
Black, Sandra E, Paul J Devereux, and Kjell G Salvanes. 2005. “Why the Apple Doesn’t
  Fall Far: Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital.” American
  Economic Review 95 (1):437–449.

Branigan, Amelia R, Kenneth J McCallum, and Jeremy Freese. 2013. “Variation in the
  Heritability of Educational Attainment: An International Meta-Analysis.” Social Forces
  :109–140.

Card, David and Alan B Krueger. 1996. “Labor Market Effects of School Quality: Theory
  and Evidence.” NBER Working Paper.

Cesarini, David, Christopher T Dawes, Magnus Johannesson, Paul Lichtenstein, and Björn
  Wallace. 2009. “Genetic Variation in Preferences for Giving and Risk Taking.” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 124 (2):809–842.

Cesarini, David, Magnus Johannesson, Paul Lichtenstein, Örjan Sandewall, and Björn Wal-
  lace. 2010. “Genetic Variation in Financial Decision-Making.” The Journal of Finance
  65 (5):1725–1754.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Erik Hurst. 2003. “The Correlation of Wealth across Generations.”
 Journal of Political Economy 111 (6):1155–1182.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Alexandra Killewald. 2013. “Marital Sorting and
 Parental Wealth.” Demography 50 (1):51–70.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2014. “Measuring the Impacts
 of Teachers II: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood.” American
 Economic Review 104 (9):2633–2679.

Cronqvist, Henrik and Stephan Siegel. 2014. “The Genetics of Investment Biases.” Journal
  of Financial Economics 113:215–234.

———. 2015. “The Origins of Savings Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy 123 (1):123–
 169.

De Nardi, Mariacristina. 2004. “Wealth Inequality and Intergenerational Links.” Review of
  Economic Studies 71 (3):743–768.

Delavande, Adeline, Michael Perry, Robert Willis et al. 2006. “Probabilistic Thinking and
  Early Social Security Claiming.” Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper.



                                           41
Delavande, Adeline, Susann Rohwedder, and Robert J Willis. 2008. “Preparation for Retire-
  ment, Financial Literacy and Cognitive Resources.” Michigan Retirement Research Center
  Research Paper.

Deming, David J, Justine S Hastings, Thomas J Kane, and Douglas O Staiger. 2014. “School
  Choice, School Quality, and Postsecondary Attainment.” American Economic Review
  104 (3):991–1013.

Dobbie, Will and Roland G Fryer Jr. 2011. “Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase
 Achievement among the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children’s Zone.” American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (3):158–87.

Dominitz, Jeff and Charles F Manski. 2007. “Expected Equity Returns and Portfolio Choice:
 Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study.” Journal of the European Economic
 Association 5 (2-3):369–379.

Dynan, Karen E, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P Zeldes. 2004. “Do the Rich Save More?”
 Journal of Political Economy 112 (2):397–444.

Fagereng, Andreas, Luigi Guiso, Davide Malacrino, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2016. “Heterogene-
  ity and Persistence in Returns to Wealth.” NBER Working Paper.

Fagereng, Andreas, Magne Mogstad, Marte Rønning et al. 2015. “Why Do Wealthy Parents
  Have Wealthy Children.” Statistics Norway, Discussion Papers 813.

Feuk, Lars, Andrew R. Carson, and Stephen W. Scherer. 2006. “Structural Variation in the
  Human Genome.” Nature Reviews Genetics 7:85–97.

Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson. 2017. “Myopia and Discounting.” NBER Working Paper.

Grinblatt, Mark, Seppo Ikäheimo, Matti Keloharju, and Samuli Knüpfer. 2015. “IQ and
  Mutual Fund Choice.” Management Science 62 (4):924–944.

Grinblatt, Mark, Matti Keloharju, and Juhani Linnainmaa. 2011. “IQ and Stock Market
  Participation.” Journal of Finance 66 (6):2121–2164.

Heckman, James J and Yona Rubinstein. 2001. “The Importance of Noncognitive Skills:
  Lessons from the GED Testing Program.” American Economic Review 91 (2):145–149.

Hudomiet, Peter, Gábor Kézdi, and Robert J Willis. 2011. “Stock Market Crash and Ex-
 pectations of American Households.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 26 (3):393–415.


                                           42
Hurd, Michael D. 2009. “Subjective Probabilities in Household Surveys.” Annual Review of
 Economics 1:543.

Jackson, C Kirabo, Rucker C Johnson, and Claudia Persico. 2015. “The Effects of School
  Spending on Educational and Economic Outcomes: Evidence from School Finance Re-
  forms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (1):157–218.

Jones, Charles I. 2015. “Pareto and Piketty: The Macroeconomics of Top Income and Wealth
  Inequality.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (1):29–46.

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. 1972. “Subjective Probability: A Judgment of Rep-
 resentativeness.” In The Concept of Probability in Psychological Experiments. Springer,
 25–48.

Kézdi, Gábor and Robert J Willis. 2003. “Who Becomes a Stockholder? Expectations,
  Subjective Uncertainty, and Asset Allocation.” Unpublished manuscript, University of
  Michigan.

———. 2009. “Stock Market Expectations and Portfolio Choice of American Households.”
 Unpublished manuscript, University of Michigan.

———. 2013. “Expectations, Aging and Cognitive Decline.” In Discoveries in the Economics
 of Aging. University of Chicago Press, 305–337.

Kimball, MS, CR Sahm, and MD Shapiro. 2009. “Risk Preferences in the PSID: Individual
  Imputations and Family Covariation.” American Economic Review P&P 99 (2):363–368.

Kindermann, Fabian and Dirk Krueger. 2014. “High Marginal Tax Rates on the Top 1%?
  Lessons from a Life Cycle Model with Idiosyncratic Income Risk.” NBER Working Paper.

Lee, J. J. and et al. 2018. “Gene Discovery and Polygenic Prediction from a 1.1-Million-
  Person GWAS of Educational Attainment.” Nature Genetics, forthcoming.

Lillard, Lee and Robert J Willis. 2001. “Cognition and Wealth: The Importance of Proba-
  bilistic Thinking.” Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper .

Locke, Adam E., Bratati Kahali, Sonja I. Berndt, Anne E. Justice, Tune H. Pers et al. 2015.
  “Genetic Studies of Body Mass Index Yield New Insights for Obesity Biology.” Nature
  518 (7538):197–206.

Lumsdaine, Robin L and Rogier J D Potter van Loon. 2017. “Do Survey Probabilities Match
  Financial Market Beliefs?” Journal of Behavioral Finance, forthcoming.

                                            43
Lusardi, Annamaria, Pierre-Carl Michaud, and Olivia S Mitchell. 2017. “Optimal Financial
  Knowledge and Wealth Inequality.” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Martin, Alicia R, Christopher R Gignoux, Raymond K Walters, Genevieve L Wojcik, Ben-
 jamin M Neale, Simon Gravel, Mark J Daly, Carlos D Bustamante, and Eimear E Kenny.
 2017. “Human Demographic History Impacts Genetic Risk Prediction across Diverse Pop-
 ulations.” The American Journal of Human Genetics 100 (4):635–649.

Okbay, Aysu, Jonathan P Beauchamp, Mark Alan Fontana, James J Lee, Tune H Pers,
 Cornelius A Rietveld, Patrick Turley, Guo-Bo Chen, Valur Emilsson, S Fleur W Med-
 dens et al. 2016. “Genome-Wide Association Study Identifies 74 Loci Associated with
 Educational Attainment.” Nature 533 (7604):539–542.

Okbay, Aysu, Daniel Benjamin, and Peter Visscher. 2018. “SSGAC Educational Attainment:
 GWAS and MTAG Polygenic Scores (Ver. 1.0).” SSGAC Educational Attainment: GWAS
 and MTAG Polygenic Scores (Ver. 1.0).

Olsen, Anya and Russell Hudson. 2009. “Social Security Administration’s Master Earnings
  File: Background Information.” Social Security Bulletin 69 (3). URL https://www.ssa.
  gov/policy/docs/ssb/v69n3/v69n3p29.html.

Papageorge, Nicholas W and Kevin Thom. 2016. “Genes, Education and Labor Outcomes:
  Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study.” IZA Discussion Paper 10200.

Poterba, James M and David A Wise. 1998. “Individual Financial Decisions in Retirement
  Saving Plans and the Provision of Resources for Retirement.” In Privatizing Social Security.
  University of Chicago Press, 363–401.

Price, Alkes L, Nick J Patterson, Robert M Plenge, Michael E Weinblatt, Nancy A Shadick,
  and David Reich. 2006. “Principal Components Analysis Corrects for Stratification in
  Genome-Wide Association Studies.” Nature Genetics 38 (8):904–909.

Rietveld, Cornelius A, Sarah E Medland, Jaime Derringer, Jian Yang, Tõnu Esko, Nicolas W
  Martin, Harm-Jan Westra, Konstantin Shakhbazov, Abdel Abdellaoui, Arpana Agrawal
  et al. 2013. “GWAS of 126,559 Individuals Identifies Genetic Variants Associated with
  Educational Attainment.” Science 340 (6139):1467–1471.

Rohwedder, Susann and Robert J Willis. 2010. “Mental Retirement.” The Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives 24 (1):119–138.



                                             44
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. 2014. “Wealth Inequality in the United States since
  1913: Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data.”

Savage, L.J. 1954. The Foundations of Statistics. Wiley.

Schmitz, Lauren L and Dalton Conley. 2017. “The Effect of Vietnam-Era Conscription and
  Genetic Potential for Educational Attainment on Schooling Outcomes.” Economics of
  Education Review 61:85–97.

Smith-Woolley, Emily, Jean-Baptiste Pingault, Saskia Selzam, Kaili Rimfeld, Eva Krapohl,
  Sophie von Stumm, Kathryn Asbury, Philip S Dale, Toby Young, Rebecca Allen et al.
  2018. “Differences in Exam Performance between Pupils Attending Selective and Non-
  Selective Schools Mirror the Genetic Differences between Them.” npj Science of Learning
  3 (1):3.

Thorgeirsson, Thorgeir E, Daniel F Gudbjartsson, Ida Surakka, Jacqueline M Vink, Najaf
 Amin, Frank Geller, Patrick Sulem, Thorunn Rafnar, Tõnu Esko, Stefan Walter et al.
 2010. “Sequence Variants at CHRNB3-CHRNA6 and CYP2A6 Affect Smoking Behavior.”
 Nature Genetics 42 (5):448–453.

Tucker-Drob, Elliot M. and Timothy C. Bates. 2015. “Large Cross-National Differences
  in Gene x Socioeconomic Status Interaction on Intelligence.” Psychological Science
  27 (2):138–149.

Venti, Steven F and David A Wise. 1998. “The Cause of Wealth Dispersion at Retirement:
  Choice or Chance?” American Economic Review 88 (2):185–191.

Vilhjalmsson, et al., Bjarni J. 2015. “Modeling Linkage Disequilibrium Increases Accuracy
  of Polygenic Risk Scores.” The American Journal of Human Genetics 87:576–592.

Wiswall, Matthew and Basit Zafar. 2015. “Determinants of College Major Choice: Identifi-
 cation Using an Information Experiment.” Review of Economic Studies 82 (2):791–824.

Yitzhaki, Shlomo. 1987. “The Relation between Return and Income.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 102 (1):77–95.

Yogo, Motohiro. 2016. “Portfolio Choice in Retirement: Health Risk and the Demand for
  Annuities, Housing, and Risky Assets.” Journal of Monetary Economics 80:17–34.




                                            45
7   Tables and Figures

             Table 1: Summary Statistics — Birth Year and Education

                                   All Households     Coupled        Female Only       Male Only
                                       (4297)           (3026)           (309)            (962)
                                    Mean      SD     Mean      SD    Mean      SD     Mean      SD
                                     [1]      [2]     [3]      [4]    [5]      [6]     [7]      [8]
Year of birth
  Female                           1934.41   9.47   1935.32   8.86   1931.53   10.69    .        .
  Male                             1932.39   8.91   1932.07   8.68      .        .   1935.49   10.40
Years of Education
  Female                            12.68    2.35    12.73    2.32    12.50    2.45     .        .
  Male                              12.77    2.95    12.77    2.95      .        .    12.78    3.01
No Degree
  Female                             0.17    0.37     0.16    0.36    0.20     0.40      .       .
  Male                               0.19    0.40     0.20    0.40      .        .     0.16    0.37
GED
  Female                             0.04    0.20     0.04    0.20    0.04     0.19      .       .
  Male                               0.06    0.23     0.05    0.23      .        .     0.07    0.26
High School
  Female                             0.58    0.49     0.59    0.49    0.57     0.49      .       .
  Male                               0.48    0.50     0.47    0.50      .        .     0.49    0.50
2-Year Degree
  Female                             0.04    0.20     0.04    0.20    0.04     0.20      .       .
  Male                               0.03    0.17     0.03    0.17      .        .     0.05    0.21
4-Year Degree
  Female                             0.11    0.31     0.11    0.32    0.08     0.27      .       .
  Male                               0.13    0.34     0.13    0.34      .        .     0.14    0.34
Masters
  Female                             0.05    0.22     0.05    0.22    0.06     0.23      .       .
  Male                               0.08    0.27     0.08    0.27      .        .     0.07    0.25
Professional
  Female                             0.01    0.08     0.00    0.06    0.01     0.11      .       .
  Male                               0.03    0.17     0.03    0.18      .        .     0.02    0.15
Some Post-Secondary / Unknown
  Female                             0.00    0.03     0.00    0.03    0.00     0.00      .       .
  Male                               0.00    0.03     0.00    0.03      .        .     0.01    0.08

Notes: This table reports means and standard deviations (SD) for birth year, years of education,
and indicator variables for highest degree obtained for s household members examined in our
main analytic sample. The final category “Some Post Secondary / Unknown” includes some
education after high school, but no completed or recorded degree, and cases with unknown
degree. Summary statistics are presented for males and females in all households and then
separately for those in coupled households (where both members are observed at least once),
female-only households, and male-only households.




                                              46
                           Table 2: Summary Statistics — Income

                        All Households             Coupled          Female Only          Male Only
Panel A                 Mean      SD           Mean       SD       Mean     SD        Mean      SD
                          [1]      [2]           [3]      [4]       [5]      [6]        [7]      [8]
Non-Missing Income       0.90     0.30          0.90     0.30      0.89     0.31       0.90     0.31
Zero Income              0.01     0.07          0.00     0.03      0.02     0.13       0.01     0.08
Avg. Yrs. Top-Coded     12.19    12.57         15.06     12.55     3.50     7.59      10.78    12.56
Never Top Coded          0.29     0.46          0.17     0.38      0.69     0.46       0.26     0.44
Tot. Real Inc.         2171.12 1405.13        2476.31 1376.18 1301.01 1082.62        1863.10 1380.59
                                                  Quantiles of Income
Panel B                   10          25         50       75        90     Mean        SD        N
                          [1]         [2]        [3]      [4]       [5]      [6]       [7]      [8]
All Households          429.36      1122.23   2065.58 2963.52 3941.04 2171.12        1405.13   3853
Coupled                 773.76      1532.96   2391.92 3208.35 4191.20 2476.31        1376.18   2720
Female Only             134.86      441.01    1084.00 1874.06 2704.72 1301.01        1082.62   856
Male Only               396.46      938.94    1660.59 2494.59 3250.70 1863.10        1380.59   277

Notes: This table reports summary statistics for the income measure used in our main analysis
obtained from the Social Security Administration Master Earnings File data. Panel A provides
information on the proportion of households with non-missing data, the proportion of households
with zero income (conditional on having non-missing income data), average number of years that
any household member reports top-coded income, the fraction of households never observed with
a top-coded income observation, and average total real income (in $1,000s). In years in which
a household member’s income is top-coded, we replace the top-coded amount with the average
of individual earned incomes greater than or equal to the top-coded amount in the Current
Population Survey for that year. Income statistics are provided for all households and separately
by household structure. Panel B reports quantiles of the income distribution (in $1000s) along
with the mean and standard deviation of income by household structure.




                           Table 3: Summary Statistics — Wealth

                             p10       p25      p50     p75       p90     Mean       SD
                              [1]       [2]     [3]      [4]       [5]      [6]       [7]
            Total Wealth    40.73    124.72   321.04   687.53   1311.97   563.06    733.98
            No Housing      17.66    55.45    179.57   474.16   1000.68   459.95   1430.83
            No Ret.          5.41     77.34   234.33   562.41   1142.00   518.07   1203.57
            No H or R        0.00      8.00    90.86   339.28    825.98   348.00   1029.78

Notes: This table reports summary statistics on the distribution of real wealth in our main
sample. Measures of wealth include total real wealth, total wealth excluding housing, total
wealth excluding retirement wealth (the present discounted value of retirement income), and
the total wealth excluding housing and retirement wealth. Each wealth measure is winsorized
at the 1st and 99th percentiles. These statistics are calculated for the full analytical sample of
15,670 household-year observations.




                                                  47
                   Table 4: EA Score Related to Key Economic Variables


          Panel A
          Individual EA Score
          and Individual Variables                                                 Q4−Q1
                                          Q1           Q2        Q3         Q4     p-value
                                           [1]          [2]      [3]        [4]      [5]
          Birth Year                    1935.13      1934.64   1933.53   1932.81    0.00
          Male                            0.38         0.39     0.40       0.42     0.02
          Father’s Education              8.95         9.55     9.95      10.58     0.00
          Mother’s Education              9.49        10.16     10.42     10.93     0.00
          Education                      11.89        12.52     13.11     13.88     0.00
          Age                            72.11        72.87     73.78     74.15     0.00
          Coupled                         0.45         0.47     0.52       0.55     0.00

          Panel B
          Avg. Household EA Score
          and Individual Variables                                                 Q4−Q1
                                          Q1           Q2        Q3        Q4      p-value
                                          [1]          [2]       [3]       [4]       [5]
          Female:
          Birth Year                    1935.50      1934.87   1934.38   1932.86    0.00
          Education                      11.78        12.29     13.01     13.62     0.00
          Father’s Education              8.75         9.25     10.02     10.70     0.00
          Mother’s Education              9.34        9.84      10.50     10.82     0.00
          Age                            70.81        71.32     71.92     73.06     0.00

          Male:
          Birth Year                    1933.70      1932.77   1932.24   1930.88    0.00
          Education                      11.65        12.45     13.08     13.87     0.00
          Father’s Education              8.73         9.30      9.84     10.51     0.00
          Mother’s Education              9.30        9.87      10.33     10.83     0.00
          Age                            71.35        72.49     73.19     74.01     0.00

          Household:
          Avg. HH Income (in $1000)     1989.00      2135.81   2263.04   2297.20    0.00
Notes: This table relates the EA score to key economic variables. Columns [1]-[4] separate
individuals into quartiles of the individual EA score distribution and report average values
of demographic variables for each quartile. Averages are calculated for the 5,692 genotyped
individuals belonging to a household in the sample; age and coupled status are time-varying
and thus their averages are calculated over the larger person-year observation count. Column
[5] reports the p-value associated with test of difference in means between the fourth and first
quartiles. Panel B repeats this exercise at the household level and separates households into
quartiles of the average household EA score. We report averages for individual-level variables,
separately for females and males, for the full analytic sample of 4,297 households. The age of
male and female household members is time-varying, so averages of this variable are based on a
larger sample of household-year observations. We only use age observations on living household
members for these averages. The final row reports averages of our total household income
variable.
                                                48
                         Table 5: EA Score and Assortative Mating


                             Panel A: Unadjusted               Panel B: Adjusted for
                             means (N =1,477)                  degree and years
                                                               of education (N =1,473)


                             Female EA Quartile                Female EA Quartile


       Male EA Quartile      Q1     Q2      Q3       Q4        Q1      Q2    Q3      Q4
                              [1]    [2]    [3]      [4]        [1]    [2]    [3]    [4]
       Q1                    29.2   27.0   21.8     20.3       29.3   20.2   24.6   23.2
       Q2                    28.2   22.2   25.3     23.1       25.3   27.8   26.8   23.7
       Q3                    24.7   26.7   25.1     23.7       24.5   24.7   25.1   26.1
       Q4                    18.0   24.1   27.8     32.9       21.0   27.2   23.5   27.0
Notes: This table reports the distribution of the male household member’s EA score conditional
on the quartile of the female household member’s EA score for all coupled households with
non-missing EA scores for both members. For each panel, each row-column entry reports the
probability that a female with an EA score in the quartile corresponding to the column is coupled
with a male whose EA score is in the quartile corresponding to the row. The column probabilities
sum to 100 percent. Panel A presents these statistics based unconditional individual EA scores.
Panel B presents the same statistics based on the residual EA score obtained from a regression
of the individual EA score on years of education and indicators for highest degree attained.




                                               49
            Table 6: Average Household EA Score and Household Wealth

Dep. Var:
Log Wealth                [1]        [2]         [3]         [4]         [5]        [6]         [7]
EA Score               0.331***   0.319***    0.305***    0.141***    0.124***   0.291***    0.115***
                        (0.023)    (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.022)     (0.021)    (0.022)     (0.022)
Male Educ                                                 0.091***
                                                           (0.009)
Female Educ                                               0.148***
                                                           (0.010)
Log Income                                                                       0.263***    0.215***
                                                                                  (0.032)     (0.027)
Obs.                    15670       15670       15670      15660       15660       14273       14266
R2                      0.048       0.250       0.270      0.352       0.406       0.306       0.434
Standard Controls                     X           X          X           X           X           X
Principal Comp.                                   X          X           X           X           X
Years of Educ.                                               X
Full Educ. Controls                                                      X                       X

Notes: This table presents estimates from regressions of log household wealth on average house-
hold EA score and varying sets of controls. Column [1] includes no controls. Column [2] includes
controls for age, birth cohort, sex of respondent, and calendar year, as described in Section 4.2.
Column [3] adds controls for principal components of the genetic data for genotyped household
members. Column [4] adds years of education separately for both female and male household
members. Column [5] replaces the two schooling variables with our full set of education controls
(dummies for years of education, degree dummies and interactions as described in Section 4.2).
Column [6] includes the log of total household income, but excludes any controls for education.
Column [7] includes our full set of controls including the detailed education variables and the
log of total household income. Significance stars ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance
at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the family level.




                                                50
      Table 7: EA Score and Household Wealth: Alternative Specifications

      Panel A
      FR and Non-FR             [1]        [2]        [3]        [4]        [5]        [6]        [7]
      FR EA Score            0.255***   0.272***   0.268***   0.139***   0.128***   0.252***   0.116***
                              (0.028)    (0.028)    (0.028)    (0.026)    (0.028)    (0.028)    (0.029)
      Non-FR EA Score        0.156***   0.160***   0.159***    0.052*     0.046*    0.152***    0.047*
                              (0.030)    (0.028)    (0.028)    (0.027)    (0.026)    (0.028)    (0.026)
      Male Educ.                                              0.091***
                                                               (0.014)
      Female Educ.                                            0.109***
                                                               (0.015)
      Log Income                                                                    0.232***   0.190***
                                                                                     (0.055)    (0.048)
      Obs.                     5350      5350       5350       5340       5340        5065       5058
      R2                       0.071     0.216      0.225      0.331      0.448       0.245      0.462
      Panel B
      Include Non-Retired       [1]        [2]        [3]        [4]        [5]        [6]        [7]
      EA Score               0.319***   0.311***   0.305***   0.139***   0.116***   0.275***   0.104***
                              (0.018)    (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.018)
      Male Educ.                                              0.093***
                                                               (0.008)
      Female Educ.                                            0.135***
                                                               (0.008)
      Log Income                                                                    0.299***   0.238***
                                                                                     (0.028)    (0.024)
      Obs.                     27845     27845      27845      27795      27795       25423      25384
      R2                       0.044     0.209      0.222      0.298      0.339       0.259      0.363
      Panel C:
      SSA and HRS Income        [1]        [2]        [3]        [4]        [5]        [6]        [7]
      EA Score               0.344***   0.329***   0.329***   0.152***   0.122***   0.266***   0.108***
                              (0.029)    (0.027)    (0.027)    (0.028)    (0.028)    (0.027)    (0.028)
      Male Educ.                                              0.088***
                                                               (0.012)
      Female Educ.                                            0.134***
                                                               (0.013)
      Log Income (SSA)                                                              0.223***   0.220***
                                                                                     (0.051)    (0.041)
      Log Income (HRS)                                                              0.375***   0.242***
                                                                                     (0.040)    (0.034)
      Obs.                     7998      7998       7998       7994       7994        7588       7587
      R2                       0.059     0.265      0.300      0.384      0.452       0.376      0.491
      Standard Controls                    X          X          X          X           X          X
      Principal Comp.                                 X          X          X           X          X
      Years of Educ.                                             X
      Full Educ. Controls                                                   X                     X
      Log Income                                                                       X          X

Notes: This table presents estimates from regressions of log household wealth on household
polygenic scores and varying sets of controls. (see notes to Table 6 for an explanation of the
controls in each column). In Panel A, we include the individual EA score of the financial
respondent (FR) and the score of the non-financial respondent (NFR) separately and restrict
the sample to households with two genotyped members. Panel B uses the average EA score,
but expands our sample to include households that are not yet retired. In Panel C, we again
restrict our attention to retired households, but now include two separate household incomes
measures: our primary measure derived from the Social Security Administration data, and
the log of average annual income based on self-reported values in the HRS. In Panel C, all
specifications are restricted to households with non-missing observations of the HRS income
variable. Significance stars ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and
0.10 levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the family level.
                                                   51
                                                       Table 8: Summary Statistics: Mechanisms

                                                 All Households                   Coupled                 Female Only                Male Only
                                             Mean      SD        N       Mean       SD         N     Mean      SD      N        Mean     SD     N
      Panel A: Transfers                      [1]      [2]      [3]       [4]       [5]       [6]     [7]      [8]    [9]       [10]     [11]  [12]

      Any Inheritance                          0.34    0.47     4297       0.38     0.49     3026      0.28    0.45      309      0.23    0.42      962
      Inheritance Amount (in $1000)          143.20   528.64    8717     144.76    559.09    6615    172.76   614.08     521    123.25   255.61    1581
      Fathers’ Education (HH Avg.)             9.61    3.23     3271       9.52     3.05     2498     10.20    3.79      222      9.75    3.68      551
      Mothers’ Educ (HH Avg.)                 10.09    2.81     3362      10.02     2.65     2516     10.65    3.12      235     10.20    3.24      611

      Panel B: Mortality and Savings           [1]      [2]       [3]      [4]      [5]       [6]      [7]       [8]     [9]     [10]      [11]    [12]

      Mortality                               0.03      0.18    33297     0.03      0.18    27131     0.05      0.23    1432     0.04      0.20    4734
      Mortality Expectations                 67.39     26.03    29430    67.78     25.66    25123    59.83     28.97    1182    67.13     27.40    3125
      Expenditures (in $1000)                56.36     38.90    3186     60.81     39.99    2585     38.11     29.73    160     36.95     25.02    441

      Panel C: Risk Aversion (Income)          [1]      [2]       [3]      [4]      [5]       [6]      [7]       [8]     [9]     [10]      [11]    [12]
52




      Not take 50-50 Gamble
      Doubling Income or 10% Cut              0.39     0.49     10632     0.39      0.49     9138     0.38      0.49     425     0.40      0.49    1069

      Take 50-50 Gamble
      Doubling Income or
      10% Cut (but not 20%)                   0.22     0.42     10632     0.22      0.42     9138     0.19      0.40     425     0.22      0.41    1069
      20% Cut (but not 33%)                   0.17     0.37     10632     0.17      0.38     9138     0.13      0.34     425     0.16      0.37    1069
      33% Cut (but not 50%)                   0.10     0.29     10632     0.10      0.29     9138     0.11      0.32     425     0.09      0.29    1069
      50% Cut (but not 75%)                   0.07     0.26     10632     0.07      0.26     9138     0.10      0.30     425     0.06      0.25    1069
      75% Cut                                 0.05     0.22     10632     0.05      0.21     9138     0.09      0.29     425     0.06      0.23    1069
     Notes: This table reports means and standard deviations for additional variables used to investigate mechanisms underlying the estimated gene-wealth
      gradient. Each panel corresponds to an alternative mechanism. Mechanisms include Transfers (Panel A); Savings (Panel B); Risk aversion (Panel C);
      Portfolio choices (Panel D); Beliefs and planning horizons (Panel E); and Defined-benefit pensions (Panel F). Summary statistics are reported for all
     households and then separately for coupled households (where a male and a female are present and genotyped), female only and male only households.
                                                 Table 8: Summary Statistics: Mechanisms (continued)

                                                       All Households                  Coupled               Female Only              Male Only
                                                    Mean    SD       N        Mean       SD        N     Mean    SD       N      Mean    SD      N
       Panel D: Portfolio Choices                    [1]     [2]    [3]        [4]       [5]      [6]     [7]    [8]     [9]     [10]    [11]   [12]

       Has House                                     0.82     0.39   17721     0.89     0.32     12705   0.67     0.47    1163    0.64     0.48   3853
       Has Business                                  0.08     0.27   17721     0.09     0.29     12705   0.08     0.28    1163    0.05     0.21   3853
       Any Stocks                                    0.44     0.50   14637     0.50     0.50     10274   0.37     0.48    1022    0.29     0.45   3341

       Panel E: Beliefs and Planning Horizons         [1]      [2]     [3]      [4]      [5]      [6]     [7]      [8]     [9]    [10]     [11]    [12]

       Prob: Stock Market Up
       Reported Probability                          48.24   26.14   36189     48.93    26.08    30605   48.55   27.01    1474   42.99    25.63   4110
       Deviation from Objective                      30.02   21.11   36189     29.51    20.93    30605   30.17   21.60    1474   33.76    21.88   4110
       Report 0%                                     0.05     0.22   36189      0.05    0.21     30605   0.06     0.24    1474   0.08     0.27    4110
       Report 50%                                    0.30     0.46   36189      0.30    0.46     30605   0.30     0.46    1474   0.31     0.46    4110
       Report 100%                                   0.04     0.20   36189      0.04    0.20     30605   0.05     0.21    1474   0.02     0.15    4110
53




       Planning Horizon:
       Less than 1 Year                              0.13     0.34   28032     0.12     0.32     23964   0.20     0.40    989     0.21     0.41   3079
       More than 1 Year                              0.12     0.33   28032     0.12     0.32     23964   0.14     0.35    989     0.15     0.36   3079
       More than a Few Years                         0.29     0.46   28032     0.30     0.46     23964   0.25     0.43    989     0.26     0.44   3079
       5-10 Years                                    0.34     0.47   28032     0.35     0.48     23964   0.32     0.47    989     0.28     0.45   3079
       More than 10 Years                            0.11     0.32   28032     0.12     0.32     23964   0.09     0.29    989     0.09     0.29   3079

       Panel F: Pensions                              [1]      [2]     [3]      [4]      [5]      [6]     [7]      [8]     [9]    [10]     [11]    [12]

       Has DB Pension                                 0.56   0.50    15660     0.60     0.49     11087    0.48   0.50     1090   0.45      0.50   3483
       Pension Value (in $1000)                      45.43   64.67   8717      49.95    67.84     6615   34.29   49.41     521   30.20    51.41   1581


     Notes: This table reports means and standard deviations for additional variables used to investigate mechanisms underlying the estimated gene-wealth
      gradient. Each panel corresponds to an alternative mechanism. Mechanisms include Transfers (Panel A); Savings (Panel B); Risk aversion (Panel C);
      Portfolio choices (Panel D); Beliefs and planning horizons (Panel E); and Defined-benefit pensions (Panel F). Summary statistics are reported for all
     households and then separately for coupled households (where a male and a female are present and genotyped), female only and male only households.
             Table 9: Transfers: Inheritances and Parental Education

Dep. Var:                Receive       Inheritance     Fathers’    Mothers’      Fathers’    Mothers’
                       Inheritance       Amount         Educ.       Educ.         Educ.       Educ.
                            [1]             [2]           [3]         [4]           [5]         [6]
EA Score                 0.021***          0.070       0.836***    0.658***      0.328***    0.193***
                          (0.008)         (0.060)       (0.061)     (0.052)       (0.063)     (0.054)
Obs.                       4293            1463          3271        3362          3267        3358
R2                         0.267           0.427         0.211       0.214         0.406       0.419
Standard Controls            X               X             X           X             X           X
Principal Comp.              X               X             X           X             X           X
Full Educ. Controls          X               X                                       X           X

Notes: This table presents estimates from regressions of inheritance and parental education
variables on the average household EA score and various controls. In Column [1], the dependent
variable is an binary that takes a value of 1 if the household ever receives an inheritance in the
sample. In Column [2], the dependent variable is the log of the total real inheritance amount
that the household receives over the course of the sample, conditional on having received an
inheritance. In Column [3], the dependent variable is average years of fathers’ education (aver-
aging over household members). Column [4] repeats this exercise for average years of mothers’
education. Columns [5] and [6] repeat the analysis in Columns [3] and [4], but now include con-
trols for education of household members. Significance stars ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the
family level.




                                                54
                              Table 10: Mortality and Savings

Panel A: Dep. Var:                Observed Mortality                Exp. Mortality Pr(Live to 75)
                          All Ind. Females       Males              All Ind. Females     Males
                              [1]         [2]       [3]                 [4]      [5]        [6]
Ind. EA Score             -0.003** -0.003**       -0.001               0.444   0.658*     -0.278
                           (0.001)     (0.001)   (0.002)             (0.284)  (0.368)    (0.479)
Obs.                        33297       20415     12882               29430    17615      11815
  2
R                           0.024       0.027     0.034               0.117    0.128      0.148
Standard Controls              X           X         X                   X        X          X
Principal Comp.                X           X         X                   X        X          X
Full Educ. Controls            X           X         X                   X        X          X
Panel B: Dep. Var:                             Drop Low                                Drop Low
Log HH Expenditures          All      Age <60    Income                 All  Age <60    Income
                              [1]         [2]       [3]                 [4]      [5]        [6]
EA Score                    0.009       0.032     0.041               -0.005   0.022       0.014
                           (0.017)     (0.028)   (0.028)             (0.017)  (0.028)    (0.028)
Log Income (2nd Quintile)   -0.045      -0.082     0.000              -0.040   -0.096      0.000
                           (0.038)     (0.101)                       (0.040)  (0.113)
Log Income (3rd Quintile)  0.072*       -0.048    0.030              0.094**   -0.012      0.073
                           (0.040)     (0.093)   (0.076)             (0.041)  (0.095)    (0.083)
Log Income (4th Quintile) 0.118***      0.050     0.119             0.125***   0.016       0.093
                           (0.042)     (0.089)   (0.075)             (0.043)  (0.092)    (0.085)
Log Income (5th Quintile) 0.227*** 0.236***     0.290***            0.191***  0.189**   0.252***
                           (0.049)     (0.090)   (0.077)             (0.049)  (0.090)    (0.083)
Log Wealth                                                          0.112*** 0.095***   0.063***
                                                                     (0.012)  (0.018)    (0.020)
Obs.                            3186        1130         1021          2654     925         840
R2                              0.483       0.609        0.637        0.532    0.653      0.681
Standard Controls                 X           X            X             X        X          X
Principal Comp.                   X           X            X             X        X          X
Full Educ. Controls               X           X            X             X        X          X
Log Wealth                                                                        X          X

Notes: This table presents estimates from regressions of observed mortality, mortality expecta-
tions, and the log of household expenditures on the EA score and various controls. In Panel A,
we estimate linear probability models for the annual probability of death as a function of the
individual EA score. Column [1] presents estimates pooling all individuals and Columns [2] and
[3] repeat this exercise separately for females and males, respectively. In Columns [4]-[6], the
outcome variable is an individual’s subjective probability of surviving until age 75, and again
we estimate this specification for the full sample and then separately for females and males. In
Panel [B], the outcome variable is the log of household expenditures, and we restrict our sample
to non-retired households. In Column [1] we control for quintiles in contemporaneous annual
household income. In Column [2], we restrict the sample to households with a maximum age of
less than 60. In Column [3], we restrict to households with a maximum member age of less than
60, and also drop households in the lowest quintile of contemporaneous income. Columns [4]-[6]
repeat the analyses in Columns [1]-[3], controlling for log wealth in the previous HRS survey
year. Significance stars ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10
levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the family level.

                                                 55
                                   Table 11: Risk Aversion

Dep. Var:                    Risk Aversion: Indicator                Risk Aversion: Categorical
                        Income Inheritance Business               Income Inheritance Business
                           [1]          [2]         [3]              [4]         [5]        [6]
EA Score               -0.022***      -0.002     -0.026**        -0.045***     0.021     -0.056**
                         (0.007)     (0.012)      (0.011)          (0.015)    (0.028)     (0.027)
Obs.                      10632        2972        2937             10632       2972       2937
R2                        0.107       0.210        0.246
Standard Controls           X            X           X               X             X              X
Principal Comp.             X            X           X               X             X              X
Full Educ. Controls         X            X           X               X             X              X
Log Income                  X            X           X               X             X              X

Notes: This table presents estimates from regressions of measures of individual risk tolerance
on the EA score and various controls. Risk tolerance is elicited from questions based on risky
gambles over labor income, inheritance wealth, and business wealth. In Columns [1]-[3], the
dependent variable is an indicator that takes a value of 1 for individuals that never choose the
risky option over a guaranteed outcome. In Columns [4]-[6] we report estimates from ordered
probit models where the outcome is a categorical variable that takes one of six values depending
on the riskiest gamble that an individual accepts, with higher values indicating greater risk
aversion. Significance stars ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and
0.10 levels, respectively.




                                                56
         Table 12: Average Household EA Score and Portfolio Decisions

       Panel A                      Owns       Owns        Owns       Owns        Owns       Owns
       Dep. Var:                    House     Business     Stocks     House     Business     Stocks
                                      [1]         [2]        [3]        [4]         [5]        [6]
       EA Score                      0.003     0.008*     0.048***   -0.012**      0.001    0.035***
                                    (0.006)    (0.004)     (0.007)    (0.006)     (0.004)    (0.007)
       Log Income                  0.030***     -0.005    0.053***     0.005    -0.015***   0.032***
                                    (0.006)    (0.004)     (0.007)    (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.007)
       Lagged Log Wealth                                             0.122***    0.043***   0.134***
                                                                      (0.004)     (0.003)    (0.006)
       Obs.                         17721      17721       14637       12559       12559      11278
       R2                           0.240      0.111       0.291       0.370       0.165      0.399
       Standard Controls              X          X           X           X           X          X
       Principal Comp.                X          X           X           X           X          X
       Full Educ. Controls            X          X           X           X           X          X
       Panel B Dep. Var:
       Log Wealth                     [1]        [2]         [3]        [4]        [5]           [6]
       EA Score                    0.124***   0.113***    0.117***   0.116***   0.072***     0.065***
                                    (0.023)    (0.023)     (0.019)    (0.022)    (0.021)      (0.017)
       Has House                                          1.561***                           1.364***
                                                           (0.052)                            (0.048)
       Has Business                                                  0.942***                0.715***
                                                                      (0.049)                 (0.043)
       Any Stocks                                                               1.018***     0.814***
                                                                                 (0.034)      (0.029)
       Any Inheritance                        -1.311***                                     -1.061***
                                                (0.201)                                       (0.155)
       Log Total Inheritance                   0.160***                                      0.121***
                                                (0.018)                                       (0.014)
       Father Education (Male)                   -0.005                                        -0.007
                                                (0.008)                                       (0.006)
       Father Education (Female)                0.015*                                          0.002
                                                (0.008)                                       (0.006)
       Mother Education (Male)                   0.013                                          0.007
                                                (0.008)                                       (0.007)
       Mother Education (Female)                 -0.007                                         0.001
                                                (0.009)                                       (0.007)
       Obs.                         12927        12927     12927      12927      12927         12927
       R2                           0.446         0.465    0.563      0.468      0.523          0.638
       Standard Controls              X             X        X          X          X              X
       Principal Comp.                X             X        X          X          X              X
       Full Educ. Controls            X             X        X          X          X              X
       Log Income                     X             X        X          X          X              X

Notes: Panel A of this table presents estimates from regressions of indicators for ownership of
different asset types on the EA score and various controls. Panel B presents estimates from
regressions of log household wealth on the EA score, inheritance variables, parental education,
indicators for ownership of different asset types, and various controls. Significance stars ***, **,
and * indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels, respectively. Standard
errors are clustered at the family level.




                                                   57
                  Table 13: Extreme Beliefs and Planning Horizons

     Panel A                              The EA Score and Beliefs
     Dep. Var:              Deviation      Prob=0           Prob=0.5    Prob=1
                               [1]             [2]                [3]       [4]
                                           Stock Market Goes Up
     EA Score               -0.572***      -0.005***            -0.003    -0.002
                              (0.170)        (0.002)           (0.003)   (0.001)
     Obs.                      36189          36189             36189     36189
     R2                        0.101          0.062              0.030     0.048
                                                   Depression
     EA Score               -0.537***       -0.004**            -0.004  -0.008***
                              (0.136)        (0.002)           (0.003)   (0.002)
     Obs.                      36261          36261             36261     36261
     R2                        0.088          0.046              0.037     0.073
                                           Double Digit Inflation
     EA Score               -1.047***       -0.004**            -0.005  -0.011***
                              (0.191)        (0.002)           (0.004)   (0.002)
     Obs.                      22786          22786             22786     22786
     R2                        0.080          0.057              0.044     0.072
     Panel B                         The EA Score and Planning Horizons
     Dep. Var:             PH≥ 1 Yr. PH≥ Few Yrs. PH≥ 5-10 Yrs. PH> 10
                                [1]            [2]                [3]       [4]
     EA Score                0.008***       0.012***          0.013***     0.004
                              (0.003)        (0.004)           (0.004)   (0.003)
     Obs.                      28032          28032             28032     28032
     R2                        0.072          0.080              0.077     0.045
     Standard Controls           X              X                  X         X
     Principal Comp.             X              X                  X         X
     Full Educ. Controls         X              X                  X         X

Notes: Panel A of this table presents estimates from regressions of beliefs about probabilities
of three macroeconomic events on the EA score and various controls. Separate estimates are
given for three distinct macroeconomic events: an increase in the stock market over the next
year, a major depression in the next 10 years, and double-digit inflation in the next 10 years.
In Column [1] the dependent variable is the absolute value of the deviation of the respondent’s
belief from an “objective” probability (as described in Section 5.5). The outcome variables in
Columns [2], [3] and [4] are indicators for providing subjective probabilities of 0, 0.5 and 1,
respectively. Panel B presents estimates from regressions of indicator variables for the length
of a respondent’s financial planning horizon on the EA score and various controls. In Column
[1] the dependent variable is an indicator for reporting a planning horizon greater than or equal
to one year. In Columns [2], [3] and [4], the dependent variables are indicators for horizons of
“greater than or equal to a few years;” “greater than or equal to 5-10 years;” and “greater than
10 years,” respectively.




                                               58
                        Table 14: Pensions and Household Wealth

             Dep. Var:                     Has        Pension       Log         Log
                                         Pension      Wealth      Wealth      Wealth
                                            [1]          [2]         [3]         [4]
             EA Score                      0.012        0.004     0.120***   0.207***
                                          (0.008)      (0.023)     (0.021)    (0.031)
             DB Pension                                           0.385***   0.186***
                                                                   (0.034)    (0.049)
             EA Score × DB Pension                                           -0.169***
                                                                              (0.034)
             Obs.                          15660       8717        15660       15660
             R2                            0.168       0.695       0.419       0.429
             Standard Controls               X           X           X            X
             Principal Comp.                 X           X           X            X
             Full Educ. Controls             X           X           X            X
             Log Income

Notes: Columns [1]-[2] of this table present estimates from regressions of defined benefit (DB)
pension participation and log pension wealth (conditional on participation) on the EA score and
various controls. Columns [3]-[4] presents estimates from regressions of log household wealth on
the EA score, DB pension participation, an interaction between the EA score and pension par-
ticipation, and various controls. Significance stars ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance
at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the family level.




                                                 59
   .4
   .3
Density
  .2
   .1
   0




          -4               -2                0                 2      4
                                EA Score (Household Average)



               Figure 1: Distribution of Household Average EA Score




                                         60
                                         13.5
                                         13
                             log Real Total Wealth
                                  12       12.5
                                         11.5
                                         11
                                                        -2      -1          0           1          2
                                                               EA Score (Household Average)
                                        13.5       13
                             log Real Total Wealth
                                  12      12.5
                                        11.5
                                        11




                                                        -2     -1          0           1           2
                                                              EA Score (Household Average)

                                                             2006 and Before           2008 and Later
                                     13.5       13
                          log Real Total Wealth
                               12      12.5
                                     11.5
                                     11




                                                        -2     -1          0           1          2
                                                              EA Score (Household Average)

                                                             2006 and Before          2008 and Later

Figure 2: Notes: Panel A plots average household EA score v.s. log household wealth using
data for all household-year observations in the analytic sample. Panel B restricts the sample to
households with a maximum education level of a high school degree or less and provides separate
plots for household-year observations prior to 2008, and those from 2008 or later. Panel C is
analogous to Panel B, but restricts the sample to households with at least one member having
at least a college degree.                     61
