                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE CRITICAL ROLE OF MARKETS IN CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION

                                       Sarah E. Anderson
                                       Terry L. Anderson
                                          Alice C. Hill
                                        Matthew E. Kahn
                                       Howard Kunreuther
                                        Gary D. Libecap
                                       Hari Mantripragada
                                          Pierre Mérel
                                        Andrew Plantinga
                                         V. Kerry Smith

                                       Working Paper 24645
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24645


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2018




The authors thank the Koret Foundation for funding a conference on climate change adaptation
through market responses at the Hoover Institution, Stanford. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24645.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Sarah E. Anderson, Terry L. Anderson, Alice C. Hill, Matthew E. Kahn, Howard
Kunreuther, Gary D. Libecap, Hari Mantripragada, Pierre Mérel, Andrew Plantinga, and V. Kerry
Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Critical Role of Markets in Climate Change Adaptation
Sarah E. Anderson, Terry L. Anderson, Alice C. Hill, Matthew E. Kahn, Howard Kunreuther,
Gary D. Libecap, Hari Mantripragada, Pierre Mérel, Andrew Plantinga, and V. Kerry Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 24645
May 2018
JEL No. Q1,Q15,Q21,Q22,Q24,Q25,Q28,Q51,Q54,R14
                                          ABSTRACT

This paper summarizes and synthesizes the role of markets in facilitating climate change
adaptation. It explains how market signals encourage adaptation through land markets. It also
identifies impediments to critical market signals, provides related policy recommendations, and
points to promising new technologies. Urban, coastal, and agricultural land markets provide
effective signals of the emerging costs of climate change. These signals encourage adjustments by
both private owners and by policy officials in taking preemptive action to reduce costs. In
agriculture, they promote consideration of new cropping and tillage practices, seed types, timing,
and location of production. They also stimulate use of new irrigation technologies. In urban
areas, they motivate new housing construction, elevation, and location away from harm. They
channel more efficient use of water and its application to parks and other green areas to make
urban settings more desirable with higher temperatures. To be effective, however, land markets
must reflect multiple traders and prices must be free to adjust. Where these conditions are not met,
land market signals will be inhibited and market-driven adaptation will be reduced. Because
public policy is driven by constituent demands, it may not be a remedy. The evidence of the
National Flood Insurance Program and federal wildfire response illustrates how politically
difficult it may be to adjust programs to be more adaptive.

Sarah E. Anderson                                  Howard Kunreuther
University of California, Santa Barbara            Operations and Information Management
Bren School of Environmental Science               The Wharton School
and Management & Department of                     University of Pennsylvania 3730 Walnut
Political Science                                  Street, 500 JMHH
4510 Bren Hall                                     Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366 and NBER
Santa Barbara, CA 93106                            kunreuther@wharton.upenn.edu
sanderson@bren.ucsb.edu
                                                   Gary D. Libecap
Terry L. Anderson                                  Bren School of Environmental Science
Hoover Institution                                 and Management and Economics Department
269 E. Hodgeman Rd                                 University of California, Santa Barbara
Bozeman, MT 59718                                  Bren Hall 4412
terryleeanderson@gmail.com                         Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131
                                                   and NBER
Alice C. Hill                                      glibecap@bren.ucsb.edu
Hoover Institution
Stanford University                                Hari Mantripragada
Palo Alto, CA                                      Civil Engineering
ahill2@stanford.edu                                University of Pittsburgh
                                                   Pittsburgh, PA
Matthew E. Kahn                                    ham103@pitt.edu
Department of Economics
University of Southern California
KAP
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
kahnme@usc.edu
Pierre Mérel
University of California, Davis
Agricultural and Resource Economics
3102 Social Sciences and Humanities
Davis, CA 95616
merel@primal.ucdavis.edu

Andrew Plantinga
Bren School of Environmental Science
and Management
University of California
Rm 3424
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
plantinga@bren.ucsb.edu

V. Kerry Smith
Department of Economics
W.P. Carey School of Business
P.O. Box 879801
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287-9801
and NBER
kerry.smith@asu.edu
             The Critical Role of Markets in Climate Change Adaptation

                                                       by

Sarah Anderson, UCSB; Terry L. Anderson, Hoover; Alice C. Hill, Hoover; Matthew E. Kahn, USC and
      NBER; Howard Kunreuther, U Penn and NBER; Gary D. Libecap, UCSB and NBER; Hari
Mantripragada, Pitt; Pierre Mérel, UCD; Andrew Plantinga, UCSB; and V. Kerry Smith, ASU and NBER

                                                 May 16, 2018

        “Climate change, once considered an issue for a distant future has moved firmly into the

present”(Melillo, et al, 2014).1 Humanity must find expeditious ways to deal with its effects,

including more extreme heat and precipitation events, sea-level rise, higher intensity storms, and

extended drought. The most widely discussed option to address anthropogenic climate change is

thru mitigation. Policies to reduce emissions include taxing carbon, trading carbon credits, and

displacing conventional sources of energy by subsidizing renewable technologies. To be globally

effective, these mitigation options require international collective action that has been difficult to

attain (Libecap, 2014).2 Moreover, even with full implementation of cross-national mitigation

options, such as through the Paris Agreement of 2015, recent estimates suggest that the

temperature targets will be missed unless emissions are more sharply reduced. 3

        Ambitious mitigation efforts undertaken now do not alter the fact that humans are

committed to some amount of climate change as the result of past emissions (Mauritsen and

Pincus, 2017).4 As such, adaptation will necessarily be part of the response to climate change.

Adaptation can “moderate or avoid harm or exploit beneficial opportunities” associated with




1
  Melillo, J. M., Richmond, T.C. and Yohe, G.W. eds., 2014: “Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The
Third National Climate Assessment.” U.S. Global Change Research Program, 841 pp. doi:10.7930/J0Z31WJ2.
2
  Libecap, G. D. 2014, “Addressing Global Environmental Externalities: Transaction Costs Considerations,” Journal
of Economic Literature 52 (2): 424-479.
3
  https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/news/releases/2018/decadal-forecast-2018.
4
  Mauritsen, T. and Yohe, R. 2017. “Committed Warming Inferred from Observations.” Nature Climate Change 7:
652-655.


                                                                                                               1
climate change.5 Adaptation has some distinctive advantages. In addition to adaptation

undertaken by private individuals or firms, adaptation policies can be implemented and adjusted

unilaterally by countries without requiring international coordination. A country’s adaptive

responses offer opportunities for learning. They can serve as templates for use elsewhere. Social

scientists have published peer-reviewed scholarship highlighting successful examples of

adaptation in North America (Filho and Keenan, 2017),6 central Europe (Rüter, et al, 2014), 7 and

South America (Krellenberg and Barth, 2014). 8 There also are examples of maladaptation in the

Maldives, Ethiopia, South Africa, and Bangladesh (Magnan, et al, 2016). 9

         Whether and to what extent humans will adapt to a changing climate depends partially on

whether they receive sufficient advance information about the possible impacts of new weather

patterns resulting from this change. Moreover, if climate change affects goods traded in markets,

the prices of these goods will change, sending signals to owners, traders, and policy makers of

the anticipated impacts. These incentives create opportunities to respond and with them identify

potential benefits from adaptation. A market does not require consensus on climate change

outcomes, and indeed is most effective when there are multiple and perhaps, conflicting, views.

Accordingly, market prices will incorporate new information as it unfolds. In this manner, a



5
  http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/wg2/ar5_wgII_spm_en.pdf, p. 6.
6
  Filho, L.W. and Keenan, J. 2017. Climate Change Adaptation in North America: Fostering Resilience and the
Regional Capacity to Adapt. New York: Springer. Accessed December 22, 2017.
http://www.springer.com/us/book/9783319537412.
7
  Rüter, S., Vos, C. C., van Eupen, M., and Rühmkorf, H. 2014. “Transboundary ecological networks as an
adaptation strategy to climate change: The example of the Dutch – German border.” Basic and Applied Ecology 15
(8): 639-650. Accessed December 22, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.baae.2014.09.007.
8
  Krellenberg, K. and Barth, K. 2014. “Inter- and Transdisciplinary Research for Planning Climate Change
Adaptation Responses: The Example of Santiago de Chile.” Interdisciplinary Science Reviews 39 (4): 360-375.
Accessed December 22, 2017. http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1179/0308018814Z.00000000097.
9
  Magnan, A. K., Schipper, E. L. F., Burkett, M., Bharwani, S., Burton, I., Eriksen, S., Gemenne, F., Schaar, J., and
Ziervogel, G. 2016. “Addressing the risk of maladaptation to climate change.” WIREs: Climate Change 7 (5): 646-
665. Accessed December 22, 2017.
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wcc.409/abstract;jsessionid=DA101B5F581DEB4EC1719DA3951A66B
4.f01t04.


                                                                                                                   2
market can reveal new evidence regarding the anticipated effects of a changing climate. 10 This

knowledge, in turn, becomes valuable in responding in a timely and cost-effective manner. On

the other hand, policies that inhibit trade or that fix prices can, as a result, undermine this

information revelation process and impede adaptation.

         To explore the conditions under which adaptation can take place, a workshop on the

potential for market-based responses to climate change involving 10 economists, political

scientists, civil engineers, and policy scholars was held at the Hoover Institution, Stanford

University, November 7-8, 2017. Building upon the contributions presented at the workshop and

the discussions that ensued, this paper explains how market signals encourage adaptation through

land markets. It also identifies impediments to critical market signals, provides related policy

recommendations, and points to promising new technologies. 11

Market Signals Can Stimulate Adaptation

Agricultural and Urban Land Markets

        Land is perhaps the foremost resource signaling climate change. Because land is a

durable asset and a primary input in agricultural production, urban housing, and commercial

development, climate change will affect its productivity and desirability. If land is traded in

markets, these effects will be capitalized into land values, thus signaling anticipated impacts and



10
   Grossman S.J. and Stiglitz J.E. (1976). “Information and Competitive Price Systems.” The American Economic
Review. 66(2):246-53.
11
   Workshop on adaptation funded by the Koret Foundation. Participants include Andrew Plantinga, “Land Markets
and Climate Change Adaptation,” Pierre Mérel, “Measuring Market-Mediated Adaptation to Climate Change in US
Agriculture: Empirical Evidence and Challenges,” Matthew E. Kahn, “Urban Climate Change and Local Real Estate
Markets,” Gary Libecap, “Adaptation to Climate Change: The Role of Water Markets,” Matthew E. Kahn and V.
Kerry Smith, “Reforming the National Flood Insurance Program as Adaptation to Climate Change,” Alice C. Hill
and Bill Kakenmaster, “A Tale of Two Cities: A Comparative Analysis of Miami Beach, FL and Norfolk, VA and
Lessons in Coastal Real Estate Markets,” Howard Kunreuther, “Encouraging Adaptation to Flood Risk: The Role of
the National Flood Insurance Program,” Sarah Anderson, Ryan Bart, Maureen Kennedy, Andrew MacDonald, Max
Moritz, Andrew Plantinga, Christina Taque, and Matthew Wibbenmeyer, “Salience-driven Responses to Climate
Change and their Consequences for (Mal)Adaptation, and Hari Mantripragada, “Feasibility Analysis of Coal-based
Power with CO2 Control.”


                                                                                                             3
the potential benefits of adaptation. As land is generally fixed in supply, the value of land

derives from changes in demand. The demand for land in a variety of uses reflects both current

and expected future returns, monetary or non-monetary, to the goods and services it provides

(Lobell, et al, 2011).12 Climate change may affect land productivity through temperature

variation, access to water and rainfall (Jaeger, et al), 13 and desirability for human habitation

(Albouy, et al, 2016).14 New risk assessments recognizing climate change affect these attributes

and as a result land prices, thereby motivating landowners to adjust land use (Severen et al.

2018).15

        Identifying changes in land market prices that are tied to new climate change risks is

challenging statistically because it is difficult to know if a given change in risk is due to climate

change or to background variation in climate. Even so, a large quantitative literature exists on

how variables affecting productivity and desirability influence land values (Plantinga, 2017). The

observed price patterns in response to long term weather patterns provide evidence on how land

markets likely will respond to evolving climate change information (Irwin, 2002; Anderson and

West, 2006; Burke and Emerick, 2016; McWilliams and Moore, 2017). 16


12
    Lobell, D. B., Schlenker, W., and Costa-Roberts, J. (2011). Climate Trends and Global
Crop Production Since 1980. Science, 333(6042):616–620.
13
   Jaeger, W. K., Amos, A., Bigelow, D., Chang, H., Conklin, D., Haggerty, R., Langpap, C., Moore,
K., Mote, P., Nolin, A., Plantinga, A. J., Schwartz, C., Tullos, D., and Turner, D. (2017). Scarcity
amid abundance: Water, climate change, and policy role of regional system models. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 114(45):11884-9.
14
   Albouy, D., Graf, W., Kellogg, R., and Wolff, H. (2016). Climate amenities, climate change, and
American quality of life. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists,
3, 205-246.
15
   Severen, C., Costello, C., and Deschenes, O. (2018). “A Forward Looking Ricardian Approach: Do Land
Markets Capitalize Climate Change Forecasts?” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
forthcoming.
16
   Irwin, E. G. (2002). “The Effects of Open Space on Residential Property Values.” Land Economics, 78,465-480;
Anderson, S. T. and West, S. E. (2006). “Open Space, Residential Property Values, and Spatial Context.”
Regional Science and Urban Economics, 36, 773-789; Burke, M. and Emerick, K. (2016). “Adaptation to Climate
Change: Evidence from US Agriculture.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8, 106-140. McWilliams,
M. R. and Moore, M. R. (2017). “Land-Use Adaptation to Climate Change in the United States, 1982-2012.”
Technical report, University of Michigan.


                                                                                                              4
        For example, empirical evidence reveals how uncertainty over future land rents and

changes in the incidence of natural disasters influences both agricultural and urban land values

(Plantinga et al, 2002; Bin and Landry, 2013).17 There also is strong evidence that climate

change forecasts are capitalized into farmland prices and the effect is larger where there is

greater awareness of future climate change risk as revealed in public opinion surveys (Severen,

et al, 2016). Jaeger et al, (2017) find that farm land rents, crop choice, and irrigation decisions in

the Willamette Valley of Oregon vary with temperature and precipitation. Landowners make

adjustments to higher temperatures and less precipitation by changing crops and irrigation

practices as well as by shifting across forest, agriculture, and urban land uses. Additionally,

vineyard sales data in California and Oregon analyzed by Beasley and Cross (2017) indicate that

climate forecasts raise land values in cool, but not in warm areas. The finding suggests that the

market is anticipating that already-warm vineyard areas will become less productive in the future

as temperatures increase and wine production will gradually move to cooler regions. 18

        Absent adaptive responses in agriculture, recent empirical studies indicate large, negative

short-run effects on crop yields, channeled principally through increases in crop exposure to

extreme heat and reduced access to water (Fisher et al., 2012; Lobell et al., 2011; Porter et al.,

2014).19 Holding everything constant, by the end of the century area-weighted average yields of


17
   Plantinga, A. J., Lubowski, R. N., and Stavins, R. N. (2002). “The Effects of Potential Land Development
on Agricultural Land Prices. Journal of Urban Economics, 52, 561-581.
18
   Beasley, J. and Cross, R. (2017). “Are Vineyard Buyers Warming Up to Cooler Locations?” Oregon State
University, Technical report.
19
   Fisher, A. C., Hanemann, W. M., Roberts, M. J., and Schlenker, W. (2012). “The Economic
Impacts of Climate Change: Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations
in Weather: Comment.” The American Economic Review, 102(7):3749–3760; Porter, J. R., Xie, L., Challinor, A. J.,
Cochrane, K., Howden, S. M., Iqbal, M. M., Lobell, D. B., and Travasso, M. I. (2014). “Food Security and Food
Production Systems.” In Field, C. B., Barros, V. R., Dokken, D. J., Mach, K. J., Mastrandrea, M. D., Bilir, T. E.,
Chatterjee, M., Ebi, K. L., Estrada, Y. O., Genova, R. C., Girma, B., Kissel, E. S., Levy, A. N., MacCracken, S.,
Mastrandrea, P. R., and White, L. L., eds., Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A:
Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, pages 485–533. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.


                                                                                                                 5
corn, soybeans, and cotton could decrease by 63-82%, leading to a decline in U.S. farmland

prices between 27% and 69% (Schlenker and Roberts 2009, Schlenker et al, 2006). 20 Such

productivity declines would be gradually reflected in land market prices as production moves to

less affected areas and crops.

        Adaptation via land market signals and related agricultural adjustments, however, could

modify these negative predictions substantially. Adaptation could occur through geographic

shifts in farm production as well as shifts in crop timing, crop mixes, and hybridization.

Warming would likely increase the useful growing season in some areas, often limited by spring

and fall frost events, which could allow farmers to adjust planting times to reduce heat exposure

during summer months or allow multiple cropping (Seifert and Lobell, 2015). 21 Earlier planting

by around two weeks could reduce US corn yield losses due to warming by 44% (Ortiz-Bobea

and Just, 2013).22 Deryng et al (2011) use global crop models for corn, soybeans, and spring

wheat and find that shifts in planting dates and cultivation could more than compensate for yield

losses induced by climate change in temperate regions. 23 Research and development is also an

important source of adaptation. New hybrid corn varieties that were both higher-yielding and

more robust to heat exposure increased yields markedly following the Dust Bowl years until

about 1960 (Roberts and Schlenker, 2011). Further evidence of climate adaptation can be seen


20
   Schlenker, W., and Roberts, M. J. (2009). Nonlinear Temperature Effects Indicate Severe Damages to US crop
Yields under Climate Change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(37): 15594-15598;
Schlenker, W., Hanemann, W. M., and Fisher, A. C. (2006). “The Impact of Global Warming
on U.S. Agriculture: An Econometric Analysis of Optimal Growing Conditions.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 88(1):113–125.
21
   Seifert, C. A., and Lobell, D. B. (2015). Response of Double Cropping Suitability to Climate Change in the
United States. Environmental Research Letters, 10(2): 024002.
22
   Ortiz-Bobea, A. and Just, R. E. (2013). Modeling the Structure of Adaptation in Climate Change Impact
Assessment. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 95(2):244–251.
23
   Deryng, D., Sacks, W. J., Barford, C. C., and Ramankutty, N. (2011). Simulating the Effects of Climate and
Agricultural Management Practices on Global Crop Yield.” Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 25(2). Costinot, A.,
Donaldson, D., and Smith, C. (2016). “Evolving Comparative Advantage and the Impact of Climate Change in
Agricultural Markets: Evidence from 1.7 Million Fields Around the World.” Journal of Political Economy,
124(1):205–248.


                                                                                                                6
during the westward expansion of American agriculture in the 19 th century when farmers

introduced crop varieties suited to more arid and both colder and warmer climates (Olmstead and

Rhode, 2011).24

        Absent any adaptation, Gammans et al. (2017) predict a 21.0% decline in winter wheat

yield, a 17.3% decline in winter barley yield, and a 33.6% decline in spring barley yield for

French agriculture by the end of the century. These predictions, however, hold technology and

cropping practices constant. If farmers adjust, then the costs can be reduced. In fact, French

farmers appear to have partially adjusted by increasing the share of winter barley relative to

spring barley, as winter barley is more resistant to higher temperatures. Continuing technology

trends in these crops would counterbalance most of the negative effects of climate change, even

without accounting for climate-change-induced research and development. 25

        Other empirical evidence also indicates that farmers worldwide are responsive to changes

in weather risk. For instance, panel data from 1956-1990 analyzed by Taraz (2018) reveal that

Indian farmers adapt irrigation investments and cropping patterns to shifting Monsoon regimes. 26

Producers in Israel substitute capital, primarily irrigation technology, for a poorer climatic

conditions (Fleischer, et al, 2011).27 Using panel data from 1982-2010, across wet and dry years

in parts of Colorado dependent upon precipitation, Manning et al (2011) found that farmers have

responded to expected surface water shortages by reducing acres of corn planted and

concentrating the application of scarce water on productive areas to protect yields. The authors


24
   Olmstead, A. L. and Rhode, P.W. (2011). “Adapting North American Wheat Production to climatic challenges,
1839–2009.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(2):480–485; Waltz, E. (2014). “Beating the
Heat.” Nature Biotechnology, 32(7):610.
25
   Gammans, M., Mérel, P., and Ortiz-Bobea, A. (2017). Negative Impacts of Climate Change on Cereal Yields:
Statistical Evidence from France. Environmental Research Letters, 12(5):054007.
26
   Taraz, V. (2018). “Adaptation to Climate Change: Historical Evidence from the Indian Monsoon.” Environmental
and Development Economics.
27
   Fleischer, A. Mendelsohn, R. and Dinar, A. (2011) “Bundling Agricultural Technologies to Adapt to Climate
Change,” Technological Forecasting and Social Change 78(6): 982-90.


                                                                                                              7
conclude that failure to account for such behavioral adaptive responses would overstate the

negative effects of climate change by 17%. 28

        Albouy et al, (2016) examine how US housing markets respond to climate amenities,

such as temperature, precipitation, humidity, and sunshine, and then explore how those markets

would respond to future climatic conditions and different amenities. Changes in climate

amenities reduce welfare under business-as-usual climate predictions, but these losses are

reduced somewhat by migration responses. Climatic effects on housing supply and demand are

capitalized into urban land values (Kahn, 2017; Plantinga, 2017). Bin and Landry (2013)

generally find that flood risk, often associated with climate change, is reflected in housing prices.

Buyers’ and sellers’ risk perceptions can differ when hazard experiences are remote and risk

information is incomplete, but converge in the immediate period after a flood. Risk premiums,

however, appear to decline over time in the absence of any new flood event. 29

        Water Markets

        Access to water is critical for both agricultural productivity and urban living and, hence,

land values (Libecap, 2017). It will affect the ability of land owners to make the kinds of

adjustments needed for agriculture and urban development. Climate change can be expected to

affect both the supply and demand for freshwater though higher temperatures, greater incidence

of drought, and increased use of irrigation. There also will be greater reliance upon urban green

spaces, landscaping, and water for recreation as well as environmental protection (Barnett, et al.

2005 (Rosenburg, et al. 1999; Barnett, et al, 2014; Ranjan, et al. 2006; Treidel, 2012; Woodruff,




28
   Manning, D. T., Goemans, C., and Maas, A. (2017). “Producer Responses to Surface Water Availability and
Implications for Climate Change Adaptation.” Land Economics, 93(4), 631–653.
29
   Bin, O. and Landry, C.E., 2013. “Changes in Implicit Flood Risk Premiums: Empirical Evidence from the
Housing Market.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 65(3), pp.361-376.


                                                                                                             8
2016).30 New supply and demand conditions require conservation, greater storage in surface

reservoirs and groundwater basins, as well as supply augmentation, such as desalinization, along

with reallocation from existing to new uses.

        Where they exist, water markets can be a critical factor in facilitating adaptation in land

markets to climate change. They can encourage reallocation of water to its highest valued uses,

reflecting new demands, compensating owners of water rights, and importantly, generating

information about alternative values. Information may be the single greatest contribution of

water markets because successful reallocation requires that water be moved to higher-valued

uses and effective supply support from water supply organizations requires weighing the costs

and benefits of different options. Absent market trades, such information is not available. As

suggested below, the potential of water markets in contributing to adaptation has not been

“tapped.”

        The dominant policy response to drought, which will increase with climate change, has

been government-mandated reductions in water consumption. For example, during the recent

drought in California, the Governor called for 25% reductions in urban areas, along with other

conservation programs.31 These uniform cutbacks, however, do not take into account different

values of water use that otherwise would dictate differential reductions, and there can be




30
   Barnett, T., Malone, R., Pennell, W., Stammer, D., Semtner, B., and Washington, W. (2004). “The Effects of
Climate Change on Water Resources in the West: Introduction and Overview.” Climatic Change, 62(1–3), 1–11.
https://doi.org/10.1023/B:CLIM.0000013695.21726.b8; Ranjan, S. P., Kazama, S., and Sawamoto, M. (2006).
“Effects of Climate and Land Use Changes on Groundwater Resources in Coastal Aquifers. Journal of
Environmental Management, 80(1), 25–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2005.08.008; Rosenberg, N. J.,
Epstein, D. J., Wang, D., Vail, L., Srinivasan, R., and Arnold, J. G. (1999). “Possible Impacts of Global Warming on
the Hydrology of the Ogallala Aquifer Region.” Climatic Change, 42(4), 677–692.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1005424003553;Treidel, H. (Ed.). (2012). Climate Change Effects on Groundwater
Resources: A Global Synthesis of Findings and Recommendations (1st edition). Boca Raton, Fla.: CRC Press;
Woodruff, S. C. (2016). “Planning for an Unknowable Future: Uncertainty in Climate Change Adaptation
Planning.” Climatic Change, 139(3–4), 445–459. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-016-1822-y.
31
   (www.water.ca.gov/wateruseefficiency/conservation/docs/EO_B-37-16_Report.pdf).


                                                                                                                  9
important long-term social losses. Mandated decreases do not generate the information signals

provided by markets, and there are few options for private reallocation to sustain water in critical

areas. Uniform cutbacks also are not equitable since low-income consumers consume less water

per capita than do high-income consumers. In contrast, shifting water prices that reflect new

supply and demand conditions promote voluntary adaptation.

        Further, water markets can be used to protect minimum stream flows for environmental

uses. Such acquisitions are likely more durable and consistent with the multiple values for how

water is used than are government-mandated reallocations. In the latter case, water rights

holders are not compensated; rights are made less secure, inhibiting water market development;

and agency officials as well as lobby advocates do not have to assess the economic tradeoffs

inherent in any regulatory reallocation. All of these factors suggest costly conflict and political

insecurity that would undermine any conservation “set-asides.” Overall, markets help answer

questions about the tradeoffs that necessarily arise among irrigation, urban, industrial, and

environmental uses as supplies tighten and demands increase.

        Water markets exist in the fast-growing western United States, a region predicted to be

especially vulnerable to climate change due to its reliance upon snow-melt (Ojha et al. 2015). 32

The region has an established water rights system that allows for water to be traded. Even so,

water markets are not as active as they could be. Only about 2%- 4% of annual water

consumption is traded, and there are large potential gains from reallocation from agriculture

where 60-80% of water is in use (Brewer, et al, 2008).33 Existing water prices reveal the gains

from trade. For example, in Nevada’s Reno/Truckee Basin, the median price of agriculture-to-


32
   Ojha, R, Ramadas, M, and Govindaraju. R.S. (2015), “Current and Future Challenges in Groundwater. I:
Modeling and Management of Resources,” Journal of Hydrologic Engineering, 20(1).
33
   Brewer, J, Glennon, G, Ker, A, and Libecap, G.D. (2008), “2006 Presidential Address Water Markets in the West:
Prices, Trading, and Contractual Forms,” Economic Inquiry 46 (2): 91–112.


                                                                                                              10
urban water rights sales between 2002 and 2009 was $17,685/acre-foot (an acre-foot = 325,851

gallons, about enough to meet the needs of four people for a year), whereas for agriculture-to-

agriculture water rights sales, the median price was $1,500/acre-foot, a difference in value of

over 12 times (Libecap, 2011).34 Despite these differences, a major reason for limited market

trading during drought is a costly, slow, and resistant regulatory process where multiple parties

can intervene to protest water trades (Culp, et al, 2014). 35

        The information provided by access to the pricing information from water trades can

serve is essential for water supply organizations as they tackle climate change. Further, required

water supply estimates conducted by urban water supply organizations often hold existing

demand constant, but that would not be the case if urban water were priced more effectively.

Many urban water suppliers use flat rates that do not encourage conservation. 36 A few cities,

however, use steep tiered water pricing, whereby low levels of consumption are priced near zero,

but rates rapidly increase as consumption rises. Tucson, Arizona uses such tiered pricing,

whereas similar cities near Phoenix use low flat rate or modest tiered pricing systems. Per-capita

consumption in Tucson is about 25% less than in Phoenix.37 Such pricing policies can be

designed to be both equitable and effective in encouraging conservation. It is possible to protect

essential family water consumption with minimal or “lifeline” prices, allowing prices for water

use beyond that threshold to rise.

Policy Flexibility Can Encourage Adaptation




34
    Libecap, G.D. (2011), “Institutional Path Dependence in Climate Adaptation: Coman’s “Some Unsettled
Problems of Irrigation,” American Economic Review 101 (1): 112-40.
35
   Culp, P.W., Glennon, R.J., and Libecap, G.D., 2014, Shopping for Water: How the Market can Mitigate Water
Shortages in the American West. Washington D.C.: Island Press.
36
   http://www.circleofblue.org/waterpricing/
37
   ww.tucsonsentinalcom/local/report/050214_water/tucson-water-rates-higher-than-phx-usage-lower-here.


                                                                                                               11
        Adaptation requires access to the latest information on the possible timing, intensity, and

location of climate change effects. Regulations that restrict market trades or reduce the incentive

to engage in them limit the potential of land markets to promote adaptation to climate change.

The evidence suggests that farmers can be responsive across a variety of margins through shifts

in cropping, timing, cultivation, water use, and location. Their incentives to do so, however, can

be reduced by subsidized crop insurance and unpriced irrigation water that reduces the private

costs of lower productivity due to weather risk (Wahl, 1989; Annan and Schlenker, 2015). 38

Restrictions on land use and cropping adjustments, such as those adopted under the Conservation

Reserve Program, also can limit flexible responses (Antle and Capalbo, 2010). 39 Further, the

failure to define property rights to groundwater leaves it vulnerable to over extraction as farmers

turn to groundwater during drought (Ayres, et al, 2018).40 Government and private research and

development promoted by strengthened intellectual property policies also are essential for

discovery of new production techniques, capital, and crop varieties.

        Land use regulations that restrict market trades and subsidies that artificially encourage

particular types of uses can distort the information released and make responses to new

information less flexible. For instance, zoning and growth controls are often motivated by

desirable objectives. They seek to influence urban development and to preserve open space.

Nevertheless, these controls constrain land market transactions and hence, distort property prices.

Accordingly, where in place, zoning restrictions can limit the generation of useful price signals



38
   Wahl, R.W. (1989). Markets for Federal Water: Subsidies, Property Rights, and the Bureau of Reclamation.
Washington D.C.: Resources for the Future; Annan, F. and Schlenker, W. (2015). “Federal Crop Insurance and the
Disincentive to Adapt to Extreme Heat.” The American Economic Review, 105(5):262–266.
39
   Antle, J. M. and Capalbo, S. M. (2010). “Adaptation of Agricultural and Food Systems to
Climate Change: An Economic and Policy Perspective.” Applied Economic Perspectives
and Policy, 32(3):386–416.
40
   Ayres, A.B, Edwards, E.C., and Libecap, G.D. “How Transaction Costs Obstruct Collective Action:
The Case of California’s Groundwater,” NBER Working paper.


                                                                                                             12
and the associated incentives for adaptive land use in light of new climate change forecasts

(Glaeser, et al, 2005; Dempsey and Plantinga, 2013; Grout, et al, 2011). Accordingly, zoning

rules may need to be made more flexible in order to encourage adaptive responses to climate

change. Zoning maps can be redrawn to facilitate changes in land use in response to an increased

threat of flooding or coastal erosion. Other land use regulations that allow for flexible adaptation,

such as tradable development rights (TDRs), could be implemented more broadly. With TDRs,

landowners in one area can sell development rights that permit land to be developed in another

area. If the profitability of development in the receiving area were to be increased by climate

change, prices for development rights would adjust and provide the correct incentives to

landowners in the sending area to preserve land and for development to take place in the

receiving area.

        We focus, below, on flood insurance and wildfire suppression activities, which illustrate

the problems at hand for land markets. They subsidize existing land uses and undermine the

ability of market trades to convey information about the need to adapt to climate change.

Distortions in Flood Insurance Markets and Wildfire Suppression Policies

        The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), enacted in 1968, provides federal

subsidies to some property owners to make flood insurance rates affordable, rather than to have

them reflect the risk of floods in particular locations. Under the NFIP homeowners whose houses

satisfy specific criteria can be insured against flood damage at rates that are below what actuarial

principles would imply. While there are provisions encouraging rate modifications, based on the base

flood elevation level, in general these rates do not encourage property owners to sufficiently invest in

flood-proofing measures, including moving from harm. The best signal of the changing risks in

flood-prone regions is through pricing of insurance at actuarial rates, reflecting risk and adjusting

them as those risks change with anticipated climate change.


                                                                                                        13
        Nevertheless, the current NFIP policies encourages rebuilding in flood-prone areas. For

example, the Natural Resources Defense Council reported that between 1978 and 2015 the NFIP

paid $5.5 billion to repair and rebuild more than 30,000 of the “severe repetitive loss properties”

in response to flood or hurricane damage. “These homes and businesses have been rebuilt

multiple times in the wake of floods or hurricanes… While they represent just 0.6 percent of the

5.1 million properties insured through the NFIP, they account for a disproportionate 9.6 percent

of all damages paid, as of 2015.”41

        The justification for current insurance pricing policies is to maintain rates that are

“affordable” so as to increase the take-up of insurance in areas subject to flood risk. Kahn and Smith

(2017) use information available from mortgage applications from 1989 to 2014 due to mandates of

the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) and federal tax returns from 2007 to 2014 to analyze

the incomes of property owners who are potential recipients of NFID-subsidized rates. Two different

spatial scales are used to evaluate the income levels of households living along the coast in

comparison to those who live in interior locations in each of the five Gulf Coast states. Comparing

real median income for coastal counties to the same measure for interior counties, they find

households in coastal areas generally have higher real median incomes and this persists over the full

25-year period.

        Kahn and Smith also investigate the same question computing median income for shoreline

zip codes in comparison to the adjacent interior zip codes. For Florida and Texas, the pattern is

maintained, and the differences are statistically significant. For Alabama and Mississippi, the ranking

of median income is maintained, but the differences in median incomes are not consistently

significant. At the zip code level in Louisiana the ordering reverses, but this arises due to the




41
  Natural Resources Defense Council (2017), Seeking Higher Ground: How to break the Cycle of Repeated
Flooding with Climate Smart Flood Insurance Reforms. Issue Brief 17-07-A, July, p. 2.


                                                                                                        14
locations of coastal wetlands.42 Using Internal Revenue Service (IRS) data on income distributions

for those households claiming a mortgage interest deduction, median incomes estimated at the zip

code level confirm the earlier HMDA results for Florida. Thus, Kahn and Smith find that NFIP

pricing policy is both distorting risk signals and offering subsidized rates to higher-income

households. The Congressional Budget Office’s (2017) analysis of the NFIP’s complex system

of subsidized and cross-subsidized rates implies that 85% of the policies in the highest-risk

coastal areas are below what would be implied by actuarial rates for the flood insurance rate

maps associated with these areas. 43

         Affordability in this context has been interpreted as providing insurance at rates below

actuarial levels for those living in high-risk coastal areas. The size of the subsidy depends on

when a home was built in relation to the most recent flood maps; whether communities are

participating in public flood-risk information and mitigation programs; and other factors. It does

not require an income threshold for eligibility. As a result, preferential treatments are capitalized

into home values, making the prospects of dramatic changes difficult, because homeowners

would then experience significant losses with any policy change.

         A better signal of the changing risks in flood-prone regions is through risk-based pricing

of insurance. The impact of both subsidizing higher-property values in coastal zones as well as

lowering incentives to make adjustments is further revealed by Hill and Kakenmaster (2017)

who examine Miami Beach, Florida and Norfolk, Virginia. Both communities underinvest in



42
   Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority of Louisiana (2017), Louisiana’s Comprehensive Master Plan for a
Sustainable Coast, State of Louisiana; Couvillion, B. R. Barras, J.A., Steyer, G.D., Sleavin, W., Fischer, M., Beck,
H., Trahan, N., Griffin, B. and Heckman, D ( 2011). Land Area Change in Coastal Louisiana from 1932 to 2010,
U.S. Geological Survey Scientific Investigations Map 3164, scale 1: 265,000, 12 p. pamphlet; The Data Center
(2017), The Coastal Index: Tracking development of the water management cluster in Southeast Louisiana, June.
43
   Congressional Budget Office. 2017. The National Flood Insurance Program: Financial Soundness and
Affordability (Washington, D.C.: CBO, Congress of United States, September)



                                                                                                                  15
private and public adaptation to sea-level rise. Of the two communities, Miami Beach has much

higher land values, supported in part by underpricing flood risk. Outdated flood maps do not

reflect future hazards and in both areas there is investment in new development driven by tax

subsidies.

        The lack of household preparation for high-cost, but low-probability events, such as

major flood and wildfire disasters is explored by Kunreuther (in press). 44 Individuals exhibit a set

of systemic biases such as myopia (focusing on short-time horizons when appraising protective

measures), optimism (underestimating the likelihood of a loss before it occurs) and simplification

(focusing on the low probability prior to the event and treating it as below their threshold level of

concern). To encourage individuals to purchase insurance and invest in protective measures prior

to a disaster, Meyer and Kunreuther (2017) recommend a behavioral risk audit that uses the

principles of choice architecture coupled with economic incentives. 45

        These individual biases, including attention to low-probability, high-cost events only in

the short-term after they are experienced, also result in government investment that is

maladaptive (Anderson, et al. forthcoming).46 Wibbenmeyer, et al. (2018) report that

governments allocate more fire prevention resources to communities that have experienced a

recent wildfire than to otherwise similar communities that have not experienced a fire, resulting

in misallocation of resources to communities that likely have a lower risk of wildfire. 47 Similarly,

historical government responses to flooding have included construction of infrastructure such as


44
   Kunreuther, H. (in press) Opportunities and Challenges in Reauthorizing the National Flood Insurance Program
Behavioral Public Policy.
45
   Meyer, R., and H. Kunreuther (2017), The Ostrich Paradox: Why We Underprepare for Disasters. Wharton
Digital Press.
46
   Anderson, S.E., Bart, R.R., Kennedy, M.C., MacDonald, A.J., Moritz, M.A., Plantinga, A.J., Tague, C.L. and
Wibbenmeyer M. (forthcoming). “The Dangers of Disaster-Driven Responses to Climate Change.” Nature Climate
Change.
47
   Wibbenmeyer, M., Anderson, S.E., and Plantinga, A.J. (2018) “Salience and the Government Provision of Public
Goods”. Available at SSRN: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3173855


                                                                                                             16
levees that have worsened subsequent flooding downstream (Day et al. 2007, Pinter 2008,

Kundzewicz, et al, 2013).48 Accordingly, for disasters such as floods and wildfires that are likely

to increase with climate change, maladaptation will increase costs of climate related impacts on

them.

The Options for Policy Reform Limited by Salience, Myopic Voting, and the Political Response.

        The higher private costs of more stringent building standards, wildfire fuel reduction,

actuarially-fair insurance rates and movement away from hazards receive push back from

constituents who desire to maintain or expand existing programs. Compelled by the salience-

driven demands and myopic voting of their constituents, politicians respond by limiting policy

reform and emphasizing disaster recovery rather than preparedness or adaptation (Healy and

Malhotra 2009).49 By distorting prices, reacting to immediate past events, and subsidizing high-

income households, policies like the NFIP and government wildfire policies that encourage

resident location at the forest interface constrain effective adaptation to climate change.

 Adaptation through Market Signals

        Urban, coastal, and agricultural land markets provide effective signals of the emerging

costs of climate change. These signals encourage adjustments by both private owners and by

policy officials in taking preemptive action to reduce costs. In agriculture, they promote

consideration of new cropping and tillage practices, seed types, timing, and location of

production. They also stimulate use of new irrigation technologies. In urban areas, they

motivate new housing construction, elevation, and location away from harm. They channel more


48
   Day JW Jr, Boesch D.F, Clairain E, Kemp GP, Laska S, Mitsch WJ et al. (2007) “Restoration of
the Mississippi delta: lessons from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita.” Science 315:1679–1684; Pinter N, Jemberie AA,
Remo JWF, Heine RA, Ickes BS (2008). “Flood Trends and River Engineering on the Mississippi River System.”
Geophysical Research Letters 35: L23404; Kundzewicz ZW, Pinskwar I, Brakenridge GR (2013) “Large Floods in
Europe, 1985–2009.” Hydrological Sciences Journal 58(1):1–7.
49
   Healy, A. and Malhotra, N. (2009). “Myopic Voters and Natural Disaster Policy.” American Political Science
Review, 103(3), 387-406.


                                                                                                              17
efficient use of water and its application to parks and other green areas to make urban settings

more desirable with higher temperatures. To be effective, however, land markets must reflect

multiple traders and prices must be free to adjust. Where these conditions are not met, land

market signals will be inhibited and market-driven adaptation will be reduced. Because public

policy is driven by constituent demands, it may not be a remedy. The evidence of the National

Flood Insurance Program and federal wildfire response illustrates how politically difficult it may

be to adjust programs to be more adaptive.

       These findings suggest that specific land markets dominated by flood or wildfire risk or

those on the margin of agricultural production that rely upon crop insurance to be viable may be

unlikely to provide the signals needed for adaptation to climate change. These areas have well-

defined constituencies and political patrons. Hence they may be more subject to political

intervention to set insurance rates, maintain subsidies, and respond disproportionately to the

immediate past, rather than future hazards. Unfortunately, these are precisely the areas where

adaptation is most needed to prepare for and reduce the costs of climate change. More generally,

land markets that are less spatially and temporally tied to specific weather-related events and

constituencies may be more active in generating adaptation signals. Their broader economic

base, more diverse constituencies, and multiple options for adaptation makes them more flexible

in responding to the costs and opportunities generated by climate change. Other markets, such as

those for energy, can also provide adaptive responses if allowed to respond to market signals

generated by carbon taxes or the trading of pollution permits. These adaptations can include new

technologies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in electricity generation (Mantripragada, 2017).




                                                                                                   18
