                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HOW DOES SCHOOL ACCOUNTABILITY AFFECT TEACHERS? EVIDENCE
                        FROM NEW YORK CITY

                                     Rebecca Dizon-Ross

                                      Working Paper 24658
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24658


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2018




I want to thank the New York City Department of Education for providing me with the
data, and Dominique West and Marsha Modeste for answering all of my data questions. I am
very grateful to Ran Abramitzky, Pascaline Dupas, Caroline Hoxby, and Seema Jayachandran
for help and guidance, and to Marinho Bertanha, Elise Dizon-Ross, David Figlio, Anil Jain,
Jonah Rockoff, Fabiana Silva, Jenny Ying, and numerous participants at the Stanford Applied
Lunch for helpful comments. Christine Cai provided excellent research assistance. All errors are
my own. I appreciate the generous support of the Shultz Graduate Student Fellowship in
Economic Policy, the endowment in memory of B.F. Haley and E.S. Shaw, the Spencer
Foundation, and the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Rebecca Dizon-Ross. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
How Does School Accountability Affect Teachers? Evidence from New York City
Rebecca Dizon-Ross
NBER Working Paper No. 24658
May 2018
JEL No. I2

                                          ABSTRACT

Does holding schools accountable for student performance cause good teachers to leave low-
performing schools? Using data from New York City, which assigns accountability grades to
schools based on student achievement, I perform a regression discontinuity analysis and find
evidence of the opposite effect. At the bottom end of the school grade distribution, I find that a
lower accountability grade decreases teacher turnover and increases joining teachers’ quality. A
likely channel is that accountability pressures induce increases in principal effort at lower-graded
schools, especially among high-quality principals, and teachers value these changes. In contrast,
at the top end of the school grade distribution, where accountability pressures are lower, low
accountability grades may negatively impact joining teachers’ quality.

Rebecca Dizon-Ross
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
rdr@chicagobooth.edu
1    Introduction
Since the mid-1990’s, school accountability systems have become a central focus of education re-
form in the United States. Even before the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) made accountability
mandatory across the U.S. in 2001, many states and districts had already instituted some form of
accountability.
    Policymakers and observers often worry that these systems, which attempt to hold schools ac-
countable for student performance, could make it difficult for low-performing schools to attract and
retain good teachers. Evidence from surveys of teachers suggests that good teachers may want to
avoid the stress, restricted autonomy, and emphasis on “teaching to the test” that they think account-
ability brings to low-performing schools (Jones et al., 1999; Kirtley, 2012). Since high-quality teach-
ers improve students’ long-run educational attainment and earnings more than low-quality teachers
(Chetty et al., 2014; Kane et al., 2008), this means that accountability systems could have lasting,
negative implications for students at low-performing schools. Indeed, some have suggested that
poor accountability ratings could start low-performing schools down a negative quality spiral where
high-quality teachers leave, causing the best students to leave, thus causing more teachers to leave,
and so forth.
    However, from a theoretical perspective, the effect of low school accountability ratings on
teacher quality is actually ambiguous. For example, teachers could prefer to teach in lower-rated
schools. Although that may sound counterintuitive, one potential reason is school improvement: low
accountability ratings are designed to improve school performance, and a large literature shows that
they do (Carnoy and Loeb, 2002; Chiang, 2009; Figlio and Rouse, 2006; Hanushek and Raymond,
2005; West and Peterson, 2006; Rockoff and Turner, 2010). Teachers may prefer to teach in schools
where achievement is improving, perhaps because they value achievement or because the process
of improvement is satisfying. Thus, it is ultimately an empirical question whether the impact of
accountability pressures on teachers is positive or negative.
    This paper exploits the introduction of an accountability system in the New York City Depart-
ment of Education (hereafter: NYCDOE) to provide new evidence on this issue. In November,

                                                  1
2007, the NYCDOE launched a comprehensive accountability system which assigned schools letter
grades for school performance. The grades were based on continuous performance metrics, with
determination of the actual grade based on strict thresholds. This allows for the use of a regres-
sion discontinuity analysis to estimate the effect of the reform, as previously shown by Rockoff and
Turner (2010). While these authors focused on the within-year impacts of receiving a low grade
on student performance (finding large positive improvements), here I focus on the impacts on the
teacher labor market.
   Using data from the first two years of NYCDOE’s accountability system, I find evidence that
accountability pressures can in some cases improve teacher retention and recruitment. At the bottom
end of the school grade distribution (i.e., the C/D and D/F thresholds), where the NYCDOE account-
ability sanctions have more “bite,” receipt of a lower school accountability grade, which occurs early
in the school year, decreases teacher turnover at the end of the year by three percentage points. This
is a large effect, representing roughly 20% of baseline turnover. This pattern is robust across several
different specifications: I consistently reject the null of no effect and, a fortiori, the conventional
wisdom that low accountability scores might lead to a sizeable increase in teacher turnover. The
decrease in turnover likely benefits students in low-graded schools, as turnover has been shown to
decrease student achievement (Ronfeldt et al., 2013).
   I next examine the sorting implications of accountability grades, and again find evidence that
lower accountability grades help the low-performing schools at the bottom end of the grade distri-
bution. The evidence suggests that joiners to lower-graded schools have higher value-added than
the joiners to higher-graded schools, but there is no difference in the value-added of leavers between
lower-graded and higher-graded schools.
   There are two main hypotheses that could explain these effects. The first hypothesis is that
receiving a lower school grade increases the attractiveness of the jobs at the school (the job desir-
ability hypothesis). One potential reason is school improvement: Rockoff and Turner (2010) show
that the lower-rated schools in the NYCDOE improved their performance within the same year the
grade was received. Teachers may prefer to teach in schools where achievement is improving, be-



                                                  2
cause, as discussed above, they value achievement per se, appreciate the changes that enable the
performance improvements, or expect that it will lead to higher accountability grades in the future.
Another potential channel for job desirability is that, induced by accountability pressure, principals
at lower-graded schools put more effort into making the schools better places for teachers to work,
or into attracting and retaining high-quality teachers. The second hypothesis is that receiving a lower
school grade attaches a negative stigma to the teachers at the school, reducing their perceived value
to potential employers who view low grades as a signal of low unobservable teacher quality (the
stigma hypothesis). Note that this is a rational hypothesis.1
    I argue that the job desirability hypothesis matches the data better than the stigma hypothesis.
The fact that lower-graded schools have higher-quality joiners than higher-graded schools is more
consistent with increased job desirability. Also suggestive is the fact that the effect of lower grades
on turnover is primarily driven by a decrease in out-of-district departures. Data on the transfer
applications submitted by teachers also show that teachers who applied to transfer out of lower-
graded schools were no less likely to be able to transfer out, and that the number of teachers who
applied to transfer to lower-graded schools did not fall.
    The results of surveys conducted with teachers provide additional evidence for the potential
mechanisms underlying job desirability. At the bottom end of the grade distribution, teachers at
schools that received lower accountability grades at the beginning of the year gave their principals
higher leadership ratings at the end of the year than teachers at higher-graded schools, agreeing more
strongly with statements such as “the principal is an effective manager who makes the school run
smoothly” and “I feel strongly supported by my principal” (note that the results are significant at
the 10% level). Since principal leadership ratings also correlate with lower turnover, these effects
suggest that one channel for the positive impact of lower grades may be principals at low-graded
schools respond to accountability pressures by making management changes that appeal to teachers.
    Given the important role for principals suggested by these results, I also look at heterogeneity in
   1 This type of stigma is distinct from the social stigma that the existing accountability literature has often deemed

responsible for spurring test score improvements in response to low accountability grades (Figlio and Rouse, 2006; West
and Peterson, 2006). In this paper’s categorization, social stigma would in fact impact job desirability. The direct effect
would be negative, but the indirect (and thus net) effect could be positive if it spurs test score improvements that teachers
value; this is thus a potential channel for job desirability to explain this paper’s findings.


                                                             3
the RD impacts of low grades by baseline measures of principal quality. I find that the decreases in
turnover at lower-graded schools are driven primarily by schools with higher-quality principals (as
measured by baseline principal leadership ratings). This suggests that principal capacity to transform
accountability pressures into positive changes for the school may be a key ingredient that enables
low accountability grades to have positive labor market effects.
    Thus, the results suggest that the accountability system benefited low-performing schools at the
bottom end of the grade distribution through two labor market channels: decreased turnover and
increased teacher quality. These effects appear to be driven by the low-graded schools becoming
more attractive to teachers. However, at the top end of the school grade distribution (the A/B and
B/C thresholds), the results differ. Here, I find no evidence of positive effects of receiving a lower
grade, and some suggestive evidence of negative impacts on the quality of the joiners relative to the
leavers and on teacher survey responses about their principals’ leadership.
    The difference in the results at the top and bottom ends of the grade distribution (i.e., the fact that
accountability seems to benefit lower-rated schools at the C/D and D/F thresholds while hurting them
at the A/B and B/C thresholds) likely reflects the fact that accountability pressures are higher at the
C/D and D/F thresholds, and so only motivated positive changes there (Rockoff and Turner, 2010).2
Are there other ingredients besides high stakes that help us predict when accountability systems will
positively impact the teacher labor market? The results on mechanisms suggest that positive impacts
may be more likely in settings where principals are good leaders and have the latitude to implement
positive changes, but of course such discussion is still speculative at this point.
    This paper contributes to the literature on determinants of teacher mobility and sorting (Scafidi
et al., 2007; Falch and Rønning, 2007; Imazeki, 2005; Hanushek et al., 2004; Hendricks, 2014;
Dolton and von der Klaauw, 1995; Hensvik, 2012; Venhorst et al., 2011; Jackson, 2009, 2012).
Within the more specific literature examining how accountability affects teachers, the paper ad-
dresses two of the primary challenges. The first challenge is identification: accountability reforms
    2 Specifically, the explanation is that teachers prefer schools that (1) have improved in some way (e.g., environment,

performance, principal effort) in response to accountability pressures, and (2) have a higher nominal accountability
grade. At the top end of the grade distribution, accountability does not bind, and so (1) plays no role while (2) dominates.
At the bottom end of the grade distribution, low-performing schools do improve in response to accountability, and so
(1) dominates.


                                                             4
are often instituted simultaneously with many other reforms that also affect teachers, making it dif-
ficult to cleanly identify accountability’s effects. As with all regression discontinuity designs, the
analysis used in this paper focuses on schools right next to the grade thresholds, and thus holds
fixed the effects of concurrent reforms. This builds on some earlier papers in the literature that
used difference-in-differences strategies which could be more subject to these identification con-
cerns (Clotfelter et al., 2004; Boyd et al., 2008), with Feng et al. (2010) and Gjefsen and Gunnes
(2016) more recent exceptions. Feng et al. (2010) use unexpected changes to the school account-
ability grading system in Florida that exogenously “shocked” some schools’ grades, while Gjefsen
and Gunnes (2016) uses triple difference specifications.3
    The second challenge is finding good data on teacher quality, and specifically, on teachers’ con-
tributions to student learning, or their “value-added.” Having a good measure of teacher quality is
important for understanding the implications of accountability: high turnover could either reflect
high-quality teachers leaving or low-quality teachers being pushed out. Value-added is widely re-
garded as unmatched as a measure of teacher quality, with, for example, important predictive power
over students’ long-run outcomes (Chetty et al., 2014). Unfortunately, value-added estimation has
extensive data requirements, and so most of the existing literature (Boyd et al., 2008; Clotfelter et
al., 2004; Gjefsen and Gunnes, 2016) could only use other teacher characteristics, which often do
not proxy well for value-added (see, e.g., Hanushek et al. (2010) and Rivkin et al. (2005)).4
    This paper makes several new contributions that go beyond the results contributed by Feng et
al. (2010), which also make use of value-added data to examine a similar question. First, my
analysis speaks to how accountability affects teacher quality in a more comprehensive manner, by
incorporating value-added data on joining teachers, not just leaving teachers. This is important
because, as the results here show, there can be asymmetric effects for the two groups, and it is the
comparison of the two effects that determines the overall impact. Second, this is the first paper
to unpack the mechanisms behind accountability’s effects on teachers by trying to disentangle the
two main factors that affect teacher mobility: changes in choice sets vs. changes in job desirability.
   3 On   a related topic, Shirrell (2016) uses RD to look at the effect of “subgroup-specific” accountability (i.e., whether
a school was accountable for the performance of specific racial/ethnic student subgroups or not) on teacher turnover.
    4 In related work, Li (2011) uses data on principal value-added to examine how accountability affects principals.



                                                             5
This helps us learn not just about accountability’s channels but also about teacher preferences and
mobility decisions more broadly.
    In contrast to my findings, previous literature looking at similar phenomena largely concludes
that accountability pressures hurt low-performing schools by accelerating turnover (Feng et al.,
2010; Clotfelter et al., 2004; Gjefsen and Gunnes, 2016), more so at the bottom of the grade distri-
bution in Feng et al. (2010). Section 7 discusses potential reasons for the different results.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the institutional background.
Section 3 describes the data and empirical strategy. Section 4 presents the main results, while Section
5 discusses potential mechanisms for the results. Section 6 examines robustness. In Section 7, I
discuss my results in the context of the overall literature. Section 8 concludes.


2     Background

2.1    The NYCDOE Accountability System

I now review the key features of the NYCDOE accountability system, much of which was previ-
ously described in Rockoff and Turner (2010). The NYCDOE launched its current accountability
system in November of 2007. Under the system, schools receive progress reports with letter grades
meant to capture school performance relative to peer schools. The progress report also contains the
school’s NCLB status, and the score from a school’s Quality Review, a 2-3 day qualitative eval-
uation. The NYCDOE links the letter grades with rewards and sanctions, and makes the reports
publicly available in an effort to incentivize low-performing schools to improve their performance.
    The letter grade is based on a numeric score. For elementary and middle schools (the focus
of this study), the score reflects three measures: student progress, student performance, and school
environment. Student progress represents 60% of the score and measures year-to-year changes in
student scores on the New York State standardized tests in Mathematics and English Language Arts
(ELA). Student performance (25% of the score) captures the level of test scores. School environment
(15% of the score) reflects attendance and parent, student, and teacher surveys results.
    School scores are calculated as a weighted average of the school’s “city horizon score” (1/3


                                                   6
weight), which compares the school to all others of the same school type (i.e., that serve the same
grades), and its “peer horizon score” (2/3), which compares it to a peer group of up to 40 similar
schools.5 The overall pre-additional-credit score, which ranges from 0 to 100, is then calculated as
the weighted average of the scores for each grading measure. Schools can also earn additional credit
if their “high-need” students make “exemplary gains” (i.e., improve their performance by at least
one-half of a proficiency level in ELA or Math). The credit is added to the school’s pre-additional-
credit score to determine the final score.
    Thresholds for letter grade assignment are determined based upon the distribution within school
type of pre-additional-credit scores. For example, in the first year of the program, the NYCDOE
set the threshold for receipt of an A, B, C, and D at the 85th, 45th, 15th, and 5th percentiles of
pre-additional-credit scores, respectively. Grades are then determined by comparing each school’s
score to the thresholds, with the thresholds strict (see Appendix Figure A1).

Consequences of grades

The NYCDOE links the letter grades with rewards and sanctions. Quoting the guidelines, “schools
that are given an overall grade of A receive financial rewards, unless they score poorly on the Quality
Review. Schools that receive an overall grade of D or F are subject to school improvement measures
and target setting and, if no progress is made over time, possible leadership change, restructuring, or
closure. The same is true for schools receiving a C for three years in a row. Over time, school orga-
nizations receiving an overall grade of F are likely to be closed. Ultimately, schools are accountable
for making progress and receiving an overall grade of A, B, or C” (NYCDOE website, 2010).6 The
sanctions associated with receiving low accountability grades (i.e., D or F) are significant. For ex-
ample, after receiving the first report cards in November 2007, the NYCDOE told five F schools in
December that they would be closed immediately or phased out at the end of the school year. At the
top end of the grade distribution, higher letter grades are associated with modest rewards. Principals
   5 To  calculate the peer horizon score, the NYCDOE assigns each school a peer index based on student demographics
(elementary and K-8 schools) or past test scores of current students (middle schools). They then sort schools by peer
indices within school types to form peer groups, which consist of the 20 schools above and below a given school.
    6 The NYCDOE was unable to provide specifics about exactly what was entailed by the school improvement mea-

sures, except to confirm that the measures did not involve any additional resources being given to the schools, and that
there is no record of any formal guidelines for the process.


                                                           7
of schools that had a score among the top 20% of schools and that received a Well Developed or
Proficient quality review rating were eligible for bonuses of $7,000 to $25,000. Schools receiving an
A and a Well Developed quality review rating received roughly $33 per student in extra funds, to be
used at the principal’s discretion. Finally, schools receiving an A or B grade and a Well Developed
or Proficient quality review rating received $1,500 to $3,000 per student that transferred in from an
F school or a school not in good standing under NCLB.
    Besides these consequences, there were no other financial ramifications of school grades; for
example, D and F schools did not receive any additional funding, resources, or staff for school
improvement.

2.2     The NYCDOE Teacher Transfer System

Since 2005, NYCDOE’s staffing system has been an open market system built around the principle
of “mutual consent”: schools post openings, teachers apply, principals choose which teachers to
hire, and then teachers decide whether to accept the job offers. This means that the effects estimated
in this paper are the effects on equilibrium matches within a market-based system.

2.3     Differences Between NYCDOE and Other U.S. Contexts

The NYCDOE system has lower paperwork requirements for failing schools than some other ac-
countability systems, such as Florida, where failing schools are required to complete regular, ex-
tensive reports (Rouse et al., 2013). The base NYCDOE system also does not link progress reports
with teacher-level incentives, whereas North Carolina’s and Florida’s systems include teacher perfor-
mance bonuses.7 Teachers unions are much stronger in New York than Florida or North Carolina,
which could partially explain some of the differences in accountability program design. Finally,
some accountability systems give failing schools additional funding for school improvement, but
that was not the case in the NYCDOE.
   7 There was a pilot schoolwide bonus program instituted in NYCDOE that did tie progress reports to teacher bonuses,

but it was a randomized pilot conducted with a subsample of schools and was not part of the core program instituted
for all schools. As discussed in Section 3.4, this program does not affect the study results. In North Carolina, teacher
bonuses were guaranteed, whereas in Florida, schools received payments that could be used either for bonuses or other
school improvement, at the school’s discretion (Peterson, 2006).



                                                           8
3     Data and Empirical Strategy

3.1    Data

I use data from several sources within the NYCDOE. The accountability data come from publicly
available files downloaded from the NYCDOE website. The data contain each school’s accountabil-
ity score and components, as well as NCLB status, quality review rating, and school identifiers. The
data are available for the 2007-08 through 2011-12 school years (where the school year given is the
year in which the accountability grade was released; report cards are released in fall of the school
year and depend on performance results from the previous year.)
    The second data source is demographic and exam performance data at the student level, provided
by the NYCDOE and covering the 1998-99 through 2008-09 school years. The demographic data
include gender, ethnicity, free-lunch, and special-education status. The exam performance data
include student scores on Mathematics and ELA tests administered statewide in 4th and 8th grade,
and citywide in the 3rd, 5th, 6th, and 7th grades.
    The majority of the teacher data come from the NYCDOE HR/payroll system and contain teacher
experience and education, and school- and grade-level identifiers, from the 1999-2000 through the
2009-2010 school years. This is my primary source of data on teacher turnover and mobility. Based
on guidance from the NYCDOE, to calculate turnover, I define a teacher as having left a school
if she leaves between May of one school year and November of the subsequent school year, since
the (rare) midyear departures tend to reflect emergencies (e.g., sickness, birth) and would increase
noise, but I show robustness to this definition.
    I combine these data with annual data from the open market transfer system showing which
teachers submitted transfer applications, with a tag for which applicants successfully transferred.
Data are available from the 2006-2007 through 2009-2010 schoolyears. Although the HR/payroll
system allows me to calculate transfers, the open market data is useful for understanding (a) which
teachers want to transfer even if not successful, and (b) how many transfer applications different
schools receive. However, the data have some weaknesses. First, although I see every application


                                                     9
submitted by the 60% of teachers who did not ultimately transfer, for the 40% of applicants who
do transfer, I only see the application to the school they ultimately transferred to. This means that I
can create a proxy for how many transfer applications a given school received, but it is incomplete.
Second, the open market transfer data do not always align with the payroll system data. Although
97% of the successful transfers in the open market transfer data are associated with transfers in the
payroll data, only 80% of the transfers in the payroll data are associated with a transfer applica-
tion, and only 63% with a successful transfer application. NYCDOE has not been able to identify
the source of discrepancies or provide me with updated data, but has advised me that the admin-
istrative data from the payroll system is the more reliable source for actual teacher transfers. My
primary results thus use the payroll system data (the payroll data also contain additional outcomes
such as leaving NYCDOE entirely instead of transferring); the open market transfer data is used as
suggestive supplementary evidence.
    I also use data from surveys conducted with teachers by the NYCDOE as part of the account-
ability system. Surveys were conducted near the end of the schoolyear, after high-stakes tests were
conducted but before the results were received. I use survey data from the 2006-07 through 2009-10
schoolyears. The schools asked questions on a broad range of issues, from contact with parents to
school safety to interaction with principals.
    I study schools in the first two years that accountability grades were released: the 2007-08 and
2008-09 schoolyears.8

3.2 Value-added estimation

To estimate teacher value-added, I created a matched-panel of student and teacher data.9 I use the
approach that has been experimentally validated in the economics of education literature (Kane and
   8I  do not use the data from later years of the accountability program for two main reasons: first, because changes
were made to the program in the later years which made the thresholds less strict, including that outcomes began to
depend not just on current grades but also on past performance; and, second, because data from those years are not
included in the data files I was able to obtain from the NYCDOE.
    9 For the 2004-2005 through 2006-2007 school years, I matched teachers with classrooms based on a file maintained

by the NYCDOE with student-level math and ELA teacher linkage data that has been verified by the schools. Based on
guidance from the NYCDOE, for school years previous to 2004-2005, I matched elementary school students to teachers
based on their homeroom identifiers, and middle school students to teachers based on course section identifiers.



                                                         10
Staiger, 2008). Appendix A describes the estimation in detail; I follow the recent literature and
use Empirical Bayes shrinkage estimates (Jackson, 2012; Koedel et al., 2015). (Recent literature
has highlighted the potential biases of the value-added approach; see Appendix A for discussion
of why these biases should not be problematic here.) A primary strength of NYCDOE data is that
the matched panel exists for eight years prior to the institution of accountability. This allows me to
estimate value-added using data from the pre-accountability period and not conflate teacher quality
with responses to accountability. As a result, value-added is only available for teachers who taught
in tested grades before 2008.
    Estimated value-added (VA) data is unfortunately only available for a subset of teachers (27%
of all teachers in the sample, 21% of leavers, and 9% of joiners). I thus follow Jackson (2012)
and calculate a predicted VA measure based on observable characteristics that is available for all
teachers in the dataset. See Appendix A.1 for more details. Note that because I have a more limited
set of observable characteristics than used in some of the existing literature (e.g., Jackson (2012)),
the correlation between my predicted value-added measure and estimated value-added is relatively
small (correlation of 0.06), although highly statistically significant. I thus focus on the estimated VA
results as my main measure in the exposition, but use the predicted VA results to provide suggestive
evidence of whether the results in the subsample with estimated VA data might extend more broadly.

3.3    Empirical Strategy

The RD approach adopted in this paper is similar to much of the literature studying the effects of
accountability grades (e.g., Rouse et al. (2013), Chiang (2009)), and most closely follows Rockoff
and Turner (2010), who use a similar specification to estimate how the NYCDOE accountability
reforms affected short-run achievement. I estimate equations of the following form:


                             Y jt = a + bg I gjt + gh(S jt ) ⇥ I gjt ⇥ I type
                                                                         j    ⇥ It + e jt                  (1)

where j indexes teachers, t indexes time, g indexes accountability grades, Y jt is the outcome variable
of interest (e.g., an indicator that the teacher left the school), I gjt is an indicator for the grade received



                                                         11
by a school, S jt is the school’s accountability score, h() represents a flexible control function allowed
to differ on either side of the grade threshold, and e jt is a mean 0 error term. I follow Rockoff and
Turner (2010) in interacting the control function with an indicator for school type, I type
                                                                                       j    , as well as
for the year, It , since the grade thresholds are all specific for school types and years.10 My base
specification for h() follows Hahn et al. (2001) and much of the recent literature (e.g., Malamud
and Pop-Eleches (2011)) in using a locally linear control function and a rectangular kernel.11 I also
explore robustness to parametric regression functions. All standard errors are clustered at the school
level.
    To increase statistical power, I follow Rockoff and Turner (2010)12 and group the schools from
the bottom thresholds together (C/D and D/F), and from the top thresholds together (A/B and B/C).
The accountability pressures placed on schools (and the marginal increases in those pressures across
grade thresholds) are much stronger at the bottom of the grade distribution than the top, and indeed,
Rockoff and Turner (2010) find that accountability induced improvements in achievement at both
bottom grade thresholds but not the top.13
    Appendix B discusses selection of the base bandwidth used for the analysis. I also explore the
sensitivity of the results to a range of bandwidths.
    As with all RD analyses, the treatment effect under estimation is local to schools adjacent to the
grade thresholds, and does not capture any universal effects of accountability. Since the analysis
pools estimates from multiple cutoffs, the treatment effect represents the weighted average of the
local effects at each individual cutoff, where cutoff values that are more likely to occur and that have
more observations are given higher weight (Cattaneo et al., 2016). The identification assumption
  10 The   qualitative findings are the same if I omit the interaction term, but the estimates are less precise.
  11 Cheng, Fan, and Marron (1997) show that the triangular kernel has boundary optimal properties, but, in practice, the

results are not very sensitive to choice of kernel. Imbens and Lemieux (2008) and Lee and Lemieux (2010) recommend
using a rectangular kernel and checking sensitivity to small bandwidths as an arguably more transparent method of
putting more weight on observations close to the cutoff.
   12 Rockoff and Turner (2010) only adopt this specification when using locally linear control functions and small

bandwidths, which is the specification adopted in this paper.
   13 Specifically, I assign all D (B) schools to the C/D or D/F (A/B or B/C) thresholds based on whether they were above

or below the median score for other D (B) schools of the same year/schooltype. I then estimate equation (1), controlling
for a linear trend in the accountability score for each schooltype-year combination, and including a dummy for whether
a school received the lower grade at the grade threshold it was assigned to.




                                                              12
is that, conditional on the continuous metric underlying the grade, the grade itself is exogenous.
Below I discuss the two primary potential violations of this assumption: manipulation of the running
variable, and “ex post gaming” (selection into the analysis sample based on the grade received).

Density Evidence

A primary potential violation of the RD identification assumption is manipulation of the running
variable. Manipulation is unlikely to be problematic in this setting because of the use of fixed grade
thresholds and the fact that the underlying components of the score are all publicly verifiable and
difficult to manipulate precisely (like test scores).14 To investigate this further, I perform the density
test suggested in McCrary (2008) and do not find evidence of bunching. Specifically, I use the
number of schools within a 0.5-point or 0.1-point bandwidth as the dependent variable in equation
1 and the base bandwidth used in the analysis (5 score points), and none of the coefficients on the
dummy for being on the lower-graded side of the grade threshold are statistically significant. See
Appendix Table A1 for results.15

Sample construction and “ex post gaming”

My sample consists of all non-charter elementary, K-8, and middle schools that received account-
ability grades in the 2007-08 or 2008-09 school years (1,987 school-year observations).16 I exclude
the school-year observations where the school closed in the following year: this represents 5 school-
year observations, all from the 2007-08 school year. As a result, unlike in most RD settings, one
could be concerned about “ex post gaming” here: If administrators took accountability grades into
  14 The   largest potential threat to identification is thus not in gaming of the score itself, but in gaming of the cut-
offs by accountability officials. Although this concern is mitigated by the fact that the accountability program used
round-number percentile cutoffs for thresholds and so would have had to manipulate the thresholds by large amounts to
accommodate individual schools, it could still be the case that accountability officials changed the threshold to accom-
modate certain schools that they felt should receive given grades. However, since there are multiple schools receiving
any given score, I rely on the fact that, even in the scenario that accountability officials changed thresholds to accommo-
date schools, that could only be for 1-2 schools, while the empirical results are driven by the many other schools at the
threshold.
   15 Each column contains two cells with the results from separate regressions: the results at the top and bottom ends

of the grade distribution. See Appendix Figure A2 for figures showing accountability scores on the X-axis and, on the
Y-axis, the number of elementary schools. The figures are shown separately for each school type and year to show the
full distribution, since the thresholds are specific to the school type and year.
   16 Charter schools did not receive accountability grades in 2007-08; in 2008-09, 40 charter schools received account-

ability grades, but are excluded because accountability may affect them differently and because I do not have other data
for them.


                                                           13
account when selecting schools for closure, this would violate the identification assumption. How-
ever, most of the school closures took place far from the thresholds: only one of the schools that
was closed during the sample period fell within a 5-point bandwidth of any grade threshold (the
base bandwidth used in the paper), and there is no significant RD relationship between that closure
and accountability grades (see App. Table A2, col. (1)). Since just one school-year observation is
excluded, the results are also robust to bounding exercises assuming that outcomes at that school
fall at the extreme ends of the distribution (see Section 6). Thus, ex post selection is not driving the
results. I also exclude 6 school-year observations that do not appear in the teacher data (2 within
a 5-point bandwidth of any grade threshold). These observations fall across the grade distribution,
and there is no significant RD relationship between accountability grades and missing data (App.
Table A2, col. (2)). The final sample has 1,976 school-year observations, 1,243 within 5 points of
any grade threshold.
    In addition to schools that were immediately closed, there were also schools that were phased
out over time. According to Rockoff and Turner (2010), at the end of the 2007-08 school year,
the NYCDOE announced that 7 schools would be either closed or phased out; the administrative
data on school closures show that only 5 schools were closed immediately, leaving 2 schools that
began phase out at the end of the first year of the program, and potentially more at the end of the
second year. These phase-out schools are included in the base analysis sample. Although they do
not represent a threat to identification, from an interpretation perspective, it is important to check
whether different dynamics at these schools affect the results. Using a proxy for phase-outs,17 I show
that they do not affect the results: First, there is no significant RD relationship between phase-outs
and accountability grades (App. Table A2, col. (3)); and, second, the results are robust to dropping
phase-out schools (see Section 6).
    My base analysis sample includes all schools. However, I also show my main results for a
restricted sample that excludes the schools that had begun restructuring prior to the institution of
   17 Although the NYCDOE has administrative data on school closure dates, the NYCDOE does not track data on

when school phase-outs began. However, I can proxy for the beginning of a phase-out by tagging schools that received
accountability grades in one year but not in any subsequent year. This method tags 1% of schools, 75% of which closed
in the ensuing 5-year period, implying that this proxy method seems reasonable. Results are also robust to using eventual
closing as the proxy.


                                                          14
accountability (i.e., schools in year 2+ of restructuring in the 2007-08 school year). Restructur-
ing often entails significant staffing shifts which are pre-determined to accountability and which
could dampen their ability to respond to the school-based accountability system; thus, while the full
sample has broader external validity, the restricted sample is interesting to look at for a more pure
examination of how schools respond to one specific accountability system.18

3.4        Summary Statistics

Descriptive statistics for the base analysis sample (i.e., within 5 points of the grade thresholds) are
presented in Table 1. (Statistics are very similar when excluding the restructuring schools, shown
in Appendix Table A10). Panel A shows descriptive statistics about the sample of teachers teach-
ing in the base analysis sample schools in the 2007-08 and 2008-09 school years. The two-year
panel contains 50,616 unique teachers and 71,677 teacher-year observations. Roughly 27% of the
teachers have math value-added data.19 Baseline teacher value-added generally increases with the
accountability grade.
    Panel A of Table 1 shows that there is 11% teacher turnover across the sample period, with
turnover increasing across accountability grades. Eight percent of the turnover is teacher retire-
ments, 33% is transfers made between teaching positions in the NYCDOE, and 57% reflects de-
partures from NYCDOE.20 Turnover is generally higher among less-experienced and less-educated
teachers.21
    Table 1 shows that 15% of schools in the sample were part of the New York School Bonus
Program (NYSBP), a pilot program of incentive pay for teachers started by the NYCDOE in the fall
  18 Six  percent of all schools and 10% of schools within 6 points of a grade threshold had begun restructuring. Since
the restructuring designation was pre-determined relative to accountability, it should not be related to accountability
grades, and, reassuringly, col. (4) of App. Table A2 shows that there is no RD relationship between the two.
   19 Roughly 32% of them have either ELA or Math value-added. The reason that so many teachers do not have value-

added data is that, in grades K-5, only grades 4-5 have usable value-added data (because only grades 3-5 are tested and
one year of lagged test score is necessary for construction of value-added estimates), and in grades 6-8, only one of a
student’s approximately 5 teachers will be the subject teacher for math or for ELA; thus roughly 1/3 of teachers should
be eligible to have ELA value-added data, and 1/3 for math.
   20 I cannot follow these teachers in the data: they could take teaching positions in other districts, take other non-

teaching positions, stop working, or take non-teaching roles within the NYCDOE.
   21 See Appendix Table A11, which uses data from the pre-accountability era to understand the correlates of turnover.

The negative correlation between experience and turnover could reflect the fact that there is no technical role for seniority
in NYCDOE’s open market system.


                                                            15
of 2007 in a small subset of schools. The program had limited impact, with no evidence of effects
on overall teacher or student behavior (Fryer, 2013; Goodman and Turner, 2010; Springer, 2011).
Since program participation was randomly assigned and determined both prior to and independently
of the accountability system, it should be unrelated to accountability grades and should not affect the
results; indeed, col. (5) of App. Table A2 shows that there is no RD relationship between grades and
the program. I also include a NYSBP control in the vector of school-level controls in the regressions
(described more below), but the results are invariant to exclusion of the control.

3.5     Balance Tests

Appendix Table A3 tests for balance in baseline characteristics by estimating equation 1 using base-
line characteristics as the outcome variables. Each column contains two cells displaying the results
from separate regressions, with the upper cell showing the results from the bottom end of the grade
distribution (C/D and D/F thresholds pooled) and the lower cell showing the results from the top end
(A/B and B/C pooled). The coefficient on the indicator for receiving the lower grade at the threshold
is shown. I find roughly the number of significant coefficients that would be expected due to chance
(5.8% of coefficients are significant at the 5% level). I thus follow Lee and Lemieux (2010) and per-
form a joint test of the significance of all coefficients, and reassuringly fail to reject the null that all
of the coefficients are equal to 0 (the p-values are 0.30 for the top grade thresholds and 0.16 for the
bottom grade thresholds). At the bottom of the grade distribution (the primary focus of the paper),
the specific variables that are unbalanced are related to the racial composition of the school: the
lower-graded schools have fewer black students and teachers, and more Hispanic students. These 3
variables are highly correlated with each other, with the correlation between percent black students
and percent black teachers (percent Hispanic students) equal to 0.82 (-0.39). All regressions con-
trol for a vector of school-level variables that includes any variables unbalanced at the 5% level, in
addition to other controls designed to improve precision.22
  22 School controls include: average student achievement from the previous year; the previous year’s accountability
score (second year only); the percent of students that are black, Hispanic, Asian, that receive free and reduced price
lunch, and that are immigrants; the percent of teachers that are black, Hispanic, or Asian; fixed effects for school size;
five-year average school turnover before the institution of the accountability system; and whether the school was part
of the NY school bonus program. For the turnover regressions, I also include a vector teacher-level covariates that


                                                           16
4     Results

4.1     Turnover Results

I begin with graphical evidence. The left column of Figure 1 plots average residual turnover against
accountability scores. The top graph shows the results at the bottom of the grade distribution (C/D
and D/F pooled), the lower graph shows the top pooled (A/B and B/C). To create residual turnover,
I regress an indicator for whether a teacher left a school on a vector of covariates.23 I then group
schools according to their accountability scores relative to the grade threshold, with each dot repre-
senting the schools within a 1-point bandwidth, and plot the average residual turnover at the end of
the school year on the average accountability score received at the beginning of the year.24 For ease
of interpretation, I also plot a locally linear regression line in the figures, fitted to the raw teacher-
level data and fitted separately on either side of the grade threshold. Shaded areas represent 95%
confidence intervals around the line.
    At the bottom of the grade distribution (C/D and D/F), lower-graded schools appear to have
locally lower turnover. In contrast, at the top of the grade distribution, there is virtually no disconti-
nuity at the threshold.
    To test for the significance of these results, columns (1) and (2) of Table 2 present the regression
results, calculated from estimation of equation (1) using an indicator for whether a teacher left the
school at the end of the school year as the dependent variable. Each cell contains the results from
a separate regression, with the results from the bottom end of the grade distribution shown first.
All regressions control for the vector of controls outlined in Section 3.5. Column (1) shows the
full-sample results, whereas column (2) shows the results in the non-restructuring sample.
    Consistent with the graphical evidence, the regressions show that at the bottom end of the grade
distribution lower accountability grades decrease turnover by roughly 3 percentage points, signif-
the literature has shown to influence teacher turnover, including fixed effects for teacher experience and age, teacher
education level, teacher race, and teacher gender.
   23 The covariates used for creating the residuals are the same used in the regressions, described below.
   24 Note that, because density varies along the x-axis, the number of schools in each dot varies; Appendix Fig. A3

shows versions of the graphs where the number of schools per dot is fixed instead of the bandwidth per dot (so each dot
represents the average score and the average turnover across 10 schools).


                                                          17
icant at the 5% level. This reduction in turnover should provide a direct benefit to low-graded
schools, since turnover has been shown to decrease student achievement (Ronfeldt et al., 2013).
The magnitude of the effect is economically meaningful, equal to roughly 20% of average turnover
amongst those schools. To put the magnitude in the context of the literature, studies on the elasticity
of turnover to wage changes find elasticities ranging from roughly -1 to -1.5 (Hanushek et al., 2004;
Hendricks, 2014; Dolton and von der Klaauw, 1995) to roughly -3 to -4 for women and -3 to -8 for
men (Imazeki, 2005; Clotfelter et al., 2008), implying that the 20% decrease in turnover seen here
would be equivalent to an increase in salary of anywhere from 2.5-7% to 13-20%. The magnitude
of the point estimates is substantial, but seems reasonable in the context of the literature on mobility
responses to other reforms, including accountability, for which estimates of the magnitude of the
effects on teacher turnover are in the range from 25% to 65%.25 While the point estimates are large
in magnitude, since turnover is a rare event, the confidence intervals are relatively wide.
    In contrast, at the top end of the grade distribution, where accountability pressures have less bite,
grades do not affect turnover: the estimate is small in magnitude (0.5 percentage points, col. (1))
and not statistically distinguishable from 0.
    I examine the robustness of the turnover results in Section 6.1.

4.1.1    Turnover Placebo Test

The credibility of the RD design rests on the assumption that schools are as if randomly assigned
at the grade thresholds. To examine the validity of this assumption, I also perform a placebo test,
checking whether there are any baseline differences in turnover between schools on either side of
grade thresholds. Thus, I estimate the exact same regression model, but using turnover from the
previous year, i.e., from the year before the accountability grade was received, as the dependent
  25 Most  of the other literature on school accountability finds effects in the other direction, where the differences in
the sign of the effects likely comes from reasons that will be discussed in Section 7, but the magnitudes are substantial:
Feng et al. (2010) estimate that being shocked to receive an F grade in Florida increases turnover by 42%, Clotfelter
et al. (2004) estimates that being labeled a low-performing school increases turnover by 25%, and Gjefsen and Gunnes
(2016) estimate that the institution of school accountability increased teacher turnover by roughly 45-65%. One can also
benchmark against other types of policies and reforms and again the estimates do not seem unreasonable. For example,
Smith and Ingersoll (2004) find that giving new teachers a mentor in their field or encouraging collaboration decreases
turnover of first-year teachers by 30% and 43% respectively.




                                                           18
variable.26 Column (3) of Table 2 shows the placebo tests using both years of data, while column
(4) shows the placebo from the first year of the program only in order to limit to pre-accountability
data.27 Reassuringly, none of the placebo coefficients are statistically significant, and the magnitudes
are relatively small. The right column in Figure 1 presents the placebo results graphically, with
consistent results.

4.2     Teacher Sorting Results

I now look at how accountability grades affect the quality of the teachers who leave schools (leavers)
and the teachers who join in the next year (joiners). Note that the results in this section should be
interpreted as suggestive because the samples of teachers are small, especially the sample of joiners
with estimated value-added data. The placebo tests presented in the next subsection are also not
dispositive.
    Panel A of Table 3 presents the RD estimates of the effect of receiving a lower grade on the av-
erage quality of leavers and joiners, calculated by estimating equation (1) using teacher value-added
as the dependent variable and using either the leavers or the joiners as the sample. I use mathemat-
ics value-added as my value-added measure since the literature has shown that teacher fixed effects
in mathematics tend to have more predictive power over student outcomes than ELA fixed effects
(e.g., Jacob and Lefgren (2008), Jackson and Bruegmann (2009)). This probably reflects the fact
that, while most students learn language skills from many sources (e.g., their parents, the televi-
sion), the primary source of math knowledge for many students is their teachers (Gates Foundation,
2010).28 Figures 2 and 3 depict the estimated VA results graphically, with consistent results.
  26 Since  regressions are run at the teacher level, using previous-year school turnover as the dependent variable means
using teachers who were teaching in the school in the previous year as the sample. Note that the vector of control
variables are taken from the previous year as well so that the control variables are predetermined, not measured after the
(placebo) outcome.
   27 Using both years has the advantages of testing for baseline differences across the full sample that identifies the

actual results, and of having the same power for rejecting the null as the actual results. However, some of the previous
papers in the accountability literature use data from the first year of the accountability system only so that the falsification
exercise is performed purely with pre-accountability data, so I perform that test as well. Placebo results for the second
year only are the same as well. Placebo results are shown using the full sample, but the results in the non-restructuring
sample are nearly quantitatively identical.
   28 The results using ELA value-added are statistically weaker and less robust, and available upon request. Note that

roughly 70 percent of teachers with any value-added data have both math and ELA value-added.



                                                              19
    There are two ways to examine leaver quality: look at how leaver quality varies on either side
of the grade threshold, or estimate the turnover regressions from the previous section separately for
teachers with different value-added. The former is shown in Table 3, while the latter approach is
shown in Table 4.29 I focus on the former specification for the exposition since it enables an easier
comparison with the joiner quality results, but the results are consistent.
    Beginning with the bottom end of the grade distribution, where we saw that lower accountabil-
ity grades decreased average turnover, there is not strong evidence that turnover varies by quality
(columns (1) through (4)): the point estimates are negative using estimated VA (implying that higher
VA teachers were more likely to stay), but positive using predicted VA. None of the coefficients using
this specification are statistically significant, with the estimated VA result significant at the 10% level
in the Table 4 specification. However, there is suggestive evidence of an impact on joiner quality.
The point estimates in columns (5) through (6) of Table 3 suggest that lower-graded schools attract
joiners with 0.9 std. dev. higher estimated value-added, statistically significant at the 5% level. Since
estimated VA is only available for a small sub-sample of the joiners, it is reassuring that the results
using predicted VA, which is available for the full sample, are qualitatively consistent, if weaker,
potentially reflecting the low power of the predicted VA measure in predicting VA (cols. (7) - (8)). It
is also reassuring that there is no significant selection into having estimated VA data by accountabil-
ity grade (Panel B, column (4)). Overall the results provide suggestive evidence of positive sorting
implications for lower-graded schools, as lower-graded schools may attract higher-quality joiners
relative to leavers.
    In contrast, at the top end of the grade distribution (i.e., A/B and B/C), there is no evidence of
a positive effect on quality, and some evidence that lower accountability grades may, if anything,
decrease the quality of joiners relative to leavers. However, the results are only suggestive, as the
leaver result only shows up in the predicted VA data and the joiner only in the estimated VA.30
  29 Specifically, the table presents results from estimating equation (1) where the RD control function and the indicator
for receiving the lower grade are both interacted with a teacher characteristic.
   30 Note that, unlike Table 3, Table 4 does not seem to suggest that teachers with higher predicted VA are more likely to

leave. The discrepancy reflects the functional form, i.e., the fact that I need to convert to a binary variable for the Table
4 specification and so use “above-median” for the split; if I split at other places in the distribution (e.g., 25th percentile,
90th percentile) then, consistent with Table 3, teachers with higher predicted VA do appear to have higher turnover,



                                                             20
Table 4 and Panel B of Table 3 also show results for other teacher characteristics (experience and
education); none of the results are statistically significant. In general, no single characteristic proxies
well for value-added (Rivkin et al., 2005; Hanushek et al., 2010), and so I do not see these results as
inconsistent with the others.31

4.2.1    Placebo Tests

Appendix Table A4 presents placebo results regressing the average previous-year characteristics of
leavers and joiners on accountability grades, shown for both years of data (panel A) and the first
year only (Panel B). There are roughly the number of significant coefficients that would be expected
due to chance in Panel A (none significant at the 5% level and 2/16 significant at the 10% level), and
a somewhat higher percentage for Panel B (2/16 significant at the 5% level). See the right column of
Figures 2 and 3 for placebo graphs. The robustness of the joiner results is examined in Section 6.2.

4.3     Summary of Results

At the bottom end of the grade distribution, receiving a lower accountability grade causes teacher
turnover to fall, and improves the quality of the joiners hired relative to the leavers. These results
thus provide a more hopeful story for accountability than suggested by policy makers, implying that,
through their labor market effects, accountability systems can in some cases benefit, not harm, the
most disadvantaged schools. In contrast, at the top end of the grade distribution, the teacher labor
market effects of receiving a lower grade are not positive, and, if anything, are negative. In the next
section, I examine which mechanisms could explain these findings.


5       Mechanisms
The finding that receiving a lower accountability grade causes teacher turnover to decrease is some-
what unexpected. Turnover decisions can in general either reflect supply-side factors, demand-side
although the results are never significant.
   31 For experience, an indicator for having at least 4 years of experience is shown since the quality gains to experience

generally taper after 4 years (Boyd et al., 2008; Kane et al., 2008; Rivkin et al., 2005; Rockoff, 2004), and, in the
NYCDOE data, there is no significant relationship between experience and value-added after four years, but the results
look similar with other experience measures. The correlation between teacher value-added and masters degrees is not
statistically significant in the NYCDOE data, and is generally tenuous, sometimes even negative (Rivkin et al., 2005).



                                                           21
factors, or some combination of the two. Here, supply-side factors would mean that the desirability
of working at these schools has increased, which I will refer to as the job desirability hypothesis.
Demand-side factors would mean that external employers do not want to hire teachers from lower-
graded schools, which I will refer to as the stigma hypothesis.
    The job desirability hypothesis is somewhat counterintuitive, since many of the factors one might
first associate with lower grades (such as lower prestige, higher pressure, higher risk of future clo-
sure, etc.) are negative. Thus, the job desirability hypothesis requires that between the beginning of
the year (when schools receive grades) and the end of the year (when teachers make turnover deci-
sions), lower-graded schools respond to accountability pressures by making changes that make the
school a more desirable place to work. One potential channel would be performance improvements:
the previous literature has shown that schools respond to accountability pressures by improving their
performance (Carnoy and Loeb, 2002; Hanushek and Raymond, 2005; Chiang, 2009; Rockoff and
Turner, 2010). Accountability pressures could also motivate principals to do things that are attractive
to teachers, such as focusing more on teacher development, offering more opportunities for teachers
to collaborate, or providing more autonomy. Relatedly, accountability pressures could cause princi-
pals to focus more on hiring and retaining the best teachers (Shipps and White, 2009). Alternatively,
lower grades could foster collaboration as teachers work together to improve. Teachers could even
like the challenge of the lower grade, perhaps because it makes them feel that they are making a
difference for students.32
    The evidence presented so far seems more aligned with the job desirability hypothesis, although
is far from definitive. The fact that lower-graded schools attract higher-quality joiners provides
some evidence for the “job desirability” hypothesis by suggesting that the lower-graded schools
or principals made some positive changes or increased their recruitment efforts. The fact that the
decrease in turnover is only seen at the bottom of the grade distribution may also support the job
desirability hypothesis, as the change in accountability pressures when crossing a grade threshold
  32 Indeed, in a related context (subgroup-specific accountability policies), Shirrell (2016) finds that, when a school is
held accountable for the performance of black students, black teachers’ turnover falls, with one potential mechanism
being that the teachers’ motivation increases when they see that the school is trying to improve the performance of black
students.



                                                           22
were larger at the bottom end of the grade distribution, and thus any pressure-induced increases in
job desirability should have been larger there too. In contrast, although possible, it is not clear why
one would expect ex ante that stigma would change more across thresholds at the bottom end of the
grade distribution than at the top.
    I now provide further evidence on mechanisms. I first provide evidence for the plausibility and
potential channels for the “job desirability” hypothesis. I cannot distinguish between all of the
potential channels outlined above since I do not have data on them all and they all are likely highly
correlated, but I do provide evidence that supports the hypothesis that there are some ways that the
lower-graded schools were improving, and suggestive evidence that these changes are attractive to
teachers. I then use data on transfers and transfer applications to provide additional tests of the
stigma hypothesis. I do not find evidence supporting the stigma hypothesis.

5.1 Mechanisms for the supply-side (job desirability) hypothesis

Rockoff and Turner (2010) show that accountability pressures spurred achievement improvements at
lower-graded schools at the bottom of the grade distribution in the NYCDOE even within the same
year, so that is a plausible mechanism for improved job desirability. Results of teacher surveys con-
ducted by the NYCDOE at the end of the school year can provide further evidence on mechanisms.
The NYCDOE grouped questions in the survey by topical area (e.g., principal leadership, campus
environment); I created indexes for each topical area equal to the average standardized responses
across all the questions in each section.33 Panel A of Table 5 presents the results. At the lower
grade thresholds, the strongest impacts are on the principal leadership index, which is roughly 0.3
sd more positive at lower-graded schools than higher-graded schools, although only significant at
the 10% level (col. (1)). Panel B shows the detailed questions that make up the principal leadership
index. Teachers were more likely to think that their principals supported them, and that their princi-
pals were effective managers who made the school run smoothly. Since the differences in perceived
principal leadership were not present at baseline, this suggests that low grades encouraged principals
  33 Sometimes  two sections covered the same topic and so I grouped those sections together. All responses were
normalized so that more positive was better.



                                                      23
to work harder at their jobs and that teachers appreciated these changes.34
    We do not see similar results at the top end of the grade distribution: accountability pressures
may not have been large enough to induce principal responses, perhaps explaining why there also
were no turnover impacts at those thresholds. In fact, if anything, there is suggestive evidence
that the effect on survey responses were negative, consistent with the general trend that, unlike at
the bottom of the grade distribution, at the top, low accountability grades seem to have negatively
impacted schools, presumably because the accountability pressures were not strong enough to spur
positive changes by principals and teachers.
    Appendix Table A5 tests for other changes at lower-graded schools, testing for changes to the
number of joiners, staff size, enrollment, class size, and principal turnover. (The change in number
of leavers, i.e., turnover, is included as column (1) to compare with the joiner effects.) There are
no significant impacts on any of these variables.35 Of course, other changes could be happening for
which I do not have data.36
    In order for changes such as higher student performance or better principal leadership to increase
job desirability, teachers must value them. Table 6 provides suggestive evidence that teachers do
value these types of changes by showing that, in general, when schools have higher performance or
principal leadership survey scores (conditional on previous-year performance or principal leadership
   34 Across the 10 variables shown, no placebo results are significant at the 5% level, and one (the course offerings index

in panel A) is significant at the 10% level. Note that one potential concern with these results is that teacher survey results
are an input into future accountability grades. Although they only represent roughly 3% of grades (teacher, student, and
parent surveys together represent 2/3 of the school environment score, which represents 15% of the overall score),
some teachers may still have answered questions strategically to try to affect their future grades, and the likelihood of
answering strategically could vary with accountability grades. Since all survey questions affect the accountability grade
equally, this could cause a bias in the average responses across all questions, but is less likely to cause more positive
responses to some questions than others. Thus, the fact that there are much more positive responses for principal
leadership than for, say, safety, likely reflects true effects, not strategic responses. The fact that there are some negative
coefficients is also suggestive that teachers were not responding strategically.
   35 The number of joiners falls by 1% at lower-graded schools, which is not enough to offset the fall in leavers, and

thus the number of teachers increases by 2% (not statistically significant). Enrollment increases by 1% and class size
falls by 1%. There is no effect on principal turnover, and the turnover results are also robust to excluding principals who
left [coefficient of -3.2% at the bottom of the grade distribution when leaving principals are excluded]. All regressions
are weighted by staff size.
   36 One thing that could change is teacher expectations of future school closures. When schools close in the NYCDOE,

teachers are not fired. If they cannot find permanent positions, they are given work as substitute teachers. If teachers
prefer substitute work, they could stay at lower-graded schools hoping that the schools will be closed in the future. I do
not view this hypothesis as very plausible because (1) all of the closures had already been announced before teachers
made turnover decisions, and so they would have needed to anticipate closures a full year in the future, and (2) anecdotal
evidence suggests that teachers dislike being substitutes.


                                                             24
scores), those schools also experience lower teacher turnover.37
    Further evidence on mechanisms can be provided by looking at whether the RD effects are
larger at schools that we would predict would respond more positively to accountability pressures.
The teacher survey results suggest an important role for principals; high-quality principals may be
able to better channel accountability pressures into positive changes for their schools. Consistent
with this hypothesis, Table 7 shows that the decreases in turnover are 6 percentage points larger
among schools with above-median baseline principal leadership (as measured in the teacher sur-
veys). This difference is substantial in magnitude, and significant at the 5% level. This suggests that
schools with good leadership may have been better able to translate accountability pressures into
positive changes that the teachers appreciate. The results for heterogeneity in the effects on survey
responses about principal leadership and joiner quality are not statistically significant, although the
point estimate for the survey responses is large, suggesting three times as large an effect for schools
with better principals at baseline. For joiner quality, the point estimate is actually negative, but con-
fidence intervals are very wide and so I cannot reject that the improvements in joiner quality were
substantially larger at schools with higher-quality principals.

5.2 Additional Tests: Destinations and Transfer Applications

The stigma and job desirability hypotheses have different implications for how the results will vary
by teachers’ destinations. Since external (non-NYCDOE) employers are unlikely to look up school
accountability grades, stigma should primarily affect intra-district transfers, whereas the job desir-
ability hypothesis could affect all types of turnover. Table 8 shows the turnover results by desti-
nation, with column (1) replicating the overall result from Table 2, and columns (2) through (4)
showing the results separately for retirement, transfers between NYCDOE schools, or leaving the
NYCDOE.38 The turnover result is driven almost entirely by fewer teachers leaving NYCDOE (col.
  37 Note  that the regressions pool across all schools and teachers in my sample, not just those at the bottom or top of
the grade distribution, but the results are different if one limits to schools in one area of the grade distribution. Principal
leadership results are also similar if one does not condition on previous-year leadership. The correlations with joiner VA
are more mixed than the turnover correlations, but joiner VA is also much less precise.
   38 Teachers who leave the NYCDOE could be changing professions, taking a short stint away from teaching, transfer-

ring to a different district, or taking non-teaching roles within the NYCDOE.



                                                             25
(2)), which accounts for over 75% of the decrease in turnover at lower-graded schools, somewhat
larger than the share of turnover driven by departures from the NYCDOE (50%). In contrast, within-
district transfers (col. (4)) represent a smaller percentage of the effect than of overall turnover. (Note
that in neither case can we reject equality.)
    Columns (5) through (8) bring in transfer application data from the open market transfer system
to shed further light on the mechanisms (note that I consider these analyses suggestive due to the
caveats with the open market data raised in Section 3.1). Under the stigma hypothesis, transfer
applicants from lower-graded schools should be less likely to receive job offers and thus to ultimately
transfer. The number of transfer applications received by lower-graded schools should likely fall as
well. This is not what the data suggest: using either the open market transfer data (col. (6)) or the
payroll data (col. (7)) to define which applicants ultimately transferred, lower grades do not decrease
the transfer rate among applicants, and lower-graded schools do not receive any fewer applications
to transfer, with both point estimates in fact positive (i.e., running against the stigma hypothesis).
    Note that at the top of the grade distribution, consistent with the general trend that, if anything,
lower accountability grades seem to make schools worse off through the labor market impacts,
we see more transfer applications submitted (significant at the 10% level), although this is hard to
interpret due to the discrepancies between the open market transfer and payroll data; in the payroll
data, transfers themselves remain flat.


6     Robustness of the RD Results

6.1    Robustness of the Turnover Results

Table 9 shows robustness of the turnover results to the RD specification used. Column (1) shows
the results estimated without including baseline covariates; the coefficient remains negative, with
the magnitude still large but smaller than the base specification (shown in column (2)), and standard
errors much larger. Columns (3) through (6) show the results using linear specifications with a range
of bandwidths (specifically, 50% and 200% of the base bandwidth, and the base bandwidth +/-1).
Columns (7) and (8) show that the results are qualitatively similar if one uses a parametric regression


                                                   26
function (either quadratic or cubic in the accountability score, estimated separately by grade using a
bandwidth of 200% the base bandwidth). Column (9) shows the specification linearly for all of the
components of the accountability score separately instead of the composite score. The coefficient is
smaller in magnitude but maintains its sign and I cannot reject equality with my base specification.39
Column (10) shows the results after collapsing the data at the school level, weighted by the number
of teachers at the school.
    Given the noise in the graphs, one might be concerned that there are random breaks in the regres-
sion function. Per Lee and Lemieux (2010), I perform a specification test, testing for discontinuities
at points other than the grade thresholds, and present p-values in Table 9.40 Reassuringly, the test
statistic is not rejected in any of the specifications.
    Appendix Table A6 shows that the results are not driven by different dynamics at schools that
were being phased out, as the results are robust to excluding those schools (col. (2)), nor are the
results driven by sample selection due to the one school within five points of a grade threshold that
was closed and thus excluded from the analysis, since the results are robust to a bounding exercise
where we include the closing school and assign it turnover at the extremes of the distribution (the
99th percentile or 1st percentile, cols. (3)-(4)). The results are also robust to counting midyear
departures as turnover (col. (5)).
    Given the density and placebo tests presented earlier, I do not think that gaming is driving the
results. However, looking at the results for 2007-08 and 2008-09 separately can also provide more
insight: 2007-08 was the first year of the accountability system, and so it is especially unlikely that
schools could have manipulated their scores around the cutoffs in that year.41 Columns (6)-(7) show
that, reassuringly, the results are similar when one estimates equation 1 separately for the 2007-08
  39 My   base specification adopts the more standard approach in the literature of using the running variable itself as
opposed to its underlying components.
   40 Specifically, I test for whether the discontinuities at all 1-point intervals from the grade threshold are all equal to

zero. Results are robust to different interval widths.
   41 See Rockoff and Turner (2010) for a complete timeline of events. It is unlikely that schools knew what their 2007

accountability grades would be in advance. In April 2007, the NYCDOE informed principals of the progress report
methodology and gave principals pilot progress reports based on 2005 and 2006 results. These reports did not contain
letter grades, only numeric scores, and did not inform principals about how the numeric scores would be mapped
to grades. The pilot reports also omitted other key information (e.g., peer groups, environmental scores) that would
ultimately affect the schools score. Anecdotal newspaper evidence indicates that some principals were surprised to
receive low grades.


                                                            27
and 2008-09 school years. Appendix Table A7 also shows that the estimates are robust to excluding
schools that fall directly on a grade threshold.42
    One may also wonder if the results vary at the different thresholds that are grouped in the analysis
(e.g., C/D vs. D/F). Columns (1) and (2) of Appendix Table A8 shows that the main turnover
results are qualitatively consistent across thresholds. At the bottom end of the grade distribution, the
magnitude of the coefficient is larger at the D/F threshold than the C/D, but I cannot reject equality.

6.2     Robustness of the Joiner Quality Results

Table 10 repeats the analyses from Table 9 to examine the robustness of the joiner quality results.
The results at both the top and bottom ends of the grade distribution are relatively robust across
specifications, although the coefficient magnitude and significance vary somewhat. The positive
result at the bottom end of the grade distribution is not robust to the cubic specification. However,
the parametric specifications (quadratic and cubic) may allow too much flexibility given the noise
in the data, as suggested by the fact that the p-value for the specification test is rejected in the
quadratic specification (this test can also be seen as a test for whether the regression function is
well approximated by the control function within the bandwidth). Appendix Table A9 shows that
the results are robust to including the schools undergoing restructuring or excluding the schools
that were being phased out, and that the results were qualitatively similar in 2008 and 2009.43 One
potential concern with the results would be if they were driven primarily by teachers coming from
the schools that were closed for having low accountability grades. Since there were no restrictions
on where these teachers could be hired, this would not be an internal validity concern, but could be
an external validity concern if there were more teachers from closed schools in the NYCDOE than
there typically are in other settings. However, teachers from closing schools do not seem to drive
the results: these teachers represent less than 2% of the overall population of joiners and less than
  42 Fort et al. (2016) outline potential bias that can arise in multi-threshold RD settings when all thresholds have exactly

one observation located precisely on the threshold (i.e., exactly one observation for which the running variable takes the
value 0). Here, that concern likely does not apply since only 17% of the thresholds I analyze (4/24) have exactly one
school at the threshold, but, to be conservative, Appendix Table A7 shows that the estimates are nearly identical when
estimated excluding the observations at the cutoff – which is the recommended strategy to address the potential bias.
   43 The 2009 results are shown without controls only since the versions with controls are not identified due to small

sample sizes and the large number of controls.


                                                            28
5% of the joiners with value-added data, and the results are robust to omitting these teachers from
the analysis (col. (5)).44


7      Discussion
In this section, I discuss my findings in the context of the literature. This paper suggests that ac-
countability pressures help low-performing schools by decreasing turnover and potentially improv-
ing teacher quality. The findings are inconsistent with the majority of the previous literature, which
has largely found that accountability pressures hurt low-performing schools by accelerating turnover
(Feng et al., 2010; Clotfelter et al., 2004; Gjefsen and Gunnes, 2016), more so at the bottom of the
grade distribution in Feng et al. (2010).45
     What might explain the differences between my results and some of the other findings in the
literature? Part of the explanation is likely the stakes: Gjefsen and Gunnes (2016) study an ac-
countability regime that does not have high-stakes rewards and sanctions, which likely explains the
differences, as their results are more analogous to my results at the top end of the grade distribution
than the bottom. However, other papers, such as Feng et al. (2010), also study high-stakes settings
and find different results. My results on heterogeneity by principal leadership capacity suggests that
variation in principal capacity and control across settings may contribute to the difference in results.
For example, in the Florida accountability system studied by Feng et al. (2010), administrators do
not seem to directly close low-graded schools as a disciplining mechanism like they do in the NY-
CDOE (Chiang, 2009; Feng et al., 2010). So, it may be the case that the Florida system does not
place as much pressure on principals as the NYCDOE system. However, this is speculative, as I do
not have enough information on the institutional differences regarding principals to say for sure, and
    44 Columns   (3) - (8) of Appendix Table A8 show the main joiner and leaver results separately by grade threshold. The
results are qualitatively consistent across grade thresholds, although the results, especially at the lower end of the grade
distribution, should be treated as suggestive at best due to the small samples involved. Note that, when using estimated
VA as the outcome variable (columns (7)-(8)), the D/F threshold sample has a particularly small sample. The result is
shown for transparency, but the coefficient should be interpreted with great caution due to the small sample and potential
for overfitting. Indeed, the result is sensitive to the covariates included: if we limit the school covariate vector to only
the covariates that were unbalanced in the balance tests, the coefficient falls from 2.1 to 1.7 (p-value of .06), and when
we remove all school covariates it falls to 0.83 (p-value of 0.20).
   45 In a related setting, Boyd et al. (2008) exploit within-school variation to find that, when New York state introduced

high-stakes testing for fourth grade teachers, turnover among fourth grade teachers fell.



                                                            29
there are of course many other differences between the settings.46 Thus, I cannot definitively say
why the results differ; with just a few settings, the problem is not identified.


8      Conclusion
In this paper, I present evidence that accountability pressures impact the teacher labor market. At
the bottom end of the grade distribution (the C/D and D/F thresholds), I find that accountability pos-
itively impacts lower-graded schools by decreasing turnover and by increasing the quality of joiners.
These results echo the results from the earlier literature showing that lower accountability grades also
improve academic performance (e.g., Rockoff and Turner (2010)). A plausible explanation here is
that teachers actively choose to stay in the lower-graded schools because job desirability increases
at those schools, perhaps because principals – especially high-quality principals – put more effort
into leading their schools and into transforming the accountability pressures into positive change. In
contrast, at the top end of the grade distribution (the A/B and B/C thresholds), where the account-
ability pressures are more mild, there is no evidence of positive impacts, and instead evidence that,
if anything, receiving a lower accountability grade hurts schools through the labor market impacts,
with suggestive evidence of a decrease in the quality of joiners relative to leavers.
     These results raise an important question: When will accountability have positive impacts through
its labor market effects, and when negative? The results suggest two ingredients for when account-
ability might lead to positive effects: in cases where (a) accountability is high-stakes enough to
motivate schools to change, and (b) principals are good leaders and have the latitude to implement
changes. These hypotheses are motivated by the fact that (a) I only see positive impacts at the bot-
tom end of the grade distribution, where the stakes were higher, and (b) the positive turnover effects
at the bottom end of the grade distribution are primarily driven by schools led by high-quality prin-
cipals. Of course, these hypotheses are still speculative, and the question remains why other papers
    46 My findings also contrast with those of Clotfelter et al. (2004), who use a difference-in-differences approach to
estimate the effect of the institution of accountability in North Carolina and find that accountability accelerated teacher
turnover at low-performing schools. Again, institutional differences could have played a role; for example, North
Carolina linked teacher-level incentives with school accountability ratings, whereas the NYCDOE system only used
school- and principal-level incentives. It is also possible that their results are partially explained by other reforms
instituted concurrently with accountability, such as streamlining the process of teacher dismissals and dramatically
changing salary structures and tenure requirements.


                                                           30
in the literature looking at high-stakes systems find dissimilar results. I cannot definitively say why
the results differ, primarily because, with just a few settings, the problem is not identified. One area
for further research is to investigate the reasons for the differences, and in particular, the extent to
which they reflect the context and design features of the accountability system. A more thorough
understanding of these features would enable policymakers to design accountability systems that
better improve the performance of disadvantaged schools.




                                                  31
References
Boyd, D., H. Lankford, S. Loeb, J. Rockoff, and J. Wyckoff (2008). The narrowing gap in New York
  City teacher qualifications and its implications for student achievement in high-poverty schools.
  Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 27(4), 793–818.

Boyd, D., H. Lankford, S. Loeb, and J. Wyckoff (2008). The impact of assessment and accountability
  on teacher recruitment and retention: Are there unintended consequences? Education Finance
  and Policy 1(36).

Carnoy, M. and S. Loeb (2002). Does external accountability affect student outcomes? A cross-state
  analysis. Educational Evalation and Policy Analysis 24(4), 305–331.

Cattaneo, M. D., R. Titiunik, G. Vazquez-Bare, and L. Keele (2016). Interpreting regression discon-
  tinuity designs with multiple cutoffs. The Journal of Politics 78(4), 1229–1248.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff (2014). Measuring the impacts of teachers ii: Teacher
  value-added and student outcomes in adulthood. American Economic Review 104(9), 2633–2679.

Chiang, H. (2009). How accountability pressure on failing schools affects student achievement.
  Journal of Public Economics 93(9), 1045–1057.

Clotfelter, C., E. Glennie, H. Ladd, and J. Vigdor (2008). Would higher salaries keep teachers in
  high-poverty schools? evidence from a policy intervention in north carolina. Journal of Public
  Economics 92(5), 1352–1370.

Clotfelter, C., H. F. Ladd, J. L. Vigdor, and R. A. Diaz (2004). Do school accountability systems
  make it more difficult for low-performing schools to attract and retain high-quality teachers?
  Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 23(2), 251–271.

Dolton, P. and W. von der Klaauw (1995). Leaving teaching in the uk: A duration analysis. The
  Economic Journal, 431–444.



                                                32
Falch, T. and M. Rønning (2007). The influence of student achievement on teacher turnover. Edu-
  cation Economics 15(2), 177–202.

Feng, L., D. N. Figlio, and T. Sass (2010). School accountability and teacher mobility. Technical
  report.

Figlio, D. N. and C. E. Rouse (2006). Do accountability and voucher threats improve low-performing
  schools? Journal of Public Economics 90(1), 239–255.

Fort, M., A. Ichino, and G. Zanella (2016). On the perils of stacking thresholds in rd designs.

Fryer, R. G. (2013). Teacher incentives and student achievement: Evidence from new york city
  public schools. Journal of Labor Economics 31(2), 373–407.

Gjefsen, H. M. and T. Gunnes (2016). The effects of school accountability on teacher mobility and
  teacher sorting.

Goodman, S. and L. Turner (2010). Teacher incentive pay and educational outcomes: Evidence
  from the nyc bonus program. program on education policy and governance working papers series.
  pepg 10-07. Program on Education Policy and Governance, Harvard University.

Hahn, J., P. Todd, and W. Van der Klaauw (2001). Identification and estimation of treatment effects
  with a regression-discontinuity design. Econometrica 69(1), 201–209.

Hanushek, E., S. Rivkin, D. Figlio, and B. Jacob (2010). Generalizations about using value-added
  measures of teacher quality. American Economic Review 100(2), 267–271.

Hanushek, E. A., J. F. Kain, and S. G. Rivkin (2004). Why public schools lose teachers. Journal of
  Human Resources 39(2), 326–354.

Hanushek, E. A. and M. E. Raymond (2005). Does school accountability lead to improved student
  performance? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24, 297–327.

Hendricks, M. D. (2014). Does it pay to pay teachers more? evidence from texas. Journal of Public
  Economics 109, 50–63.

                                                 33
Hensvik, L. (2012). Competition, wages and teacher sorting: Lessons learned from a voucher
  reform. The Economic Journal 122(561), 799–824.

Imazeki, J. (2005). Teacher salaries and teacher attrition. Economics of Education Review 24(4),
  431–449.

Imbens, G. and K. Kalyanaraman (2012). Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression discontinuity
  estimator. The Review of Economic Studies 79(3), 933–959.

Imbens, G. and T. Lemieux (2008). Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice. Journal
  of Econometrics 142(2), 611–650.

Jackson, C. K. (2009). Student demographics, teacher sorting, and teacher quality: Evidence from
  the end of school desegregation. Journal of Labor Economics 27(2), 213–256.

Jackson, C. K. (2012). School competition and teacher labor markets: Evidence from charter school
  entry in north carolina. Journal of Public Economics 96(5), 431–448.

Jackson, C. K. and E. Bruegmann (2009). Teaching students and teaching each other: The im-
  portance of peer learning for teachers. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(4),
  85–108.

Jacob, B. and L. Lefgren (2008). Can principals identify effective teachers? Evidence on subjective
  performance evaluation in education. Journal of Labor Economics 26(1), 101–136.

Jones, M. G., B. D. Jones, B. Hardin, L. Chapman, T. Yarbrough, and M. Davis (1999). The impact
  of high-stakes testing on teachers and students in North Carolina. The Phi Delta Kappa 81(3),
  199–203.

Kane, T. J., J. E. Rockoff, and D. Staiger (2008). What does certification tell us about teacher
  effectiveness? Evidence from New York City. Economics of Education Review 27, 615–631.

Kane, T. J. and D. O. Staiger (2008). Estimating teacher impacts on student achievement: An
  experimental evaluation. Nber working paper 14607.

                                                34
Kirtley, K. (2012). High stakes testing in lower-performing high schools: Mathematics teachers’
  perceptions of burnout and retention. Ph. D. thesis, University of Colorado.

Koedel, C., K. Mihaly, and J. E. Rockoff (2015). Value-added modeling: A review. Economics of
  Education Review 47, 180–195.

Lee, D. and T. Lemieux (2010, June). Regression discontinuity designs in economics. Journal of
  Economic Literature 48, 281–355.

Li, D. (2011). School accountability and principal mobility: How no child left behind affects the
  allocation of school leaders. Working Paper, MIT.

Ludwig, J. and D. L. Miller (2007). Does Head Start improve children’s life chances? Evidence
  from a regression discontinuity design. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1), 159–208.

Malamud, O. and C. Pop-Eleches (2011). Home computer use and the development of human
  capital. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(2), 987–1027.

McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design: A
  density test. Journal of Econometrics 142(2), 698–714.

Peterson, P. E. (2006). The A+ plan. Reforming Education in Florida: A Study Prepared by the
  Koret Task Force on K–12 Education. Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution.

Rivkin, S., E. Hanushek, and J. Kain (2005). Teachers, schools, and academic achievement. Econo-
  metrica 73(2), 417–458.

Rockoff, J. (2004). The impact of individual teachers on student achievement: Evidence from panel
  data. American Economic Review, 247–252.

Rockoff, J. and L. J. Turner (2010). Short run impacts of accountability on school quality. American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2(4), 119–147.

Ronfeldt, M., S. Loeb, and J. Wyckoff (2013). How teacher turnover harms student achievement.
  American Educational Research Journal 50(1), 4–36.

                                                35
Rothstein, J. (2010, February). Teacher quality in educational production: Tracking, decay, and
  student achievement. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(2), 175–215.

Rouse, C. E., J. Hannaway, D. Goldhaber, and D. Figlio (2013). Feeling the florida heat? how low-
  performing schools respond to voucher and accountability pressure. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 5(2), 251–281.

Scafidi, B., D. Sjoquist, and T. Stinebrickner (2007). Race, poverty, and teacher mobility. Economics
  of Education Review 26(2), 145–159.

Shipps, D. and M. White (2009). A new politics of the principalship? Accountability-driven change
  in New York City. Peabody Journal of Education 84(3), 350–373.

Shirrell, M. (2016). The effects of subgroup-specific accountability on teacher turnover and attrition.
  Education Finance and Policy.

Smith, T. M. and R. M. Ingersoll (2004). What are the effects of induction and mentoring on
  beginning teacher turnover? American educational research journal 41(3), 681–714.

Springer, M. G. (2011). New York City’s school-wide bonus pay program: Early evidence from a
  randomized trial. DIANE Publishing.

Venhorst, V., J. Van Dijk, and L. Van Wissen (2011). An analysis of trends in spatial mobility of
  dutch graduates. Spatial Economic Analysis 6(1), 57–82.

West, M. R. and P. E. Peterson (2006, March). The efficacy of choice threats within school account-
  ability systems: Results from legislatively induced experiments. The Economic Journal 116,
  C46–C62.




                                                  36
                                             Figure 1: Residual Turnover, by Accountability Score



                                        Actual Results                                                                     Placebo Results

                                            C/D and D/F                                                                      C/D and D/F
                      .2




                                                                                                       .2
 % teachers that left




                                                                                  % teachers that left
             .1




                                                                                              .1
     0




                                                                                      0
              −.1




                                                                                               −.1
                           −10       −5           0          5          10                                  −10       −5           0          5          10
                                 Score relative to the closest cutoff                                             Score relative to the closest cutoff


                                            A/B and B/C                                                                      A/B and B/C
                      .2




                                                                                                       .2
 % teachers that left




                                                                                  % teachers that left
             .1




                                                                                              .1
     0




                                                                                      0
              −.1




                                                                                               −.1




                           −10       −5           0          5          10                                  −10       −5           0          5          10
                                 Score relative to the closest cutoff                                             Score relative to the closest cutoff


Notes. The left column plots the actual turnover results. The x-axes show schools’ average accountability
scores relative to the closest grade threshold (so the grade threshold is always displayed at 0). Each dot
represents the average for all schools within a 1-point bandwidth on the x-axis. The y-axes show average
residual turnover in the summer after the schools received their accountability grades. The right column shows
placebo turnover results: there, the y-axes show residual turnover in the year before schools received grades.
Residual turnover is calculated by regressing an indicator for leaving a school on a vector of covariates (see
Table 2 notes for list of covariates). The lines correspond to local polynomial smooth plots, and the shaded
areas represent their 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                             37
                                   Figure 2: Average Math Value-Added of Leavers, by Accountability Score



                                            Actual Results                                                               Placebo Results

                                               C/D and D/F                                                                  C/D and D/F
                         2




                                                                                                       2
     Teacher Value−Added




                                                                                   Teacher Value−Added
                   1




                                                                                                 1
              0




                                                                                            0
        −1




                                                                                      −1
   −2




                             −10        −5           0          5          10    −2                        −10       −5           0          5          10
                                    Score relative to the closest cutoff                                         Score relative to the closest cutoff


                                               A/B and B/C                                                                  A/B and B/C
                         2




                                                                                                       2
     Teacher Value−Added




                                                                                   Teacher Value−Added
                   1




                                                                                                 1
              0




                                                                                            0
        −1




                                                                                      −1
   −2




                                                                                 −2




                             −10        −5           0          5          10                              −10       −5           0          5          10
                                    Score relative to the closest cutoff                                         Score relative to the closest cutoff



Notes. The left column plots the actual leaver quality results. The x-axes show the schools’ average ac-
countability scores relative to the grade threshold (so the grade threshold is always displayed at 0). The
y-axes show the average value-added of leavers (i.e., of the teachers who left their schools in the summer
after their schools received the accountability score and grade). The right column shows the placebo results:
there, the y-axes show the average value-added of the teachers who left their schools the year before their
schools received the accountability score and grade. The lines correspond to local polynomial smooth plots,
and the shaded areas represent their 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                            38
                                   Figure 3: Average Math Value-Added of Joiners, by Accountability Score



                                            Actual Results                                                               Placebo Results

                                               C/D and D/F                                                                  C/D and D/F
                         2




                                                                                                       2
     Teacher Value−Added




                                                                                   Teacher Value−Added
                  1




                                                                                                1
          0




                                                                                        0
   −1




                                                                                 −1
                             −10        −5           0          5          10                              −10       −5           0          5          10
                                    Score relative to the closest cutoff                                         Score relative to the closest cutoff


                                               A/B and B/C                                                                  A/B and B/C
                         2




                                                                                                       2
     Teacher Value−Added




                                                                                   Teacher Value−Added
                  1




                                                                                                1
          0




                                                                                        0
   −1




                                                                                 −1




                             −10        −5           0          5          10                              −10       −5           0          5          10
                                    Score relative to the closest cutoff                                         Score relative to the closest cutoff



Notes. The left column plots the actual joiner quality results. The x-axes show schools’ average account-
ability scores relative to the closest grade threshold (so the grade threshold is always displayed at 0). Each
dot represents the average for all schools within a 1-point bandwidth on the x axis. The y-axes show the
average value-added of joiners (i.e., of the teachers who joined schools in the summer after their schools
received the accountability score and grade). The right column shows the placebo results: there, the y-axes
show the average value-added of the teachers who joined their schools the year before their schools received
the accountability score and grade. The lines correspond to local polynomial smooth plots, and the shaded
areas represent their 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                            39
                             Table 1. Descriptive Statistics by Accountability Grade
                                                                          Accountability Grade
                                           All Schools        A         B           C          D                                               F
Panel A: Teacher Characteristics
 % Teachers with Master's Degree               0.43         0.46      0.44        0.43        0.39                                            0.43
 Teacher Experience (years)                    9.79         9.90      9.94        9.71        9.26                                            9.30
 Estimated Math Value-Added                    -0.02        0.10      0.00        -0.07      -0.13                                           -0.28
 Estimated ELA Value-Added                     -0.03        0.07      -0.02       -0.07      -0.05                                           -0.21
 Predicted Math Value-Added                    0.12         0.16      0.13        0.11        0.06                                            0.09
 Predicted ELA Value-Added                     0.09         0.10      0.09        0.09        0.10                                            0.08
 % Teachers that are:
   Female                                      0.83         0.84      0.83        0.82        0.80                                            0.81
   Black                                       0.20         0.15      0.19        0.22        0.29                                            0.23
   Non-Hispanic White                          0.61         0.66      0.63        0.59        0.51                                            0.59
   Hispanic                                    0.14         0.13      0.14        0.14        0.16                                            0.14
   Asian                                       0.05         0.05      0.05        0.04        0.04                                            0.04
 Turnover                                      0.11         0.10      0.11        0.12        0.15                                            0.19
    Retirement                                 0.01         0.01      0.01        0.01        0.01                                            0.01
    Intra-district transfers                   0.04         0.03      0.03        0.04        0.06                                            0.10
    Exited NYCDOE teacher files                0.07         0.06      0.07        0.07        0.08                                            0.08

 Sample Size: Teacher-Year Observations (Base Sample)
   All                                     71,677     12,125                                 30,161         21,362           6,814           1,215
   With Math Value-Added Data              19,092      3,154                                  8,119          5,639           1,885            295
 Sample Size: Unique Teachers (Base Sample)
   All                                     50,616
   With Math Value-Added Data              13,202

Panel B: School Characteristics
 Enrollment                                                    809             662             702            697             600             521
 % Students that are:
  Black                                                       0.32             0.27           0.32            0.38            0.45            0.39
  Non-Hispanic White                                          0.15             0.16           0.15            0.15            0.08            0.15
  Hispanic                                                    0.40             0.38           0.40            0.38            0.42            0.40
  Asian                                                       0.12             0.18           0.12            0.09            0.04            0.05
  Immigrants                                                  0.02             0.02           0.02            0.02            0.01            0.01
 Components of Accountability Grades
  Environment Score                                           7.43             9.22            7.99           6.90            5.90           6.37
  Performance Score                                          15.11            18.49           15.64          13.94           11.42           9.50
  Progress Score                                             26.67            34.47           29.58          22.10           16.24           11.71
  Additional Credit                                           2.18             3.32            2.40           1.22            0.75           0.26
      Overall Score                                          51.40            65.51           55.62          44.16           34.33           27.85
 Other characteristics
  NY School Bonus Program                                     0.15             0.14           0.17            0.15            0.18            0.23
  Being phased outa                                           0.01             0.00           0.00            0.00            0.07            0.12
  Not restructuring at baselineb                              0.87             0.94           0.90            0.90            0.88            0.85
 Sample Size: Schools
    Number of school-year observations                       1,243             220             507            360             130              26
    Number of unique schools                                  847
Notes. Data come from the 2007-08 and 2008-09 school years in the New York City Department of Education. The accountability grade is the
school report card grade that was received by the school during fall of the school year. Sample here limited to the sample used for the base
turnover analysis: schools within a 5-point bandwidth of one of the grade thresholds.
a. Phase outs proxied for by schools that received accountability grades in one year but not the subsequent year.
b. Schools that were not undergoing restructuring prior to the institution of the accountability system (i.e., that were not in year 2+ of restructuring
in the 2007-08 school year).
     Table 2. Regression Discontinuity Estimates of the Effect of School Accountability Grades on Turnover
                                                                        Dependent Var.: Teacher Left School (Dummy)
                                                                          Actual results                       Placebo results
                                                                    (current year turnover)                (previous year turnover)
                                                                                      Non-
                                                                                                                          Full sample,
                                                   Sample:       Full sample      restructuring         Full sample
                                                                                                                          Year 1 only
                                                                                     sample
                                                                      (1)               (2)                  (3)                (4)
Bottom of the grade distribution (C/D and D/F)
  School received lower grade (dummy)                                -0.029             -0.030              0.008             -0.003
                                                                   [0.013]**          [0.014]**            [0.016]           [0.020]
     N                                                              16,897              14,617             14,535              9,848
     Dep. Var. Mean                                                   0.13               0.12                0.14               0.14
Top of the grade distribution (A/B and B/C)
  School received lower grade (dummy)                                0.005               0.003              0.002             0.004
                                                                    [0.007]             [0.007]            [0.007]           [0.011]
     N                                                              54,672              47,967             47,676            24,939
     Dep. Var. Mean                                                  0.11                 0.11              0.12               0.13

Notes. Table presents regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of school accountability grades on teacher turnover. For the
actual regressions, the dependent variable is teacher turnover, i.e., a dummy for the teacher leaving the school at the end of the school
year. In the placebo regressions, the dependent variable is turnover in the year prior to the year the accountability grade was received.
The sample is all teachers teaching in sample schools and each observation represents one teacher in a given year. Regressions use a
bandwidth of 5 grade points. Standard errors are reported in brackets and clustered at the school level. All regressions include school
covariates (i.e., controls for the average previous year's achievement; previous year's accountability score (second year only); the
percent of students that are black, Hispanic, Asian, that receive free and reduced price lunch, and that are immigrants; fixed effects for
school size; the percent of teachers that are black, Hispanic, or Asian; whether the school was in the NYSBP; and five-year average
school turnover prior to the institution of accountability), teacher covariates (i.e., fixed effects for teacher experience and age, teacher
education level, teacher gender, teacher race), and controls for the "RD running variable" (accountability score relative to the
threshold) separately by (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade), as well as controls for (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower
grade) and all of the main effects and lower-order interactions (e.g., year, schooltype, yearXschooltype, etc.). Data come from the
2008-09 and 2009-10 school years for the actual regressions and the 2007-08 school year for the placebo regressions. All data from
the New York City Department of Education. Significant at 10%;            significant at 5%;        significant at 1%.
                Table 3. RD Estimates of the Effect of Accountability Grades on the Characteristics of Leavers and Joiners



                                                                Panel A. Value-added
                                                              Leavers                                                           Joiners
                                           Estimated math VA          Predicted math VA                  Estimated math VA                Predicted math VA
                                                        Non-                        Non-                              Non-                              Non-
                            Sample:         Full                      Full                                Full                            Full
                                                    restructuring               restructuring                     restructuring                     restructuring
Independent Variable =                      (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)
Received lower grade at:
Bottom of the grade distribution
  D/F and C/D thresholds                  -0.028          -0.150          0.124          0.021           0.869          0.887             0.164         0.214
                                          [0.21]          [0.24]          [0.10]         [0.12]         [0.34]**       [0.38]**           [0.11]       [0.11]**
     N                                      479             385            2228           1765             126            113              1493          1339
     Dep. Var. Mean                        -0.12           -0.09           -0.07          -0.07           -0.12          -0.12            -0.05          -0.04
Top of the grade distribution
  B/C and A/B Thresholds                  -0.130          -0.145           0.119          0.117         -0.392          -0.374            0.023         0.009
                                          [0.10]          [0.10]         [0.05]**       [0.05]**        [0.20]*         [0.22]*           [0.07]        [0.07]
     N                                     1194             999            5916           5056            379             339              4251          3765
     Dep. Var. Mean                        -0.05           -0.05           -0.03          -0.01          -0.09           -0.11             -0.05         -0.04
Notes. Table presents regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of school accountability grades on the characteristics of the teachers that leave (leavers)
and teachers that are hired by a given school (joiners). Specifically, each observation is a teacher in a given year. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the
estimated math value-added (VA) of the teachers in the sample (columns (1)-(2) and (5)-(6)) or the predicted math VA (columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8)). In Panel
B, the dependent variable is a dummy for having VA data, the teacher's experience or education. The sample is all leaving (Panel A: columns (1)-(4), Panel
B: columns (1)-(3)) or joining (Panel A: columns (5)-(8), Panel B: columns (4)-(6)) teachers and each observation represents one teacher in a given year.
Regressions use a bandwidth of 5 grade points. Standard errors are reported in brackets and clustered at the school level. All regressions include controls for
(year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade) and all of the main effects and lower-order interactions (e.g., year, schooltype, yearXschooltype, etc.), as well as
school controls (which include controls for the average previous year's achievement; previous year's accountability score (second year only); the percent of
students that are black, Hispanic, Asian, that receive free and reduced price lunch, and that are immigrants; fixed effects for school size; whether the school
was in the NYSBP; and five-year average school turnover prior to the institution of accountability. Data come from the 2008-09 and 2009-10 school years in
the New York City Department of Education for the actual regressions and the 2007-08 and 2008-09 school years for the placebo regressions, with the report
card grades used being the report card that was received by the school during fall of the school year. ∗ Significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗
significant at 1%.
!
                                               Panel B. Other teacher characteristics
                               Sample:                        Leavers                                           Joiners
                                                Has           At least 4                                       At least 4
                                                                                Has        Has estimated
                 Dependent Variable:         estimated         years                                            years         Has masters
                                                                               masters       VA data
                                              VA data        experience                                       experience
Independent Variable =
                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)
Received lower grade at:
Bottom of the grade distribution
  D/F and C/D thresholds                       0.060           -0.047          -0.051           0.003            -0.048          -0.031
                                               [0.04]          [0.05]          [0.05]           [0.03]           [0.06]          [0.04]
     N                                          2228            2228            2228             1493             1493            1493
     Dep. Var. Mean                             0.21            0.51            0.33             0.08             0.28            0.23
Top of the grade distribution
  B/C and A/B Thresholds                       -0.009           0.045          -0.012           -0.025           -0.001          -0.013
                                               [0.02]           [0.03]         [0.03]           [0.02]           [0.03]          [0.03]
     N                                          5916             5916           5916             4251             4251            4251
     Dep. Var. Mean                             0.20             0.54           0.36             0.09             0.26            0.21
Notes. Table presents regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of school accountability grades on the characteristics of the
teachers that leave (leavers) and teachers that are hired by a given school (joiners). Specifically, each observation is a teacher in a given
year. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the estimated math value-added (VA) of the teachers in the sample (columns (1)-(2) and (5)-
(6)) or the predicted math VA (columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8)). In Panel B, the dependent variable is a dummy for having VA data, the
teacher's experience or education. The sample is all leaving (Panel A: columns (1)-(4), Panel B: columns (1)-(3)) or joining (Panel A:
columns (5)-(8), Panel B: columns (4)-(6)) teachers and each observation represents one teacher in a given year. Regressions use a
bandwidth of 5 grade points. Standard errors are reported in brackets and clustered at the school level. All regressions include controls
for (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade) and all of the main effects and lower-order interactions (e.g., year, schooltype,
yearXschooltype, etc.), as well as school controls (which include controls for the average previous year's achievement; previous year's
accountability score (second year only); the percent of students that are black, Hispanic, Asian, that receive free and reduced price lunch,
and that are immigrants; fixed effects for school size; whether the school was in the NYSBP; and five-year average school turnover prior
to the institution of accountability. Data come from the 2008-09 and 2009-10 school years in the New York City Department of
Education for the actual regressions and the 2007-08 and 2008-09 school years for the placebo regressions, with the report card grades
used being the report card that was received by the school during fall of the school year. Significant at 10%; significant at 5%;
significant at 1%.
                          Table 4. Heterogeneity in the turnover effects by teacher characteristics

                                                                                Teacher characteristic used for heterogeneity:


                                                                            Above-       Above-     At least 4
                                                                                                                              Has
                                                                            median       median      years
                                                                 Sample:                                                     masters
                                                                         estimated VA predicted VA experience

                                                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)
Bottom of the grade distribution (C/D and D/F)
  School received lower grade (dummy)                                            0.019          -0.025         -0.027        -0.030
                                                                                [0.023]         [0.020]        [0.030]       [0.019]
   School rec'd lower grade X (Teacher characteristic)                          -0.061          -0.008          0.000         0.006
                                                                                [.034]*          [.022]         [.03]         [.022]
       N                                                                         4,524          16,897         16,897        16,897

Top of the grade distribution (A/B and B/C)
  School received lower grade (dummy)                                            0.020           0.004         -0.003         0.012
                                                                                [0.014]         [0.010]        [0.015]       [0.009]
   School rec'd lower grade X (Teacher characteristic)                          -0.026           0.004          0.011        -0.016
                                                                                 [.018]          [.012]         [.016]        [.012]
       N                                                                        14,544          54,672         54,672        54,672

Notes. Table presents regression discontinuity estimates of heterogeneity in the turnover effects by teacher characteristics. All
regressions include the standard "RD controls" (i.e., a control for (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade) and a dummy for
received lower grade interacted with the teacher characteristic listed at the top of the column, as a well as a control for the teacher
characteristic itself. All results shown with the full sample of schools but results consistent in the non-restructuring sample. The
dependent variable is teacher turnover, i.e., a dummy for the teacher leaving the school at the end of the school year. The sample is
all teachers teaching in sample schools and each observation represents one teacher in a given year. Regressions use a bandwidth of
5 grade points. Standard errors are reported in brackets and clustered at the school level. All regressions include school covariates
(i.e., controls for the average previous year's achievement; previous year's accountability score (second year only); the percent of
students that are black, Hispanic, Asian, that receive free and reduced price lunch, and that are immigrants; fixed effects for school
size; the percent of teachers that are black, Hispanic, or Asian; whether the school was in the NYSBP; and five-year average school
turnover prior to the institution of accountability), teacher covariates (i.e., fixed effects for teacher experience and age, teacher
education level, teacher gender, and teacher race), and a year dummy. Data come from the 2008-09 and 2009-10 school years for the
actual regressions and the 2007-08 school year for the placebo regressions. All data from the New York City Department of
Education. ∗ Significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%.
                           Table 5. Regression Discontinuity Estimates of the Effects of School Grades on Teacher Survey Responses

Panel A. Teacher survey responses: Summary measures
                                                                     Dependent Variable = Standardized index of teacher survey responses about:
                                                              Setting high    School
                                              Principal       expectations     course        Teacher      Professional       Parent
Independent Var. =                           leadership       for students   offerings    collaboration development        interaction     Safety
Received lower grade at the:                     (1)               (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)              (6)          (7)
Bottom of the grade distribution
  D/F or C/D thresholds                         0.27               0.19              -0.01            0.08              -0.06              0.11            -0.09
                                               [0.16]*            [0.14]            [0.10]           [0.15]            [0.16]             [0.11]          [0.05]*
   N                                             309               309                309             309                309               309              309
Top of the grade distribution
  B/C or A/B Thresholds                          -0.16             -0.08           -0.16              0.04              0.01               -0.08            0.04
                                                [0.10]            [0.09]         [0.05]***           [0.08]            [0.09]             [0.07]           [0.03]
   N                                             932               932               932              931                932               932              932

Panel B. Teacher survey responses: Detailed survey responses for principal leadership questions
                                                       Dependent Variable = Level of teacher agreement with the following statements:
                                                                               School     Curriculum,
                                                                               leaders     instruction,
                                                                             encourage and assessment The principal The principal
                                                             School leaders     open       are aligned     places the  is an effective                  To what
                                           School leaders    let staff know communicati     w/in and    learning needs manager who                   extent do you
                                           communicate           what is        on on     across grade    of children     makes the      I trust the feel supported
                                           a clear vision     expected of     important   levels at the ahead of other school run       principal at     by the
Independent Var. =                         for the school          them     school issues    school         interests     smoothly     his/her word principal?
Received lower grade at the:                      (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)              (7)              (8)
Bottom of the grade distribution
  D/F or C/D thresholds                          0.26              0.29              0.25             0.30              0.24              0.32              0.28             0.35
                                                [0.19]            [0.20]            [0.19]          [0.15]*            [0.19]            [0.19]*           [0.18]          [0.18]*
       N                                         309               309               309              309               309                309              309              309
Top of the grade distribution
  B/C or A/B Thresholds                         -0.18              -0.15             -0.18            -0.08             -0.21             -0.24            -0.22            -0.21
                                               [0.11]*            [0.11]            [0.11]           [0.09]            [0.11]*          [0.11]**          [0.11]*          [0.11]*
       N                                         932                932               932              932               932               932              932              932
Notes. Table presents regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of school accountability grades on teacher survey responses. The dependent variables are school-average
responses from teacher survey questions, expressed in standard deviations of the response distribution, with all questions normalized so that more positive is better. For panel A,
the variables are indexes that average the responses across several sub-questions in a given area; for panel B, the variables are responses to the individual sub-questions in the
principal leadership index Each observation represents one teacher in a given year. Regressions use a bandwidth of 5 grade points. Standard errors are reported in brackets and
clustered at the school level. All regressions include controls for (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade) and all of the main effects and lower-order interactions (e.g., year,
schooltype, yearXschooltype, etc.) and school covariates, which include controls for the average previous year's achievement; previous year survey responses; previous year's
accountability score (second year only); the percent of students that are black, Hispanic, Asian, that receive free and reduced price lunch, and that are immigrants; the percent of
teachers that are black, Hispanic, or Asian; fixed effects for school size; whether the school was in the NYSBP; and five-year average school turnover prior to the institution of
accountability. Regressions are weighted by the number of teachers who filled out the surveys. Data come from the 2008-09 and 2009-10 school years. All data from the New
York City Department of Education. Significant at 10%;           significant at 5%;     significant at 1%.
      Table 6. Correlations Between Labor Market Outcomes and School Performance or
                                        Leadership
                                                         Turnover Results                   Joiner VA Results
                                                                                         Estimated Math Value-
                           Dependent Variable:         Teacher Left School
                                                                                                 Added
                                          Sample:            Incumbents                         Joiners
Independent Variable:                                     (1)            (2)                  (3)            (4)

School achievement (standardized)                    -0.0205***                           0.480***
                                                      [0.00739]                            [0.153]
Principal leadership rating (standardized)                          -0.0133***                            0.0445
                                                                     [0.00176]                           [0.0401]

  N                                                    111,926        111,926                801            801
Notes. Table presents estimates of the correlation between labor market outcomes (specifically, turnover at the
end of the year (columns (1)-(2)) or the quality of joiners hired in the subsequent year (column (3)-(4)), and either
school achievement (columns (1) and (3)) or school principal leadership ratings (columns (2) and (4)).
Achievement is the average between math and English; principal leadership ratings come from teacher surveys.
Both achievement and principal leadership are expressed in standard deviations. Sample covers 2008-2009 and
includes all schools that received accountability grades. For columns (1)-(2), the dependent variable is an
indicator for whether a teacher stopped teaching at the school; the sample is all teachers teaching in sample
schools, and each observation represents one teacher in a given year. For columns (3)-(4), the dependent variable
is a teacher’s math value-added; the sample is all joiners to a school at the end of the year, and each observation
represents one teacher in a given year. Standard errors are reported in brackets and clustered at the school level.
Columns (1) and (3) include school covariates (i.e., controls for the average previous year's achievement; the
previous year's accountability score (second year only); the percent of students that are black, Hispanic, Asian,
that receive free and reduced price lunch, and that are immigrants; fixed effects for school size; whether the
school was in the NYSBP; and five-year average school turnover prior to the institution of accountability), teacher
covariates (i.e., fixed effects for teacher experience and age, teacher education level, teacher gender, and teacher
race), and an accountability score control. Columns (2) and (4) include the same covariates except the set of
teacher controls, and also add in previous year principal leadership controls. All data from the New York City
Department of Education. Significant at 10%; significant at 5%;               significant at 1%.
                         Table 7. Heterogeneity in the RD effects by principal quality

                                                                                           End-of-year
                                                                             Turnover        principal        Joiner
                                                 Dependent Variable:
                                                                             Dummy          leadership        quality
                                                                                          survey ratings
                                                                                (1)             (2)             (3)

Bottom of the grade distribution (C/D and D/F)
  Lower grade                                                                  -0.012          0.080           0.998
                                                                              [0.019]         [0.215]          [0.70]
  (Lower grade) X (Above-median baseline principal leadership)                 -0.060          0.154           -0.331
                                                                             [.029]**          [.33]           [0.97]
     N                                                                        16,833            308             124

Top of the grade distribution (A/B and B/C)
  Lower grade                                                                 -0.107          -0.106           -0.359
                                                                              [0.165]         [0.134]          [0.29]
  (Lower grade) X (Above-median baseline principal leadership)                 0.052           0.139           -0.205
                                                                               [.206]          [.191]          [.451]
     N                                                                           927             927             378

                                                                                                             Joiners to
  Sample                                                                     Teachers         Schools
                                                                                                               school

Notes. Table presents regression discontinuity estimates of heterogeneity in the turnover effects by principal quality.
Regressions use a bandwidth of 5 grade points. Standard errors are reported in brackets and clustered at the school
level. All regressions include the standard "RD controls" (i.e., controls for (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower
grade) and all of the main effects and lower-order interactions (e.g., year, schooltype, yearXschooltype, etc.)) as well
as a dummy for received lower grade interacted with the dummy for above-median baseline principal leadership, and
a control for above-median baseline principal leadership. Baseline principal leadership is the leadership rating for the
principal of that school in the previous year. All regressions include school covariates (i.e., controls for the average
previous year's achievement; previous year's accountability score (second year only); the percent of students that are
black, Hispanic, Asian, that receive free and reduced price lunch, and that are immigrants; the percent of teachers that
are black, Hispanic, or Asian; fixed effects for school size; whether the school was in the NYSBP; and five-year
average school turnover prior to the institution of accountability) and a year dummy. Column (1) also includes teacher
covariates (i.e., fixed effects for teacher experience and age, teacher education level, teacher gender, and teacher
race). Data come from the 2008-09 and 2009-10 school years for the actual regressions and the 2007-08 school year
for the placebo regressions. All data from the New York City Department of Education. Significant at 10%;
significant at 5%;       significant at 1%.
                         Table 8. Heterogeneity in the Regression Discontinuity Turnover Estimates by Teacher Destination
                                                                                                                                                   School transfer
                                                                      Teacher turnover and transfer application submission                          applications
                                                                                                                                                      received
                                                                                                                                                    Open market
                                                                  Payroll data                              Open market transfer data
                                                                                                                                                    transfer data
                                                                                                                     Percent
                                                                                                                                   Percent              Transfer
                                                                                                                 applications
                                                               Left                                 Submitted                  applications           applications
                                                                                                                   leading to
                         Dependent Variable:       Left     NYCDOE           Retire   Transfer      application                  leading to             received
                                                                                                                  transfers in
                                                            Classrooms                               to transfer                transfers in         (as % current
                                                                                                                 open market
                                                                                                                               payroll data            staff size)
                                                                                                                      data
Independent Var. =
                                                    (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)                (8)
School received lower grade at the:
Bottom of the grade distribution
  D/F or C/D thresholds                           -0.029    -0.023           -0.003     -0.003          0.006         0.062           0.048               0.08
                                                [0.013]** [0.008]***        [0.004]    [0.010]         [0.014]       [0.062]         [0.067]            [0.206]
     N                                           16,897     16,897          16,897     16,897          16,897         1,604           1,604               309
     Dep. Var. Mean                                0.13       0.07            0.01       0.05            0.09         0.35             0.44               0.92

Top of the grade distribution
  B/C or A/B Thresholds (grouped)                  0.005      0.003          0.001      0.000          0.011          -0.014          -0.003              0.08
                                                  [0.007]    [0.005]        [0.002]    [0.005]        [0.006]*       [0.032]         [0.035]            [0.108]
     N                                            54,672     54,672         54,672     54,672          54,672          3,457           3,457              932
     Dep. Var. Mean                                0.11        0.07           0.01       0.03           0.06           0.34             0.42              0.98
Each observation is a                            Teacher     Teacher        Teacher    Teacher        Teacher        Teacher        Teacher             School
What proportionate coefficient would be
                                                  -0.029      -0.015         -0.002    -0.011
 for the grouped C/D and D/F thresholds
Notes. Table presents regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of school accountability grades on teacher turnover by teacher destination. Columns (1)
through (4) use the payroll data to look at turnovers by destination: Column (1) has overall turnover, and columns (2)-(4) break up departures between the three
main ways teachers can leave the school (retirements, transfers, and stopping working in NYCDOE classrooms). Columns (5)-(8) use the open market transfer
data on submitted transfer applications to look at the effects on whether teachers applied to transfer; whether their transfer application was listed as leading to a
successul transfer in the open market transfer data (col. (6)); whether that application was associated with a transfer in the payroll data (col. (7)); and on the
number of transfer applications received by lower-graded schools (col. (8)). The sample is all teachers teaching in sample schools during the 2008-2009 and
2009-2010 school years and each observation represents one teacher in a given year, except for column (8), where each observation is a school and the regression
is weighted by the number of teachers. Regressions use a bandwidth of 5 grade points. Standard errors are reported in brackets and clustered at the school level.
All regressions include school controls (which include controls for the average previous year's achievement; the previous year's accountability score (second year
only); the percent of students that are black, Hispanic, Asian, that receive free and reduced price lunch, and that are immigrants; fixed effects for school size;
whether the school was in the NYSBP; and five-year average school turnover prior to the institution of accountability), teacher covariates (which include fixed
effects for teacher experience and age, teacher education level, teacher gender, and teacher race) and controls the "RD running variable" (accountability score
relative to the threshold) separately by (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade), as well as controls for (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade) and all of
the main effects and lower-order interactions (e.g., year, schooltype, yearXschooltype, etc.), except column (8) which excludes the set of teacher controls. Data
come from the 2008-09 and 2009-10 school years in the New York City Department of Education.
  Significant at 10%;      significant at 5%;     significant at 1%.
                                               Table 9. Robustness of the Regression Discontinuity Turnover Estimates

                                                                                                                                                          Detailed     Local linear,
                                Specification:               Local linear, different bandwidths and controls                 Quadratic       Cubic         score       school level,
                                                                                                                                                          control        weighted


                                                     5           5           2.5            4            6       10
                                  Bandwidth:                                                                                      10           10             5               5
                                                   (base)      (base)      (base/2)      (base-1)    (base+1) (baseX2)
Ind. Var. = Received lower grade at the:             (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)            (9)           (10)

Bottom of the grade distribution
  D/F or C/D (grouped)                              -0.018   -0.029         -0.033        -0.009      -0.028       -0.022       -0.030       -0.060         -0.017         -0.030
                                                   [0.017] [0.013]**       [0.017]*      [0.014]    [0.014]**     [0.014]      [0.020]     [0.023]***      [0.017]       [0.015]**
      N                                            16,897   16,897          9,882        13,706      18,521       28,452       28,452        28,452        16,897           309
      P-Value: Spec Test                                                                                            0.24         0.53         0.21           0.44           0.34

Top of the grade distribution
  B/C or A/B (grouped)                              0.008       0.005        0.001        0.003       0.002        0.000        0.003        -0.002         0.001          0.005
                                                   [0.008]     [0.007]      [0.010]      [0.007]     [0.006]      [0.005]      [0.007]       [0.010]       [0.003]        [0.007]
      N                                            54,672      54,672       27,627       43,511      64,091       88,132       88,132        88,132        54,672           932
      P-Value: Spec Test                                                                                           0.80         0.78          0.67          0.54           0.86

School covariates?                                   No          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Teacher covariates?                                  No          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            No
Notes. Table presents regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of school accountability grades on teacher turnover. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether
a teacher stopped teaching at the school in the summer after the accountability grade was received. The sample is all teachers teaching in sample schools during the 2008-
2009 and 2009-2010 school years, and each observation represents one teacher in a given year (columns (1)-(9)) or one school in a given year (column (10)). Column (10)
displays the results from column (2) collapsed to the school level instead of the teacher level, with the estimates weighted by the number of teachers at a school. Regressions
control for the “RD running variable” (accountability score relative to the threshold) separately by (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade), as well as controls for
(year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade) and all of the main effects and lower-order interactions (e.g., year, schooltype, yearXschooltype, etc.). The control function is
linear for columns (1)-(6) and (10), quadratic for column (7), and cubic for column (8). School controls include controls for the average previous year's achievement; the
previous year's accountability score (second year only); the percent of students that are black, Hispanic, Asian, that receive free and reduced price lunch, and that are
immigrants; whether the school was in the NYSBP; fixed effects for school size; and five-year average school turnover prior to the institution of accountability. Teacher
covariates include fixed effects for teacher experience and age, teacher education level, teacher gender, and teacher race. Data come from the 2008-09 and 2009-10 school
years in the New York City Department of Education. The specification test tests for discontinuities in the regression function other than at the specified threshold
(specifically, at all points that are a multiple of one point from the true threshold); the p-value represents the p-value from a joint test that there are no discontinuities at any
other points. Significant at 10%; significant at 5%;              significant at 1%.
                                           Table 10. Robustness of the Regression Discontinuity Joiner Quality Estimates
                         Dependent Variable:                                                               Estimated Math VA
                                                                                                                                                               Detailed
                                                                                                                                                                        Local linear,
                                  Specification:               Local linear, different bandwidths and controls                     Quadratic       Cubic        Score
                                                                                                                                                                        school level
                                                                                                                                                               Control
                                                        5            5          2.5       4         6       10
                                    Bandwidth:                                                                                         10            10             5             5
                                                      (base)       (base)     (base/2) (base-1) (base+1) (baseX2)
Ind. Var. = Received lower grade at the:                (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)           (8)          (9)            (10)

Bottom of the grade distribution
  D/F or C/D (grouped)                                0.789    0.869           0.411       0.757     0.888             0.465         0.494         -0.049       0.474          0.869
                                                     [0.34]** [0.34]**         [0.53]     [0.38]** [0.31]***          [0.27]*        [0.38]        [0.53]      [0.19]**       [0.36]**
      N                                                126      126              66         100       146               216           216           216          126             94
      P-Value: Spec Test                                                                                                0.24          0.01          0.58         0.57           0.30

Top of the grade distribution
  B/C or A/B (grouped)                                -0.365       -0.392      -0.434       -0.521      -0.316        -0.077         -0.398        -0.648       -0.070         -0.392
                                                      [0.20]*     [0.20]*      [0.31]     [0.22]**      [0.18]*       [0.14]        [0.23]*       [0.30]**       [0.10]        [0.21]*
      N                                                 379         379         166         288           452          629            629           629           379            269
      P-Value: Spec Test                                                                                               0.72          0.26           0.13          0.19          0.73
School covariates?                                      No          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes
Notes. Table presents regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of school accountability grades on the quality of joiners hired in the subsequent year. The dependent
variable is a teacher’s math value-added; the sample is all joiners to a school at the end of the year, and each observation represents one teacher in a given year, except for
column (10) which collapses the data to the school level and estimates the regression weighted by the number of teachers. Regressions control for the “RD running variable”
(accountability score relative to the threshold) separately by (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade), as well as controls for (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade)
and all of the main effects and lower-order interactions (e.g., year, schooltype, yearXschooltype, etc.). The control function is linear for columns (1)-(6) and (10), quadratic for
column (7), cubic for column (8), and controls for the factors underlying the accountability score in column (9). School covariates include controls for the average previous
year's achievement; the previous year's accountability score (second year only); the percent of students that are black, Hispanic, Asian, that receive free and reduced price lunch,
and that are immigrants; whether the school was in the NYSBP; fixed effects for school size; and five-year average school turnover prior to the institution of accountability. Data
come from the 2008-09 and 2009-10 school years in the New York City Department of Education. The specification test tests for discontinuities in the regression function other
than at the specified threshold (specifically, at all points that are a multiple of one point from the true threshold); the p-value represents the p-value from a joint test that there are
no discontinuities at any other points. Significant at 10%; significant at 5%;             significant at 1%.
     Appendix Figure A1: Relationship between Accountability Scores and Accountability Grades

                             (Each year and schooltype shown separately)

              2008 Elementary Schools                                2009 Elementary Schools




                2008 Middle Schools                                    2009 Middle Schools




                  2008 K-8 Schools                                       2009 K-8 Schools




Notes. For each year and school type, the figures plot the accountability grade received by a school as a
function of the underlying accountability score.


                                                   51
                                                   Appendix Figure A2: Density of Schools Near Grade Thresholds

                                                                             (Each year and schooltype shown separately)


                                                 2008 Elementary Schools                                                                                   2009 Elementary Schools
                          25




                                                                                                                                    25
                                       20




                                                                                                                                                 20
          Number of schools (Full sample)




                                                                                                                    Number of schools (Full sample)
                             15




                                                                                                                                       15
                                                  F                 D       C         B              A                                                      F             D        C           B              A
                  10




                                                                                                                            10
          5




                                                                                                                    5
                          0




                                                                                                                                    0
                                            0         20                 40              60         80   100                                          0         20                 40              60         80       100
                                                                        Accountability score                                                                                      Accountability score



                                                  2008 Middle Schools                                                                                           2009 Middle Schools
                          15




                                                  F                 D        C         B             A                              15                      F                 D        C           B               A
          Number of schools (Full sample)




                                                                                                                    Number of schools (Full sample)
                                10




                                                                                                                                          10
               5




                                                                                                                         5




                                                                                                                    F                                       D             C                B                  A
                                 F                    D         C                B              A
                          0




                                                                                                                                    0




                                            0         20                 40              60         80   100                                          0         20                 40             60          80       100
                                                                        Accountability score                                                                                      Accountability score



                                                          2008 K-8 Schools                                                                                       2009 K-8 Schools
                                                                                                                                    8
                          8
          Number of schools (Full sample)




                                                                                                                    Number of schools (Full sample)
                                                                                                                                               6
                                    6




                                                                                                                                  4
                       4




                                                                                                                      2
            2             0




                                                                                                                                    0




                                            20             40                   60             80        100                                          20             40                  60              80            100
                                                                        Accountability score                                                                                      Accountability score




Notes. For each year and school type, the figures plot the number of schools with a given account-
ability score (specifically, the y-axis shows the number of schools within a 0.5 point bandwidth of the
accountability score displayed on the X-axis). The red lines show the 4 grade thresholds (A/B, B/C, C/D,
and D/F). Evidence of heaping directly adjacent to the grade thresholds line would be a violation of the
regression discontinuity identification assumptions.




                                                                                                               52
                                     Appendix Figure A3: Residual Turnover, by Accountability Score
                                            (version with a fixed number of schools per dot)



                                        Actual Results                                                                    Placebo Results

                                           C/D and D/F                                                                      C/D and D/F
                     .2




                                                                                                      .2
% teachers that left




                                                                                 % teachers that left
            .1




                                                                                             .1
    0




                                                                                     0
             −.1




                          −10       −5           0          5          10                     −.1          −10       −5           0          5          10
                                Score relative to the closest cutoff                                             Score relative to the closest cutoff


                                           A/B and B/C                                                                      A/B and B/C
                     .2




                                                                                                      .2
% teachers that left




                                                                                 % teachers that left
            .1




                                                                                             .1
    0




                                                                                     0
             −.1




                                                                                              −.1




                          −10       −5           0          5          10                                  −10       −5           0          5          10
                                Score relative to the closest cutoff                                             Score relative to the closest cutoff




Notes. Each dot represents 10 schools. The left column plots the actual turnover results. The x-axes show
the schools’ average accountability scores relative to the closest grade threshold (so the grade threshold is
always displayed at 0) and the y-axes show average residual turnover in the summer after the schools re-
ceived their accountability grades. The right column shows placebo turnover results: there, the y-axes show
residual turnover in the year before schools received grades (placebo uses data from the first year only).
Residual turnover is calculated by regressing an indicator for leaving a school on a vector of covariates (see
Table 2 notes for list of covariates). The lines correspond to local polynomial smooth plots, and the shaded
areas represent their 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                            53
                           Appendix Figure A4: Average Math Value-Added of Leavers, by Accountability Score
                                            (version with a fixed number of schools per dot)


                                          Actual Results                                                                 Placebo Results

                                            C/D and D/F                                                                      C/D and D/F
                       2




                                                                                                        2
   Teacher Value−Added




                                                                                    Teacher Value−Added
                 1




                                                                                                  1
            0




                                                                                             0
      −1




                                                                                       −1
 −2




                                                                                  −2
                           −10       −5           0          5          10                                  −10       −5           0          5          10
                                 Score relative to the closest cutoff                                             Score relative to the closest cutoff


                                            A/B and B/C                                                                      A/B and B/C
                       2




                                                                                                        2
   Teacher Value−Added




                                                                                    Teacher Value−Added
                 1




                                                                                                  1
            0




                                                                                             0
      −1




                                                                                       −1
 −2




                                                                                  −2




                           −10       −5           0          5          10                                  −10       −5           0          5          10
                                 Score relative to the closest cutoff                                             Score relative to the closest cutoff




Notes. Each dot represents 10 schools. The left column plots the actual leaver quality results. The x-axes
show the schools’ average accountability scores relative to the closest grade threshold (so the grade threshold
is always displayed at 0). The y-axes show the average value-added of leavers (i.e., of the teachers who left
their schools in the summer after their schools received the accountability score and grade). The right panel
has the placebo results: there, the y-axes show the average value-added of the teachers who left their schools
the year before their schools received the accountability score and grade (placebo uses data from the first
year only). The lines correspond to local polynomial smooth plots, and the shaded areas represent their 95%
confidence intervals.




                                                                             54
                         Appendix Figure A5: Average Math Value-Added of Joiners, by Accountability Score
                                          (version with a fixed number of schools per dot)


                                        Actual Results                                                               Placebo Results

                                          C/D and D/F                                                                    C/D and D/F
                     2




                                                                                                    2
 Teacher Value−Added




                                                                                Teacher Value−Added
                1




                                                                                               1
            0




                                                                                           0
 −2 −1




                                                                                −2 −1
                         −10       −5           0          5          10                                −10       −5           0          5          10
                               Score relative to the closest cutoff                                           Score relative to the closest cutoff


                                          A/B and B/C                                                                    A/B and B/C
                     2




                                                                                                    2
 Teacher Value−Added




                                                                                Teacher Value−Added
                1




                                                                                               1
  −2 −1 0




                                                                                −2 −1      0




                         −10       −5           0          5          10                                −10       −5           0          5          10
                               Score relative to the closest cutoff                                           Score relative to the closest cutoff




Notes. Each dot represents 10 schools. The left panel plots the actual joiner quality results. The x-axes show
the schools’ average accountability scores relative to the closest grade threshold (so the grade threshold is
always displayed at 0). The y-axes show the average value-added of joiners (i.e., of the teachers who joined
schools in the summer after their schools received the accountability score and grade). The right panel has
the placebo results: there, the y-axes show the average value-added of the teachers who joined their schools
the year before their schools received the accountability score and grade (placebo uses data from the first
year only). The lines correspond to local polynomial smooth plots, and the shaded areas represent their 95%
confidence intervals.




                                                                           55
                       Appendix Table A1. McCrary test
                                                               Number of schools
                                        Dependent Variable:
                                                                     in a bin
                                                     Binwidth:   0.5        0.1
Independent Variable:                                            (1)        (2)

Bottom of the grade distribution (C/D and D/F)
  School received lower grade (dummy)                               -2.585     -0.561
                                                                   [3.326]     [0.845]
   N                                                                  20         100

Top of the grade distribution (A/B and B/C)
  School received lower grade (dummy)                              -3.436      -0.807
                                                                   [4.865]     [1.281]
   N                                                                  20         100
Notes. Table shows the results of the McCrary test for gaming. The dependent
variable is the number of schools in a bin, using a binwidth of 0.5 (column (1)) or 0.1
point (column (2)). Each column contains two cells containing the results of two
separate regressions (one with schools at the bottom of the grade distribution, one with
those at the top). Regressions use a bandwidth of 5 grade points. All regressions
include a control for the score relative to the closest threshold, allowed to vary on
either side of the threshold. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. Data come
from the 2007-08 and 2008-09 school years in the New York City Department of
Education, using the report card grade that was received by the school during fall of
the school year. Significant at 10%;        significant at 5%;      significant at 1%.
                       Appendix Table A2. No Selection Into the Analysis Sample
                                                                                                     School was
                                                                                                     part of New
                                                             School is    School
                                                                                       School not       York
                                                  School      missing      being
                       DependentDep.
                                 Variable:
                                     Var.=                                           restructuring at School
                                                  closed      teacher     phased
                                                                                         baseline       Bonus
                                                                data        out
                                                                                                       Program
                                                                                                      (NYSBP)
Independent Variable =
                                                    (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)             (5)
School received lower grade at the:
Bottom of the grade distribution
  D/F or C/D thresholds (grouped)                  0.000      -0.023       0.011         -0.107            0.000
                                                  [0.000]     [0.020]     [0.032]        [0.080]          [0.000]
     N                                              312         312         312            312              312
     Dep. Var. Mean                                0.003       0.006       0.038          0.901            0.173

Top of the grade distribution
  B/C or A/B Thresholds (grouped)                   n/a         n/a        0.007         -0.014            0.000
                                                                          [0.005]        [0.031]          [0.000]
     N                                              932         932         932            932              932
     Dep. Var. Mean                                0.000       0.000       0.002          0.905            0.157

Notes. The table presents regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of school accountability grades on
school characteristics. Regressions use a bandwidth of 5 grade points. Standard errors are reported in brackets
and clustered at the school level. Each observation is a school in a given year. Cols (1) and (2): The sample is all
schools receiving accountability grades, and the dependent variable is an indicator that the school is excluded
from the analysis sample because it closed or was missing teacher data (4 schools total). Cols (3)-(6): The
sample is all non-excluded schools receiving accountability grades. Cols (7) and (8): The sample is all non-
excluded schools that had not started restructuring prior to accountability. School controls include controls for
the average previous year's achievement; the previous year's accountability score (second year only); the percent
of students that are black, hispanic, that receive free and reduced price lunch, and that are immigrants; whether
the school was in the NYSBP; fixed effects for school size; and five-year average school turnover prior to the
institution of accountability. All regressions control for the “RD running variable” (accountability score relative
to the threshold) separately by (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade), as well as controls for
(year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade) and all of the main effects and lower-order interactions (e.g., year,
schooltype, yearXschooltype, etc.). Data come from the 2007-08 and 2008-09 school years in the New York
City Department of Education, using the report card grade that was received by the school during fall of the
school year. Significant at 10%; significant at 5%;             significant at 1%.
                                                                                                  Appendix Table A3. Covariate Balance
Panel A. Teacher characteristics
                                                                                                                       Teacher characteristics                                                                                    Turnover

                                                                                        ELA            Math                                                                                            Has
                                                        Math value-                                                                                                                    Years of                                     Prior
                                Dependent Variable:                     ELA VA        predicted      predicted     Female     White       Asian           Black        Hispanic                       master's       Age
                                                        added (VA)                                                                                                                    experience                                  turnover
                                                                                         VA             VA                                                                                            degree

Independent Variable =                                       (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)            (8)            (9)             (10)          (11)         (12)           (13)
School received lower grade at the:
Bottom of the grade distribution
  D/F or C/D thresholds (grouped)                          0.050          0.012         0.001         0.000        0.009      0.067       -0.006         -0.088          0.028          -0.227         0.002        -0.594         0.008
                                                           [0.10]         [0.08]        [0.00]        [0.00]       [0.02]     [0.06]      [0.01]         [0.05]*         [0.03]         [0.59]         [0.03]       [0.81]         [0.01]
      N                                                     306            306           309           309          309        309         309             309            309            309            309          309            309
  Dep. Var. Mean                                            -0.13         -0.09          0.04          0.01         0.81       0.55        0.04           0.27            0.15            9.28          0.41         40.90          0.17
Top of the grade distribution
  B/C or A/B Thresholds                                    -0.007         -0.003        0.001         0.001         -0.005     -0.046      0.001          0.007          0.039           -0.290        -0.017        -0.069        0.015
                                                          [0.053]        [0.044]       [0.000]       [0.000]*      [0.009]    [0.031]     [0.010]        [0.027]       [0.017]**        [0.310]       [0.017]       [0.457]       [0.008]*
      N                                                     927            928           932           932           932        932         932            932            932             932           932           932           932
  Dep. Var. Mean                                            0.00           0.00          0.04          0.01         0.83       0.61        0.05           0.21            0.14            9.72          0.43         40.97          0.157

Panel B. Student and school characteristics
                                                                                                      Student body characteristics                                                                   School characteristics
                                                                  Previous                                                                                                                                                        Teacher
                                                    Previous year                                                                                                       Poverty      ln(enrollmen    ln(#
                                Dependent Variable:               year ELA             Female         White        Asian       Black     Hispanic      Immigrants                                                 New hires        bonus
                                                     math scores                                                                                                         status            t)     teachers)
                                                                   scores                                                                                                                                                         program
Independent Variable =
                                                             (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)            (8)            (9)             (10)          (11)         (12)           (13)
School received lower grade at the:
Bottom of the grade distribution
  D/F or C/D thresholds (grouped)                          0.016         -0.030         0.004         0.065        -0.016   -0.185   0.135                0.000          0.011          -0.145         -0.133       -0.194         0.049
                                                           [0.08]        [0.08]         [0.01]        [0.05]       [0.02] [0.06]*** [0.06]**              [0.00]         [0.05]         [0.12]         [0.11]       [1.12]         [0.10]
      N                                                     309           309            309           309          309      309      309                  309            309            309            309          309            309
  Dep. Var. Mean                                            -0.25         -0.18          0.49          0.12         0.07       0.42        0.39           0.02            0.71            6.33          3.91         7.78           0.17
Top of the grade distribution
  B/C or A/B Thresholds                                    -0.051         -0.056        0.003          -0.031       -0.031     0.013       0.050          0.003          0.026           0.088         0.041         0.361          -0.012
                                                          [0.059]        [0.059]       [0.005]        [0.031]      [0.024]    [0.038]     [0.035]        [0.003]        [0.031]         [0.065]       [0.059]       [0.637]        [0.046]
    N                                                       932            932           932            932          932        932         932            932            932             932           932           932            932
  Dep. Var. Mean                                            0.03           0.03          0.49           0.15         0.13       0.32        0.39           0.02           0.67            6.43          3.98          6.75           0.16

Notes. This table presents balance tests: regression discontinuity estimates where the outcome variables are teacher (Panel A), student (Panel B, columns (1)-(9)), or school characteristics (Panel B, columns (10)-(13)). Each
observation is a school in a given year. All regressions include controls for the "RD running variable" (specifically, a control for (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade)) and all of the main effects and lower-order interactions
(e.g., year, schooltype, yearXschooltype, etc.), and a dummy for receiving the lower accountability grade at the threshold). Poverty is the percent of students who receive free and reduced price lunch. Prior turnover is the control used
in the regressions, which represents 5-year average turnover before the institution of accountability. Standard errors are reported in brackets. Data come from the 2008-09 and 2009-10 school years. All data from the New York City
Department of Education. ∗ Significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%.
                     Appendix Table A4. Joiner and leaver characteristics: Full set of placebo tests
                         Sample:                       Leavers                                            Joiners
                                    Estimated Predicted >=4 years Has a               Estimated Predicted >=4 years Has a
Independent Var. =                  math VA math VA experience masters                math VA math VA experience masters
                                                                                                                   (
Received lower grade at:                (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)
                                                                                                                   1
Panel A. Both years of accountability system
Bottom of the grade dist.
  D/F and C/D thresholds              0.107       -0.095       -0.033      -0.073       0.241        -0.087       0.036       0.047
                                      [0.17]      [0.09]       [0.05]      [0.04]*      [0.26]       [0.09]       [0.04]    [ [0.03]
      N                                496         2,118       2,118        2,118        227          2,404       2,404       2,404
      Dep. Var. Mean                  -0.16        -0.07        0.52         0.34       -0.11         -0.14        0.24        0.18

Top of the grade dist.
   A/B and B/C thresholds             0.016     -0.032          0.012      -0.006       0.324         0.069       -0.039    [ -0.013
                                      N
                                      [0.10]     [0.05]         [0.03]     [0.03]       [0.17]*      [0.06]       [0.02]    0 [0.02]
      N                               Dep.
                                      1,274Var. Mean
                                                 5,628          5,628      5,628          521        6,292        6,292       6,292
      Dep. Var. Mean                  -0.02        -0.02         0.54       0.36         -0.06        -0.09         0.21       0.17

Panel B. First year of accountability system only

Bottom of the grade dist.
  D/F and C/D thresholds              0.119        0.093       -0.032      -0.118       0.005        0.024        -0.001      0.013
                                      [0.21]       [0.13]      [0.08]     [0.05]**      [0.31]       [0.10]       [0.05]    [ [0.05]
      N                                328         1,392       1,392       1,392         163         1,655        1,655       1,655
      Dep. Var. Mean                  -0.17         0.00        0.55        0.36        -0.14        -0.11         0.24        0.18

Top of the grade dist.                -0.070     -0.019         0.021      -0.056       -0.036       0.040        -0.030      -0.054
  A/B and B/C thresholds              [N0.13]     [0.07]        [0.04]     [0.04]       [0.22]       [0.07]       [0.03]    [[0.03]**
     N                                 Dep.
                                        754 Var. Mean
                                                  3,190         3,190      3,190          334        3,836        3,836       3,836
     Dep. Var. Mean                    -0.04      -0.03          0.54       0.36         -0.06       -0.11         0.21        0.18
Notes. Table presents regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of school accountability grades on the characteristics of the
teachers that leave (leavers) and teachers that are hired by a given school (joiners). Specifically, each observation is a teacher in a
given year. The dependent variable is the estimated math value-added (VA) of the teachers in the sample (columns (1) and (5)),
the predicted math VA of the teachers (columns (2) and (6)), teachers' experience (columns (3) and (7)), or teachers' education
(columns (4) and (8)). The sample is leavers from the school at the end of the year (columns (1)-(4)) and the joiners hired to start
the next year (columns (5)-(8)); panel A shows the results using data for both years of the accountability system while panel B
displays the results using only the first year. Regressions use a bandwidth of 5 grade points. Standard errors are reported in
brackets and clustered at the school level. All regressions control for the “RD running variable” (accountability score relative to
the threshold) separately by (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade), as well as controls for (year)X(schooltype)X(received
lower grade) and all of the main effects and lower-order interactions (e.g., year, schooltype, yearXschooltype, etc.), as well as
school controls (which include controls for the average previous year's achievement; previous year's accountability score (second
year only); the percent of students that are black, Hispanic, Asian, that receive free and reduced price lunch, and that are
immigrants; fixed effects for school size; whether the school was in the NYSBP; and five-year average school turnover prior to the
institution of accountability). Data come from the 2007-08 and 2008-09 school years, with the report card grades used being the
report card that was received by the school during fall of the school year. Significant at 10%; significant at 5%;
significant at 1%.
                                 Appendix Table A5. Effect of School Accountability Grades on School Characteristics

                                                                                     New hires
                                                                        Leavers
                                                                                    i.e., joiners % change in                          % change in
                                                                     (as % current                                     % change in                        Principal
                                         Dependent Variable:                       (as % current    number                             pupil teacher
                                                                        number                                         enrollment                         turnover
                                                                                       number      teachers                                ratio
                                                                       teachers)
                                                                                      teachers)
Independent Var. =
                                                                           (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)
School received lower grade at the:
Bottom of the grade distribution
  D/F or C/D thresholds (grouped)                                        -0.03            -0.01            0.02             0.01            -0.01            0.00
                                                                       [0.015]**         [0.015]         [0.018]          [0.029]          [0.032]         [0.079]
       N                                                                  309              309             309              306              306             290
       Dep. Var. Mean                                                     0.14            0.10            -0.03            -0.06            -0.01            0.08

Top of the grade distribution
  B/C or A/B Thresholds (grouped)                                        0.00             -0.01           -0.01            -0.02            -0.01           0.00
                                                                        [0.007]          [0.008]         [0.008]          [0.013]          [0.015]         [0.035]
       N                                                                  932              932             932              931              931             877
       Dep. Var. Mean                                                    0.12             0.09            -0.02            -0.03            -0.01           0.08
Notes. The table presents regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of school accountability grades on school size. Regressions use a bandwidth of 5 grade
points. Standard errors are reported in brackets and clustered at the school level. Each observation is a school in a given year. All regressions control for the “RD
running variable” (accountability score relative to the threshold) separately by (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade), as well as controls for
(year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade) and all of the main effects and lower-order interactions (e.g., year, schooltype, yearXschooltype, etc.) and school
controls (which include controls for the average previous year's achievement; previous year's accountability score (second year only); the percent of students that
are black, Hispanic, Asian, that receive free and reduced price lunch, and that are immigrants; whether the school was in the NYSBP; fixed effects for school size;
and five-year average school turnover prior to the institution of accountability). Columns (1) through (5) estimated weighted by the number of teachers in a school.
Data come from the 2008-09 and 2009-10 school years in the New York City Department of Education, using the report card grade that was received by the school
during fall of the school year. Significant at 10%;      significant at 5%;     significant at 1%.
       Appendix Table A6. Other Robustness Checks for the Regression Discontinuity Turnover Estimates
                                                                 Dependent Variable = Teacher Left School
                                                                   Bounding - Bounding -
                                                                    includes   includes
                                                                     closing    closing
                                                           Sample    school,    school,
                                                          excludes assuming assuming Transfers
                                                           phase-     99th        1st    include
                                                Base         out   percentile percentile mid-year                  2008       2009
Independent Var. =                             sample      schools turnover    turnover departures                 Only       Only
School received lower grade at the:              (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)            (5)         (6)        (7)
Bottom of the grade distribution
  D/F or C/D thresholds                        -0.029    -0.028    -0.029              -0.029         -0.030    -0.027 -0.022
                                             [0.013]** [0.013]** [0.013]**           [0.013]**      [0.014]** [0.014]** [0.029]
       N                                       16,897      14,348       16,936         16,936        16,687       11,436      5,461
Top of the grade distribution
  B/C or A/B Thresholds                         0.005       0.002        0.005          0.005         0.004        0.010      -0.002
                                               [0.007]     [0.007]      [0.007]        [0.007]       [0.007]      [0.009]    [0.010]
       N                                       54,672      47,919       54,672         54,672        54,131       28,575     26,097
Notes. The table presents regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of school accountability grades on turnover. Regressions
use a bandwidth of 5 grade points. Standard errors are reported in brackets and clustered at the school level. Each observation is a
teacher in a given year. Columns (1) and (5)-(7) use the base analysis sample which excludes schools undergoing restructuring;
column (2) excludes schools that were in the process of being phased out. Columns (3)-(4) perform a bounding exercise to show
whether the one closing school affects the results by including the closing school and assuming either turnover at the 99th
percentile of the cross-school distribution (42%) or the 1st percentile (0%). The dependent variable is an indicator that the teacher
left the school, either between May of one year and November of the following year (all columns except (5)) or between
November of one year and November of the following year (column (5)). Column (6) only includes schools from the 2007-08
school year, and column (7) only includes schools from the 2008-09 school year. All regressions control for the “RD running
variable” (accountability score relative to the threshold) separately by (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade), as well as
controls for (year)X(schooltype)X(received lower grade) and all of the main effects and lower-order interactions (e.g., year,
schooltype, yearXschooltype, etc.), school covariates (which include controls for the average previous year's achievement; the
previous year's accountability score (second year only); the percent of students that are black, Hispanic, Asian, that receive free
and reduced price lunch, and that are immigrants; whether the school was in the NYSBP; fixed effects for school size; and five-
year average school turnover prior to the institution of accountability), and teacher covariates (which include fixed effects for
teacher experience and age, teacher education level, teacher   race, and teacher gender). Data come from the 2007-08 and 2008-09
                                                            78.3333
school years in the New York City Department of Education, using the report card grade that was received by the school during
fall of the school year. Significant at 10%; significant at 5%;           significant at 1%.
                                                    Appendix Table A7. Main results estimated with vs. without schools directly on threshold

    Description                                               Turnover                                  Leaver Value-Added                                                 Joiner Value-added
    Dependent Variable                                Teacher Left School               Estimated math VA                Predicted math VA                 Estimated math VA                Predicted math VA
                                                                       Non-                              Non-                            Non-                               Non-                            Non-
                                      Sample:          Full
                                                                   restructuring
                                                                                          Full
                                                                                                     restructuring
                                                                                                                          Full
                                                                                                                                     restructuring
                                                                                                                                                            Full
                                                                                                                                                                        restructuring
                                                                                                                                                                                            Full
                                                                                                                                                                                                        restructuring
                                                        (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)                (7)             (8)             (9)            (10)
Bottom of the grade distribution (C/D and
  Base sample                                         -0.029          -0.030            -0.028          -0.150          0.124           0.021             0.869           0.887            0.164           0.214
                                                    [0.013]**       [0.014]**           [0.21]          [0.24]          [0.10]          [0.12]           [0.34]**        [0.38]**          [0.11]         [0.11]**
      N                                              16,897          14,617               479             385           2,228           1,765               126             113            1,493           1,339
      Dep. Var. Mean                                   0.13            0.12              -0.12           -0.09          -0.07           -0.07              -0.12           -0.12           -0.05            -0.04

    Sample Excl. Schools on Threshold                 -0.029          -0.031            -0.022          -0.145          0.113           0.004             0.904           0.932            0.181           0.234
                                                    [0.014]**       [0.015]**           [0.21]          [0.25]          [0.10]          [0.12]           [0.39]**        [0.42]**         [0.11]*         [0.11]**
      N                                              16,806          14,526               475             381           2,221           1,758               122             109            1,484           1,330
      Dep. Var. Mean                                   0.13            0.12              -0.11           -0.09          -0.07           -0.07              -0.11           -0.12           -0.05            -0.04


Top of the grade distribution
  Base sample                                         0.005           0.003             -0.130          -0.145           0.119           0.117            -0.392          -0.374           0.023           0.009
                                                     [0.007]         [0.007]            [0.10]          [0.10]         [0.05]**        [0.05]**           [0.20]*         [0.22]*          [0.07]          [0.07]
      N                                              54,672          47,967             1,194             999           5,916           5,056               379             339            4,251           3,765
      Dep. Var. Mean                                   0.11            0.11              -0.05           -0.05           -0.03           -0.01             -0.09           -0.11           -0.05           -0.04

    Sample Excl. Schools on Threshold                 0.005           0.003             -0.128          -0.143          0.121            0.118            -0.370           -0.354          0.032           0.019
                                                     [0.007]         [0.007]            [0.10]          [0.10]         [0.05]**        [0.05]**           [0.20]*          [0.22]          [0.07]          [0.07]
      N                                              54,585          47,880             1,189             994           5,900           5,040               377              337           4,239           3,753
      Dep. Var. Mean                                   0.11            0.11              -0.05           -0.05           -0.03           -0.01             -0.09            -0.11          -0.05           -0.04



Notes. Table presents the main estimates from the paper, and then re-estimates those results excluding any schools that fall directly on a grade threshold to address concerns with potential biases that could
arise from including those schools. Specifically, columns (1) and (2) replicate the main turnover results (columns (1) and (2) from Table 2), and columns (3) - (10) replicate the main joiner and leaver value-
added results (columns (1) - (8) of Table 3), both including and excluding the schools that fall directly on a grade threshold. See table notes from Tables 2 and 3 for the details of the specifications including
control variables included. All regressions use a bandwidth of 5 grade points. ∗ Significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%.
!
                                                    Appendix Table A8. Main RD results shown separately for the individual thresholds

    Description                                     Turnover                                Leaver Value-Added                                                 Joiner Value-added
    Dependent Variable                     Teacher Left School               Estimated math VA               Predicted math VA                 Estimated math VA               Predicted math VA
                                                             Non-                             Non-                           Non-                              Non-                            Non-
                            Sample:          Full
                                                         restructuring
                                                                              Full
                                                                                          restructuring
                                                                                                              Full
                                                                                                                         restructuring
                                                                                                                                                Full
                                                                                                                                                           restructuring
                                                                                                                                                                                Full
                                                                                                                                                                                           restructuring
                                             (1)               (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)               (7)             (8)             (9)            (10)
Bottom of the grade distribution
  C/D and D/F Pooled                       -0.029           -0.030           -0.028          -0.150          0.124           0.021            0.869           0.887           0.164           0.214
                                         [0.013]**        [0.014]**          [0.21]          [0.24]          [0.10]          [0.12]          [0.34]**        [0.38]**         [0.11]         [0.11]**
      N                                   16,897           14,617              479             385           2,228           1,765              126             113           1,493           1,339
      Dep. Var. Mean                        0.13             0.12             -0.12           -0.09          -0.07           -0.07             -0.12           -0.12          -0.05            -0.04
    D/F Threshold                           -0.023         -0.049            -0.252         -0.668          0.318           0.353             2.125           3.382           0.096           0.107
                                           [0.034]        [0.026]*           [0.33]         [0.39]*        [0.16]**        [0.17]**          [0.92]**       [0.53]***         [0.19]          [0.20]
      N                                     5,194          4,325               185            137             876             630               37              34             470             429
      Dep. Var. Mean                         0.17           0.15              -0.17          -0.11           -0.05           -0.07             -0.17          -0.13           -0.04           -0.05
    C/D
    D/F Threshold                           -0.021          -0.022           0.000           -0.068          0.147           0.026             0.251          0.261           0.162           0.194
                                           [0.014]         [0.015]           [0.22]          [0.24]          [0.10]          [0.11]            [0.43]         [0.44]          [0.12]          [0.12]
      N                                    13,706          12,100             357              306           1,614           1,359              105             95            1,203           1,080
      Dep. Var. Mean                         0.12            0.11            -0.08            -0.08          -0.10           -0.07             -0.12          -0.14           -0.05           -0.03
Top of the grade distribution
  A/B and B/C Pooled                        0.005           0.003            -0.130          -0.145          0.119           0.117            -0.392          -0.374          0.023           0.009
                                           [0.007]         [0.007]           [0.10]          [0.10]        [0.05]**        [0.05]**           [0.20]*         [0.22]*         [0.07]          [0.07]
      N                                    54,672          47,967            1,194             999          5,916           5,056               379             339           4,251           3,765
      Dep. Var. Mean                         0.11            0.11             -0.05           -0.05          -0.03           -0.01             -0.09           -0.11          -0.05           -0.04

    B/C
    D/F Threshold                           0.003           -0.001           -0.012          -0.035         0.148           0.150             -0.253          -0.333          -0.021          -0.057
                                           [0.009]         [0.009]           [0.13]          [0.13]        [0.07]**        [0.07]**           [0.29]          [0.35]          [0.09]          [0.09]
      N                                    29,085          24,411              675             544          3,228           2,676               188             162           2,300           1,993
      Dep. Var. Mean                         0.11            0.11             -0.11           -0.12          -0.06           -0.03             -0.01           -0.04           -0.07           -0.07

    A/B Threshold                           0.008           0.004            -0.286         -0.277           0.061           0.058            -0.599          -0.470          0.052           0.073
                                           [0.010]         [0.010]          [0.14]**        [0.15]*          [0.08]          [0.08]          [0.30]**         [0.28]*         [0.10]          [0.10]
      N                                    25,587          23,556             519             455            2,688           2,380              191             177           1,951           1,772
      Dep. Var. Mean                         0.11            0.10             0.03           0.02             0.00            0.01             -0.16           -0.17          -0.03           -0.01

Notes. Table presents the main estimates from the paper separately for the individual grade thresholds. Specifically, columns (1) and (2) replicate the main turnover results (columns (1) and (2)
from Table 2) separately by grade threshold, and columns (3) - (10) replicate the main joiner and leaver value-added results (columns (1) - (8) of Table 3). See table notes from Tables 2 and 3 for
the details of the specifications including control variables included. All regressions use a bandwidth of 5 grade points. ∗ Significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%.
!
              Appendix Table A9. Other Robustness Checks for the Regression Discontinuity Joiner Quality Estimates
                                                                                    Dependent Variable = Math Value-Added
                                                                                    Sample
                                                                                                                                   Sample excludes
                                                                                   excludes
                                                     Sample: Base sample                           2008 Only        2009 Only        joiners from
                                                                                   phase-out
                                                                                                                                    failed schools
                                                                                    schools
Independent Variable =
                                                                      (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)                (5)
School received lower grade at the:
Bottom of the grade distribution
  C/D and D/F thresholds (grouped)                                   0.87             0.88             0.58            1.14               1.01
                                                                   [0.34]**         [0.38]**          [0.43]          [0.68]*          [0.37]***
         N                                                           126              112               84               42               122

Top of the grade distribution
  A/B and C/D thresholds (grouped)                                   -0.39           -0.37             -0.25            -0.18            -0.39
                                                                    [0.20]*         [0.22]*           [0.32]           [0.25]           [0.20]*
         N                                                           379              339              178              201               375
School and teacher covariates                                         Yes             Yes              Yes              No                Yes

Notes. Table presents regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of school accountability grades on the quality of joiners hired in the
subsequent year, using different samples. Each observation is a teacher in a given year, the dependent variable is the math value-added of the
teachers in the sample. Regressions use a bandwidth of 5 grade points. Standard errors are reported in brackets and clustered at the school level.
Each observation is a teacher in a given year. Cols (1), (3), (4) and (5) use the base analysis sample; col (2) excludes schools that were in the
process of being phased out. Column (3) only includes schools from the 2007-08 school year (so teachers that joined at the beginning of the
2008-09 year), and Column (4) only includes schools from the 2008-09 school year (joiners in 2009-10). Due to a low number of observations,
                 Appendix Table A10. Descriptive Statistics for the Sample of Schools Not Undergoing Restructuring

                                                                   All schools
                                                                                            Not-Restructuring Sample, by Accountability Grade
                                                                         Not-
                                                                 Full Restructuri
                                                               sample ng Sample               A            B            C            D            F
Panel A: Teacher Characteristics
  % Teachers with Master's Degree                                0.43         0.44          0.46         0.45         0.43         0.39         0.44
  Teacher Experience (years)                                     9.79         9.81          9.89         10.01        9.69         9.21         9.35
  Estimated Math Value-Added                                    -0.02        -0.01          0.11         0.00         -0.06        -0.11        -0.24
  Estimated ELA Value-Added                                     -0.03        -0.01          0.08         0.00         -0.07        -0.03        -0.16
  Predicted Math Value-Added                                     0.12         0.14          0.17         0.15         0.13         0.06         0.07
  Predicted ELA Value-Added                                      0.09         0.09          0.09         0.08         0.09         0.09         0.01
  % Teachers that are:
    Female                                                      0.83         0.84           0.85         0.84          0.84         0.81         0.82
    Black                                                       0.20         0.19           0.15         0.18          0.21         0.29         0.22
    Non-Hispanic White                                          0.61         0.63           0.67         0.65          0.61         0.53         0.65
    Hispanic                                                    0.14         0.13           0.13         0.12          0.13         0.15         0.09
   Asian                                                        0.05         0.04           0.05         0.05          0.04         0.03         0.04
  Turnover                                                      0.11         0.11           0.10         0.10          0.11         0.14         0.12
     Retirement                                                 0.01         0.01           0.01         0.01          0.01         0.01         0.01
     Intra-district transfers                                   0.04         0.03           0.03         0.03          0.04         0.05         0.05
     Exited NYCDOE teacher files                                0.07         0.07           0.06         0.06          0.07         0.08         0.07

  Sample Size: Teacher-Year Observations (Base Sample)
    All                                              71,677                 62,692         11,263       26,392       18,352        5,728         957
    With Math Value-Added Data only                  19,092                 16,572         2,912         7,081        4,784        1,569         226
  Sample Size: Unique Teachers (Base Sample)
    All                                              50,616                 44,303
    With Math Value-Added Data only                  13,202                 11,499

Panel B: School Characteristics
  Enrollment                                                     809         783             656          685          667          567          492
  % Students that are:
   Black                                                        0.32         0.32           0.28         0.32          0.38         0.46         0.39
   Non-Hispanic White                                           0.15         0.17           0.17         0.17          0.16         0.09         0.18
   Hispanic                                                     0.40         0.37           0.37         0.38          0.36         0.40         0.37
   Asian                                                        0.12         0.13           0.18         0.13          0.09         0.04         0.06
   Immigrants                                                   0.02         0.02           0.01         0.02          0.01         0.01         0.01
  Components of Accountability Grades
   Environment Score                                             7.43        7.58           9.33         8.12         6.97         6.05         6.54
   Performance Score                                            15.11       15.39           18.62        15.86        14.12        11.46        9.65
   Progress Score                                               26.67       26.54           34.31        29.33        21.75        16.02        11.63
   Additional Credit                                             2.18        2.13           3.17         2.31         1.17         0.72         0.24
      Overall Score                                             51.40       51.65           65.45        55.64        44.02        34.26        28.07
  Other characteristics
   NY School Bonus Program                                      0.15         0.13           0.13         0.15          0.14         0.17         0.18
   Being phased outa                                            0.01         0.01           0.00         0.00          0.00         0.04         0.05
   Not restructuring at baselineb                               0.87         1.00           1.00         1.00          1.00         1.00         1.00
  Sample Size: Schools
     Number of school-year observations                         1,243       1,123            207          456          323          115           22
     Number of unique schools                                    847         766
 Notes. Data come from the 2007-08 and 2008-09 school years in the New York City Department of Education. The accountability grade is the
 school report card grade that was received by the school during fall of the school year. Sample here limited to the sample used for the base
 turnover analysis: schools within a 5-point bandwidth of one of the grade thresholds. For all columns except the first, sample also limited to
 schools that were not undergoing restructuring prior to the institution of the accountability system (i.e., that were not in year 2+ of restructuring
 in the 2007-08 school year).
 a. Phase outs proxied for by schools that received accountability grades in one year but not the subsequent year
 b. Schools that were not undergoing restructuring prior to the institution of the accountability system (i.e., that were not in year 2+ of
 restructuring in the 2007-08 school year).
           Appendix Table A11. Correlates of teacher mobility

                                 Dep. Var.:         Teacher left school
Independent Variables:                              (1)             (2)
Years of experience                            -0.00208***       -0.00125***
                                                [0.000254]        [0.000227]
Has masters                                     -0.0180***       -0.0126***
                                                 [0.00324]        [0.00282]
Female                                          -0.0410***       -0.00860***
                                                 [0.00443]        [0.00322]
Black                                             0.00424        -0.0424***
                                                 [0.00502]        [0.00390]
Hispanic                                        -0.0164***       -0.0406***
                                                 [0.00427]        [0.00420]
School Fixed Effects?                                No              Yes
Notes. Table presents regressions of teacher mobility on teacher
characteristics. Each observation is a teacher in a given year. Data comes from
the pre-accountability era (2007 school year). Standard errors clustered at the
school level.
∗ Significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%.
A     Value-Added Estimation
To estimate teacher value-added, I follow an approach that has been experimentally validated in the
economics of education literature (Kane and Staiger, 2008) and estimate the following regression using
the matched student-teacher panel:

            Ai jgt = a + b1 Ai, j   1,g 1,t 1 + b2 Ā i, j 1,g 1,t 1 + b3 Xi + tt   + tg + t j + h jt + ei jgt          (2)

where Ai jgt is the achievement score (either mathematics or English Language Arts, standardized by year
and grade) of student i in the classroom of teacher j in grade g and year t; Ai, j                  1,g 1,t 1    is the stu-
dent’s lagged achievement; Ā       i, j 1,g 1,t 1   represents the average previous-year achievement of student
i’s classmates (to control for peer effects); Xi are student demographics (e.g., gender, ethnicity, eligibil-
ity for free-and-reduced-price-lunch); the t terms represent fixed effects for the year, the grade, and the
teacher, respectively; and h jt and ei jgt represent classroom-level and individual-level error terms, both
mean zero and assumed to be independently and identically distributed over time. Following the litera-
ture (e.g., Jackson (2012)), in order to have estimates that are comparable across schools, I omit school
fixed effects, but the results are quantitatively very similar if I instead estimate using school fixed effects.
I only use data from years before the institution of accountability in order to isolate teacher quality from
teacher responses to accountability.
    I then follow the approach outlined in Kane and Staiger (2008) and Jackson (2009) to create Empirical
Bayes (EB) estimates of teacher value-added. Although the estimates obtained by estimating equation
2 directly are consistent (under identifying restrictions), they are not efficient. EB estimates are more
efficient, providing the Best Linear Predictor of the random teacher effect in equation 2, which is also
the posterior mean with normally distributed errors. Consider the error term in equation 2, wi jgt ⌘
t j + h jt + ei jgt . It is the sum of the teacher effect, assumed constant across years, a mean-zero year-
specific classroom error, and a mean-zero year-specific student error. To construct EB estimate, I need
to estimate the variance of each component. To do this, I first estimate equation 2 using OLS. For the
teacher effect, I calculate the mean residual, by teacher, in each year, and use the covariance between these




                                                            67
residuals in adjacent years as the estimate of the variance of the teacher effect, sˆt2 = Cov(w̄ jgt , w̄ jgt                   1 ).
                                                                                                                                       47


For the variance of the student effect, I calculate the variance of the student residuals after the classroom
mean residual has been removed: sˆe2 = Var(wi jgt                  w̄ jgt ). Finally, under the assumption that all three
components of the error term are orthogonal to each other, I calculate the variance of the classroom
term as the variance of the total error term minus the variance of the teacher and student components:
sˆh2 = Var(wi jgt )    sˆt2   sˆe2 .
       Next, I compute a raw estimate of a teacher’s effect as a weighted average of their classroom residuals
                                                                                                T           (sh2 +se2 /N jt )    1
(w̄ jgt ), where each classroom is weighted by the inverse of its variance: tˆj = Ât=1
                                                                                    j
                                                                                       w̄ jgt              Tj                              ,
                                                                                                         Ât=1 (sh2 +se2 /N jt )        1

where N jt is the number of students in classroom jt and T j is the total number of classrooms for teacher
j.
       Finally, I weight this estimate by an estimate of the precision of the teacher’s effect to form the
                                                         st2
empirical Bayes estimate: tˆj EB = tˆj            Tj                           .
                                            st +[Ât=1 (sh +se2 /N jt ) 1 ] 1
                                             2          2

       Since the identification of true teacher value-added depends on strong identification assumptions, e.g.,
that assignment of students to teachers is orthogonal to the student error term ei jgt in equation 2, recent
literature has highlighted the potential biases of value-added measures (e.g., Rothstein (2010)). However,
given the RD framework, my identification requirements are less stringent than if I was, say, trying to
evaluate teachers based on the estimates. The RD results would only be biased if, conditional on the
accountability score, there were differences in the average school-level bias of the value-added estimates
that was correlated with the grades. Since the value-added was calculated using pre-period data, this is
unlikely. Of greater concern is the comprehensiveness of the value-added estimates: if there are aspects
of teacher quality which are not summarized well in teacher value-added measures (which is likely), then
my analysis will not incorporate these aspects.
A.1        Calculation of Predicted VA

To compute teacher predicted VA, I follow the approach used in Jackson (2012) and estimate an equation
of student achievement (with the inclusion of observable teacher characteristics) on students, using the
     47 This
         is slightly different from the procedure used by Kane and Staiger (2008) and Jackson (2009), who use the covariance
between adjacent classroom-level residuals instead of teacher-level residuals since they both use elementary data only in which
the majority of teachers only teach one classroom.



                                                               68
same period of data used above for calculating teacher VA. Specifically, I estimate the following equation:



          Ai jgt = a + b1 Ai, j   1,g 1,t 1 + b2 Ā i, j 1,g 1,t 1 + b3 Xi + b4W jt   + b5W j + tt + tg + h jt + ei jgt   (3)

where all variables are defined as before, and the equation now omits the teacher fixed effect t j but
includes W jt which captures time-varying teacher characteristics (i.e., experience), and W j which is a
vector of observable teacher characteristics (e.g., education and demographics). Using the estimates
from equation (3), I predict teacher effectiveness using the observable teacher characteristics. Specifi-
cally, the predicted VA for teacher j is bˆ4W jt + bˆ5W j (i.e., the predicted VA associated with teacher j’s
experience, education, and demographics). This measure serves as a useful summary statistic for all of
the observable teacher characteristics. It is a weighted average of a teacher’s observable characteristics,
where the weights are determined by the characteristics’ relationship with actual student achievement.
The advantage of this measure is that it can be calculated for all teachers irrespective of when they enter
the data.48 Unfortunately, I do not have as extensive observable teacher characteristics as some previous
papers (e.g., Jackson (2012)) to be able to do the prediction.

B Regression Discontinuity Bandwidth Selection
Since there is no universally agreed-upon method for determining bandwidth for an RD analysis, I follow
the standard approach of examining the robustness of the results to different bandwidths.
    To select the base bandwidth used for the analyses, I follow the “leave one out” cross-validation
procedure of Ludwig and Miller (2007) and Lee and Lemieux (2010) in which I estimate locally linear
models at different bandwidths while omitting one observation, calculate the cross-validation criterion
as the average squared difference between the predicted and actual values for the omitted observations,
and choose the bandwidth that minimizes the cross-validation criterion. The optimal bandwidth using
covariates for both the upper and lower thresholds was 5 and so I use that as my base bandwidth for the
regressions. When looking at the value-added outcomes and using as my samples either the joiners or
the leavers, the optimal bandwidths ranged from 2-7, with the median 4. For consistency, I adopt the
  48 I   have test score data from both elementary and middle schools so the measure is defined for all school levels.



                                                                69
turnover bandwidth (5) for my base bandwidth and then show robustness to different bandwidths in the
robustness section (Section 6, Tables 9 and 10).
    To check robustness, I also calculate a version of the Imbens-Kalyanarman (IK) optimal bandwidth
(Imbens and Kalyanaraman, 2012).49 For the turnover outcomes, these range from 4-6 with a median
of 5, and for the value-added, they range from 2-5 with a median of 3; all of these are in the ranges of
bandwidths displayed in the robustness tables (Tables 9 and 10).
    For the graphs, I show a bandwidth two times wider than the base bandwidth used in the regressions
to give a better sense of the regression function.




  49 The  IK formula is not developed for the pooled threshold model I use here, where I interact the running variable for
indicators for which threshold (school type and year) a given observation is at. I try two modifications to the IK procedure to
try to get reasonable estimates within the pooled setting. First, I simply ignore the fact that I am pooling across thresholds,
so calculate the IK bandwidth that would be appropriate if there were no interactions with the running variable. Second, I
calculate the IK bandwidth separately for each threshold (i.e., for each school type and year). I then calculate the weighted
average of the separate bandwidths (weighted by the relative sample sizes), where all are normalized by their sample sizes.
Finally, I normalize the averaged bandwidth by the total sample size. In practice, the two methods yield nearly identical
results.


                                                             70
