                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EFFECTS OF ACCESS TO LEGAL SAME-SEX MARRIAGE ON MARRIAGE AND HEALTH:
                         EVIDENCE FROM BRFSS

                                    Christopher Carpenter
                                      Samuel T. Eppink
                                     Gilbert Gonzales Jr.
                                        Tara McKay

                                     Working Paper 24651
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24651


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2018


Carpenter is Professor of Economics at Vanderbilt University, Research Associate at the National
Bureau of Economic Research, and Research Fellow at IZA Institute for the Study of Labor.
Eppink is a PhD candidate at Vanderbilt University. Gonzales is Assistant Professor of Health
Policy at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine. McKay is Assistant Professor of
Medicine, Health, and Society at Vanderbilt University. We thank Ron Stall for sharing data on
LGBT policies. For helpful comments, we thank: David Adler, Cevat Aksoy, Ralph De Haas,
Marcus Dillender, Jae Downing, Kerry Anne McGeary and Justin Trogdon; participants at
the 2018 American Society of Health Economics conference, the 2018 Workshop on
Institutions, Individual Behavior, and Economic Outcomes, and the 2018 Population
Association of America conference; and seminar participants at AHRQ, Hunter College,
RAND, UIUC, U. Louisville, UNC-Charlotte, and Vanderbilt. Support for this research was
provided by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. The views expressed here do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Foundation or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All
interpretations, errors, and omissions are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Christopher Carpenter, Samuel T. Eppink, Gilbert Gonzales Jr., and Tara McKay. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage on Marriage and Health: Evidence from BRFSS
Christopher Carpenter, Samuel T. Eppink, Gilbert Gonzales Jr., and Tara McKay
NBER Working Paper No. 24651
June 2018
JEL No. I1,K0

                                          ABSTRACT

We exploit variation in access to legal same-sex marriage (SSM) across states and time to provide
novel evidence of its effects on marriage and health using data from the CDC BRFSS from
2000-2016, a period spanning the entire rollout of legal SSM across the United States. Our main
approach is to relate changes in outcomes for individuals in same-sex households (SSH) [i.e.,
households with exactly two same-sex adults], which we show includes a substantial share of gay
and lesbian couples, coincident with adoption of legal SSM in two-way fixed effects models. We
find robust evidence that access to legal SSM significantly increased marriage take-up among
men and women in SSH. We also find that legal SSM was associated with significant increases
in health insurance, access to care, and utilization for men in SSH. Our results provide the first
evidence that legal access to SSM improved health for adult gay men.


Christopher Carpenter                           Gilbert Gonzales Jr.
Department of Economics                         Department of Health Policy
Vanderbilt University                           Vanderbilt University
VU Station B, Box #351819                       School of Medicine
2301 Vanderbilt Place                           2525 West End Ave, 1200
Nashville, TN 37235                             Nashville, TN 37203
and NBER                                        gilbert.gonzales@vanderbilt.edu
christopher.s.carpenter@vanderbilt.edu
                                                Tara McKay
Samuel T. Eppink                                Department of Economics
Department of Economics                         Vanderbilt University
Vanderbilt University                           2301 Vanderbilt Place
2301 Vanderbilt Place                           Nashville TN 37235
Nashville TN 37235                              Tara.mckay@vanderbilt.edu
samuel.t.eppink@vanderbilt.edu
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




1. Introduction

Advancements in civil rights for and changes in social attitudes about lesbian,

gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) individuals in the United States represent

some of the most striking social changes in recent decades. In the policy arena

these shifts have been reflected in a major Supreme Court ruling in 2015,

Obergefell v. Hodges, which effectively legalized same-sex marriage (SSM) in

the eyes of the federal government throughout the US. Prior to Obergefell,

however, a series of state-level court rulings and legislative actions dating back to

a 2004 court case in Massachusetts created a complex legal patchwork of access

to legal SSM across space and time, such that nine states adopted same-sex

marriage without the associated federal rights and responsibilities (such as equal

tax treatment, immigration rights, and others). A June 2013 Supreme Court ruling

in United States v. Windsor gave federal marriage recognition to same-sex

couples that wed in states with legal recognition but did not require other states to

recognize those marriages. This uncertain legal landscape was exacerbated as

more states adopted marriage equality in late 2013 and throughout 2014 until

nationwide legal access to federally recognized same-sex marriage was granted in

June 2015 with the Obergefell ruling (see Figure 1).

        Despite the strong theoretical possibility that these fundamental changes in

access to marriage had meaningful effects on the lives of sexual minorities, we

know strikingly little about how these policies affected outcomes.              This




                                               1
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




knowledge gap is due primarily to data limitations: very few datasets include

information that could plausibly identify gay men, lesbians, and bisexual

individuals, and most of the small number of datasets that do include sexual

orientation information did not pre-date legal access to SSM, thus precluding

most gold-standard quasi-experimental approaches to study this research question.

A handful of studies have examined how legal access to SSM has affected

population-wide health outcomes such as sexually transmitted infections or youth

suicide ideation and attempt, but little work has studied outcomes such as direct

take-up of marriage, health insurance, healthcare access, and health.

        In this paper we provide new evidence on these questions by using data

from the 2000-2016 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) and

exploiting spatial and temporal variation in access to legal SSM induced by state

and federal court rulings and legislative activity. The BRFSS did not include

direct questions about sexual orientation over most of our sample period, so our

analysis relies on a novel method for indirectly identifying a sample that is most

likely to be directly affected by legal SSM. Specifically, we follow previous

BRFSS-based research that makes use of information on the sex composition of

adults in the household – which is ascertained in the household screener portion

of the survey – to identify a sample that is likely to contain a nontrivial share of

gay and lesbian couples. That is, we identify a treatment group composed of

individuals who report exactly two same-sex adults in the household and exactly




                                               2
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




zero different-sex adults in the household.        Through a variety of direct and

indirect measures, we estimate that 11-28 percent of individuals in households

with exactly two same-sex adults are likely to be sexual minorities.           For

individuals in this household structure who also report being married, the relevant

share is even higher: 46-60 percent.

        We also make use of individuals in other household configurations as

plausible falsification samples. For example, we estimate that about 99 percent of

individuals who report exactly one male adult and one female adult in the

household are heterosexual (most of whom are likely to be straight couples). The

key advantage and innovation of our measurement approach is that it allows us to

identify a meaningful sample size of ‘same-sex male adult’ and ‘same-sex female

adult’ households that pre-dates all of the policy variation in legal access to SSM

in a dataset that includes key family structure and health-related outcomes that

have not previously been studied in this literature. This allows us to consider new

and important health outcomes while at the same time properly addressing issues

of causal inference.       We also address several potential concerns with our

approach, including the possibility that household structure itself (i.e., the

probability of observing any household with exactly two adults or exactly two

same-sex adults) could be endogenously related to legal access to SSM, and we

show that this is not pervasive.




                                               3
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




        Our main empirical approach is a standard difference-in-differences (DD)

model that examines the sample of individuals in same-sex households and

leverages state variation in the timing of legal access to SSM with state and time

fixed effects, controlling also for individual characteristics and other aspects of

the policy environment toward sexual minorities (e.g., nondiscrimination laws,

domestic partner/civil union laws, state bans on same-sex marriage, and others).

The DD model assumes that these outcomes for individuals in same-sex

households would have trended similarly in states with and without legal access to

SSM in the absence of the change in legal regime. We first focus directly on

marriage take-up, and we then consider a range of health-related outcomes,

including having any health insurance plan, having a regular doctor, having a

checkup in the past year, having unmet medical needs due to cost, self-rated

health, bad physical and mental health days, substance use, and preventive care

utilization.

        We report several core findings from this research. First, legal access to

SSM is not meaningfully associated with living arrangements in the population,

suggesting that our focus on individuals in same-sex households is unlikely to be

biased by composition effects. Second, we find clear evidence that legal access to

same-sex marriage in one’s state is associated with a statistically significant

increase in the likelihood that an individual in a same-sex household reports being

married, an effect on the order of 79 and 41 percent relative to the pre-reform




                                               4
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




mean for women and men, respectively. This effect is highly robust to various

sample and model specification choices and obtains significance only after

adoption of legal same-sex marriage in an event-study framework. It is also

unique to individuals in same-sex households: that is, it is not meaningfully

observed in the falsification sample of households with one man and one woman.

Third, we find that legal access to SSM in one’s state is associated with

statistically significant increases in the probability of having health insurance,

reporting a usual source of care, and having a checkup in the past year for men

(but not women) in same-sex households. Finally, we find no systematic effects

of legal access to same-sex marriage on unmet medical needs, physical or mental

health, substance use, or preventive care utilization for men or women in same-

sex households. Overall our results using a novel measurement strategy provide

the most comprehensive evidence to date that legal access to SSM significantly

increased marriage take-up for gay and lesbian couples and also significantly

improved healthcare access and utilization for adult gay men in same-sex

households.

        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the

mechanisms through which legal access to same-sex marriage could affect

marriage and health-related outcomes and reviews the literature on policy

determinants of marriage and on the effects of marriage on health. It also reviews

a small and emerging literature on the effects of access to legal SSM. Section 3




                                               5
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




then describes the data and outlines our empirical approach. Section 4 presents

the results, and Section 5 offers a discussion and concludes.



2. Mechanisms and Previous Literature

2.1 Literature on the policy determinants of marriage

This paper contributes to a large literature on the policy determinants of marriage.

Scholars have demonstrated the empirical significance of the tax-cost of marriage

(Alm and Whittington 1999), unilateral divorce laws (e.g., Peters 1986, Friedberg

1998, Wolfers 2006), blood test requirements (Buckles et al. 2011), and minimum

age requirements (Blank et al. 2009) on different-sex marriage rates. Our paper

adds to those literatures by studying a much more direct change to the overall cost

of getting married – access to the legal institution for same-sex couples – than has

been typically studied. In this sense, our work is related to prior studies of anti-

miscegenation statutes and the effects of Loving v. Virginia on interracial

marriage (Fryer 2007, Gevrek 2014).

2.2 Literature on the effects of legal access to same-sex marriage on marriage

take-up

A handful of studies in economics and demography have specifically documented

how legal access to same-sex marriage affected family formation outcomes,




                                               6
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




                                                                       1
including take-up of marriage by sexual minorities.                          Carpenter (2018,

forthcoming) examines the experience of Massachusetts’ legalization of same-sex

marriage through the state Supreme Court in 2004 using data from the

Massachusetts BRFSS and finds that it significantly increased marriage take-up

by lesbians and gay men, with larger effects for lesbians. Some research has also

examined how same-sex marriage policies – including bans on same-sex marriage

– affected heterosexual individuals.             Trandafir (2014) finds no relationship

between the adoption of legal same-sex marriage in the Netherlands in 2001 and

rates of different-sex marriage.               Trandafir (2015) examines relationship

recognition in a larger sample of countries for the period 1980-2009 and finds that

legal same-sex marriage did not affect family formation (as measured by

marriage, divorce, and extramarital births) for different-sex couples. Langbein

and Yost (2009) study the US context through 2004 and find that same-sex

relationship policies have no effects on different-sex marriage, divorce, and

abortion rates or on the percentage of children born out of wedlock; Dillender

(2015) finds a similar null result using more recent data and focusing on marriage

rates (i.e., flows instead of stocks).

2.3 Literature on the relationship between marriage and health




1
  We do not review here studies in economics that have addressed the tax consequences of
legalizing same-sex marriage (Alm et al. 2014, Fisher et al. 2016), including potentially important
effects on labor supply and employment (Isaac 2017).




                                                7
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




By examining health outcomes, our study also contributes to a large literature in

economics, sociology, psychology, and demography on the effects of marriage on

health. This literature is summarized elsewhere (see, for example, Ross et al.

1990, Waite and Lehrer 2003, Wood et al. 2007), but several specific findings

merit mention. Marriage is the primary social relationship for half of American

adults (U.S. Census Bureau 2016), and is consistently linked to lower risk of

death from various causes, higher survival rates from diseases like cancer, and

better physical and mental health (Aizer et al. 2013; Goodwin et al. 1987; Hu and

Goldman 1990; Lillard and Waite 1995; Sorlie et al. 1995; Trovato and Lauris

1989). Conversely, mortality risks are highest for the never married (Hu and

Goldman 1990; Lillard and Waite 1995; Sorlie et al. 1995), and multiple studies

observe physical and mental health penalties as a result of the loss of a spouse

(Lillard and Waite 1995; Kapiro et al. 1987; Stroebe and Stroebe 1987).

        Certainly, not all marriages are equally beneficial.       Recent studies

examining the heterogeneity of effects on health across marriages find that marital

quality is an important mediator of the effects of marital status on health

(Williams 2003), especially in older age (Umberson et al. 2006). Marriage is also

less beneficial for women compared to men in different-sex couples, and for

nonwhites compared to whites (see for review Kiecolt-Glaser and Newton 2001;

Ross et al. 1990). Prior to the widespread legalization of marriage for same-sex

couples, the lack of legal and social recognition of same-sex couples was




                                               8
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




associated with poorer mental health outcomes (Herdt and Kertzner 2006). At the

same time, legal same-sex relationships have been shown to be associated with

more positive mental health outcomes and less psychological distress for

individuals in same-sex couples (Riggle et al. 2010, Wight et al. 2013).

2.4 Mechanisms through which marriage affects health

There are multiple direct and indirect mechanisms through which marriage has

been theorized to produce individual health effects. Healthier individuals have

been theorized to select into marriage and to be more likely to stay married,

although prospective studies following young adults as they select into marriage

find limited evidence of selection effects (e.g., Waldron et al. 1996). Marriage

may also confer protective effects on health.        These protective effects are

theorized to operate primarily via the provision of physical, financial, and

emotional support by a spouse (Ducharme 1994; Sherbourne and Hays 1990;

Uchino et al. 1996). One example of tangible financial support provided through

marriage is employer-sponsored health insurance, which is the predominant

source of insurance coverage in the United States. Historically, most firms have

not offered same-sex partners access to the same health insurance benefits as

would be available to different-sex spouses of employees, though more firms

increasingly were offering such benefits in recent years: 40 percent in 2017, up

from 22 percent in 2008 (Claxton et al. 2017). Alternatively, drawing on the

health capital framework (Grossman 1972), individuals may invest in health care




                                               9
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




and adopt less risky behaviors and healthier lifestyles as a function of their

personal investment in the marriage (Sherbourne and Hays 1990). At the dyad

level, spouses may reinforce positive lifestyle behaviors such as healthy diet,

exercise, and nonsmoking or engage in direct social control of a spouse’s health

related behaviors (Umberson 1987; 1992; Wilson 2002). In other instances, an

unhealthy individual may directly and negatively affect the health of a spouse

through disease transmission or, indirectly, through caregiver effects (Schulz and

Beach 1999).

2.5 Literature on the effects of legal access to same-sex marriage on health and

healthcare access

A small number of studies have specifically examined the effects of legal SSM on

health and related outcomes using quasi-experimental variation.2 For example,

Dee (2008) examined same-sex relationship policies in Europe (mostly domestic

partner registration laws, not full marriage equality) and found that they were

related to reductions in sexually transmitted infections (such as syphilis) but not to

changes in the prevalence of non-sexually transmitted diseases. Francis et al.

(2012) find a similar but less robust result using variation from the United States

on state bans on same-sex marriage.                   Raifman et al. (2017) find that the


2
  We do not review here a substantial literature in psychology that is primarily qualitative in nature
and has examined how SSM affected mental health outcomes. We also do not review here studies
in public health that have primarily leveraged cross-sectional variation in legal access to SSM at a
point in time, as these studies cannot account for the other characteristics about states with legal
SSM (e.g., a more progressive climate) that may independently contribute to outcomes.




                                                 10
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




availability of legal same-sex marriage in the United States is associated with

significant reductions in youth suicide attempts among sexual minority students

using data from the Youth Risk Behavior Surveys. Hatzenbuehler et al. (2010)

used individual panel data from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol

and Related Conditions spanning a period when many states implemented bans on

same-sex marriage in 2004 and 2005 and found that sexual minority individuals in

those states were significantly more likely to experience a range of psychiatric

disorders compared to the associated change experienced by heterosexuals and

compared to the associated change for sexual minority individuals in other states

that did not adopt bans on same-sex marriage. Hatzenbuehler et al. (2012) use

prospective data on 1,211 sexual minority men from a community health center in

Massachusetts before and after the state’s legalization of same-sex marriage in

2004 and found that sexual minority men had significantly decreased medical care

visits, including mental health care visits and mental health care costs. Moreover,

this effect was observed for both partnered and non-partnered sexual minority

men.    Finally, Gonzales (2015) examined how New York State’s marriage

equality adoption affected health insurance profiles of same-sex couples using

data from the American Community Surveys. He found that legal access to SSM

in New York was associated with statistically significant increases in the

probability of having employer sponsored insurance for individuals in same-sex

couples.    This finding supported previous studies finding increases in health




                                               11
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




insurance coverage following relationship recognition laws (i.e., domestic

partnerships or civil unions) for lesbian women in California (Buchmueller and

Carpenter 2012) and women in same-sex couples in the Current Population

Survey (Dillender 2015).



3. Data Description and Empirical Approach

3.1 Data description

Our primary data come from the Center for Disease Control and Prevention’s

2000-2016 waves of the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS).

These telephone surveys are designed to be state representative and focus on

health outcomes, access to health care, and health behaviors. The annual sample

size of the BRFSS is very large: in recent years it has surpassed 400,000

observations in a single year. Interviews are performed throughout the calendar

year. In addition to questions about health, the survey also includes standard

demographic characteristics such as age, race/ethnicity, education, and marital

status.3 Our sample includes all adults aged 25 years and older.4


3
  The survey was done exclusively via landlines through 2010; in 2011 a cellphone sample was
added. Because the household screener with questions about the number of adult men and adult
women in the household was not administered to the cellphone sample, we drop all cellphone
interviews from the sample since, as we describe below, our method for identifying the target
sample requires information on sex composition of adults in the household. The share of
cellphone interviews increased from about 12 percent in 2011 to 45 percent in 2016. In results not
reported but available upon request, we do not find statistically significant relationships between
the timing of legal access to same-sex marriage in one’s state and the likelihood of being in the
cellphone sample from 2011-2016, suggesting that composition bias is unlikely to be a serious




                                                12
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




        For our purposes a key feature of the BRFSS is that information on the sex

composition of adults in the household is ascertained during the household

screening portion of the interview (which is used to determine eligibility for the

rest of the interview). Specifically, one randomly selected adult in the household

is asked to state the number of adult men in the household and the number of

adult women in the household. We use this information to construct treatment

and control groups using the simple reasoning that gay and lesbian couples are

much more likely to have a household composed of exactly two same-sex adults

than are heterosexual couples. SAME-SEX MALE HOUSEHOLD is an indicator

variable equal to one for individuals who report their household contains exactly

two adult men and exactly zero adult women; SAME-SEX FEMALE

HOUSEHOLD is defined analogously. DIFFERENT-SEX HOUSEHOLD is an

indicator variable equal to one for individuals who report their household contains

exactly one adult man and one adult woman. A notable advantage of this indirect

approach for identifying individuals who are disproportionately likely to be

members of gay and lesbian couples is that respondents do not have to explicitly

self-identify as a sexual minority to the interviewer.                This plausibly lessens




concern. We also drop the small share of observations with missing data on demographic
characteristics or outcome variables.
4
  Results adding 18-24 year olds were similar. Because the relationship between sexual
orientation and our household structure measure should be weaker for younger adults (who are
more likely to be students and/or co-residing with another same-sex adult for reasons other than a
romantic relationship), we drop 18-24 year olds from the main sample.




                                               13
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




concerns about gay men and lesbians shielding their sexual orientation from the

survey.

          Regarding marital status, the BRFSS asks respondents: “Are you…”. The

response options include: married; divorced; widowed; separated; never married;

and member of an unmarried couple.                  The limitations of this question for

understanding the effects of legal access to SSM have been discussed elsewhere

(Carpenter and Gates 2008), but we note that the question did not explicitly ask

about legal marital status (so couples who live as if they were married might

respond ‘married’). Note also that an individual could have multiple marital

statuses at any one point in time (e.g., previously divorced but now married);

interviewers were instructed to code the one that is accurate for the respondent

that appears earliest in the list. Our primary outcome of interest is an indicator

variable for being married (which we define as MARRIED).

          Regarding healthcare access, we use four measures that are common in the

literature. Specifically, the BRFSS asks respondents if they are covered by any

kind of health insurance plan; we use this information to create an indicator

variable called INSURED. We do not observe the type of plan nor in whose

name the plan was secured or purchased. Individuals are also asked if they have

“one person you think of as your personal doctor or health care provider”; we use

this information to create an indicator variable called USUAL SOURCE OF

CARE. Individuals are also asked if there was a time in the past year when they




                                               14
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




needed to see a doctor but could not due to cost; we use this information to create

an indicator variable called UNMET MEDICAL NEEDS. Finally, regarding

healthcare access, individuals are asked when they last visited a doctor for a

routine checkup; we use this information to create an indicator variable called

HAD A PAST YEAR CHECK UP.

        The BRFSS also asks respondents about their self-rated health, asking

individuals the following question: “Would you say that in general your health

is…”. Response options include: excellent, very good, good, fair, or poor. We

follow prior work by examining two outcomes: EXCELLENT OR VERY GOOD

HEALTH and FAIR OR POOR HEALTH. Individuals are also asked about

health-related quality of life with the following question: “Now thinking about

your physical health, which includes physical illness and injury, for how many

days during the past 30 days was your physical health not good?” Individuals are

then asked: “Now thinking about your mental health, which includes stress,

depression, and problems with emotions, for how many days during the past 30

days was your mental health not good?” Individuals are asked to state the number

of days for each of these questions; we create indicator variables for AT LEAST

14 BAD PHYSICAL HEALTH DAYS IN PAST 30 (as a measure of severe

physical distress) and AT LEAST 14 BAD MENTAL HEALTH DAYS IN PAST

30 (as a measure of severe mental distress). Individuals are also asked: “During

the past 30 days, for about how many days did poor physical or mental health




                                               15
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




keep you from doing your usual activities, such as self-care, work, or recreation?”

We define AT LEAST 14 ACTIVITY LIMITED DAYS IN PAST 30

accordingly.5

        We also considered a range of substance use outcomes, as there is a large

body of evidence indicating that sexual minority adults have higher substance use

rates than heterosexual adults, possibly as self-medication and coping responses

to stress (Gonzales & Henning-Smith 2017). Specifically, we create an indicator

for whether the individual reported consuming any alcohol in the past month

(DRINKER), an indicator for whether the individual reported consuming five or

more drinks on average for men and 4 or more drinks on average for women

(BINGE DRINKER), and an indicator for whether the individual reports smoking

cigarettes every day or ‘some days’ (SMOKER).

        Finally, we considered a range of preventive care utilization measures.

We examine indicators for having had a flu shot in the past year (FLU SHOT),

which is ascertained for all BRFSS respondents.               We also consider cancer

screenings: whether adult women had a Pap test in the past year (PAP TEST),

whether women age 50 and older had a mammogram in the past year




5
  We also considered as additional outcomes a range of employment and household income
measures available in the demographic section of the BRFSS questionnaire, including
employment, labor force participation, and household income. There were no meaningful
associations between legal SSM and these outcomes. These results are available upon request.




                                               16
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




(MAMMOGRAM) and whether men and women age 50 and older ever had a

colon cancer screening (COLON CANCER SCREENING).

3.2 Empirical approach

To estimate the effect of legal access to same-sex marriage on outcomes, we

begin by estimating standard two-way fixed effects models that rely on plausibly

exogenous variation in the timing of legal access to SSM across states. These

models are estimated on the sample of individuals in same-sex households

(separately for men and women) and take the form:

    (1)     Yist = β0 + β1Xist + β2(LEGAL SAME-SEX MARRIAGE)st + β3Zst +

            β4Ss + β5Tt + β6Ss*TRENDt + εist

where Yist are family structure, health insurance, access to care, and health

outcomes for individual i in state s at time t.6 LEGAL SAME-SEX MARRIAGEst

is an indicator variable equal to one for individuals living in states and times

where same-sex couples could legally wed. Zst is a vector of other state-time

varying economic and demographic variables that includes: the state-month

unemployment rate, the state-month population count, dummy variables for when

states expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, and state income

eligibility thresholds for the Children’s Health Insurance Program (to proxy for

public insurance program generosity in the state). Zst also includes other aspects


6
  We estimate linear probability models for dichotomous outcomes for simplicity and ease of
interpretation, but results are not sensitive to this choice.




                                               17
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




of the state policy environment for LGBT individuals and couples, including:

statutory bans on same-sex marriage, constitutional bans on same-sex marriage,

legal access to civil unions or registered domestic partnerships, nondiscrimination

protection covering sexual orientation in employment, religious freedom

restoration acts, and ‘bathroom bills’.7 Ss is a vector of state dummies to control

for time invariant characteristics about states; Tt is a vector of year and month

dummies to control for secular national period effects.8 We also control for state-

specific linear time trends where we interact each state fixed effect with a variable

TREND that equals 1 in 2000, 2 in 2001, and so forth. These trends remove

variation caused by factors that are state-specific and trend linearly over time. The

coefficient of interest is β2 and in the presence of state, year, and month dummies

and linear state trends is identified from within-state deviations in outcomes from

a smooth linear trend coincident with variation in the timing of policy adoption

across states.     The key identifying assumption is that outcomes would have

evolved identically in states with and without legal SSM had they not been




7
  Domestic partnership/civil union policies are coded as one of four mutually exclusive categories
depending upon a given policy’s combination of coverage and strength. Coverage, whether the
policy applies to all couples or same-sex couples only, is coded following Dillender (2014).
Strength, whether the policy extends all of the state-level rights associated with marriage or a
limited set of those rights, is coded following Badgett and Herman (2011).
8
  To account for the change in the BRFSS sampling frame in 2011 we also include a dummy
variable for all observations in 2011 and later.




                                               18
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




adopted.    Throughout, we use the BRFSS sampling weights, and we cluster

standard errors at the state level (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan 2004).9



4. Results

4.1 Evidence on household structure and sexual orientation

Table 1 provides evidence that individuals in same-sex households are

differentially capturing samples that are likely to include gay and lesbian

couples.10 We begin with the most direct evidence using data from the 2014-2016

BRFSS in which 31 states at some point (depending on the survey wave) released

information on self-reported sexual orientation in the public use files. For these

states (shown in Figure 2) we can directly correlate our household structure

measures with self-reported sexual orientation to see if individuals in SSH are

indeed more likely to report a non-heterosexual orientation than individuals in

DSH.

        Table 1 shows that this is clearly the case. The format of Table 1 is as

follows: each entry in the table shows the share of the relevant sample (captured

in each row) in the 2014-2016 BRFSS who reported any sexual orientation other

than heterosexual (in columns 1 and 3 for women and men, respectively) or who


9
   Specifically, we follow Simon et al. (2017) in assigning sample weights by reweighting the
fraction of each individual’s assigned BRFSS sample weight over the sum of all weights in their
survey wave.
10
   A substantial literature in demography also uses household structure to understand nonmarital
and marital cohabitation. See, for example, Casper and Cohen (2000).




                                               19
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




reported a lesbian or gay sexual orientation (in columns 2 and 4, respectively).

The top row of Table 1 shows the shares for all adults in the states who released

the sexual orientation information on the public use files and conforms to prior

work: about 0.8 percent of women identify as lesbian, while about 2.3 percent of

women identify as lesbian, bisexual, or ‘other’. For men, 1.7 percent identify as

gay, while about 3 percent identify as gay, bisexual, or ‘other’.

        In the next rows of Table 1 we separately examine individuals in different-

sex households and individuals in same-sex households.              Of individuals in

different-sex households, we find that virtually none (0.1-0.2 percent) identifies as

lesbian or gay, and only about 1.2-1.4 percent identify as anything other than

heterosexual.     If we further restrict attention to individuals in different-sex

households who also report being married, the share identifying as anything other

than heterosexual falls even further. In contrast, for individuals in same-sex

households, Table 1 indicates that 11 percent of women and 27.8 percent of men

in those household configurations identify as something other than heterosexual.

Put differently, more than one in ten women in same-sex households and more

than one in four men in same-sex households are likely not heterosexual (and also

likely in a same-sex relationship). This means that for our reduced form models

below, estimates of the association between legal access to same-sex marriage and

outcomes for women (men) in same-sex households should be scaled up by

approximately a factor of ten (four). When we further examine individuals in




                                               20
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




same-sex households who also report being married, the share choosing a non-

heterosexual identity jumps even more: 46.4 percent for women in same-sex

households and 59.7 percent for men in same-sex households. Moreover, to the

extent that there is underreporting of non-heterosexual orientations in the BRFSS

due to stigma or other reasons, this is likely an underestimate of the amount of

signal in these samples.

        Thus, Table 1 provides strong evidence that household structure conveys

meaningful information about a correlate of sexual orientation. These patterns

motivate our use of household structure for defining treated and falsification

samples for our difference-in-differences models below.11

4.2 Descriptive statistics

Having documented a meaningful relationship between household structure and

sexual orientation, we next present descriptive statistics for the individual

demographic characteristics, legal SSM variable, and health-related outcomes.

Figure 3 shows trends in the share of men and women in SSH who report being

married over our sample period. Several patterns are notable. First, the share of


11
  In additional results not reported here but available upon request, we also found several other
less direct patterns that indicated that household structure is correlated in predictable ways with
what one would expect regarding different reproductive and sexual health behaviors for
individuals of different sexual orientations in the BRFSS. For example, women in same-sex
households are less likely to report being currently pregnant than women in different-sex
households. Men in same-sex households are more likely to report having ever been tested for
HIV than men in different-sex households. And both men and women in same-sex households are
less likely to have children under 18 in the household than men and women in different-sex
households. These same patterns have been documented previously in other work using BRFSS
household structure in this way (see, for example, Carpenter 2004).




                                                21
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




men in SSH who report being married is higher than the associated share of

women in SSH, consistent with the patterns in Table 1 that there is more slippage

between sexual orientation and household structure in our measure for women.

Second, both shares increase over the sample period, with the share of men in

SSH who report being married increasing from about 10 percent to 20 percent and

the share of women in SSH who report being married increasing from about 5

percent to 10 percent.

        Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for key variables for women in

same-sex households (column 1), women in different-sex households (column 2),

men in same-sex households (column 3), and men in different-sex households

(column 4). Approximately 10 percent of the sample lives in a state with legal

access to same-sex marriage over the study period. A much larger share of men

and women in different-sex households reports being married than men and

women in same-sex households. Regarding health care and health, Table 2 shows

that men and women in same-sex households are significantly less likely to be

insured, less likely to have a usual source of care, and more likely to report unmet

medical care needs due to cost compared to men and women in different-sex

households. Men and women in same-sex households are also significantly less

likely to report excellent or very good health, more likely to report fair or poor

health, and more likely to report 14 or more bad health days than men and women

in different sex households. Men and women in same-sex households are also




                                               22
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




significantly more likely to report substance use (e.g., smoking and binge

drinking) than men and women in different-sex households. Finally, men and

women in same-sex households report significantly less preventive care (e.g., flu

shots, Pap tests, mammograms, and colon cancer screenings) than men and

women in different-sex households.

4.3 Effects of legal same-sex marriage on household composition

Before presenting estimates of the relationship between legal access to same-sex

marriage and marriage take-up, we begin in Table 3 with an analysis of how the

marriage equality variation relates to various measures of household composition.

This analysis is important for interpreting any effects we observe on marriage and

health-related outcomes because our empirical strategy relies on treatment and

comparison groups defined by household structure and household sex

composition.     If these variables themselves were meaningfully related to the

variation across space and time in legal access to same-sex marriage, composition

bias would be a concern.

        Table 3 shows that this is unlikely to be the case, particularly for men.

Specifically, in Table 3 we report the coefficient on the LEGAL ACCESS TO

SAME-SEX MARRIAGE indicator variable from a fully saturated model of

equation (1) that includes all the individual level controls; state and time varying

characteristics and policies; state, month, and year fixed effects; and linear state-

specific time trends. We consider four measures of household composition in




                                               23
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




Table 3: the total number of adults the respondent reports in the household in

column 1; an indicator variable for whether the respondent reports there are

exactly two adults in the household in column 2; an indicator variable for whether

the respondent reports there are exactly two different-sex adults in the household

in column 3; and an indicator variable for whether the respondent reports there are

exactly two same-sex adults in the household in column 4.

         The overall takeaway from Table 3 is that the relationship between legal

access to same-sex marriage and all of these outcomes is very small in magnitude

both absolutely and relative to the pre-reform means of the variables. Only one of

the eight estimates is significant (the probability a woman lives in a household

with two same-sex adults), and that effect size is 4.3 percent of the pre-reform

mean. This could be consistent with an increase in partnership and cohabitation

behavior among sexual minority women, though again the effects here are very

small. For men we find no evidence of possible composition bias related to the

timing of legal access to same-sex marriage in a respondent’s state.12


12
    Appendix Table 1 makes a related point and shows the relationship between average
demographic characteristics of the individuals in same-sex households as a function of legal
access to same-sex marriage (and all the other controls in equation (1)). Appendix Table 1 reveals
little evidence of systematic selection for individuals in same-sex households when legal same-sex
marriage is in an individual’s state: the estimated changes in respondent characteristics associated
with legal same-sex marriage are generally small and insignificant, though there is some evidence
that the sample of individuals in same-sex households has lower education levels after legal same-
sex marriage in the respondent’s state. This pattern and the well documented fact that higher
educated people are more likely to have good jobs that offer health insurance suggests that the
estimated improvements in health insurance, access to care, and utilization we document below for
men in same-sex households associated with the timing of legal same-sex marriage are unlikely to
be driven by the changing characteristics of men in same-sex couples.




                                                24
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




4.4 Effects of legal same-sex marriage on marriage take-up

Table 4 provides direct evidence on the relationship between legal access to same-

sex marriage and marriage take-up among individuals in same-sex households.

The format of this table is as follows: each entry in the table is a coefficient on the

LEGAL ACCESS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE indicator from a fully saturated

regression model that includes the individual demographics; state characteristics;

other state LGBT policy variables; state, month, and year fixed effects; and linear

state-specific time trends. Column 1 reports results for women, while column 2

reports results for men. The top panel reports results for the sample of individuals

in same-sex households, our primary treatment group. The bottom panel reports

results for a comparison sample that should be largely unaffected by legal access

to same-sex marriage: individuals in different-sex households.

        The results in Table 4 return strong evidence that legal access to SSM was

associated with statistically and economically significant increases in marriage

take-up among individuals in same-sex households. For women in the top panel

of column 1, for example, we estimate that legal SSM was associated with a

significant 3.7 percentage point increase in the likelihood a woman in a SSH

reported being married. Relative to a pre-reform mean of 4.7 percent, this is a

78.7 percent proportional effect. Recall that approximately 10 percent of women

in same-sex households would identify as something other than heterosexual;

thus, the treatment effect on the treated sample of non-heterosexual women is




                                               25
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




closer to a 37 percentage point increase in marriage take-up. Measured another

way, over our sample period the share of women in SSH who reported being

married increased by about five percentage points (see Figure 3); our estimate in

the top panel of column 1 of Table 4 suggests that legal access to same-sex

marriage can explain about 74 percent of that increase. The bottom panel of

column 1 of Table 4 confirms that the marriage effects we estimate in the top

panel are unique to women in same-sex households; there is no meaningful

relationship between legal access to same-sex marriage and being married for

women in different-sex households.

        The results for men in column 2 of Table 4 are similar to the results for

women.     Specifically, we estimate that legal access to same-sex marriage is

associated with a 5.7 percentage point increase in the likelihood that a man in a

same-sex household reports being married (top row, column 2). This result is

statistically significant and is large relative to the pre-reform mean of 13.6

percent. Given that Table 1 showed that about 27 percent of men in same-sex

households would identify as something other than heterosexual, the treatment

effect on sexual minority men is closer to a 21 percentage point increase in

marriage take-up. Measured another way, over the sample period the share of

men in SSH who reported being married increased by about ten percentage points;

our estimate in the top panel of column 2 of Table 4 can explain well over half of

this overall increase. The bottom panel of column 2 of Table 4 confirms that the




                                               26
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




marriage effects we observe in the top row are uniquely observed for men in

same-sex households.13

        We explore the robustness of the main findings of Table 4 in a variety of

ways. First, in Figures 4 and 5 for women and men, respectively, we show

graphically the estimates from an event study model in which we replace the

single access to legal SSM indicator with a series of event time indicators

representing time relative to adoption of legal SSM in the individual’s state (we

observe exact interview date in the BRFSS, so policy timing can be assigned with

high accuracy).14 The results in Figures 4 and 5 clearly demonstrate that increases

in marriage among individuals in same-sex households follow access to legal

same-sex marriage in one’s state. Importantly, there is no evidence of systematic

differential trends in marriage in the period leading up to legal access to same-sex


13
   Appendix Table 2 provides an expanded set of coefficient estimates corresponding to the top
panel of Table 4. Most other LGBT-related public policies are not meaningfully related to the
likelihood individuals in same-sex households report being married. In Appendix Table 3 we
report marriage effects by demographic group to examine descriptively the heterogeneity in
marriage take-up. We also present the share of individuals in same-sex households in each of the
relevant demographic groups who report a non-heterosexual orientation (again extrapolating from
the 2014-2016 BRFSS data). The results in Appendix Table 3 indicate that legal access to same-
sex marriage had broad-based effects at increasing marriage. For both men and women we find
meaningful (but not always statistically significant) estimated increases associated with legal
access to same-sex marriage for both young and older adults (columns 1 and 2), white and
nonwhite adults (columns 3 and 4), less educated and more educated adults (columns 5 and 6), and
individuals in households with and without children present (columns 7 and 8). We consistently
estimate that the marriage take-up effect is larger for women in SSH without children present,
which is unexpected since the tangible returns to marriage are likely larger for households with
children. One possible explanation is that women in SSH with children are more likely to have
crossed state lines to get a marriage license (precisely because the returns to doing so are
nontrivial); this would cause the legal access variable to be mismeasured for women in SSH which
could bias the estimate toward zero.
14
   A limitation of this approach is that we do not observe cross state migration, so we cannot know
if the person lived in that same state many years before the interview.




                                                27
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




marriage, which is indirect evidence in support of the parallel trends assumption

required for identification. This is perhaps not surprising given that much of the

policy variation was driven by relatively unexpected judicial decisions.

        We report a series of other robustness analyses in Table 5. The format of

Table 5 is as follows: each entry is the coefficient on legal access to SSM from a

separate regression that includes all the individual and state controls as well as the

state, month, and year fixed effects and linear state trends (unless otherwise

noted). We report results for women in SSH in the top panel and for men in SSH

in the bottom panel. Each column shows the results of a different robustness

analysis relative to the baseline model for marriage from the top panel of columns

1 and 2 of Table 4; we reprint those baseline estimates in column 1 of Table 5. In

column 2 of Table 5 we report estimates from a model that excludes the linear

state trends but retains all other controls, including the state and time fixed

effects. Those models return notably larger estimated effects of access to legal

same-sex marriage on the likelihood individuals in same-sex households report

being married, suggesting that our models with linear state trends are conservative

estimates of the effects of legal access to SSM on outcomes. In column 3 we

revert to the baseline model with linear state trends and show estimates from

models that recode California as turned ‘off’ (i.e., not having legal access to

same-sex marriage) until the U.S. v. Windsor decision in June 2013. Our baseline

model codes California as ‘on’ in the summer of 2008 for the short period when




                                               28
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




same-sex marriage was legal in the state before a statewide vote in ‘Proposition 8’

ended same-sex marriages. In column 4 we show estimates where we drop

California entirely from the estimation. Both estimates from columns 3 and 4 of

Table 5 show that our core results on marriage take-up are not sensitive to the

treatment of California (and in fact are even larger when we exclude the state

entirely). In column 5 we show estimates from models that exclude the BRFSS

sample weights; results are robust to estimating unweighted models. In column 6

we report results where we add 18-24 year olds back to the full sample; estimates

continue to suggest significant effects of legal access to same-sex marriage on

marriage take-up. Finally, column 7 of Table 5 shows results from a model where

we drop anyone who – when asked about their employment status – responded

that they are a student. Excluding students returns similar estimates of the effect

of legal access to same-sex marriage on the likelihood individuals in same-sex

households report being married, which is perhaps not surprising since our main

sample selection criteria exclude 18-24 year olds.

4.5 Effects of legal same-sex marriage on health-related outcomes

Having documented that legal access to same-sex marriage significantly increased

marriage among women and men in same-sex households, we now turn to

examining effects on health-related outcomes. We present these health-related

outcomes in Table 6. The format of Table 6 is as follows: each entry is the

coefficient on LEGAL ACCESS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE from a fully




                                               29
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




saturated regression (including linear state trends). We present estimates for

women in same-sex households in column 1 and for men in same-sex households

in column 2. Each row is a different outcome variable, and the relevant sample

sizes for men and women are reported after each outcome. We also reprint the

marriage take-up estimate in the top row of Table 6 for reference. We separate

the health-related outcomes into the various categories: insurance and access to

care; self-rated health and bad health days; substance use; and preventive care.

        The results in Table 6 provide little evidence that legal access to same-sex

marriage had meaningful effects on health-related outcomes for women in same-

sex households, despite the clear evidence in the prior tables that the policy

increased marriage take-up for this sample. For health outcomes in column 1 of

Table 6 few estimates are statistically significant, and most are small in

magnitude. The handful of estimates that are statistically significant are as likely

to indicate that legal same-sex marriage was associated with worse outcomes

(more smoking, less flu shots) for women in SSH as they are to indicate that legal

same-sex marriage was associated with better outcomes (lower probability of

reporting 14 or more bad mental health days, lower probability of reporting 14 or

more activity limited days) in this sample.

        For men in same-sex households, in contrast, we estimate that legal access

to same-sex marriage was associated with statistically significant improvements

in insurance coverage, access to care, and utilization. Specifically, we estimate in




                                               30
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




column 2 of Table 6 that legal access to same-sex marriage increased the

probability a man in a same-sex household reported being insured by 4.2

percentage points. Relative to the pre-reform mean, this is a 5.4 percent effect

(compared to the 42 percent marriage take-up effect in the top row of column 2 of

Table 6).       Similarly, we estimate that legal access to same-sex marriage

significantly increased the likelihood a man in a same-sex household reported a

usual source of care by 4.2 percentage points and had a checkup in the past year

by 7.3 percentage points (6 and 12 percent effects, respectively).15 Turning to

health outcomes, we find no relationship between legal access to same-sex

marriage and self-rated health, substance use, or preventive care take-up for men

in same-sex households. Thus, we find consistent evidence for men in same-sex

households that legal access to same-sex marriage not only increased marriage

take-up but also significantly increased health insurance coverage, access to

healthcare, and utilization of checkups.16


15
   In results not reported but available upon request, we found that restricting attention to adults
age 65 or older – the vast majority of whom are eligible for Medicare – continued to return strong
evidence that men in same-sex households were significantly more likely to report being married
when legal same-sex marriage was available, but they were not significantly more likely to report
being insured, having a usual doctor, or having had a past year checkup when legal same-sex
marriage was available. This suggest that the effects of legal same-sex marriage on having a usual
doctor and on past year checkups for men in same-sex households in the full sample is most likely
due to the price effect coming through increased health insurance as opposed to other effects of
marriage (e.g., the ‘nagging spouse’ effect).
16
   Appendix Table 4 shows the results from the same robustness exercises as in Table 5 on the
outcomes indicating a significant relationship with legal access to same-sex marriage for men in
same-sex households (insurance, usual source of care, and checkup in past year) and shows that
they are largely robust. Appendix Figures 1-3 also show event study figures for those same
outcomes. Although we do not find evidence of systematic pre-trends in outcomes prior to legal
same-sex marriage in the respondent’s state, few of the ‘years since legal same-sex marriage’




                                                31
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




5. Discussion and Conclusion

The results above provide novel evidence on how legal access to SSM is

associated with marriage take-up and health-related outcomes for adults in same-

sex households. We show that a nontrivial share of these individuals are likely to

be sexual minorities.        We consistently estimate that legal access to SSM is

associated with statistically significant increases in the likelihood that men and

women in same-sex households report being married.                         These increases in

marriage were also associated with significant increases in the likelihood of

reporting health insurance coverage and various measures of access to healthcare

such as having a usual source of care for men in same-sex households. These

effects were robust to numerous sample and specification checks, including event

study estimation. Notably, we did not find that legal access to same-sex marriage

significantly affected substance use, self-rated health, or preventive care for

event time dummies are individually statistically significant. In results not reported, we also
considered other robustness tests to further probe the result that legal access to same-sex marriage
increased health insurance, access to care, and utilization for men in same-sex households. For
example, we estimated difference-in-differences models restricting attention only to men who
reported being married or a member of an unmarried couple. This approach assumes legal access
to same-sex marriage had no effects on partnership, but an advantage is that we are more confident
that men in same-sex households who report being married or a member of an unmarried couple
are sexual minorities (see Table 1). Results from that sample continued to suggest that legal
access to same-sex marriage significantly increased marriage, insurance, access to care, and
utilization. We also estimated a fully interacted triple differences model where we included
individuals in different-sex households and examined the coefficient on the interaction between
being in a same-sex household and having legal access to same-sex marriage, controlling for a full
set of state by same-sex household, year by same-sex household, and state by year fixed effects.
These models also returned evidence of significant increases in marriage, health insurance, access
to care, and utilization for men in same-sex households associated with legal access to same-sex
marriage. These results are available upon request.




                                                32
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




individuals in same-sex households. One possibility is that it will take more time

and experience with legal same-sex marriage to see improvements in these health

outcomes.

        We consistently estimate that legal access to same-sex marriage did not

systematically improve healthcare access and health-related outcomes for women

in same-sex households. The null finding for women in same-sex households for

health insurance contrasts with results from Buchmueller and Carpenter (2012)

and Dillender (2015) who found that lesbians in same-sex relationships were

significantly more likely to be insured when states extended marriage-like status

to same-sex couples compared to the associated change for heterosexual women

in different-sex relationships. Why might this be the case? There are several

possibilities. One issue may be related to how migration and state of residence

are measured in the BRFSS. If lesbian couples were more likely to travel across

state borders to obtain a marriage license than gay men, this would dampen the

apparent association between legal access to marriage in the observed state of

residence and both marriage and health-related outcomes for women in SSH. We

know from other work that lesbian households are much more likely to have

children in the household which could have increased the incentive for legal

marriage even if it were not available in one’s home state. Because we lack data

on prior residence and location of marriage, we cannot test this hypothesis

directly, but it is an important question for future work. Also, our measurement




                                               33
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




of same-sex households was a much better indicator for men in same-sex

households versus women in same-sex households.

        Overall our results are the first to span the entire rollout of legal access to

same-sex marriage in the United States. We offer the most comprehensive quasi-

experimental evaluation of legal access to same-sex marriage on adult outcomes,

and our findings suggest that access to marriage benefited the health of some

sexual minorities. Recent efforts to dismantle legal access to same-sex marriage

may negatively affect family and health outcomes, particularly among men in

same-sex households. Ongoing research on same-sex marriage should continue to

use innovative techniques and data sources collecting sexual orientation to

monitor the impacts of same-sex marriage on various economic, health, and

demographic outcomes.




                                               34
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




References

Alm, James J., Sebastian Leguizamon, and Susane Leguizamon (2014).
     “Revisiting the Income Tax Effects of Legalizing Same-Sex Marriages,”
     Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33(2): 263-289.

Alm, James and Leslie A. Whittington (1999). “For Love or Money? The Impact
       of Income Taxes on Marriage,” Economica, 66(4): 297-316.

Amato, Paul R. and Alan Booth (1997). A Generation at Risk: Growing Up in an
      Era of Family Upheaval. Harvard University Press.

Amato, Paul R., Laura Spencer, and Alan Booth (1995). “Parental Divorce,
      Marital Conflict, and Offspring Well-being during Early Adulthood,”
      Social Forces, 73(3): 895-915.

Badgett, M.V. Lee and Jody L. Herman (2011) “Patters of Relationship
       Recognition by Same-Sex Couples in the United States,” The Williams
       Institute.

Berk, Marc L. and Amy K. Taylor (1984). “Women and Divorce: Health
      Insurance Coverage, Utilization, and Health Care Expenditures,”
      American Journal of Public Health, 74(11): 1276-1278.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004). “How Much
       Should We Trust Difference-in-Differences Estimates,” Quarterly Journal
       of Economics, 119(1): 249-275.

Blank, Rebecca M., Kerwin Kofi Charles, and James M. Sallee (2009). “A
       Cautionary Tale about the Use of Administrative Data: Evidence on Age
       of Marriage Laws,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
       1(2): 128-149.

Buchmueller, Thomas and Christopher Carpenter (2010). “Disparities in Health
     Insurance Coverage, Access, and Outcomes for Individuals in Same-Sex
     Versus Different-Sex Relationships, 2000-2007,” American Journal of
     Public Health, 100(3): 489-495.

Buchmueller, Thomas and Christopher Carpenter (2012). “The Effect of
     Requiring Employers to Extend Health Benefit Eligibility to Same-Sex




                                               35
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




        Partners of Employees: Evidence from California,” Journal of Policy
        Analysis and Management, 31(2): 388-403.

Buckles, Kasey, Melanie Guldi, and Joseph Price (2011). “Changing the Price of
      Marriage: Evidence from Blood Test Requirements,” Journal of Human
      Resources, 46(3): 539-567.

Carpenter, Christopher (2017, forthcoming). “The Direct Effects of Legal Same-
      Sex Marriage: Evidence from Massachusetts,” Demography, forthcoming.

----- (2004). “New Evidence on Gay and Lesbian Household Incomes,”
        Contemporary Economic Policy, 22(1): 78-94.

Carpenter, Christopher and Gary Gates (2008). “Gay and Lesbian Partnership:
      Evidence from California,” Demography, 45(3): 573-590.

Casper, Lynn M. and Philip N. Cohen (2000). “How does POSSLQ measure up?
       Historical estimates of cohabitation,” Demography, 37(2): 237-245.

Claxton, Gary, Matthew Rae, Michelle Long, Anthony Damico, Gregory Foster,
       and Heidi Whitmore (2017). “Employer Health Benefits: 2017 Annual
       Survey.” Menlo Park, CA: Kaiser Family Foundation; Chicago, IL: Health
       Research & Educational Trust.

Dee, Thomas (2008). “Forsaking All Others? The Effects of Same-Sex
      Partnership Laws on Risky Sex,” Economic Journal, 118(530): 1055-
      1078.

Dillender, Marcus (2014). “The Death of Marriage? The Effects of New Forms
       of Legal Recognition on Marriage Rates in the United States,”
       Demography, 51(2): 563-585.

Dillender, Marcus (2015). “Health Insurance and labor Force Participation: What
       Legal Recognition Does for Same-Sex Couples,” Contemporary Economic
       Policy, 33(2): 381-394.

Ducharme, Francine (1994). “Conjugal Support, Coping Behaviors, and
      Psychological Well-Being of the Elderly Spouse,” Research on Aging,
      16(2): 167-190.




                                               36
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




Fisher, Robin, Geof Gee, and Adam Looney (2016). “Joint Filing by Same-Sex
        Couples after Windsor: Characteristics of Married Filers in 2013 and
        2014,” Office of Tax Analysis Working Paper 108.

Francis, Andrew, Hugo Mialon, and Handie Peng (2012). “In Sickness and in
       Health: Same-Sex Marriage Laws and Sexually Transmitted Infections,”
       Social Science and Medicine, 75(8): 1329-1341.

Friedberg, Leora (1998). “Did Unilateral Divorce Raise Divorce Rates?
       Evidence from Panel Data,” American Economic Review, 88(3): 608-627.

Fryer Jr., Roland G. (2007). “Guess Who’s Been Coming to Dinner? Trends in
       Interracial Marriage over the 20th Century,” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives, 21(2): 71-90.

Gevrek, Deniz (2014). “Interracial Marriage, Migration and Loving,” Review of
      Black Political Economy, 41(1): 25-60.

Gonzales, Gilbert (2015). “Association of the New York State Marriage Equality
      Act with Changes in Health Insurance Coverage,” JAMA Research Letter,
      314(7): 727-728.

Gonzales, Gilbert and Carrie Henning-Smith (2017). “Health Disparities by
      Sexual Orientation: Results and Implications from the Behavioral Risk
      Factor Surveillance System,” Journal of Community Health, 42(6): 1163-
      1172.

Grossman, Michael (1972). “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand
      for Health,” Journal of Political Economy, 80(2): 223-255.

Hatzenbuehler, Mark L., Conall O’Cleirigh, Chris Grasso, Kenneth Mayer,
      Steven Safren, and Judith Bradford (2012). “Effects of Same-Sex
      Marriage Laws on Health Care Use and Expenditures in Sexual Minority
      Men: A Quasi-Natural Experiment,” American Journal of Public Health,
      102(2): 285-291.

Hatzenbuehler, Mark L., Katie A. McLaughlin, Katherine M. Keyes, and Deborah
      S. Hasin (2010). “The Impact of Institutional Discrimination on
      Psychiatric Disorders in Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Populations: A
      Prospective Study,” American Journal of Public Health, 100(3): 452-459.




                                               37
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




Isaac, Elliott (2017). “Suddenly Married: Joint Taxation and the Labor Supply of
        Same-Sex Married Couples after U.S. vs. Windsor,” working paper.

Kiecolt-Glaser, Janice K. and Tamara L. Newton (2001). “Marriage and Health:
       His and Hers,” Psychological Bulletin, 127(4): 472-503.

Langbein, Laura and Mark A. Yost, Jr. (2009). “Same-Sex Marriage and
      Negative Externalities,” Social Science Quarterly, 90(2): 292-308.

Levin, Irene (2004). “Living Apart Together: A New Family Form,” Current
       Sociology, 52(2): 223-240.

Meyer, Madonna Harrington, and Eliza K. Pavalko (1996). “Family, Work, and
      Access to Health Insurance among Mature Women,” Journal of Health
      and Social Behavior, 37(4): 311-325.

Obergefell et al. v. Hodges, Director, Ohio Department of Health, et al. 576 US
      (2015).

Peters, H. Elizabeth (1986). “Marriage and Divorce: Informational Constraints
        and Private Contracting,” American Economic Review, 76(3): 437-54.

Raifman, Julia, Ellen Moscoe, S. Bryn Austin, and Margaret McConnell (2017).
      “Difference-in-Differences Analysis of the Association Between State
      Same-Sex Marriage Policies and Adolescent Suicide Attempts,” JAMA
      Pediatrics, 171(4): 350-356.

Ross, Catherine E., John Mirowsky, and Karen Goldsteen (1990). “The Impact of
       the Family on Health: The Decade in Review,” Journal of Marriage and
       the Family, 52(4): 1059-1078.

Schulz, Richard and Paula Sherwood (2008). “Physical and Mental Health
       Effects of Family Caregiving,” American Journal of Nursing, 108(9
       Suppl): 23-27.

Sherbourne, CD and RD Hays (1990). “Marital status, social support, and health
      transitions in chronic disease patients,” Journal of Health and Social
      Behavior, 31(4): 328-343.

Smock, Pamela J. (1993). “The Economic Costs of Marital Disruption for Young
      Women Over the Past Two Decades,” Demography, 30(3): 353-371.




                                               38
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




Taylor, Amy K., Sharon Larson, and Rosaly Correa-de-Araujo (2006).
       “Women’s health care utilization and expenditures,” Women’s Health
       Issues, 16(2): 66-79.

Trandafir, Mircea (2015). “Legal Recognition of Same-Sex Couples and Family
      Formation,” Demography, 51(1): 113-151.

----- (2014). “The Effect of Same-Sex Marriage Laws on Different-Sex Marriage:
        Evidence from Netherlands,” Demography, 51(1): 317-340.

Uchino, Bert N., John T. Cacioppo, and Janice K. Kiecolt-Glaser (1996). “The
      relationship between social support and physiological processes: a review
      with emphasis on underlying mechanisms and implications for health,”
      Psychological Bulletin, 119(3): 488-531.

Umberson, Debra, Kristi Williams, Daniel A. Powers, Hui Liu, and Belinda
      Needham (2006). “You Make Me Sick: Marital Quality and Health Over
      the Life Course,” Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 47(1): 1-16.

United States v. Edith Schlain Windsor, et al. 570 US (2013).

Waite, Linda J. and Evelyn L. Lehrer (2003). “The Benefits of Marriage and
       Religion in the United States: A Comparative Analysis,” Population and
       Development Review, 29(2): 255-275.

Wight, Richard, Allen J. LeBlanc, and M. V. Lee Badgett (2013). “Same-Sex
       Legal Marriage and Psychological Well-Being: Findings from the
       California Health Interview Survey,” American Journal of Public Health,
       103(2): 339-346.

Wolfers, Justin (2006). “Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A
      Reconciliation and New Results,” American Economic Review, 96(5):
      1802-1820.

Wood, Robert G., Brian Goesling, and Sarah Avellar (2007). “The Effects of
      Marriage on Health: A Synthesis of Recent Research Evidence.” Report
      for the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation
      (ASPE).                             Available                           at:
      https://aspe.hhs.gov/system/files/pdf/75106/report.pdf. Last accessed April
      4, 2018.




                                               39
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




                                    Figure 1
       Timeline of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage in the United States




                                               40
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




                                      Figure 2
             States that Released Sexual Orientation Data to the BRFSS
                                     2014-2016




                                               41
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




                                 Figure 3
      Trends in Share Married Among Individuals in Same-Sex Households
          2000-2016 BRFSS, Adults age 25+ in Same-Sex Households
     0.25

     0.20

     0.15

     0.10

     0.05

     0.00



               Men in Same-Sex Households           Women in Same-Sex Households




                                               42
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




                                  Figure 4
Event Study: Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage and Marriage Take-up, Women
       2000-2016 BRFSS Data, Women age 25+ in Same-Sex Households
      0.14
      0.12
       0.1
      0.08
      0.06
      0.04
      0.02
         0
     -0.02   5+ yrs 4 yrs   3 yrs   2 yrs      1 yr   1 yr   2 yrs   3 yrs   4 yrs 5+ yrs
              pre    pre     pre     pre       pre    post   post    post    post post
     -0.04
     -0.06
                              Estimate            95% ci        95% ci




                                                43
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




                                  Figure 5
  Event Study: Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage and Marriage Take-up, Men
         2000-2016 BRFSS Data, Men age 25+ in Same-Sex Households
       0.2


      0.15


       0.1


      0.05


         0
             5+ yrs 4 yrs   3 yrs   2 yrs      1 yr   1 yr   2 yrs   3 yrs   4 yrs 5+ yrs
              pre    pre     pre     pre       pre    post   post    post    post post
     -0.05
                              Estimate            95% ci        95% ci




                                                44
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage


                     Table 1: Direct evidence on household structure proxies and self-reported sexual orientation
                            BRFSS states that asked the SOGI module in 2014, 2015, or 2016; Adults age 25+
                                                                        (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)
                                                                     Women              Women               Men              Men
                                     Outcome is                Not heterosexual        Lesbian      Not heterosexual        Gay
                                                              (lesbian, bisexual, or                 (gay, bisexual, or
Sample is ↓                                                          ‘other’)                             ‘other’)
All respondents in states and years when the SOGI module           .023 (.150)         .008 (.087)      .030 (.170)       .017 (.128)
was asked (31 states from 2014-2016) [N=338,613]

All respondents reporting exactly one man and one woman            .014 (.117)         .001 (.036)      .012 (.108)       .002 (.048)
in the HH [47% of top row sample]

All respondents reporting exactly one man and one woman            .011 (.103)         .001 (.024)      .010 (.099)       .001 (.031)
in the HH and who report being married [42 % of top row
sample]

All respondents reporting exactly two same-sex adults (and         .110 (.313)         .082 (.275)      .278 (.448)       .248 (.432)
zero different-sex adults) in the HH [i.e., two adult women
in cols 1 & 2; two adult men in cols 3 &4] [3% of top row
sample]

All respondents reporting exactly two same-sex adults (and       .464 (.499)           .433 (.496)      .597 (.491)       .576 (.495)
zero different-sex adults) in the HH and who report being
married [0.4% of top row sample]
Notes: Author calculations, 2014-2016 BRFSS landline respondents.




                                                                                 45
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage


                                                               Table 2: Sample Characteristics
                                                            2000-2016 BRFSS Data, Adults age 25+
                                                                      (1)                         (2)                           (3)                          (4)
 Variables                                                        Women in SSH                Women in DSH                   Men in SSH                  Men in DSH

 Same-sex marriage legal                                            .118* (.305)                .100* (.302)                 .095* (.264)                .089* (.286)

 Married                                                            .060* (.225)                .869* (.339)                 .146* (.318)                .881* (.325)
 Member of an unmarried couple                                      .056* (.218)                .031* (.173)                 .128* (.302)                .031* (.174)

 Age < 50                                                           .454* (.471)                .538* (.501)                 .604* (.441)                .534* (.501)
 High school degree or less                                         .423* (.467)                .367* (.484)                 .388* (.440)                .364* (.483)
 BA or more                                                         .290* (.429)                .355* (.481)                 .354* (.431)                .392* (.491)
 White                                                              .608* (.461)                .791* (.409)                 .687* (.418)                .776* (.419)

 Has a health plan                                                  .841* (.346)                .903* (.297)                 .793* (.365)                .897* (.305)
 Has a usual source of care                                         .855* (.333)                .891* (.314)                 .731* (.401)                .815* (.390)
 Had a past year checkup                                             .752 (.407)                 .754 (.433)                 .640* (.434)                .666* (.474)
 Unmet medical care due to cost in past year                        .180* (.363)                .111* (.315)                 .149* (.322)                .083* (.277)

 Excellent or very good health                                      .434* (.469)                .574* (.497)                 .510* (.451)                .555* (.499)
 Fair or poor health                                                .241* (.404)                .143* (.351)                 .186* (.351)                .143* (.352)
 At least 14 bad physical health days in past 30                    .166* (.351)                .110* (.314)                 .122* (.295)                .094* (.293)
 At least 14 bad mental health days in past 30                      .154* (.342)                .099* (.300)                 .124* (.297)                .067* (.252)
 At least 14 activity limited days in past 30                       .183* (.369)                .119* (.325)                 .163* (.335)                .133* (.341)

 Current smoker                                                     .222* (.393)                .150* (.359)                 .305* (.415)                .177* (.384)
 Past month drinker                                                 .417* (.466)                .598* (.502)                  .626 (.437)                 .630 (.485)
 Past month binge drinker                                           .094* (.273)                .060* (.238)                 .163* (.329)                .103* (.306)

 Had a flu shot in past year                                        .383* (.460)                .390* (.490)                 .334* (.426)                .368* (.484)
 Had a Pap test in past year                                        .521* (.473)                .614* (.489)                      --                          --
 Had a mammogram in the past two years, among 50+                   .744* (.400)                .824* (.385)                      --                          --
 Ever had a colon cancer screening, among 50+                       .569* (.453)                .639* (.484)                 .557* (.458)                .646* (.480)

 N                                                                    124,219                     1,514,900                     48,545                    1,149,147
Notes: Weighted means (standard deviations). * indicates the difference in means between column 1 vs. column 2 or column 3 vs. column 4 is significant at p<.05. Sample size
varies across outcomes because not all questions were asked in each survey year; the reported sample size is the largest one used for any of the descriptive statistics.




                                                                                      46
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage




    Table 3: Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage Is Largely Unrelated to Composition of Treatment & Comparison Groups
                                               BRFSS 2000-2016, Adults age 25+
                            Coefficient on Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage, Fully Saturated Model
                                                                   (1)                      (2)                        (3)                      (4)
Outcome is                                              Total # of adults in the   Household has exactly      Household has two         Household has two
                                                                   HH                    two adults            different-sex adults       same-sex adults
Women
Pre-reform mean of the outcome                                    2.070                     .567                      .521                      .046

Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage                                 .012                      -.008                     -.010                    .002*
                                                                 (.013)                    (.006)                    (.006)                    (.001)

R-squared                                                         .101                      .066                      .080                      .009
N                                                              3,293,318                 3,293,318                 3,293,247                 3,293,247
Men
Pre-reform mean of the outcome                                    2.181                     .625                      .590                      .034

Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage                                 .017                      .005                      .004                      .001
                                                                 (.015)                    (.005)                    (.004)                    (.001)

R-squared                                                          .081                       .052                       .054                    .004
N                                                               2,006,858                  2,006,858                  2,006,807               2,006,807
Notes: † significant at 10%; * significant at 5%. Each entry is the coefficient on Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage from a separate regression. All models
control for: dummy variables for 5 year age ranges, dummy variables for education (less than high school, some college, college or more, and refusal to provide
educational attainment), dummy variables for race/ethnicity (black, Asian, Native American, Hispanic, other race, and race not ascertained), the state
unemployment rate, state population, ACA Medicaid expansions, and CHIP income eligibility thresholds. Models also include state, month, and year fixed
effects as well as linear state-specific time trends and a dummy variable equal to 1 for individuals interviewed after the 2011 changes in BRFSS methodology.
Results use the BRFSS sampling weights as described in the text. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                                               47
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage


  Table 4: Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage Significantly Increased Marriage Take-Up
                         Among Individuals in Same-Sex Households
                                     Outcome is: Married
                              BRFSS 2000-2016, Adults age 25+
           Coefficient on Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage, Fully Saturated Model
                                                            (1)            (2)
                                                          Women           Men
Share of individuals in SSH in 2014-2016 BRFSS who         .110           .278
identify as something other than heterosexual
[Henceforth, non-heterosexual share in SSH]
Individuals in same-sex HHs
Pre-reform mean                                             .047           .136

Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage                          .037*          .057*
                                                           (.015)         (.028)

R-squared                                                  .025            .061
N                                                         122,902         48,138
Individuals in different-sex HHs
Pre-reform mean                                             .868           .880

Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage                          -.002           .005
                                                           (.003)         (.003)

R-squared                                                    .058          .074
N                                                         1,508,557     1,144,768
Notes: * significant at 5%. See notes to Table 3.




                                                     48
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage


                                              Table 5: Effects on Marriage Take-Up Are Robust
                                      Sample is: Individuals in Same-Sex Households; Outcome is: Married
                                                       BRFSS 2000-2016, Adults age 25+
                                    Coefficient on Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage, Fully Saturated Model
                                             (1)                  (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)
                                           Baseline         (1), without    (1), code CA    (1), drop CA   (1), without   (1), with 18-   (1), without
                                          model (from        linear state    as off until      entirely      sample       24 year olds      students
                                           Table 3)             trends          US. v.                       weights        included
                                                                              Windsor
Non-heterosexual share in SSH                .110              .110             .110          .111           .110            .114           .110
Households with two adult women
Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage            .037*            .041**           .047**         .041**         .038*           .033*          .037*
                                             (.015)            (.015)           (.012)         (.012)        (.015)          (.013)         (.015)

R-squared                                    .025              .023            .025            .027          .031            .024           .025
N                                           122,902           122,902         122,902         119,399       122,902         136,557        121,109
Non-heterosexual share in SSH               .278              .278            .278            .270          .278            .261           .278
Households with two adult men
Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage            .057*            .062**           .077**         .068**         .048*           .055*          .056*
                                             (.028)            (.023)           (.019)         (.022)        (.022)          (.026)         (.028)

R-squared                                      .061             .055            .061           .066           .051           .077            .062
N                                             48,138           48,138          48,138         46,510         48,138         55,055          47,435
Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. See notes to Table 3.




                                                                               49
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage


    Table 6: Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage on Access to Care and Health
                         Sample is Individuals in Same-Sex Households
                              BRFSS 2000-2016, Adults age 25+
           Coefficient on Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage, Fully Saturated Model
                                                                                 (1)                  (2)
                                                                            Women in SSH          Men in SSH
Married (Nw=122,902; Nm=48,138)                                              .037* (.015)         .057* (.028)

Insurance and Access to Care
Insured (Nw=123,677; Nm=48,299)                                               -.020 (.026)       .042** (.016)
Has a usual source of care (Nw=120,477; Nm=46,491)                             .002 (.006)        .042* (.017)
Had a checkup in the past year (Nw=103,227; Nm=38,822)                        -.004 (.012)       .073** (.016)
Unmet medical needs in past year (Nw=119,996; Nm=46,278)                       .026 (.020)         .040 (.028)

Self-rated health and bad health days
Excellent or very good health (Nw=123,950; Nm=48,433)                         -.026 (.016)         .050 (.054)
Fair or poor health (Nw=123,950; Nm=48,433)                                   -.004 (.011)         .002 (.018)
14+ days bad physical health in past month (Nw=118,085; Nm=46,035)             .007 (.009)         .019 (.017)
14+ days bad mental health in past month (Nw=118,801; Nm=46,080)             -.019* (.008)         .023 (.017)
14+ days activity limited days in past month (Nw=71,884; Nm=24,207)          -.029* (.012)         .042 (.031)

Substance use
Drank alcohol in past month (Nw=118,149; Nm=45,709)                           -.008 (.007)        -.002 (.010)
Binged in past two weeks (Nw=46,352; Nm=26,290)                               -.014 (.010)        -.026 (.053)
Smoked cigarettes in past month (Nw=122,389; Nm=47,864)                      .024** (.007)        -.022 (.034)

Preventive care
Had a flu shot in past year (Nw=109,295; Nm=42,634)                          -.022* (.009)          .029 (.027)
Had a Pap test in past year (Nw=68,359)                                       -.035 (.033)              --
Had a mammogram in the past two years, among 50+ (Nw=43,601)                  -.005 (.015)              --
Ever had a colon cancer screening, among 50+ (Nw=43,296; Nm=14,596)           -.011 (.017)          .010 (.027)
Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. See notes to Table 3. Sample sizes vary across the outcomes, as
not all outcomes were asked in every year. Nw (Nm) indicates the sample size for the women (men) in same-sex
households.




                                                       50
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage


                                      Appendix Figure 1
            Event Study: Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage and Insurance Coverage
                2000-2016 BRFSS Data, Men age 25+ in Same-Sex Households
                0.1
              0.08
              0.06
              0.04
              0.02
                 0
                      5+ yrs 4 yrs   3 yrs     2 yrs   1 yr   1 yr   2 yrs   3 yrs   4 yrs 5+ yrs
              -0.02
                       pre    pre     pre       pre    pre    post   post    post    post post
              -0.04
              -0.06
              -0.08
                                       Estimate           95% ci        95% ci




                                                        51
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage


                                      Appendix Figure 2
            Event Study: Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage and Usual Source of Care
                 2000-2016 BRFSS Data, Men age 25+ in Same-Sex Households
                0.1


              0.05


                 0
                      5+ yrs 4 yrs   3 yrs     2 yrs   1 yr   1 yr   2 yrs   3 yrs   4 yrs 5+ yrs
                       pre    pre     pre       pre    pre    post   post    post    post post
              -0.05


               -0.1


              -0.15
                                       Estimate           95% ci        95% ci




                                                        52
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage


                                      Appendix Figure 3
             Event Study: Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage and Past Year Checkup
                 2000-2016 BRFSS Data, Men age 25+ in Same-Sex Households
              0.15

                0.1

              0.05

                 0
                      5+ yrs 4 yrs   3 yrs     2 yrs   1 yr   1 yr   2 yrs   3 yrs   4 yrs 5+ yrs
              -0.05    pre    pre     pre       pre    pre    post   post    post    post post


               -0.1

              -0.15
                                       Estimate           95% ci        95% ci




                                                        53
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage


        Appendix Table 1: Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage and Demographics of Individuals in Same-Sex Households
                                               BRFSS 2000-2016, Adults age 25+
                            Coefficient on Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage, Fully Saturated Model
                                                 (1)                       (2)                  (3)                 (4)                (5)
                                               Under 50                   White         High school or Less   College graduate   Any kids <18 in
                                                                                                                                   Household
Households with two adult women
Pre-reform mean                                   .518                     .624                .442                .293               .347

Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage                 .019                     .004               .039**                -.005            .022*
                                                 (.012)                   (.008)               (.013)              (.011)            (.009)

R-squared                                        .071                      .148               .086                 .072              .195
N                                               122,489                   122,668            123,572              123,572           123,646
Households with two adult men
Pre-reform mean                                   .708                     .697                .369                .363               .146

Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage                 .011                     -.015              .050*               -.054*              .007
                                                 (.016)                   (.023)              (.022)              (.023)             (.011)

R-squared                                         .093                     .112                .081                .079               .066
N                                                48,114                   47,843              48,289              48,289             48,321
Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. See notes to Table 3.




                                                                                   54
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage


        Appendix Table 2: Expanded Set of Coefficient Estimates, Marriage Take-Up
            Sample is: Individuals in Same-Sex Households; Outcome is: Married
                             BRFSS 2000-2016, Adults age 25+
          Coefficient on Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage, Fully Saturated Model
                                                                                      (1)      (2)
                                                                                     Women     Men

Pre-reform mean                                                                       .047      .136

Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage                                                     .037*    .057*
                                                                                      (.015)   (.028)
Strong Civil Unions/Domestic Partnership Policy Available to Same-Sex Couples Only     -.004    -.027
                                                                                      (.016)   (.024)
Strong Civil Unions/Domestic Partnership Policy Available to All Couples             .029**     -.036
                                                                                      (.010)   (.034)
Weak Civil Unions/Domestic Partnership Policy Available to Same-Sex Couples Only       -.008    .035
                                                                                      (.013)   (.029)
Weak Civil Unions/Domestic Partnership Policy Available to All Couples                 .018     -.034
                                                                                      (.013)   (.035)
Nondiscrimination policy in private employment                                         -.016   -.057*
                                                                                      (.021)   (.023)
Statutory Ban on Same-Sex Marriage                                                     .008      .011
                                                                                      (.015)   (.033)
Constitutional Ban on Same-Sex Marriage                                                .001      .005
                                                                                      (.011)   (.018)
Religious Freedom Restoration Act                                                      .006     -.015
                                                                                      (.007)   (.021)
Medicaid Expansion                                                                     .016      .043
                                                                                      (.014)   (.028)
CHIP Eligibility Threshold for a Family of 3                                           .000      .000
                                                                                      (.000)   (.000)

R-squared                                                                             .025      .061
N                                                                                    122,902   48,138
Notes: * significant at 5%. See notes to Table 3.




                                                      55
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage


                                     Appendix Table 3: Effects on Marriage Take-Up, by Demographics
                                      Sample is: Individuals in Same-Sex Households; Outcome is: Married
                                                       BRFSS 2000-2016, Adults age 25+
                                    Coefficient on Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage, Fully Saturated Model
                                 (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)          (6)          (7)            (8)
                               Under 50       50 and older        White          Nonwhite       High school   College    Any kids <18    No kids <18
                                                                                                  or less     graduate   in Household   in Household
Non-heterosexual share           .153             .093             .135               .065         .061         .191         .099           .115
in SSH 
Households with two
adult women
Pre-reform mean                  .055             .037             .037               .063         .051        .043          .068           .036

Access to Legal Same-           .045*            .026*             .040†               .032†       .032†        .041         .029         .037**
Sex Marriage                    (.019)           (.012)           (.021)              (.017)      (.017)       (.030)       (.020)         (.012)

R-squared                        .030             .022             .030             .033           .027        .055         .048           .020
N                               43,595           78,112           84,494           37,292         49,793      38,514       35,783         86,933
Non-heterosexual share           .275             .280             .317               .162         .112        .506          .156           .292
in SSH
Households with two
adult men
Pre-reform mean                  .113             .187             .111               .192         .174        .112          .402           .090

Access to Legal Same-            .044             .061†            .056†               .070        .067        .084*         .134           .052†
Sex Marriage                    (.037)           (.031)           (.031)              (.043)      (.043)       (.034)       (.157)         (.031)

R-squared                        .073             .057             .054             .092           .085        .086         .143           .063
N                               21,263           26,595           36,706           10,893         18,641      17,542        5,786         42,269
Notes: † significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. See notes to Table 3.




                                                                                 56
Effects of Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage


           Appendix Table 4: Health Insurance and Access to Care Effects for Men in Same-Sex Households Are Robust
                                             Sample is: Men in Same-Sex Households
                                                BRFSS 2000-2016, Adults age 25+
                             Coefficient on Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage, Fully Saturated Model
                                             (1)                  (2)              (3)                (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)
                                           Baseline         (1), without     (1), code CA       (1), drop CA   (1), without   (1), with 18-   (1), without
                                          model (from        linear state     as off until         entirely      sample       24 year olds      students
                                           Table 6)             trends           US. v.                          weights        included
                                                                               Windsor
Non-heterosexual share in SSH                .278              .278              .278             .270           .278            .261           .278
Insured
Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage            .042**            .035*              .027             .043*          .010          .047**          .042*
                                              (.016)           (.017)            (.023)            (.016)        (.012)          (.015)         (.017)

R-squared                                     .112              .110             .111              .114           .117           .115            .114
N                                            48,299            48,299           48,299            46,665         48,229         55,087          47,594
Usual Source of Care
Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage            .042*             .043**             .031              .039†         .007            .046†         .051**
                                             (.017)             (.014)           (.019)            (.020)        (.012)          (.026)          (.019)

R-squared                                     .138              .136             .138              .129           .127           .138            .136
N                                            46,491            46,491           46,491            44,906         46,491         52,696          45,839
Checkup in Past Year
Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage            .073**            .051**             .045            .074**         .039**          .066*          .071**
                                              (.016)            (.018)           (.031)            (.016)         (.012)         (.025)          (.016)

R-squared                                      .103              .101             .103             .103           .101           .093            .103
N                                             38,822            38,822           38,822           37,452         38,822         42,944          38,373
Notes: † significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. See notes to Table 3.




                                                                                 57
