                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PUBLIC POLICY IN AN AI ECONOMY

                                      Austan Goolsbee

                                     Working Paper 24653
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24653


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2018




I wish to thank the participants at the NBER Artificial Intelligence conference for helpful
comments and the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of
Business for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Austan Goolsbee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Public Policy in an AI Economy
Austan Goolsbee
NBER Working Paper No. 24653
May 2018
JEL No. H0,L16,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper considers the role of policy in an AI-intensive economy (interpreting AI broadly). It
emphasizes the speed of adoption of the technology for the impact on the job market and the
implications for inequality across people and across places. It also discusses the challenges of
enacting a Universal Basic Income as a response to widespread AI adoption, discuss pricing,
privacy and competition policy the question of whether AI could improve policy making itself.


Austan Goolsbee
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
goolsbee@chicagobooth.edu
INTRODUCTION
      This conference has brought together a mix of technology and economics
scholars to think broadly about the role of Artificial Intelligence in the economy
and this short paper will present a few thoughts about the role of policy in a world
where AI becomes ubiquitous.
      Most of the public discussion about an AI dominated economy has focused
on robots and the future of work. Ruminations by public figures like Bill Gates,
Stephen Hawking and Elon Musk have stoked fears that robots will destroy our
jobs (and, possibly, the world). Some of these same figures have called for various
heterodox policy ideas, too, from moving to colonies in space to taxing the robots
to providing a Universal Basic Income (UBI) untethered to work.
      As the research and comments in this volume suggest, economists have
generally been less pessimistic when thinking about the role of AI on jobs. They
often highlight the historical record of job creation despite job displacement,
documented the way technological advances have eliminated jobs in some sectors
but expanded jobs and increased wages in the economy overall and highlighted the
advantages that the new technologies will likely have in the future (some recent
discussions include Autor, 2015; Autor and Salomons, 2018; Brynjolfsson and
Mcafee, 2014; Mokyr, 2014).
      The pessimistic case has come more from technology/business sector.
Perhaps seeing the advances in technology up close, they worry that the machines
may soon be so good that they could replace almost anyone. One major study
across many industries by McKinsey Global Institute (McKinsey, 2017) argues that
73 million jobs may be destroyed by automation by 2030 because of the rise of the
new technologies.
      In many ways, it is unfortunate that labor market policy has dominated our
thinking about the AI economy. The main economic impact of AI is not about jobs
or, at least, is about much more than just jobs. The main economic impact of these
technologies will be how good they are. If the recent advances continue, AI has the
potential to improve the quality of our products and our standard of living. If AI
helps us diagnose medical problems better, improves our highway safety, gives us
back hours of our day that were spent driving in traffic, or even just improves the



                                                                                  2
quality of our selfies, these are direct consumer benefits. These raise our real
incomes and the economic studies valuing the improvements from quality and from
new products tend to show their value is often extremely high (see the discussions
in the volume of Bresnahan and Gordon, 1997 or the discussions over valuing “free”
goods like Goolsbee and Klenow, 2006 and Varian, 2013).
       That’s a different way of saying that if AI succeeds, it will raise our
productivity and higher productivity makes us rich. It is not a negative. Indeed, if
AI succeeded in the way some fear, it would mean the exact reversal of the main
problem facing growth in the last decade or more that productivity growth has
been too slow. Indeed, it would decisively refute one of the central tenets of secular
stagnationist thinkers like Gordon (2017) who argue that low productivity growth
is a semi-permanent condition for the advanced economies because of the scarcity
of path breaking ideas. Would that AI could change that equation.
       This paper will consider a few disparate thoughts about policy in an AI-
intensive economy (interpreting AI broadly to include a cluster of information
technology based productivity improvements beyond just conventional Artificial
Intelligence or Machine Learning). It will consider the speed of adoption of the
technology—the impact on the job market and the implications for inequality
across people and across places, discuss the challenges of enacting a Universal Basic
Income as a response to widespread AI adoption, discuss pricing, privacy and
competition policy and conclude with the question of whether AI will improve
policy making itself.


THE SPEED OF ADOPTION—IMPLICATIONS FOR THE JOB MARKET
AND FOR INEQUALITY
       Taking the issue of job displacement first, the basic conclusion of the
economists is that for the last hundred years, there have been massive amounts of
job displacement yet the structural unemployment rate has not seemed to rise,
much less trend toward 100%. Over time, people adjust. They move. They get
skills. The long-run impact of labor saving technologies have overwhelming been
positive for market economies. If the fear is that AI will replace low-skill jobs, it is
a fact that tens or even hundreds of millions of low skill jobs were displaced by


                                                                                      3
technology in previous years in a process very similar to the one we describe today.
If the fear is that AI is different this time around because it will begin to replace
types of jobs that have never been automated before like higher-skill or white-collar
jobs the historical data indicate that those groups have been able to adjust to
shocks and move to new sectors and new geographic areas easier than lower skill
workers have.
       A critical issue is, of course, how fast the adjustment takes place/the speed
of adoption of AI technology. The economy has proven quite capable of inventing
new things for people to do over the long-run. Obviously, if change happens all at
once, the adjustment problem is worst. Spread out over time, however, the
adjustment can be manageable. Take the much discussed case of autonomous cars.
There were about 3.5 million truck, bus, and taxi drivers in 2015 and suppose that
every one of them were lost due to advances in self-driving car technology.
       If this loss takes place over 15 years, this would average a little over 19,000
per month and compare that to the fact that in 2017 the JOLTS data show that
the economy generated about 5.3 million jobs per month (with 5.1 million
separations per month). The complete elimination of every job in the sector would
increase the increase the separation rate by less than four tenths of a percent. It
would force drivers into new sectors and be disruptive to their livelihoods. But as
a macroeconomic phenomenon, the impact would be small. If that loss happened
in two years, the impact would be quite significant.
       So it’s worth considering what influences the speed of adoption and,
certainly, a key determinant will be how good the AI actually is compared to
people. But, many analysts seem to view that as the only thing that will determine
adoption rates. It’s worth considering at least two other factors: prices and
adjustment costs.
       First, many of these AI innovations involve significant capital outlays up
front and that alone may slow their adoption for some time. Ride-share drivers, for
example, by some measures can barely cover the cost of operating their cars
(including depreciation, fuel, maintenance and insurance) at the price of cars now.
AI enabled autonomous vehicles are likely to cost substantially more per car than
conventional cars when they become available to the public. Will companies be



                                                                                    4
willing to incur large up front to bypass paying drivers? It really depends on prices
that we do not yet know.
       Second, ‘better’ doesn’t always mean faster adoption. Economists have
shown automated stock picking through index funds superior to active management
for decades yet people still hold trillions in inefficient, high-fee funds. Millions of
people have mortgages with higher than market interest rates that they don’t
refinance, cell phone data plans that do not match their usage, and so on. There
are tens of millions of people that do not use the Internet. Inertia is a powerful
force slowing the adoption of technology products and is certainly worth
remembering if we want to predict something like how fast people will give up
common behaviors like driving for themselves.
       Third, in an important sense, we know that AI can only be as good as its
training sample and there are some very different types of customers in the country
that may make the AI quality improvements much more fitting for certain types
of customers than others. Microsoft created an AI program to learn from Twitter
and see if it could create content that people would think was written by a human.
They started it in the U.S. and had to shut it down almost immediately because it
became so abusive and offensive. It mirrored what it saw online. Running the same
program in China, where Twitter is heavily censored, it has performed well and
not turned abusive. The attributes of the product and the ‘quality’ of the product
depend on how relevant the training sample is to that customer.
       This is likely to influence the adoption rate of the AI technologies in different
places. Again, think of the autonomous cars. Will we gather loads of information
about driving in urban areas and on highways or in Silicon valley from the early
adopters, tailor the product to their needs but then find that it doesn’t work as
well for dirt roads or rural places or places without Bay area weather?
       Heterogeneous demand is the hobgoblin of the AI mind. Groups that differ
most from the training sample will likely be the slowest to adopt the technology in
part because it will be the least helpful to them. That may lead to another
manifestation of the digital divide. In this sense, the rise of AI technologies is likely
to make the problem of income and of geographic inequality even worse. To the
extent that new AI technologies are expensive and tailored toward the training



                                                                                       5
sample of adopters, it will be like having lower inflation and greater consumer
surplus going to those groups (for discussions about differences in prices and
innovation across income groups or for online buyers versus offline buyers, see
Jaravel, 2017 or Goolsbee and Klenow, 2018).
       Government policy will face the potential of divisions along red state/blue
state or high-education/low-education locations or high-income/low-income
neighborhoods even more than it does today.


CHALLENGES FOR UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME AS A RESPONSE TO JOB
MARKET DISPLACEMENT
       Now suppose that the arguments above prove wrong. Nothing slows the
speed of AI adoption and there is mass job displacement in a short time. There has
been a rising call among the believers in that scenario for Universal Basic Income
policy. Closely tied to the old Milton Friedman notion of a negative income tax,
the UBI would grant some minimal level of income to people regardless of
employment status as a new form of safety net and anyone could then work beyond
that UBI level to earn more. In the purest libertarian concept, this UBI would
replace the existing collection of safety net programs. The advantage of the UBI
would be that people could survive in a world with few human jobs and alleviate
poverty in a relatively efficient manner and without destroying all incentives in the
private economy. It seeks to separate the notion of ‘making-a-living’ from having
a job. There are some small scale experiments with the UBI in a few countries like
Finland and New Zealand or funded by private individuals in the US.
       There are a number of challenges associated with negative income taxes and
UBIs as a policy solution to widespread AI adoption.
       First, if you accept the economists’ basic labor supply model (that people
value leisure and so generally need to be paid to work) then there are likely to be
some sizable number of people who are working only because they absolutely have
to. In a world where AI induced unemployment is already high, separating work
and income might be an advantage. In a world like the one we are in now, though,
offering a basic income will likely cause a sizable drop in labor market participation
by low wage earners. To the extent that non-participation in exactly that segment


                                                                                    6
of the labor force is already viewed as a problem, the UBI would likely make things
worse and risk angering the broader public.
       Second, for a given amount of money to be used on redistribution, a UBI
likely shifts money away from the very poor. To oversimplify, if you have $50B to
alleviate poverty, the targeting approach followed in most countries today might
use the $50B to help the poorest/sickest 25m people and give them the equivalent
of $25,000 of benefits each. With a broad-based UBI, the same $50B would be
spread out. It might involve, say, 100m people getting $5000 each. Perhaps a UBI
could change the total taste for redistribution in a society—leaving the most
disadvantaged people with the same amount and upping the total amount spent—
but for the UBI to not end up more regressive than the current system necessarily
entails greater amounts of public funds.
       Third, the conception of the UBI as a replacement for a myriad of other in-
kind transfers and safety net programs forgets the historical origins of that safety
net. Fundamentally, the in-kind safety net exists today because rich societies are
not comfortable with grievously injured people coming into a hospital but being
turned away if they don’t have money or letting kids go hungry because their
parents cannot afford to feed them, and so on. Converting to a UBI and abolishing
the in-kind safety net will lead to a situation where some people will blow their
UBI money in unsympathetic ways—gambling, drugs, junk food, Ponzi schemes,
whatever. Those people will then come to emergency rooms or their kids will be
hungry and by the rules, they will be out of luck. That’s what their UBI income
was supposed to cover. But the fact that advanced economies evolved an in-kind
safety net in order to avoid this situation makes me think that enforcing “UBI-
discipline” and replacing the safety net with a straight transfer would require a
rather extraordinary changes in the psyche of people in the advanced economies.


POLICY RESPONSES TO AI BEYOND JOBS: PRICING, DATA PROPERTY
RIGHTS AND ANTITRUST
       Just as the impact of AI goes far beyond just the impact on employment,
the policy response to AI raises all sorts of other considerations, as well.




                                                                                  7
       One is the perennial back-and-forth over the power of buyers versus the
power of sellers in pricing. The same issue arose with the initial rise of ecommerce-
-the new online data on customers allowed new forms of price discrimination and
market power but the ease of comparison shopping reduced search costs and
promoted competition. So far, the power of the AI technology seems
overwhelmingly to have been used by sellers. If they can individualize market and
price discriminate with it, margins will likely rise. But consumers will likely push
back. They may find technological solutions to use AI to thwart merchants. But a
more straightforward response might be to follow past practice and start making
various behaviors and practices illegal. This could include restrictions on consumer
privacy and the ways that companies can use customer information. It might
manifest as an argument over property rights in the sense of who owns the
consumers’ data and what level of consent it requires to use it, or might involve
rules against various types of price discrimination. Regardless of the form, these
issues of pricing and data seem like they will be a central area of policy in an AI-
centric world.
       The second thing about an AI economy is that the fixed-cost/economies of
scale seem pretty significant and in many cases, there are also often network
externalities and switching costs on the demand side of these industries. All of
these seem to portend the possibility of many industries having a winner-take-all
market structure or the continued rise of ‘platform’ competition rather than
conventional competition. If so, the rise of AI is likely to usher in a renewed
emphasis on anti-trust policy in much the same way the original gilded age
consolidation of industry did before.


CONCLUSION: WILL ROBOTS TAKE OVER POLICY, TOO?
       The organizers of the volume also asked us to consider whether AI will
enhance or even replace the jobs of policy makers—whether improvements in
machine learning and AI could be used on the policy making process itself.
Personally, I do not think so because the most important policy matters are at
their heart not issues of prediction. The technology may improve our ability to
predict responses but it does not help us balance interests or engage in politics. We



                                                                                   8
already know, for example, a great deal about the fiscal implications for social
security of the aging population. Artificial intelligence might improve our ability
to predict revenue outcomes of various policy options, say. That hasn’t been the
problem with addressing social security. It has always been about choosing between
options and making value judgments. The kinds of problems that AI helps with
are those where large amounts of past data to inform the decision. Conditions with
small samples or where the conditions are very different than in the past will be
much less machine learnable. For small bore issues, AI may improve policy
accuracy—what conditions should cause regulators raise their estimated
probability that a bank’s loans will start to default, for example. For bigger issues,
though, like whether the Federal Reserve should raise interest rates or whether we
should cut high-income people’s taxes—I have my doubts about what AI can
contribute.
       It is also sure to increase the attention paid to business practices of large AI
platforms—their pricing, their use of personal data on customers, their behavior
toward competitors and the continuing consolidation of market power. Each of
these is likely to become a major policy battleground of the future. For the time
being, though, the job of policymakers themselves seem relatively safe…for now.




                                                                                     9
Bibliography
Autor, David (2015), “Why Are There Still So Many Jobs? The History and
Future of Workplace Automation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer
2015, 29(3), 3–30.


Autor, David & Salomons, A.M. (2018), “Is automation labor-displacing?
Productivity growth, employment, and the labor share” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 2018 (spring).


Bresnahan, Timothy and Robert Gordon, eds. (1997), The Economics of New
Goods, National Bureau of Economic Research. University of Chicago Press.
Chicago, Illinois.


Brown, Jeffrey and Austan D. Goolsbee, "Does the Internet Make Markets More
Competitive? Evidence from the Life Insurance Industry," Journal of Political
Economy, June 2002, 110(3), 481-507.


Brynjolfsson, Erik and Andrew McAfee (2014), The Second Machine Age: Work,
Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies.. New York, NY:
W.W. Norton, 2014.


Goolsbee, Austan D. and Peter J. Klenow, "Valuing Consumer Goods by the
Time Spent Using Them: An Application to the Internet," American Economic
Review (Papers and Proceedings), May 2006, 96(2), 108-113


Goolsbee, Austan D. and Peter J. Klenow, "Internet Rising, Prices Falling:
Measuring Inflation in a World of E-Commerce," American Economic Review
(Papers and Proceedings), May 2018, 108(5).


Gordon, Robert (2016), The rise and fall of American growth: the US standard of
living since the Civil War, Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ.


                                                                             10
Mckinsey Global Institute (2017), Jobs Lost, Jobs Gained: Workforce Transitions
in   a   Time   of   Automation,   McKinsey   &   Co.,   December,    URL:     <
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Global%20Themes/Future%20of
%20Organizations/What%20the%20future%20of%20work%20will%20mean%20for
%20jobs%20skills%20and%20wages/MGI-Jobs-Lost-Jobs-Gained-Report-
December-6-2017.ashx> accessed April 26, 2018.

Jaravel, Xavier (2017), “The Unequal Gains from Product Innovations: Evidence
from the US Retail Sector,” April 7, manuscript London School of Economics

Mokyr, Joel (2014), “Secular Stagnation? Not in Your Life,” in Coen Teulings
and Richard Baldwin eds., Secular Stagnation: Facts Causes and Cures. CEPR
Press, London., pp. 83-89.


Varian, Hal (2013), “The Value of the Internet, Now and in the Future,” The
Economist, March, 10. URL:
<https://www.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2013/03/technology-1>,
accessed April 26, 2018




                                                                               11
