                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        POLICY UNCERTAINTY AND INNOVATION:
                      EVIDENCE FROM IPO INTERVENTIONS IN CHINA

                                           Lin William Cong
                                           Sabrina T. Howell

                                         Working Paper 24657
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w24657


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2018


The authors especially thank Shai Bernstein and Manju Puri for helpful discussions and suggestion.
They also thank Viral Acharya, Philip Bond, Jennifer Carpenter, Francois Derrien, Shan Ge, Steve
Kaplan, Elisabeth Kempf, Charles Lee, Yifei Mao, Gustavo Manso, Holger Mueller, Raghuram Rajan,
Mike Schwert, Amir Sufi, Qian Sun, Margarita Tsoutsoura, Shan Zhao, and conference and seminar
participants at NBER Chinese Economy Meeting, CICF, Asian Finance Association Meeting, Econometric
Society Asian Meeting, the Changing Role of Stock Markets in Capital Formation Conference, HEC,
Mannheim, HKU, HKUST, NUS, NYU Stern, University of Washington Foster School, and Peking
University for comments and feedback. For data assistance, they are also grateful to the Private Capital
Research Institute (PCRI), Xiaobo Zhang, and especially Rania Zhang with whom we had repeated
discussions and consultations that helped shape an initial version of the paper. Cong’s research was
funded by the Initiative on Global Markets, the Fama-Miller Center, and the Polsky Center at the University
of Chicago Booth School of Business. Howell’s research was funded by the NYU Stern Center for
Global Economy and Business and the Kauffman Foundation. Ammon Lam, Danye Wang, Xiao Zhang,
and Yi Zhang provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Lin William Cong and Sabrina T. Howell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Policy Uncertainty and Innovation: Evidence from IPO Interventions in China
Lin William Cong and Sabrina T. Howell
NBER Working Paper No. 24657
May 2018, Revised April 2020
JEL No. G3,O3

                                              ABSTRACT

Public equity is an important source of risk capital, especially in China. The Chinese government has
occasionally suspended IPOs, exposing firms already approved to IPO to indeterminate listing delays.
The temporary bar on going public increases uncertainty about access to public markets for affected
firms. We show that suspension-induced delay reduces corporate innovation activity both during the
delay and for years after listing. Negative effects on tangible investment and positive effects on leverage
are temporary, consistent with financial constraints during the suspensions being resolved after listing.
Our results suggest that predictable, well-functioning IPO markets are important for firm value creation.
They demonstrate that corporate innovation is cumulative and is negatively affected by policy uncertainty.


Lin William Cong
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
will.cong@cornell.edu

Sabrina T. Howell
NYU Stern School of Business
KMC 9-93
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
showell@stern.nyu.edu
1   Introduction

This paper studies the impact on innovation of a government policy that created

uncertainty by suspending IPO activity indefinitely. Specifically, the policy temporarily
prevented certain firms that had already been approved to go public from accessing public
markets through IPOs. This unique situation oﬀers an ideal setting to explore the impact

of policy uncertainty, which is typically diﬃcult to isolate in empirical analysis. In our
context, we can contemporaneously compare firms facing policy uncertainty, which lose
access to public markets for an indefinite period of time but ultimately go public, with very

similar firms that have only short periods of normal processing time between their IPO
approval and listing. The forced, uncertain suspension-induced delay reduces innovation,
which we measure using patenting activity. The decline in innovation endures after listing,

suggesting that innovation has a cumulative dimension and that temporary suspensions
could have a persistent impact by altering manager preferences.
      The literature has established that when firms intending to IPO face strategic

incentives to remain private, staying private improves innovation quality (Ferreira, Manso
& Silva 2012, Bernstein 2015). At the same time, other studies find that public equity
enables innovation by providing risk capital (Atanassov, Nanda & Seru 2007, Acharya &

Xu 2017). We shed light on an as-yet unstudied dimension: certainty in access to public
markets. This is especially relevant in emerging economies, where alternative sources of
risk capital are less mature and regulatory infrastructure is less predictable than in

developed countries (Rajan & Zingales 2001, Hsu, Tian & Xu 2014, Ahlstrom, Bruton &
Yeh 2007, Cong, Lee, Qu & Shen 2018). No emerging financial market is more important
than China’s (Allen, Qian & Qian 2008).

      We exploit a novel source of variation oﬀered by the Chinese setting: Regulators have
on multiple occasions suspended all IPO activities. While related to the state of the market,
the suspensions were not scheduled and were not anticipated multiple months in advance.

The suspensions generate plausibly exogenous listing delay among firms already approved to

                                             1
go public because firms have little ability to time the IPO market. IPO approval takes two
to three years in normal, non-suspension times. Once approved, firms take several months

to complete the final steps. As a result of this multi-year time frame from application to
listing, aggregate market conditions do not aﬀect the order of firms listing around suspension
announcements. While normal, predictable time between approval and listing may create

financial constraints, suspension-induced delay adds the element of uncertainty in addition
to further delay.
        In analysis, we focus on a sample of firms that Chinese regulators approve to IPO

in the twelve months before a suspension announcement for two suspensions, the first from
September 2008 to July 2009, and the second from October 2012 to January 2014. All of these
firms ultimately go public on Chinese exchanges, but depending on their approval dates, some

experience sharply greater listing delays induced by the suspensions (see Figure 1). Members
of the control group are approved earlier and list with normal delay (i.e. standard processing
time), while members of the treated group must wait until the suspension ends and face a

longer time between approval and listing as well as greater uncertainty about when they can
list. No firms in our sample choose to withdraw and list abroad.1 In a key placebo test
we show that variation in normal delay due to processing time – which contains no policy

uncertainty – operates very diﬀerently from suspension-induced delay; it has no eﬀect on
innovation. This helps to demonstrate the importance of policy uncertainty independently
of any financial constraint eﬀect.

        Firms in the control and treatment groups are similar before approval and we verify
that the order of listing closely follows the order of IPO approval. As we explain in Section
4.1, if any queue-jumping occurs after approval, it does not adversely bias our estimation,

because we define treatment by the date of approval, which occurs before a suspension
announcement; if queue-jumping occurs before approval, it should aﬀect treatment and
   1
     This may reflect the sunk cost fallacy, as the firm will have expended considerable resources to apply to IPO in
China. It could also reflect the expectation of a more favorable domestic market valuation, or firm-specific factors
that make the firm poorly suited to IPO on a foreign exchange.




                                                         2
control equally. Suspension-induced delay is therefore plausibly exogenous to firm-specific
factors, so it oﬀers quasi-experimental variation in timely access to public capital.

        We estimate the eﬀect of suspension-induced delay in regressions that control for the
listing date and firm variables such as state ownership, size, age, and industry. To measure
innovation eﬀort, we use the number of patent applications to China’s State Intellectual

Property Oﬃce (Chinese patent applications), granted Chinese patents, citations to Chinese
patents, and granted global (non-Chinese) patents.2 In the year after IPO approval, treated
firms, which have on average 16 months of suspension-induced delay, have 28 percent fewer

Chinese patent applications than control firms, which have on average three months of normal
delay. The negative eﬀect on treated firms is significant and persists over time. For example,
in the fourth year after the approval year, when all firms are public, the treated group still has

18 percent fewer patent applications. Suspension-induced delay also reduces patent quality;
in the year after IPO approval, granted Chinese patents, citations to Chinese patents, and
granted global (non-Chinese) patents all decline. Suspension-induced delay also leads to

higher leverage, lower return on sales, and lower investment in tangible assets in the year
following IPO approval. However, none of these non-innovation eﬀects endures after listing.
        Our identification assumptions do not require suspensions to be independent of

aggregate economic conditions.              Instead, we show that cross-sectionally, firms do less
innovation when they experience suspension-induced delay. For example, one specification
considers the first and second years after IPO among treated firms and aligns control firms

so that they are considered in the same calendar time as the treatment firms. We further
show that our main results are robust to instrumenting for suspension-induced delay with
the approval date and disappear in sensible placebo tests.

        We focus on two non-mutually exclusive channels that the literature has highlighted
in order to explain our findings: capital constraints and policy uncertainty.3 Financial
    2
      Previous work on Chinese firm innovation has relied primarily on patent counts. To our knowledge, we are the
first to gather comprehensive data on citations for Chinese patents from global patent oﬃces and to include citations
to SIPO patents beyond WIPO family patents. We present findings using both SIPO data and global patent data,
but Wei et al. (2017) indicate that patent quality is not lower in China than elsewhere.
    3
      The dynamics that we observe among treated firms – depressed innovation activity during the delay period


                                                         3
constraints are known to impede investment (Froot, Scharfstein & Stein 1993, Dixit &
Pindyck 1994, Almeida & Campello 2007). In the year following IPO approval, when

treated firms are still private but their non-delayed counterparts have listed, the eﬀects on
leverage, tangible investment and innovation are consistent with a shock to access to
capital. This relationship between financial constraints during suspension-induced delay

and innovation is intuitive and complements Brown, Fazzari & Petersen (2009) and
Acharya & Xu (2017).4 Furthermore, this evidence of financial constraints suggests that in
China, IPO markets are important for capital provision.

        However, financial constraints do not tell the whole story. We find evidence that
policy uncertainty (indefinitely long IPO suspensions) is an important channel to explain the
negative eﬀect on innovation. Consistent with the real options literature, which predicts that

uncertainty negatively aﬀects irreversible investment (Dixit & Pindyck 1994), suspension-
induced delay reduces tangible investment and innovation activity. While these results could
also reflect financial constraints, several findings are inconsistent with them being the main

mechanism. First, they predict that firms with better access to alternative sources of capital
in the form of debt or VC/PE will be less aﬀected. Yet SOEs – which have advantaged access
to credit – are no less aﬀected than private firms. Firms with prior VC/PE financing are more

aﬀected, which could reflect their higher inherent risk under uncertainty. Furthermore, we do
not find that firms expected to be more financially constrained based on standard measures
experience larger eﬀects. To corroborate our argument that the suspensions increased general

uncertainty, we document that the suspensions were associated with lower VC investment
in China after controlling for market conditions, even among VC firms based in the United
States and active in China. In sum, while the data do not permit us to exclude a role for

financial constraints, the evidence strongly supports an important role for policy uncertainty.
        Policy uncertainty (and financial constraints) aﬀect innovation not only during the
and after IPO – indicate that window dressing, a well-known practice during the IPO process, cannot be the main
mechanism at play, because it does not predict a medium-term impact after IPO. We also find that firms with
suspension-induced delay have slightly lower discretionary accruals, a standard measure of window dressing.
   4
     Relatedly, Cornaggia, Mao, Tian & Wolfe (2015) study how banking competition aﬀects innovation exploiting
the deregulation of interstate bank branching laws.


                                                      4
suspensions, but also long after the uncertainty (or constraint) is resolved and the firms
publicly list.   This may reflect the cumulative nature of innovation.       Another way for

suspensions to aﬀect long-term innovation is that they may change manager preferences,
especially their tolerance for failure and interest in experimentation (Manso 2011, Tian &
Wang 2014). Using data on manager and CEO changes, we find evidence that managers

with experience of suspension-induced delays innovate less, consistent with the channel of
uncertainty reducing tolerance for failure or interest in experimentation in the long run.
       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes institutional

background and our paper’s contributions to the literature.         Section 3 introduces the
empirical strategies and the data. Section 4 presents the findings. Section 5 discusses
economic mechanisms and potential channels. Section 6 concludes.



2     Literature and Institutional Background

In this section, we describe how our paper contributes to existing studies, followed by a brief
introduction of China’s public equity markets and the IPO process. Then we explain the
IPO suspensions we use to identify the eﬀect of suspension-induced delay.


2.1   Contributions to the Literature

To our knowledge, this paper is the first to explore how regulatory uncertainty about access
to capital aﬀects corporate innovation. This adds to our understanding of the institutional

frictions that hamper innovation, which are more severe in developing countries without
strong contract enforcement (Aghion & Tirole 1994, Lerner & Schoar 2005). Uncertainty
is also central to how our setting diﬀers from the literature comparing public and private

firms. There is a large literature at the macroeconomic level about the eﬀects of policy
uncertainty on the economy. Friedman (1968), Rodrik (1991), and Hassett & Metcalf (1999),
among others, consider the detrimental economic eﬀects of monetary, fiscal, and regulatory


                                              5
policy uncertainty. Bernanke (1983) argues that high uncertainty delays investment, which
is costly to reverse. Bond & Goldstein (2015) and Baker, Bloom & Davis (2016) show

that macro policy uncertainty negatively aﬀects firms and financial markets. In corporate
finance, Bonaime et al. (2018) show that political and regulatory uncertainty are negatively
associated with merger and acquisition activity. Others document how policy uncertainty

reduces corporate investments in tangible assets, including by inducing precautionary delays
due to investment irreversibility (e.g., Bloom et al. (2007), Julio & Yook (2012), An et al.
(2016), Jens (2017)). In the Chinese context, Brunnermeier, Sockin & Xiong (2017) point

out that an interventionist approach can create uncertainty for firms, aﬀecting corporate
decisions. While most studies use political/election uncertainty or news-based text measures,
we contribute by utilizing a quasi-natural experiment concerning regulatory uncertainty.

      No study to date analyzes the eﬀect of policy uncertainty on innovation and the long-
term impacts of transitory policy uncertainty shocks. While Gulen & Ion (2015) show that
policy uncertainty can depress corporate investment by inducing precautionary delays of

investment, Julio & Yook (2012) and Stokey (2016) document that investment immediately
bounces back after uncertainty is resolved. Innovation investment is diﬀerent from investment
in tangible assets because it is riskier, imperfectly contractible, has long time horizons, and

has a cumulative dimension. Perhaps the closest study to ours is Bhattacharya et al. (2017)
which finds that innovation activities drop significantly during times of political election
uncertainty. They focus on a distinction between policy and political uncertainty. We

contribute by studying financial market policy uncertainty and using a source of variation
that occurs only once in a firm’s lifetime (as firms only IPO once).
      We also contribute to work on the relationship between going public and firm

behavior.   In addition to innovation, researchers have addressed investment (Pagano,
Panetta & Zingales 1998, Asker, Farre-Mensa & Ljungqvist 2014, Gilje & Taillard 2016),
the private benefits of control (Doidge, Karolyi, Lins, Miller & Stulz 2009), profitability

(Pástor, Taylor & Veronesi 2009), and product markets (Chemmanur, He & Nandy 2009).


                                              6
A second strand studies the eﬀects of government interventions in financial markets (Cong,
Grenadier & Hu 2017). While government intervention in IPO markets is common in

developing economies, relatively little is known about the eﬀects of these interventions.5 A
third strand of research examines China’s IPO process, including Tian (2011), Allen, Qian,
Shan & Zhu (2015), Lee, Qu & Shen (2017), and Shi, Sun & Zhang (2018).

        Although the IPO suspension policy itself is China-specific, policy uncertainty in
IPO markets exists in many countries. Chinese stock markets were modeled after those in
developed countries in some fundamental ways and have been shown to price future profits as

informatively (Carpenter & Whitelaw 2017, Carpenter, Lu & Whitelaw 2018). Furthermore,
since the early 2000s, Chinese private equity and patenting activity have borne increasing
similarity to the United States and Europe (e.g. Guo & Jiang 2013, Fang et al. 2017).

Therefore, our findings oﬀer insights and implications that are relevant beyond the Chinese
context. External validity aside, we also believe that the results are inherently important as
China is the second largest and one of the fastest growing economy in the world.

        Our results support the importance of market-based mechanisms for Chinese firms’
productivity growth (Aghion et al. (2015) and Fang, Lerner & Wu (2017)). We do not address
the welfare eﬀects of the IPO suspensions, but our findings suggest that promoting innovation

may be one reason for Chinese regulators to prioritize predictable, well-functioning IPO
markets going forward.6 Understanding how Chinese market interventions aﬀect domestic
innovation is important not only because the government plays an especially active role in

financial markets, but also because corporate innovation is central to China’s ongoing eﬀort
to transition from export- and infrastructure-led growth to an economy centered around
high-tech industries and consumption.7
   5
     For discussions on IPO interventions, see here (general description), here (India), here (Mexico), and Prasad,
Vozikis & Ariﬀ (2006) on Malaysia.
   6
     There is no convincing evidence that suspensions stabilized the market, one of the supposed objectives (Packer
et al. 2016 and Shi, Sun & Zhang 2018). While some policies explicitly aim to encourage innovation (e.g., Lerner
2009, Howell 2017), many others may have unintended consequences for innovation.
   7
     Innovation is prominently listed as the first guiding principle of economic policy in the 13th Five-Year Plan for
2016 to 2020. See here.




                                                          7
2.2      The IPO Process in China

China’s banking sector, traditionally the main source of capital for Chinese firms, is less

well-suited for funding risky projects (Atanassov, Nanda & Seru 2007) and typically favors
less-innovative state-owned enterprises (SOEs) (e.g.,Cong, Gao, Ponticelli & Yang 2018),
therefore slowly giving way to public and private equity finance (Allen et al. 2015). In the

decade after China established the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE) and the Shenzhen Stock
Exchange (SZSE) in 1990, domestic public markets primarily served SOEs (Fan et al. 2007;
see Carpenter, Lu & Whitelaw 2018 for a review). China’s public markets have recently

grown dramatically, and now serve private enterprises as well as SOEs. The Chinese A
share market is the second largest in the world, with about 3,000 firms listed and a total
market capitalization of more than 8.2 trillion USD at the end of 2017. Domestic listings are

primarily on the “main board” and “SME board” at SSE and SZSE. There are also newer,
smaller boards targeting younger firms (e.g. ChiNext or NEEQ) that have less stringent
listing criteria but are fairly illiquid and often OTC-based. As IPOs recede in importance in

the United States, they are growing in importance in China. In 2017, there were 438 IPOs
on the SSE and SZSE, compared to a total of 160 in the United States.8
          A firm seeking to conduct its IPO in China’s domestic markets must navigate an

elaborate process administered by the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC).
This administrative approval-based system contrasts with the disclosure-centric, registration-
based system in the United States. There are four major steps. First, the firm hires financial

professionals such as investment bankers and accountants for “tutorship,” restructuring the
firm into a qualified stock share limited company and preparing the financial and compliance
documents. Preparation and actual restructuring take one to three years.9 Second, the firm

and underwriter submit an application to the CSRC. Firms applying to IPO form a queue
based on the order of application. According to the WIND commercial database, in late

2016 there were 726 firms in the queue. The CSRC has published the numbers of candidates
  8
      See here and here.
  9
      See Cao et al. (2016) and here. The oﬃcial document outlining the IPO process is available in Chinese at here.


                                                          8
waiting for approval and of those approved recently.10 Because it takes multiple years for an
application to be approved, firms cannot time their listing as they do in the United States.

They typically apply as soon as they meet the requirements.
       Third,     the Stock Issuance Examination and Verification Committee (the
“committee”) of the CSRC determines whether the applicant meets the regulator’s listing

criteria, which seek to ensure that only “healthy” firms gain access to the equity markets
and include stringent historical financial performance requirements.11                    The committee
reviews the application documents and decides whether to approve the listing.12                         The

criteria beyond the oﬃcial performance requirements that the CSRC uses to select
candidates are not public. This stage takes three to six months on average, because the
committee often meets multiple times and requires the applicants to address numerous

issues before granting the final approval. The committee typically rejects 20-30 percent of
IPO applications, though the rate varies over time.13
       In the fourth step, after the committee grants formal approval, the firm may apply to

list at one of the domestic exchanges within six months. To do so, they solicit information
from institutional investors, choose an exchange, and then build the book, all with the
help from underwriters. The chosen stock exchange reviews the application to ascertain

compliance with exchange rules—a procedure known to be a rubber stamp because exchange
rules mirror CSRC requirements. Once approved, the firm can conduct its road show and
decide on a share subscription day. The issuer then publishes the prospectus in designated
  10
     The CSRC discloses the queue for application: here.
  11
     Regulating IPOs is one of the major ways that the Chinese government has historically sought to protect investors.
All applicants must meet the following requirements: (1) Positive net profits for the last three fiscal years prior to the
application, and the cumulative net profit in the three years must exceed RMB 30 million; (2) Cumulative revenue in
the three years prior to the IPO must equal at least RMB 300 million or cumulative cash flow from operation in three
years prior to the IPO must be at least RMB 50 million; (3) Intangible assets cannot account for more than 20% of
total assets; (4) Net assets in the year before the IPO must total at least RMB 30 million; (5) the company did not
suﬀer any unrecovered losses at the end of its most recent fiscal period. In addition to these financial performance
requirements, firms are subject to other nonfinancial requirements, such as the existence of a functioning corporate
governance system and no record of illegal behavior or financial scandals.
  12
     See, for example, here.
  13
     Yang 2013, Liu et al. 2013, see also http://www.xinhuanet.com/fortune/2019-01/02/c_1123934625.htm,
http://www.csrc.gov.cn/pub/zjhpublic/, and http://www.csrc.gov.cn/pub/zjhpublic/G00306203/201806/t20180601_339051.htm.
In addition to considering applicants’ quality, the CSRC also controls the aggregate approval rate based on market
conditions (Guo & Zhang 2012).



                                                      9
newspapers at least three days before the subscription day and announces the issue at least
one day prior to the subscription day. Finally, it takes an average of 24 working days after

the subscription day for the shares to publicly list (Shi et al. 2018 contains more details).
The interval between approval and listing is two to five months (the average is three), except
during IPO suspensions. Approved firms try to list as soon as possible because after six

months, they must renew approval. Very rarely do firms and the CSRC delay listing due to
disagreements on share prices.


2.3    IPO Suspensions

The CSRC is concerned that too many IPOs will reduce liquidity, depress overall market
prices, or adversely aﬀect incumbent public firms because the cap (currently about 23) on
the price to earnings ratio for IPOs might draw capital from incumbent to newly listed

stocks (e.g., Braun & Larrain 2008, Tian 2011, and Packer et al. 2016). As an extreme
form of regulating the IPO market, the CSRC occasionally suspends all IPO activities
beyond the application submission step. Between 1994 and 2016, there have been nine IPO

suspensions.14 The suspensions exogenously imposed uncertain periods of delay on firms
that were approved to IPO shortly before the suspensions were announced. We expect that
suspension-induced delay may be costly to firms if the delay imposes capital constraints;

the firm would then have to forego strategic opportunities – such as acquisitions or large
investments – and long-term planning would be disrupted (Shi, Sun & Zhang 2018). We
also expect that the suspensions may have increased market uncertainty about the firm,

which is costly (e.g., Almeida, Campello & Weisbach 2011 and Wang & Zhu 2013). Both of
these potential negative eﬀects of the suspensions are widely recognized in Chinese and
foreign media, and among practitioners.15

        The suspensions all started and ended without pre-announcements. While the fact
  14
     Note that the most recent five suspensions did not aﬀect seasoned equity oﬀerings (SEOs) at all (based on detailed
data from http://stock.hexun.com/zfsj).
  15
     See e.g., here, here, here, here, and here.




                                                          10
of historical suspensions means that market participants know a suspension is possible, the
suspensions are not predictable weeks in advance.16 For example, after October 19, 2012,

the CSRC ceased holding weekly review meetings, with no initial public explanation. The
financial press initially expected the suspension to be short, but instead it lasted more than
a year. More generally, the suspensions are predicated on the CSRC’s concern for “market

stability,” not on individual firms’ characteristics.17 Firms likely form some expectations of
the probability of a suspension. Our empirical strategy focuses on firms that should have
similar levels of anticipation and preparation.

          In sum, three institutional features make China an ideal setting to study uncertainty
in access to public markets: (1) the process is suﬃciently long that firms applying to IPO
cannot accurately foresee future market conditions or suspensions at the time they will list

(Guo & Zhang 2012); (2) once an application is approved, firms all go through a standard
procedure to list with delay determined by the CSRC’s suspension decisions; and (3) there is
a substantial cohort of approved firms waiting to list at any given time, which are negatively

shocked by the suspensions



3        Empirical Strategy and Data Description

This section explains how we use the IPO suspensions to identify the eﬀects of uncertain
suspension-induced delay on firm outcomes.
    16
     Based on interviews with Liliang Zhu, deputy director of CSRC’s department of Public Oﬀering Supervision,
Feng Yu, deputy director of CSRC Zhejiang, and George Jiang, a partner at Springs Capital. The latter noted that
while many funds tend to speculate on the timing and duration of IPO suspension, few get it right. See also articles
and CSRC documents, such as -˝¡—⇢—L—°Ëñ!l —L°h°8Â\A↵ at here and here,here, here,
here, here, here, and here. Also quoting fund managers at Longteng Asset management and StaRock Investment,
“SEC announced that IPO is about to restart. We can tell that the market has recovered from the surge in brokerage
stocks and the turnover of more than one trillion. We thought it was not until 4000 points that the issuance of new
shares were resumed. The restart is ahead of schedule unexpectedly."
  17
     For example, the oﬃcial announcements for the first two suspensions cite “consecutive abnormal falls of the SSE
Composite Index” and “327 debt event that disrupted normal trading” as the reasons. The latest suspension in 2015
was due to “abnormal volatile movements in the stock market”. See here, here, and here. These are also confirmed in
our interviews conducted with senior CSRC oﬃcials, Shi et al. 2018, as well as the CSRC oﬃcially designated media
outlet, Security Daily. For example, see Hou and Zhu, “A Review of China IPO Suspensions”, Security Daily, June
19 2013, Published: A3, retrieved from here.




                                                        11
3.1    Approach

We are interested in the eﬀects of IPO-suspension-induced delay between approval and listing

on firm outcomes. In the absence of a suspension, the interval from approval to listing is 3.3
months.18 However, it is possible that both the approval decision and the exact timing of
listing conditional on approval may reflect firm-specific unobservables that could confound

our estimates. Therefore, we do not use raw delay as our independent variable of interest
except in robustness tests.
        Instead, our approach exploits the fact that the approval date is highly predictive of

whether a firm was forced to delay until after the suspension ended.                                In a naive
instrumentation approach, we divide our estimation sample into treatment and control
groups based only on the approval date. First, we define the estimation sample as firms

approved in the 12 months before each of the two suspensions were announced. (The
results are not sensitive to this definition and Appendix Table A.2 shows that firms
approved during the 12 months are not observably of lower quality than firms approved at

other times.) Figure 2 describes our approach graphically, in which each dot, circle, or
cross is an IPO. The approval date is on the horizontal axis and delay between approval
and listing is on the vertical axis. The estimation sample comprises the dots and circles to

the right of the solid lines and to the left of the suspension periods.
        Second, we identify the approval date that lies at the discontinuity where subsequently
approved firms were delayed as a result of the suspension. This is represented by the dotted

lines in Figure 2. Control firms are the red dots on the left side of the dotted lines. The
treatment firms are the green circles to the right of the dotted lines. Average delay for the
control group is 3.2 months, while it is 16.3 months for the treatment group (Table 2). Our

results are not sensitive to the precise location of the dotted line. Figure 3 shows the same
data, but with the listing date on the horizontal axis.19
  18
    Calculated among control and out-of-estimation-sample firms.
  19
    One firm appears to have listed in the shaded area during the first suspension. This firm is Jiangsu Huachang
Chemical Co. _œN         Â°˝ Pl¯ (SHE: 002274). This firm listed eight days after the suspension. We have
confirmed with the firm as well as the CSRC that this firm listed in Shenzhen on Sept 24, 2008 despite the oﬃcially


                                                        12
        The identification assumption is that firm-specific factors do not drive treatment
assignment within the estimation sample. That is, among firms approved near in time to a

suspension, delay is not fully predictable and is exogenous to firm characteristics, as we
describe in Section 2 and evident from the observable queue post-2012 and t-tests (below in
Section 3.3 and Table 2). As firms must have applied to IPO three or more years earlier,

their positions in the queue should not be related to their expectations of a suspension
based on market conditions near in time to the actual suspension. To the degree firms may
have anticipated the suspensions, we are examining the eﬀect of suspension-induced delay

among firms with similar level of anticipation and preparation.
        As with any quasi-experimental strategy, it is challenging to completely rule out
endogeneity in delay. The primary concern is that some firms jump the queue to avoid

suspension-induced delay. This should not bias our results because we define treatment by
the date of approval, which occurs before a suspension announcement. Moreover, we test in
our sample whether actual listing follows the same order of approval and find that the

orderings have a correlation of 0.98, which indicates almost no change in the order in the
queue from approval to listing.20              Note that queue-jumping by politically connected or
state-owned firms, even if present, should bias our results against finding a detrimental

eﬀect of delay because politically connected firms and SOEs are well known to
underperform relative to their counterparts along various dimensions (Fan et al. 2007,
Dollar & Wei 2007, Chen et al. 2016, and Piotroski & Zhang 2014), including innovation

outputs (e.g., Jeﬀerson et al. 2006). If these firms have less delay because they jump the
queue, it is even more striking to find that delay leads to underperformance.
        A second concern is that firms with unobservably diﬀerent quality complete the

approval-to-listing process faster and so are less likely to be delayed. However, the approval
date defines treatment, so this should not aﬀect our estimates. Also, we show in Appendix
recognized start date of the suspension was Sept 16. The results are robust to excluding this company.
  20
     A Kendall’s tau test finds that more than 96 percent of all pairs maintain their original order in the second
sequence within a given quarter or year. About 11 percent of firms list more than a week out of order, but conditional
on being out of order, the average is only about two weeks out of order. Omitting these firms does not aﬀect our
main results.


                                                         13
Table A.2 Panel 1 that firms in the estimation sample do not take longer to list than those
outside the sample; after removing the suspension months, time to listing is very similar

(3.16 and 3.36 months).                   Within the estimation sample,                   the control group’s
approval-to-listing interval averages 3.23 months.
        A third concern is that regulators decide to launch an IPO suspension based on

their assessment that firms approved but not yet listed are of low quality. In addition to
institutional evidence that overall market conditions drive suspension decisions (Section 2.2),
we show that firms in the estimation sample are similar to firms outside it; if anything, they

have higher quality. Appendix Table A.2 Panel 2 shows that among observables in the year
before IPO approval, estimation sample firms are not significantly diﬀerent, except that they
have somewhat higher patenting and earnings.21


3.2    Specification

Our primary specification estimates variants of Equation 1, where j denotes a firm and t
denotes a year. The coeﬃcient of interest is               on whether the firm is in the treatment group,

and thus experiences suspension-induced IPO delay.


           Pjt = ↵ + T reatj + 0 Vjt + Industryj + Y earjt /f (ApprovalDatej ) + "jt                              (1)


As discussed in Section 3.1, T reatj is defined as being one of the green circle firms to the right
of the dotted lines in Figure 2; more formally, these are firms approved to IPO between June

5, 2008 and September 16, 2008 (starting date of the 2008-2009 suspension), and between
April 24, 2012 and October 19, 2012 (starting date of 2012-2014 suspension). We control
for the year of approval in the primary specification but show that the results are robust

to controlling for functions of the approval date (ApprovalDatej ), which makes the analysis
  21
    Regarding this observation, it may be that firms in the estimation sample are of higher quality, or it may reflect
the estimation sample being later in time than the full sample combined with a secular increase in patenting over
time. We confirm that Chinese firms have increased their patenting activity over time, consistent with this latter
explanation. Regardless, the diﬀerence should not bias our analysis of the cross-section of firms, especially when
aligned on calendar time.


                                                         14
similar to a regression discontinuity design.22
          Treated firms are predominantly approved but not yet listed by the time the

suspension began; as explained above, we define T reatj using the approval date rather than
actual delay to avoid any possibility that our results stem from queue-jumping. Control
firms are those approved before these cutoﬀs but within the 12 months prior to the

suspension start (the results are not sensitive to the exact number of months).                        The
primary dependent variable (Pjt ) is the number of Chinese patent applications in a
12-month period (e.g., the 12 months after IPO approval). We also consider the number of

granted Chinese invention patents, citations to granted Chinese patents, and global
non-Chinese granted patents.             To investigate the general impact of suspension-induced
delay, we examine the eﬀects on a diverse array of other outcomes, such as leverage, market

share, tangible investment, and earnings.
          Vjt is a vector of controls. It includes firm age, revenue, leverage, investment, a fixed

eﬀect for the exchange (Shanghai or Shenzhen), and indicators for whether the firm is state-

owned and whether it previously received PE/VC financing. Following Hsieh & Song (2015),
we define a firm as an SOE if either the state owns at least 50 percent of registered capital or
if the state is reported as the controlling shareholder. We also include industry fixed eﬀects

(25 industry categories). Finally, we include an indicator for which suspension the firm was
approved prior to, which is equivalent to controlling for year (12-month period before the
suspension). We double cluster errors by industry and listing quarter.

          We begin by focusing on the year following approval to examine the eﬀect while treated
firms are delayed and still private. This approach compares public and private firms, which
has been the approach in the literature but conflates the eﬀects of suspension-induced delay

and listing. We then examine the longer-term eﬀect of suspension-induced delays. This
approach considers firms at a similar stage in their lifecycle, in the sense of being after the
watershed IPO event (third year after IPO approval onward for most treated firms). An
 22
      The small number of observations around the boundary prevent us from using a conventional RDD.




                                                       15
alternative specification considers the first and second year after IPO for delayed firms and
aligns control firms so that they are considered in the same calendar year as the treatment

firms.


3.3      Data and Summary Statistics

This paper employs data from many sources. Most crucially, we obtain IPO application and

approval data from China Securities and Regulatory Commission (CSRC) for listings on the
A-share Shenzhen and Shanghai exchanges between 2004 and 2015. We hand-collect the
dates for IPO suspensions from oﬃcial announcements and news articles. China Securities

Market and Accounting Research (CSMAR)/WIND (the Bloomberg equivalents) provide
IPO prospectus data, listing, financial data, as well as Data on executive mobility (CSMAR
Executive Board Database). We supplement this with data ﬀrom Compustat and SDC New

Issues. We obtain annual and monthly invention patent application and grant data from
the State Intellectual Property Oﬃce (SIPO).23 We match the firms in our sample to patent
and citation data using Google Patents, which include the entire collection (over 87 million)

of granted patents and published patent applications from 17 major patent oﬃces around
the world (including USPTO from 1790, EPO and WIPO from 1978). Finally, VC/PE
investment data are from IPO prospectuses and Private Capital Research Insitute (PCRI)

data, all cross-validated with the ChinaVenture Source and SDC VentureXpert databases.
         Table 1 Panels 1-6 describe data used in our analysis. Panel 1 summarizes categorical
IPO information for all 1,558 firms in the data, which includes all IPOs on the Shanghai

and Shenzhen exchanges between 2004 and 2015. We focus on Shanghai and Shenzhen Main
and SME Boards for three reasons. First, during our sample period they represent over 93
percent of listed firms, 97 percent of the public market capitalization, and over 90 percent of

all transactions, based on analysis of the WIND database. Second, the additional exchanges
  23
    China has three classes of patents: invention, utility model, and design. Utility model patents represent new
technical solutions relating to the shape, the structure, or their combination, of a product; and design patents cover
new designs in relation to shapes, patterns, colors, or their combination, of a product. Applications for these two
types are essentially never rejected.


                                                         16
are new relative to the IPO suspensions, limiting our ability to observe firms before the
suspensions. Third, relative to the boards we examine, the stocks on the additional boards

are smaller and much less liquid (Li et al. 2015). The new boards are not comparable to
NASDAQ in the United States.
        Table 1 Panel 2 contains continuous IPO data. IPO delay averages 4.3 months in the

whole sample, with a standard deviation of 5.8 months. Our estimation sample consists of
350 firms approved to IPO within 12 months before a suspension announcement.24 Those
approved earlier in this time frame were ahead in a queue and listed with little delay, while the

remainder were forced to wait until the suspension ended. We focus on the two suspensions
from September 16, 2008 to July 10, 2009 and from October 19, 2012 to January 16, 2014 (see
Appendix Table A.1 for details about these suspensions) out of a total of five suspensions in

the data because (i) the two suspensions in 2004-2006 are only separated by four months and
so we cannot construct treatment and control groups; (ii) many financial variables are missing
before 2004; and (iii) long-term outcome variables for firms for the last suspension in 2015

are not yet available. Remaining summary statistics focus on the estimation sample. For
example, average underpricing (the diﬀerence between the closing price on the first trading
day and the oﬀer price) in our data is almost 80 percent, consistent with prior studies.

        We use the number of patent applications to reflect innovation eﬀort, though we
recognize they also represent the firm eﬀort to codify, disclose, and protect intellectual
property (Kortum & Lerner 2001, Rajan 2012). We use only invention patents, which are

the analog to utility patents in the United States; they cover new technical solutions
relating to a product, a process, or improvement. Invention patent protection lasts 20 years
from the application. The patent-based variables are summarized in Table 1 Panels 3 and

4.25 In the estimation sample, the average firm files five patents in the year following IPO
   24
      Only eighteen firms were approved and dropped out, primarily because regulators found evidence of fraud. No
firm approved to IPO in our sample has failed to do so and listed abroad instead.
   25
      Patent applications in China have increased dramatically since China established formal patent law in 1985, and
there are now more invention patents filed in China than in the United States. Fang, Lerner & Wu (2017) show that
while average quality may diﬀer across countries, patents generally serve the same purpose in China as they do in
the United States, and firm patenting behavior is similar across the two countries. For example, in both countries,
within-firm increases in patent stocks are associated with higher productivity, exports, and new product revenue.


                                                         17
approval, and the number only starts to decline after the fourth year after IPO approval
conditional on public listing (to 4.8), though not significantly. The sample size declines

somewhat due to truncation. In the first and second year after IPO, the average firm files
4.2 and 4.9 patent applications respectively.
        We use two measures of patent quality. First, we use Google Patent data for citations

of Chinese patents, which to our knowledge is new to the literature measuring innovation
among Chinese firms, and include citations to patents filed via the Patent Coorperation
Treaty used in Boeing & Mueller (2016) and Rong et al. (2017). The average firm has 23.8

citations to granted patents that were filed in the year following IPO approval. Note that
diﬀerent industries have systematically diﬀerent citation rates. The industry fixed eﬀects that
we include in regressions help to account for these systematic diﬀerences, and as we are not

conducting cross-industry comparisons, the diﬀerences should not confound our results. We
also control for the truncation of the citation data with time fixed eﬀects. A second measure
of patent quality is the number of granted patents, filed in Chinese and foreign (non-Chinese)

patent oﬃces respectively.26 We term the latter “global” patents. The average firm has 0.04
global granted patents that were filed in the year following IPO approval.
        Corporate variables for the year following IPO approval and the year following listing

are shown in Table 1 Panels 5 and 6. Leverage, cash and plant, property, and equipment
(PPE) investment are scaled by total assets. Market share is a focal firm’s share of total
industry revenue, where industry is defined using using a CSMAR variable with 25 categories.

Some variables are not available for pre-IPO years. We also collect data on R&D expenditure;
however, these data only exist after 2007 and appear to be poor quality. Finally, a routinely
used accounting measure for window dressing in both the U.S. and Chinese contexts is the
Interestingly, they find that SOE patents are more associated with TFP growth than private firm patents. Wei, Xie
& Zhang 2017 find that the patent approval rate is not unusually high in China, and present comparisons suggesting
robust improvement in Chinese patent quality over time.
  26
     China’s patent oﬃce (SIPO) does not disclose citation data, and prior work has primarily relied on citations
to patents that Chinese firms file in foreign countries. This approach has several limitations, including selection
into foreign patent filing, diﬀerent standards across oﬃces, and home country bias (Michel & Bettels 2001, Harhoﬀ
et al. 2003, Bacchiocchi & Montobbio 2010). In contrast, Google Patent covers SIPO citations and is searchable for
non-English patents, providing wider coverage than previous measures.



                                                        18
volume of discretionary accruals.27
          T-tests are informative about ex-ante diﬀerences between the treatment and control

groups. The results are in Table 2. First, treated firms do not take longer to list once
suspension delay periods are removed (Panel 1); the average control (treatment) firm takes
3.23(3.03) months to list. Therefore, it is not the case that absent suspensions, the treated

group would have taken longer to list anyway. We also examine pre-IPO approval year
patenting activity, financial variables, and other firm characteristics in the second year prior
to IPO in Panel 2. There are no significant diﬀerences, and no evidence that the treated

group is of lower ex-ante quality.



4        Results

This section first describes the eﬀects of suspension-induced IPO delay on patent activity,
starting immediately following the suspension when delayed firms are private (Section

4.1.1). We then consider the longer-term eﬀect multiple years after listing approval and
after the treated firms publicly list (Section 4.1.2), before showing a number of robustness
tests (Section 4.1.3). Other firm outcomes are analyzed in Section 4.2.


4.1      Patent Activity

4.1.1      Immediate Eﬀect of Suspension-induced Delay on Innovation

Suspension-induced listing delay significantly reduces firm patenting activity. We first show
the raw eﬀect visually. Figure 4 contains a local polynomial of the average patents by
month around the IPO approval date among treated and control firms. The treated firm

data include only firm-months in which the firm has not yet listed. Therefore, all firms are
included in months up until zero (the month of approval), and then drop out of the sample
as they list. The control firm data include all firm-months. The figure reveals that patent
    27
     We measure discretionary accruals as the residual from a Jones model, adjusted by a performance matched firm,
following Jones (1991) and Brau & Fawcett (2006).


                                                       19
applications rise leading up to approval as firms ready themselves for listing. They may be
doing more innovation during this period, but the patent applications could also reflect a

need to increase disclosure. It is comforting that firms aﬀected by delay have similar pre-
approval behavior as firms that did not experience abnormal delay. After approval, patents
decline much more for delayed firms.

        Table 3 shows estimates of Equation 1. We begin in Panel 1 with outcomes measured
in the 12 months following IPO approval. This period is almost entirely post-IPO for the
control group and pre-IPO for the treatment group. The advantage of examining this period

is that outcomes are observed around the same calendar time. The disadvantage is that it
compares public and private firms, though this has been the approach of the literature on
the eﬀect of going public on innovation. Table 3 Panel 1 Column 1 shows in a Poisson model

that the suspension treatment reduces patent applications in the year after approval by 28
percent.28 Column 4 uses an OLS model to show that the suspension treatment reduces
patents by 1.7 (the mean is 5.01 patents). Columns 2 and 5 find similar results without

controls. Columns 3 and 6 more closely approximate an RDD, including controls for the
approval date and approval date squared, and find very similar results to the main models.
A conservative back-of-the-envelope calculation indicates that assuming constant growth

rates for the treated and control groups after IPO approval, it would take 7.7 years after the
year of IPO approval to close the gap in patent applications between the two groups.29
        Suspension-induced delay also reduces patent quality. The treatment reduces granted

Chinese invention patents in the year following approval by about 20 percent in both the
Poisson and OLS models (Table 3 Panel 1 Columns 7-8). For granted global utility patents,
the Poisson estimation does not converge because there are too few instances of positive

patents. The OLS finds that treatment reduces the number of grants by 0.04 relative to
the sample mean of 0.04 (Column 9). Turning to citations, Columns 10-11 show declines
  28
     We follow Aghion et al. (2005) in using the Poisson for patent counts, though the results robust in a negative
binomial model. Note that the coeﬃcient of -.33 is interpreted as 1 e 0.33 = 0.28.
  29
     This is based on statistics from Table 1 Panel 3, Table 2 Panel 1, and Table 3 Panel 2. We calculate the annualized
growth rates of the mean number of patent applications for the treated group and the control group, which are -2.11%
and 2.15% respectively. Several alternative approaches result in longer time periods to close the gap.


                                                          20
of 36 percent in the Poisson model and 46 percent in the OLS model (the sample mean for
citations is 23.8).

       There may be concern that the decision to patent could be related to the
suspensions. For example, it may be that firms choose not to patent their innovations
during the suspension because somehow information leakage is exacerbated during this

period. To rule this out, we examine citations per invention patent conditional on having a
patent in Columns 12-13. The sample declines significantly, because many firms do not
patent at all. Comfortingly, we find similar results, though the OLS specification is not

significant. Overall, the results in Tables 3 Panel 1 provide consistent and compelling
evidence that suspension-induced delay reduces innovation proxied by patenting activities,
both in terms of quantity and quality.

       Ferreira et al. (2012) predicts and Bernstein (2015) documents that the quality of
internal innovation declines after public listing. Similarly, we observe patent applications
fall in both the treatment and control groups after IPO. We further verify in Appendix

Table A.3 that our data are consistent with Bernstein (2015) by decomposing with monthly
data the decline of patent citations – the measure of innovation quality used in Bernstein
(2015) – into listing and suspension-induced delay treatments. Column 1 shows that on

average, citations fall after IPO. Column 2 shows that this decline persists after controlling
for delay. It is notable that the post-IPO decline established by Bernstein (2015) exists not
just in the United States but also in China, a very diﬀerent setting. However, our focus is

on policy uncertainty, and our contribution is to show that patent activity falls further and
persistently among the treated group.
       In the absence of an industrial organization-style model that includes competition

between firms, we cannot assess whether the innovation declines we observe in a subset of
firms represents an economy-wide reduction. In an unreported test, we find no measurable
eﬀects of suspension-induced delay on competitor firms’ innovation. The IPO suspensions

aﬀected a significant number of companies at a crucial stage in their lifecycles, and a decline in


                                               21
their innovation activity may reduce positive spillovers to other firms’ innovation and, in turn,
aﬀect aggregate growth (Jones & Williams 1998, Bloom, Schankerman & Van Reenen 2013).

Therefore, our results represent an unintended consequence of IPO market intervention that
has at at least weakly negative eﬀects on overall innovation in China.


4.1.2    Longer-term Eﬀect of Suspension-induced Delay on Innovation

We next examine the longer-term eﬀect of suspension-induced delays.             Specifically, we
consider the third and fourth years following approval, conditional on the firm already
having listed. We do not use the second year because many treated firms have not yet

listed at this point. The advantages here are that firms are studied at a similar calendar
time and are at a similar stage in their lifecycle, in the sense of being after the watershed
IPO event. We find that the negative eﬀects on patenting, especially applications which

proxy for innovation eﬀort, endure for several years and after the treated firms list. Table 3
Panel 2 shows that in the third year following approval, conditional on having listed, the
treated firms average 23 percent fewer patent applications in the Poisson model, and 1.2

fewer patent applications in the OLS model. The reductions in the fourth year are 16
percent and 0.91 applications respectively.
        In an alternative specification, we examine eﬀects in the first and second year after

IPO. We align control firms to be in the same calendar year as the treatment firms. That
is, we shift the time period considered (year t) forward for control firms to make up for the
suspension period. For example, many of the control firms for the 2008-2009 suspension

listed in 2007. The treated firms mostly listed in 2009. We consider the patents for the
control firms in the second or third year after their IPO, so that all firms are considered
in (roughly) 2009. Again, this approach compares public firms at a similar stage in the

firm lifecycle, and – importantly – at the same calendar time, so the eﬀects should not be
confounded by market conditions. Eﬀects in the year and second year after IPO are shown
in Table 3 Panel 3. Treated firms have on average 29 percent fewer patents than the control


                                               22
group in the Poisson model and about 1.5 fewer patents in the OLS model, though these
eﬀects lose significance in the second year after IPO.30


4.1.3     Robustness Tests

We conduct a range of robustness tests. First, we examine whether the eﬀect is only on the
extensive margin of delay by estimating the eﬀect of continuous delay, rather than the naive

“Treat” instrument. In Equation 2, the coeﬃcient of interest is                         on months of delay. The
other variables are the same as in Equation 1.


                   Pjt = ↵ + M onthsDelayj + 0 Vjt + Industryj + Y eart + "jt                                         (2)


Table 4 Panel 1 Columns 1-2 show this eﬀect of continuous delay in months. Each additional

month of listing delay is associated with a 1.3 percent reduction in patent applications in
the Poisson model, and 0.067 fewer patent applications in the OLS model. To address
any concern that firms jump the queue after being approved within this continuous-delay

specification, we instrument for the months of delay using the month of IPO approval. The
intuition is that if firms do not jump the queue to list after being approved, the month of
approval should predict the duration of delay. The first stage consists of Equation 3, where

ApprovalMontht is a fixed eﬀect for the month of approval.


                 ˆ
           M onthsDelay j = ↵ + ApprovalMontht + Vjt + Industryj + Y eart + "jt
                                                 0
                                                                                                                      (3)


As expected from the absence of queue-jumping, the first stage is very strong, with an F-
statistic of 260, well above the rule-of-thumb cutoﬀ of ten. (We do not report the first stage
as there is a very large number of coeﬃcients.) Instrumented delay has a significant eﬀect
  30
     These approaches either omit the most delayed firms or study outcomes long after IPO for control firms. Hence
it is little surprise that these results to be somewhat noisier than other estimates. We find similar results to the
ones shown here when we do not align on calendar time. We find longer-term eﬀects on patent quality, but they
are generally not statistically significant. In part, this reflects the fact that the citation measures are noisier in the
Chinese setting and suﬀer from truncation (Boeing & Mueller 2016).



                                                           23
on innovation, shown in Table 4 Panel 1 Column 3. The coeﬃcient is larger in the IV model,
at -0.12 relative to, for example, -0.067 in the OLS model.

      These two coeﬃcients are not statistically significantly diﬀerent from one another,
but it is worth considering why the IV eﬀect is larger. First, compliers with the IV have
a larger eﬀect than average because their delay is much longer and includes uncertainty.

The IV permits a more discontinuous eﬀect of delay (closer to the discrete eﬀect of T reatj
in the main models), while the OLS measures the average eﬀect of delay, which includes
firms that experience only normal processing time. If the main eﬀect reflects the uncertainty

mechanism, then the OLS confounds estimation by using all months of delay. Also, there
could be upward bias in the OLS, for example, if firms do more patenting when they have
a bit more normal processing delay or they try to rush through patent applications before

listing in order to have a better market response. The IV isolates suspension-induced delay,
and thus eliminates such potential upward bias.
      We also conduct several placebo tests. First, we construct “mock” delay that excludes

the months during the IPO suspensions. For example, if a firm has 13 months of delay, of
which nine occurred during a suspension, its mock delay would be four months. The goal is
to test whether innovation is aﬀected by minor diﬀerences in delay from variation in normal

delay (that is, processing time in non-suspension periods). The results are in Table 4 Panel 1
Columns 4-5. The null eﬀects demonstrate that suspension-induced delay aﬀects innovation
while variation in normal processing time does not. Second, we use delays (in months) in the

non-estimation sample (i.e., outside the 12 months before an IPO suspension). Table 4 Panel
1 Column 6 contains this placebo test of delay outside of the estimation sample and yields no
eﬀect. This obviates an argument that high-quality firms tend to list faster and experience

less delay, because then the mock delay in Columns 4-6 should also be associated with less
innovation. A third placebo test examines the years before IPO approval for the treated and
control groups, which is similar to testing for diﬀerences in pre-treatment characteristics.

If non-suspension-related factors are the primary drivers for our findings, we expect similar


                                             24
findings in these placebo tests as in our main specifications. Table 4 Panel 2 shows the eﬀect
of IPO delay on patent applications in the years before IPO approval, and finds no eﬀect.

      To further establish the robustness of the eﬀect, we use a panel setting with firm fixed
eﬀects. This compares the change in innovation output between treated firms and control
firms before and after the IPO suspensions. We conduct this test for the five years before

and after the approval year and the IPO year, so that a maximum of 11 years is included
for each firm. The coeﬃcient of interest is the interaction between being treated and in the
post period. The results in Table 4 Panel 3 Columns 1-2 show that the results are robust

to the panel setting. For example, the Poisson coeﬃcient is -.4, significant at the .01 level,
somewhat larger than the -.33 found in the primary approach. Columns 3-4 consider the
five years around IPO. They also show large negative eﬀects, though the OLS result is not

statistically significant. The sample size diﬀers across the models this panel for two reasons.
First, Poisson drops groups with no patents. Second, truncation reduces the sample size
around IPO, which occurs after approval.

      Finally, we conducted a number of unreported robustness exercises, including adding a
battery of additional controls to ensure the results do not reflect changes to firm fundamentals
rather than delay. Controlling for variables related to governance, such as the number of

board members, and for measures of size and financial status, such as payroll, assets, and
total debt do not aﬀect the results. Taken together, the robustness tests confirm that IPO
suspensions are the main driver for the observed diﬀerences in patent activities by delay

treatment status.


4.2   Other Firm Outcomes

We consider the eﬀect of suspension-induced delay on firm outcomes besides innovation in

Table 5. In the year after IPO approval, we find a positive eﬀect on leverage, negative
eﬀects on tangible investment and return on sales, and no measurable eﬀects on sales or
earnings (Panel 1). The eﬀects on leverage and tangible investment are consistent with the


                                              25
firm experiencing a negative capital shock and heightened business uncertainty as a result of
suspension-induced delay, which helps explain why they may have less capacity for investing

in innovation or commercializing existing inventions (both of which may be reflected in
reduced patent applications). Table 5 Panel 2 shows that these eﬀects quickly dissipate after
the IPO. This panel includes additional outcomes, as we observe more corporate variables

after IPO than before. While most eﬀects are insignificant, the eﬀect on R&D scaled by firm
assets is nearly significant at the 10% level, suggesting that delayed firms may invest less in
R&D immediately after listing. For all these variables, we continue to find null eﬀects when

we consider multiple years after IPO approval conditional on listing.



5     Mechanism Discussion

This section considers mechanisms that may explain the results, with a focus on policy
uncertainty as the channel best supported by the evidence.


5.1   Policy Uncertainty

The suspensions, which were all of indefinite length, created uncertainty among aﬀected
firms about when they would be able to go public and what market conditions they would

face. Intuitive heterogeneity tests support this channel, where we interact treatment with a
cross-sectional variable. We expect that firms with greater dependence on risky innovation
will experience larger eﬀects. We use two proxies for this dependence, R&D intensity and

an indicator for the firm having received private equity or venture capital before applying
to list (VC/PE backing). The relationship to VC/PE backing is not obvious. On one hand,
Tian & Ye (2018) find that PE/VC-backed firms suﬀer more from holdup problems and

as a result VCs respond to policy uncertainty with more staging and reduced investment.
PE/VC-backed firms are also likely riskier and more innovative (or have greater innovative
capacity/potential). For these reasons, we expect under the uncertainty channel that they


                                              26
will be more aﬀected. On the other hand, these firms can presumably return to their private
backers for capital, so we expect under the financing constraints mechanism that they would

experience a smaller eﬀect. We find that both high R&D intensity and VC/PE-backed
firms are are much more aﬀected than their less-risky counterparts (Table 6 Columns 1-2),
providing support for the uncertainty channel.31 Note also that many mechanisms, including

financial constraints, should aﬀect normal processing time delay. Yet the placebo tests
reported in Table 4 Panels 1 and 2 show that such normal delay does not aﬀect innovation.
        To push further on whether there was meaningful uncertainty about the IPO market

during suspensions, we examine VC investment. If IPO suspensions were perceived as short
and unimportant hiatuses, contemporaneous VC investment should not be aﬀected because
VC investments are relatively illiquid. Conversely, if suspensions caused serious uncertainty

about the future of IPO markets in China, VC investors may have become concerned about
exit possibilities and reduced investment. We show an association between VC investment
and the suspensions in Appendix B. Controlling for domestic market conditions and

rest-of-world VC, we find that the suspensions were associated with depressed VC
investment, particularly later stage VC investment, in Chinese portfolio companies. This
phenomenon persists among elite U.S.-headquartered VC firms active in China. While not

causal, this analysis suggests that the suspensions had a chilling eﬀect on VC. Note that
market expectations may play a role here as well; however, we find a similar pattern using
only suspensions in which the market is not in a downturn at the time the suspension is

announced. Together, our micro and macro evidence on IPO delays and VC contributes to
literature on the relationship among VC, innovation, and going public (Brav & Gompers
1997, Krishnan et al. 2011, Cao, Jiang & Ritter 2015).

        These findings are consistent with the large body of literature on real options and
investments under uncertainty.                 The real options models establish that increased
  31
     We use the Poisson model for brevity, but the results are similar with OLS. We omit controls throughout so that
the interaction coeﬃcients are more easily interpretable. The results are similar with the controls used in the other
tables.




                                                         27
uncertainty depresses current investment because the interaction of capital irreversibility
and uncertainty generates positive option value to deferring investment (McDonald &

Siegel 1986). Investment in innovation is highlighted in this literature as a particularly
relevant example because it is often project-specific with high labor costs, making funds
diﬃcult to recoup if the project fails (e.g., Grabowski (1968), Dixit & Pindyck (1994)).

Indeed, we find strong negative eﬀects of suspension-induced delay on tangible investment
in the year following IPO approval, shown in Table 5 Panel 1. Tangible investment is
longer-term and risky relative to other types of expenditure. In sum, we find substantial

support for uncertainty as a primary channel for our main eﬀects.


5.2   Long-term Impact, Cumulative Innovation, and Managerial Changes

A remaining question is why temporary uncertainty would have lasting eﬀects on

innovation, unlike, for example, tangible investment or return on sales. The most natural
explanation is that innovation investments are cumulative, such that investing today sets
the stage for continuing to have positive NPV investment opportunities in the future. That

is, the productivity of firms’ future innovation investment depends on whether it remains
at the frontier today and maintains its R&D infrastructure. As Holmstrom (1989) points
out, “innovation is risky, unpredictable, long-term and multi-stage.”    This explanation

relates to the literature showing how innovation capability depends on years of
accumulated expertise and infrastructure (e.g., Feldman & Florida 1994, Bates & Flynn
1995). New innovations build upon and complement prior innovation (Chang 1995). Manso

(2011) formalizes corporate innovation as a cumulative, multi-stage process. He shows that
incentive schemes that motivate innovation require substantial tolerance or even reward for
early failures while compensating long-term success. Commitment to long-term plans, job

security, and timely feedback are essential ingredients to motivate innovation. All these
entail investments that are not easily adjustable and outcomes that are dependent on
long-term, cumulative eﬀorts. Both Manso (2011) and Manso (2017) argue that regulations


                                            28
limiting the ability of firms to invest in long-term, exploratory innovation may have
negative consequences.

      The notion of cumulative innovation is analogous to an individual’s investment in
education to build human capital, as Cunha & Heckman (2007) formalize. Attending third
grade oﬀers little in the way of labor market returns, but is crucial to ultimately attending

college. A child who misses a year of schooling may fall permanently behind her peers.
Similarly, falling behind in the corporate innovation process may have persistent eﬀects.
Uncertain listing delay causes a firm to pause its innovation investment, disrupting its

ability to build or maintain an innovative, entrepreneurial culture in the sense of Gompers,
Lerner & Scharfstein (2005). The temporary disruption has eﬀects on the firm’s innovation
infrastructure that last for multiple years. More broadly, short-term treatments are known

to have enduring eﬀects on people (e.g., Drago, Galbiati & Vertova 2009). In sum, in light
of the long-term, risky nature of innovation relative to other investment types, it is natural
that even short-term uncertainty may have enduring eﬀects.

      Another remaining question is how uncertainty would aﬀect corporate decision
making in the operational sense.         Manager tolerance for failure and interest in
experimentation is one channel for how uncertainty might aﬀect innovation in the long run.

Manso (2011), Tian & Wang (2014), Kerr, Nanda & Rhodes-Kropf (2014), and Manso
(2017) argue that experimentation and tolerance for initial failure are important for
successful innovation.     Experience with delay could aﬀect manager approaches to

innovation, similarly to how negative experiences with the Great Depression have been
shown to aﬀect managerial risk appetite (Malmendier & Nagel 2011). In this case, we
expect that managers whose tenure spans the delay period and the post-IPO period will be

responsible for the negative eﬀects on post-IPO innovation. Note that simply observing the
uncertain IPO environment should depress innovation at the control firms; instead, this
mechanism requires managers to themselves experience suspension-induced delay. This is

one way beyond those posited above that initial negative innovation eﬀects could become


                                             29
cumulative. That is, changes in managerial preferences may depress innovation even after
policy uncertainties have resolved.

        To investigate this mechanism, we collect data on executive changes using CSMAR
Executive and Board Database.32 In Appendix Table A4, we interact treatment with an
indicator for whether the firm’s CEO changed between approval and IPO. The interaction

coeﬃcient is robustly positive, implying that firms which changed CEOs do more innovation
after suspension-induced delay than continuing CEOs. Of course, changing the CEO is
endogenous and could emerge from the board’s desire to “clear the slate” after delay. In

Appendix Table A5, we document that suspension-induced delay does not lead to changes
in management, suggesting no systematic attempt to “clear the slate.” 33 While these tests
are only suggestive, they provide support for a decline in experimentation or tolerance for

failure as a plausible channel for how uncertainty can aﬀect innovation in the long run.34


5.3    Financial Constraints

Beyond policy uncertainty, access to finance is also known to be relevant for productivity and

innovation (e.g. Butler & Cornaggia 2011, Mao & Wang 2018, Howell 2020). In our setting,
financing constraints during the suspensions interact with heightened uncertainty, leading
to lower corporate innovation.35 For financial constraints to play a key role in explaining

our findings, alternative forms of financing must be too costly or unavailable. As explained
in Section 2.2, firms must meet various financial requirements, including multiple years of
  32
     This is only available after IPO, and was not available for about 300 firms out of the overall sample. We manually
translated and classified positions that appear more than 50 times in the database. We then examined entry and
exit of holders of these positions in the years after IPO. On average, 2.3 executives or board members depart in the
year after IPO, while just 0.09 join. Board members account for most of those who depart, but in all categories (e.g.
technology executives, finance executives) the departure rate vastly outpaces the entry rate.
  33
     Columns 1 and 2 show no eﬀects on CEO change or the entry of new board members. Columns 3-7 consider the
number of executives who enter in diﬀerent functions: finance, operations, technology, and human resources, as well
as a broader “All” category that includes these and several others. Summary statistics for these dependent variables
are in Appendix Table A6.
  34
     Experiencing transitory financial constraints, however, does not lead to the managers behaving diﬀerently towards
innovation, because we do not see more constrained managers innovate less after public listing.
  35
     We cannot completely rule out that the longer-term eﬀect on the patenting rates is an artifact of patent filings
and approvals lagging investment for years. However, the fact that firms immediately experience a drop in patenting
activities after the suspension cannot be attributed to this lag. Also, this alternative continues to imply a cost to
restricting timely access to public markets, and has the associated policy implications.


                                                          30
profitability, in order to list. This implies that firms approved to IPO in China are unlikely
to be extremely financially constrained. Also, the eﬀort to obtain IPO approval is sunk,

so firms desperately in need of capital might be expected to seek an IPO in Hong Kong or
elsewhere. The fact that listing abroad does not occur in our sample implies either that the
firms are not financially constrained, that firm-specific factors make them less well-suited to

listing abroad, or that they face severe frictions to listing abroad.36
        In the absence of financial frictions, the delayed firm could also fill a financing gap
with debt or VC/PE. Frictions in these markets may make IPO markets especially

important for risk capital provision in China. This is consistent with our findings that
during the suspension-induced delay period, aﬀected firms experience higher leverage, while
patenting and tangible investment fall (Tables 3 and 5).                        In the year following IPO,

suspension-induced delay is not associated with lower investment but continues to lead to
higher leverage. It seems that firms are able to increase debt, but that the debt is not used
to finance risky investments - tangible assets and innovation. Firms appear to be in a

“Goldilocks” position given that these activities may be constrained by the absence of risk
capital (Atanassov, Nanda & Seru 2007). They are not so constrained that they cannot
raise any debt, but frictions prevent them from financing risky projects eﬀectively in the

absence of public capital.
        In a financial constraint channel, we expect firms with PE/VC investment or better
access to debt to be less aﬀected because they could presumably turn to these other financing

sources during the delay period. We would also expect to observe larger eﬀects for firms that
are more financially constrained. To assess this, we conduct a number of heterogeneity
tests in Table 6. First, we expect that firms with prior PE/VC backing may be able to
  36
     While there are compelling arguments for listing abroad (e.g., Gounopoulos & Huang 2017), high communication
or post-listing disclosure costs may prevent firms from doing so. Except for the largest ones, most firms also expect
higher liquidity and valuation when listing domestically. The exceedingly high valuations in China surely oﬀer a
powerful inducement to wait to list once approved. One recent example is the online security firm 360 Security, which
in 2016 delisted from the NYSE and listed in Shanghai. Its market capitalization rose from $9.3 billion on the NYSE
to $52 billion on the Shanghai exchange (here). Finally, firms already applied to list domestically may abstain from
listing abroad due to firms executives’ behavioral biases, which we are agnostic of and should not alter our main
findings. Listing choice is beyond the scope of this paper, and the reader is directed to Doidge, Karolyi & Stulz
(2009) and Doidge, Karolyi, Lins, Miller & Stulz (2009) for discussion.


                                                         31
return to this source more easily for bridge financing during the delay, and that SOEs have
better access to debt in the years we examine (e.g., Cong, Gao, Ponticelli & Yang 2018).

Yet PE/VC-backed firms are more rather than less aﬀected (Column 2) and SOEs are not
significantly less aﬀected (Column 3). We also do not find that treated firms are more or less
likely to ever receive PE/VC investment before their IPO, suggesting that firms do not react

to suspension-induced delay by raising money in private capital markets. We next consider
standard measures of financial constraints: age and size (Chirinko & Schaller 1995, Whited
2006, Duchin, Ozbas & Sensoy 2010). These are appropriate in China, where more complex

measures based on, for example, detailed industry, dividends, or debt financing costs are
either unavailable or may not have the same informational content. In Columns 6-8, we find
near-zero and insignificant eﬀects on interactions between treatment and firm age, sales, and

assets in the year of IPO.
      In sum, while a capital supply channel is likely part of the story, it does not fully
explain the chilling eﬀect of suspension-induced delay on innovation. This is consistent with

other studies about firms in China finding a limited role for financial constraints, including
Li & Yang (2013), (Hao et al. 2016), and Tan & Zhang (2017). Of course, our findings by
no means imply that constraints are unimportant in other settings. Finally, note that to the

degree financial constraints are at play in reducing innovation during the delay period, the
cumulative nature of innovation and altered manager preferences could generate persistence,
as explained the previous section. Yet since we do not find that more financially constrained

firms experience more negative long-term eﬀects, the evidence favors an uncertainty channel
as the primary mechanism for the long-term eﬀect of IPO delay on innovation.


5.4   Window Dressing and Other Alternatives

Our robustness tests already rule out several alternative channels for the eﬀects of
suspension-induced delay on innovation. One that prominently remains is firms’ window
dressing behavior, or eﬀorts to artificially and temporarily mislead the market about the


                                             32
firm’s worth (Stein 1989, Jain & Kini 1994). Window dressing is almost certainly present
and may help explain the run-up in patent applications that we observe two years prior to

the firm’s approval (Figure 4). We examine the standard measure of window dressing,
discretionary accruals, in the year after IPO approval. If anything, we find that treated
firms have slightly lower, albeit statistically insignificant, discretionary accruals (Table 5

Panel 1 Column 6 and Panel 2 Column 11). It is therefore unlikely that window dressing
alone explains the innovation decline among the treatment group.
      However, firms could have exhausted window dressing resources during delays and

thus have less flexibility to window dress after IPO. That is, firms may maintain short-term
operating performance at the expense of longer-term operating performance, which could
have reduced patent activities. Yet this version of window dressing cannot explain the

persistent eﬀects on innovation that we observe during suspension-induced delay and
several years after, jointly with the absence of a longer-term eﬀect on operating
performance.   Similarly, firms may perceive a need to maintain a certain standard of

innovation under the CSRC’s watch as they wait to list. In particular, if a firm exhausts
resources for innovation during delay, we might expect it to have lower innovation after
ultimately going public. However, we observe patent applications drop precipitously during

the suspension-induced delay period (Figure 4), which directly contradicts this hypothesis.
A final possible window dressing scenario is that treated firms temporarily inflate patent
activities prior to the approval meetings more than control firms do and subsequently have

less resources for patent activities afterward. Yet Figure 4 shows that this is not the case;
instead, control and treated firms exhibit similar patterns in patenting prior to approval.



6   Conclusion

This paper sheds light on how financial policy uncertainty aﬀects innovation. The ideal

experiment would observe the same economy with and without well-functioning public



                                             33
markets, and observe policy uncertainty shocks that do not overlap. To this end, China’s
IPO suspensions provide a useful quasi-experiment in an important economy. During a

suspension, treated firms are forbidden from listing and face an uncertain period of delay.
This setting allows us to isolate the immediate and long-term eﬀects of indefinite but
temporary exclusion from public markets. We find that IPO suspension-induced delay

reduces innovation with economically significant magnitudes. This eﬀect endures for years
after listing, while eﬀects on other corporate outcomes do not outlast the delay period.
      The evidence is most consistent with heightened uncertainty disrupting the

corporate innovation process.    Our findings not only add to the literature on the real
consequences of policy uncertainty, but have regulatory implications, particularly in light of
how crucial private firm innovation is to China’s future growth. From the perspective of

firms seeking public financing, our results suggest that predictably listing in a timely
manner is valuable. Therefore, China’s innovation ecosystem could potentially benefit if
regulators focused on fostering accessible IPO markets with transparent rules and minimal

ad-hoc intervention.     One approach could be to move toward a registration-based,
disclosure-oriented listing process with lower policy uncertainty.




                                              34
References
Acharya, V. & Xu, Z. (2017), ‘Financial dependence and innovation: The case of public versus private firms’,
  Journal of Financial Economics 124(2), 223–243.

Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griﬃth, R. & Howitt, P. (2005), ‘Competition and innovation: An
  inverted-u relationship’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(2), 701–728.

Aghion, P., Cai, J., Dewatripont, M., Du, L., Harrison, A. & Legros, P. (2015), ‘Industrial policy and
  competition’, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(4), 1–32.

Aghion, P. & Tirole, J. (1994), ‘The management of innovation’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  109(4), 1185–1209.

Ahlstrom, D., Bruton, G. D. & Yeh, K. S. (2007), ‘Venture capital in china: Past, present, and future’, Asia
  Pacific Journal of Management 24(3), 247–268.

Allen, F., Qian, J. & Qian, M. (2008), ‘China’s financial system: past, present, and future’, Ch. 14 of China’s
  Great Economic Transformation, edited by L. Brandt and T. Rawski .

Allen, F., Qian, J., Shan, S. C. & Zhu, J. L. (2015), ‘Explaining the disconnection between china’s economic
  growth and stock market performance’, Shanghai Jiaotong University Working Paper .

Almeida, H. & Campello, M. (2007), ‘Financial constraints, asset tangibility, and corporate investment’, The
  Review of Financial Studies 20(5), 1429–1460.

Almeida, H., Campello, M. & Weisbach, M. S. (2011), ‘Corporate financial and investment policies when
  future financing is not frictionless’, Journal of Corporate Finance 17(3), 675–693.

An, H., Chen, Y., Luo, D. & Zhang, T. (2016), ‘Political uncertainty and corporate investment: Evidence
  from china’, Journal of Corporate Finance 36, 174–189.

Asker, J., Farre-Mensa, J. & Ljungqvist, A. (2014), ‘Corporate investment and stock market listing: a
  puzzle?’, Review of Financial Studies p. hhu077.

Atanassov, J., Nanda, V. & Seru, A. (2007), ‘Finance and innovation: The case of publicly traded firms’.

Bacchiocchi, E. & Montobbio, F. (2010), ‘International knowledge diﬀusion and home-bias eﬀect: Do uspto
  and epo patent citations tell the same story?’, The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 112(3), 441–470.

Baker, S. R., Bloom, N. & Davis, S. J. (2016), ‘Measuring economic policy uncertainty’, The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 131(4), 1593–1636.

Bates, K. A. & Flynn, E. J. (1995), Innovation history and competitive advantage: A resource-based view
  analysis of manufacturing technology innovations., in ‘Academy of Management Proceedings’, Vol. 1995,
  Academy of Management, pp. 235–239.

Bernanke, B. S. (1983), ‘Irreversibility, uncertainty, and cyclical investment’, The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 98(1), 85–106.

Bernstein, S. (2015), ‘Does going public aﬀect innovation?’, The Journal of Finance 70(4), 1365–1403.


                                                      35
Bhattacharya, U., Hsu, P.-H., Tian, X. & Xu, Y. (2017), ‘What aﬀects innovation more: Policy or policy
  uncertainty?’, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 52(5), 1869–1901.

Bloom, N., Bond, S. & Van Reenen, J. (2007), ‘Uncertainty and investment dynamics’, The review of
  economic studies 74(2), 391–415.

Bloom, N., Schankerman, M. & Van Reenen, J. (2013), ‘Identifying technology spillovers and product market
  rivalry’, Econometrica 81(4), 1347–1393.

Boeing, P. & Mueller, E. (2016), ‘Measuring patent quality in cross-country comparison’, Economics Letters
  149, 145–147.

Bonaime, A., Gulen, H. & Ion, M. (2018), ‘Does policy uncertainty aﬀect mergers and acquisitions?’, Journal
  of Financial Economics 129(3), 531–558.

Bond, P. & Goldstein, I. (2015), ‘Government intervention and information aggregation by prices’, The
  Journal of Finance 70(6), 2777–2812.

Brau, J. C. & Fawcett, S. E. (2006), ‘Initial public oﬀerings: An analysis of theory and practice’, The Journal
  of Finance 61(1), 399–436.

Braun, M. & Larrain, B. (2008), ‘Do ipos aﬀect the prices of other stocks? evidence from emerging markets’,
  The Review of Financial Studies 22(4), 1505–1544.

Brav, A. & Gompers, P. A. (1997), ‘Myth or reality? the long-run underperformance of initial public
  oﬀerings: Evidence from venture and nonventure capital-backed companies’, The Journal of Finance
  52(5), 1791–1821.

Brown, J. R., Fazzari, S. M. & Petersen, B. C. (2009), ‘Financing innovation and growth: Cash flow, external
  equity, and the 1990s r&d boom’, The Journal of Finance 64(1), 151–185.

Brunnermeier, M., Sockin, M. & Xiong, W. (2017), ‘China’s model of managing the financial system’,
  Unpublished Working Paper .

Butler, A. W. & Cornaggia, J. (2011), ‘Does access to external finance improve productivity? evidence from
  a natural experiment’, Journal of Financial Economics 99(1), 184–203.

Cao, J., Jiang, F. & Ritter, J. R. (2015), ‘Patents, innovation, and performance of venture capital-backed
  ipos’.

Cao, J. X., Ding, Y. & Zhang, H. (2016), ‘Social capital, informal governance, and post-ipo firm performance:
  A study of chinese entrepreneurial firms’, Journal of Business Ethics 134(4), 529–551.

Carpenter, J. N., Lu, F. & Whitelaw, R. F. (2018), ‘The real value of china’s stock market’.

Carpenter, J. N. & Whitelaw, R. F. (2017), ‘The development of china’s stock market and stakes for the
  global economy’, Annual Review of Financial Economics 9, 233–257.

Chang, H. F. (1995), ‘Patent scope, antitrust policy, and cumulative innovation’, The RAND Journal of
  Economics pp. 34–57.



                                                      36
Chemmanur, T. J., He, S. & Nandy, D. K. (2009), ‘The going-public decision and the product market’,
  Review of Financial Studies p. hhp098.

Chen, D., Jiang, D., Ljungqvist, A., Lu, H. & Zhou, M. (2016), ‘State capitalism vs. private enterprise’,
  Working Paper .

Chirinko, R. S. & Schaller, H. (1995), ‘Why does liquidity matter in investment equations?’, Journal of
  Money, Credit and Banking 27(2), 527–548.

Cong, L. W., Gao, H., Ponticelli, J. & Yang, X. (2018), ‘Credit allocation under economic stimulus: Evidence
  from china’, Review of Financial Studies Forthcoming.

Cong, L. W., Grenadier, S. & Hu, Y. (2017), Dynamic interventions and informational linkages, Technical
  report, Working Paper.

Cong, L. W., Lee, C., Qu, Y. & Shen, T. (2018), ‘Financing entrepreneurship and innovation in china’,
  Foundations and Trends R in Entrepreneurship, p. Accepted.

Cornaggia, J., Mao, Y., Tian, X. & Wolfe, B. (2015), ‘Does banking competition aﬀect innovation?’, Journal
  of financial economics 115(1), 189–209.

Cunha, F. & Heckman, J. (2007), ‘The technology of skill formation’, American Economic Review 97(2), 31–
  47.

Dixit, A. K. & Pindyck, R. S. (1994), Investment under uncertainty, Princeton university press.

Doidge, C., Karolyi, G. A., Lins, K. V., Miller, D. P. & Stulz, R. M. (2009), ‘Private benefits of control,
  ownership, and the cross-listing decision’, The Journal of Finance 64(1), 425–466.

Doidge, C., Karolyi, G. A. & Stulz, R. M. (2009), ‘Has new york become less competitive than london in
  global markets? evaluating foreign listing choices over time’, Journal of Financial Economics 91(3), 253–
  277.

Dollar, D. & Wei, S.-J. (2007), ‘Das (wasted) kapital: firm ownership and investment eﬃciency in china’.

Drago, F., Galbiati, R. & Vertova, P. (2009), ‘The deterrent eﬀects of prison: Evidence from a natural
  experiment’, Journal of political Economy 117(2), 257–280.

Duchin, R., Ozbas, O. & Sensoy, B. A. (2010), ‘Costly external finance, corporate investment, and the
  subprime mortgage credit crisis’, Journal of financial economics 97(3), 418–435.

Fan, J. P., Wong, T. J. & Zhang, T. (2007), ‘Politically connected ceos, corporate governance, and post-ipo
  performance of china’s newly partially privatized firms’, Journal of financial economics 84(2), 330–357.

Fang, L. H., Lerner, J. & Wu, C. (2017), ‘Intellectual property rights protection, ownership, and innovation:
  Evidence from china’, The Review of Financial Studies 30(7), 2446–2477.

Feldman, M. P. & Florida, R. (1994), ‘The geographic sources of innovation: technological infrastructure and
  product innovation in the united states’, Annals of the association of American Geographers 84(2), 210–
  229.



                                                     37
Ferreira, D., Manso, G. & Silva, A. C. (2012), ‘Incentives to innovate and the decision to go public or private’,
  The Review of Financial Studies 27(1), 256–300.

Friedman, M. (1968), ‘The role of monetary policy’, The American Economic Review 58(1).

Froot, K. A., Scharfstein, D. S. & Stein, J. C. (1993), ‘Risk management: Coordinating corporate investment
  and financing policies’, the Journal of Finance 48(5), 1629–1658.

Gilje, E. P. & Taillard, J. P. (2016), ‘Do private firms invest diﬀerently than public firms? taking cues from
  the natural gas industry’, The Journal of Finance 71(4), 1733–1778.

Gompers, P. A. & Lerner, J. (2004), The venture capital cycle, MIT press.

Gompers, P., Kovner, A., Lerner, J. & Scharfstein, D. (2008), ‘Venture capital investment cycles: The impact
  of public markets’, Journal of Financial Economics 87(1), 1–23.

Gompers, P., Lerner, J. & Scharfstein, D. (2005), ‘Entrepreneurial spawning: Public corporations and the
  genesis of new ventures, 1986 to 1999’, The Journal of Finance 60(2), 577–614.

Gounopoulos, D. & Huang, C. (2017), Political curroption and firm access to public capital market, Technical
  report, Working Paper.

Grabowski, H. G. (1968), ‘The determinants of industrial research and development: A study of the chemical,
  drug, and petroleum industries’, Journal of political economy 76(2), 292–306.

Gulen, H. & Ion, M. (2015), ‘Policy uncertainty and corporate investment’, The Review of Financial Studies
  29(3), 523–564.

Guo, D. & Jiang, K. (2013), ‘Venture capital investment and the performance of entrepreneurial firms:
  Evidence from china’, Journal of Corporate Finance 22, 375–395.

Guo, J. & Zhang, Y. (2012), ‘Firm timing or government timing? the impact of listing timing on capital
  structure under china’s special system of ipo’, Journal of Financial Research (7), 137–153.

Hao, W., Wei, W. & Wen, J. (2016), ‘How does policy uncertainty aﬀect corporate innovation——a real
  options perspective’, Business Management Journal 10, 40–54.

Harhoﬀ, D., Scherer, F. M. & Vopel, K. (2003), ‘Citations, family size, opposition and the value of patent
  rights’, Research policy 32(8), 1343–1363.

Hassett, K. A. & Metcalf, G. E. (1999), ‘Investment with uncertain tax policy: Does random tax policy
  discourage investment’, The Economic Journal 109(457), 372–393.

Holmstrom, B. (1989), ‘Agency costs and innovation’, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
  12(3), 305–327.

Howell, S. (2020), ‘Reducing information frictions in venture capital: The role of new venture competitions’,
  Journal of Financial Economics 136(3), 676–694.

Howell, S. T. (2017), ‘Financing innovation: evidence from r&d grants’, American Economic Review
  107(4), 1136–64.


                                                       38
Hsieh, C.-T. & Song, Z. M. (2015), ‘Grasp the large, let go of the small: The transformation of the state
  sector in china’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity .

Hsu, P.-H., Tian, X. & Xu, Y. (2014), ‘Financial development and innovation: Cross-country evidence’,
  Journal of Financial Economics 112(1), 116–135.

Insights, K. (2016), ‘The pulse of fintech, q2 2016: Global analysis of fintech venture funding’.

Jain, B. A. & Kini, O. (1994), ‘The post-issue operating performance of ipo firms’, The journal of finance
  49(5), 1699–1726.

Jeﬀerson, G. H., Huamao, B., Xiaojing, G. & Xiaoyun, Y. (2006), ‘R&d performance in chinese industry’,
  Economics of innovation and new technology 15(4-5), 345–366.

Jens, C. E. (2017), ‘Political uncertainty and investment: Causal evidence from us gubernatorial elections’,
  Journal of Financial Economics 124(3), 563–579.

Jones, C. I. & Williams, J. C. (1998), ‘Measuring the social return to r&d’, Quarterly Journal of Economics
  pp. 1119–1135.

Jones, J. J. (1991), ‘Earnings management during import relief investigations’, Journal of accounting research
  pp. 193–228.

Julio, B. & Yook, Y. (2012), ‘Political uncertainty and corporate investment cycles’, The Journal of Finance
  67(1), 45–83.

Kerr, W. R., Nanda, R. & Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2014), ‘Entrepreneurship as experimentation’, Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 28(3), 25–48.

Kortum, S. & Lerner, J. (2001), Does venture capital spur innovation?, in ‘Entrepreneurial inputs and
  outcomes: New studies of entrepreneurship in the United States’, Emerald Group Publishing Limited,
  pp. 1–44.

Krishnan, C., Ivanov, V. I., Masulis, R. W. & Singh, A. K. (2011), ‘Venture capital reputation, post-ipo
  performance, and corporate governance’, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46(5), 1295–
  1333.

Lee, C., Qu, Y. & Shen, T. (2017), ‘Reverse mergers, shell value, and regulation risk in chinese equity
  markets’, Working Paper .

Lerner, J. (2009), Boulevard of broken dreams: why public eﬀorts to boost entrepreneurship and venture
  capital have failed–and what to do about it, Princeton University Press.

Lerner, J. & Schoar, A. (2005), ‘Does legal enforcement aﬀect financial transactions? the contractual channel
  in private equity’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(1), 223–246.

Li, F. & Yang, M. (2013), ‘Will economic policy uncertainty hinder corporate investment? empirical evidence
   from chinese policy uncertainty indices’, The 7th Lixin Forum on Risk Management pp. 165–187.

Li, Y., Meng, X. & Wei, X. (2015), ‘China’s new third board market: Opportunities and challenges’, Procedia
   Computer Science 55, 1050–1059.


                                                     39
Liu, Q., Tang, J. & Tian, G. G. (2013), ‘Does political capital create value in the ipo market? evidence from
  china’, Journal of Corporate Finance 23, 395–413.

Malmendier, U. & Nagel, S. (2011), ‘Depression babies: do macroeconomic experiences aﬀect risk taking?’,
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1), 373–416.

Manso, G. (2011), ‘Motivating innovation’, The Journal of Finance 66(5), 1823–1860.

Manso, G. (2017), ‘Creating incentives for innovation’, California Management Review 60(1), 18–32.

Mao, Y. & Wang, J. J. (2018), ‘Access to finance and technological innovation: Evidence from antebellum
 america’, Kelley School of Business Research Paper (18-21).

McDonald, R. & Siegel, D. (1986), ‘The value of waiting to invest’, The quarterly journal of economics
 101(4), 707–727.

Michel, J. & Bettels, B. (2001), ‘Patent citation analysis. a closer look at the basic input data from patent
  search reports’, Scientometrics 51(1), 185–201.

Packer, F., Spiegel, M. et al. (2016), ‘China’s ipo activity and equity market volatility’, FRBSF Economic
  Letter 2016, 18.

Pagano, M., Panetta, F. & Zingales, L. (1998), ‘Why do companies go public? an empirical analysis’, The
  Journal of Finance 53(1), 27–64.

Pástor, L., Taylor, L. A. & Veronesi, P. (2009), ‘Entrepreneurial learning, the ipo decision, and the post-ipo
  drop in firm profitability’, Review of Financial Studies 22(8), 3005–3046.

Piotroski, J. D. & Zhang, T. (2014), ‘Politicians and the ipo decision: The impact of impending political
  promotions on ipo activity in china’, Journal of Financial Economics 111(1), 111–136.

Prasad, D., Vozikis, G. S. & Ariﬀ, M. (2006), ‘Government public policy, regulatory intervention, and
  their impact on ipo underpricing: The case of malaysian ipos’, Journal of Small Business Management
  44(1), 81–98.

Rajan, R. G. (2012), ‘Presidential address: The corporation in finance’, The Journal of Finance 67(4), 1173–
  1217.

Rajan, R. G. & Zingales, L. (2001), ‘Financial systems, industrial structure, and growth’, Oxford review of
  economic Policy 17(4), 467–482.

Rodrik, D. (1991), ‘Policy uncertainty and private investment in developing countries’, Journal of
  Development Economics 36(2), 229–242.

Rong, Z., Wu, X. & Boeing, P. (2017), ‘The eﬀect of institutional ownership on firm innovation: Evidence
  from chinese listed firms’, Research Policy 46(9), 1533–1551.

Shi, S., Sun, Q. & Zhang, X. (2018), ‘Do ipos aﬀect market price? evidence from china’, Journal of Financial
  and Quantitative Analysis 53(3), 1391–1416.

Stein, J. C. (1989), ‘Eﬃcient capital markets, ineﬃcient firms: A model of myopic corporate behavior’, The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 104(4), 655–669.


                                                     40
Stokey, N. L. (2016), ‘Wait-and-see: Investment options under policy uncertainty’, Review of Economic
  Dynamics 21, 246–265.

Tan, X. & Zhang, W. (2017), ‘Analysis on the channels for policy uncertainty to influence corporate
  investment’, The Journal of World Economy 12.

Tian, L. (2011), ‘Regulatory underpricing: Determinants of chinese extreme ipo returns’, Journal of
  Empirical Finance 18(1), 78–90.

Tian, X. & Wang, T. Y. (2014), ‘Tolerance for failure and corporate innovation’, The Review of Financial
  Studies 27(1), 211–255.

Tian, X. & Ye, K. (2018), ‘How does policy uncertainty aﬀect venture capital?’, Available at SSRN 2910075
  .

Wang, Z. & Zhu, W. (2013), ‘Equity financing regulation and corporate finance’, Investment Research 11, 3–
 15.

Wei, S.-J., Xie, Z. & Zhang, X. (2017), ‘From" made in china" to" innovated in china": Necessity, prospect,
 and challenges’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 31(1), 49–70.

Whited, T. M. (2006), ‘External finance constraints and the intertemporal pattern of intermittent
 investment’, Journal of Financial Economics 81(3), 467–502.

Yang, Z. (2013), ‘Do political connections add value to audit firms? evidence from ipo audits in china’,
  Contemporary Accounting Research 30(3), 891–921.




                                                    41
              Figure 1: IPO Delay and Shanghai and Shenzhen Composite Indices




Note: This figure shows the delay (days between IPO approval and listing) for all IPO firms (a few outlier firms are
excluded). Each IPO firm is a point. It also shows as lines the Shanghai and Shenzhen composite indices daily close
(SHCOMP:IND and SZCOMP:IND in Bloomberg, respectively). The year labels indicate the end of each calendar
year. The shaded areas correspond to the suspensions.




                                                        42
                           Figure 2: Empirical Design - IPO Approval Date




Note: This figure shows the delay (days between IPO approval and listing) for all IPO firms (a few outlier firms are
excluded). The x-axis is the date of IPO approval. Each IPO firm is a point. The sample used in analysis (estimation
sample) are those firms to the right of the solid vertical lines and to the left of the suspension periods. These are
firms approved to IPO in the 12 months before the suspension. They are divided into treatment and control groups
based on the observable discontinuity in delay. Red dots are control firms, and green circles are treated firms. The
year labels indicate the end of each calendar year.




                                                         43
                                 Figure 3: Empirical Design - IPO Date




Note: This figure shows the delay (days between IPO approval and listing) for all IPO firms (a few outlier firms are
excluded). The x-axis is the date of IPO (listing). Each IPO firm is a point. The sample used in analysis (estimation
sample) are those firms symbolized by red dots or green circles. These are firms approved to IPO in the 12 months
before the suspension. They are divided into treatment and control groups based on the observable discontinuity
in delay. Red dots are control firms, and green circles are treated firms. The year labels indicate the end of each
calendar year.




                                                         44
        Figure 4: Average monthly invention patent applications around IPO approval




Note: This figure shows Chinese invention patent applications by the month around the committee approval date.
We sort firm-months around the month that a firm was approved to IPO. For the treated firms, firms drop out of the
sample as they list, and all firms are included at month zero and before. For control firms, they are included before
and after listing. Treatment (N=118) and control (N=232) samples are defined in Table 2 and Figures 2-3. We use
a local polynomial with Epanechnikov kernel using Stata’s optimal bandwidth; 95% confidence intervals shown.




                                                         45
                                    Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                        Panel 1: Categorical IPO data
                                                                                            N
            IPOs in Shanghai/Shenzhen (2004-2015)                                          1,558
            sssssIPOs in Shanghai                                                          290
            sssssIPOs in Shenzhen                                                          1,268
            State-owned (SOE)                                                              241
            Venture backed                                                                 634
            sssssPrivate Foreign PE/VC director on board                                    33
            sssssState-backed Chinese PE/VC director on board                              150
            sssssPrivate Chinese PE/VC director on board                                   206


                    Panel 2: Continuous IPO data (Listing less approval date, months)

                                                           N     Mean    Median   S.d.       Min     Max
  Whole sample
  IPO delay in months (time approval to listing)          1558   4.3      2.3      5.8       0.43     43.4

  Estimation sample†
  IPO delay in months (time approval to listing)          350     7.7     3.7       8.1      0.63     36.63
  Market cap at listing                                   350    3313    913      15141      145     220000
  IPO proceeds                                            350    1369    463       5413      121     66276
  Price-to-book ratio first day of trading                350     12.0   10.2       8.9       1.5     108.3
  IPO underpricing††                                      350    -0.77   -0.8      0.08     -0.88      -0.3


            Panel 3: Annual patent data in year following IPO approval for estimation sample


                                                           N     Mean    Median    S.d.       Min      Max
Chinese invention patent applications                     350    5.01      3       6.73          0      43
Chinese granted invention patents                         350    1.58      1       2.06          0      13
Citations to granted Chinese invention patents            350    23.8      7       46.5          0      616
Granted global (non-Chinese) utility patents              350    0.04      0       0.33          0       5


                    Panel 4: Annual Chinese invention patent applications in later years


                                                           N     Mean    Median    S.d.       Min      Max
In 3rd year after IPO approval if public                  342    5.09     3.5      6.63          0      44
In 4th year after IPO approval if public                  320    4.83      3       6.14          0      40
In year after IPO                                         350    4.24      2       5.59          0      34
In second year after IPO                                  350    4.85      3       8.79          0      113




                                                     46
                   Panel 5: Corporate data in year following IPO approval for estimation sample
                                                             N    Mean Median S.d.            Min            Max
       PPE Investment±                                      350    0.13      0.1      0.11     0             1.12
       Leverage±                                            350    0.76     0.52      0.94   0.03            11.34
       Revenue                                              350    6013     551     48662     65            840000
       Return on sales                                      350    0.79     1.07      0.49   0.02            1.52
       Earnings‡‡                                           350     724      72      7763    5.83           140000
       Discretionary accruals                               340    0.07     0.05      0.14   -0.44            0.62

                        Panel 6: Corporate data in year following IPO for estimation sample


                                      N        Mean         Median        S.d.          Min         Max
                             ±
          PPE Investment             350        0.13           0.1        0.12           0           1.12
          R&D/Assets                 350          0             0         0.01           0           0.05
          R&D Expenditure            350        1.45            0         5.65           0           54.4
                    ±
          Leverage                   350        0.54           0.34        0.8         0.01          11.3
          Revenue                    350        1244           630        1691         64.6         13335
          Employees                  350       2516.4          997       6443.09        63          59996
          Payroll                    350        178            61.1        511          5.11        5504
                         ⇤
          Market share               350        2.47           0.37       6.34         0.02          40.3
          Return on sales            350        1.16           1.13       0.11         1.01          1.58
          Earnings‡                  350        752            75.4       7776         5.83        140000
          Cash/Assets                346        0.39           0.38       0.19         0.03          0.92
          Board size                 350        9.23            9         2.09           5            17
          Discretionary accruals     340        0.07           0.05       0.14         -0.44         0.62


Note: This table contains summary statistics about all IPOs on the Shenzhen and Shanghai exchanges between 2004
and 2015. Panel 1 contains categorical data about the IPOs for the whole sample. Panel 2 describes continuous IPO
data, including the time between IPO approval and listing (delay). † Estimation sample consists of firms approved to
IPO in the year before either 2008-9 or 2012-14 suspension. †† IPO underpricing is defined as PcPoPo , where Pc is the
closing price on the first day of trading and Po is the oﬀer price. Currency-denominated variables are in million RMB
throughout. Panel 3 contains patent data in year after IPO approval, and Panel 4 contains patent data in subsequent
years. Panel 5 describes corporate variables in the year after IPO approval (many variables are unavailable until after
IPO). Panel 6 describes corporate variables in the year after IPO. ± Investment and leverage calculated as fraction
of total assets. ‡ Equivalent to net income, in nominal RMB. ⇤ Revenue of firm i in year t scaled by total revenue of
industry in year t; Industry is CSRC industry (2 digits if in manufacturing, 1 digit otherwise).




                                                          47
                         Table 2: T-tests for diﬀerences by treatment status


                                    Panel 1: Delay (months approval to listing)

                                                         Control         Treatment
                                                        N     Mean       N        Mean    Diﬀ†    2-tailed
                                                                                                  p-value
          Delay (months approval to listing)           232     3.23     118       16.3    -13.1    0.00
          Mock delay (months approval to listing       232     3.23     118       3.03    0.20     0.71
          omitting months during IPO
          suspensions)


                             Panel 2: Outcome variables in year before IPO approval


                                                         Control         Treatment
                                                        N     Mean       N        Mean    Diﬀ†    2-tailed
                                                                                                  p-value
          Chinese invention patent applications        232     4.69     118       4.24    0.46     0.70
          Granted Chinese invention patents            232     1.98     118       2.04    -0.06    0.94
          Citations to Chinese invention patents       232     22.0     118       23.1    -1.08    0.85
          Granted global utility patents               232     0.04     118       0.02    0.02     0.35
          PPE investment                               232     0.15     118       0.14    0.00     0.81
          Leverage                                     232     1.24     116       1.15    0.09     0.57
          Revenue                                      232     1450     118       1769    -319     0.53
          Return on sales                              232     0.19     118       0.19    0.00     0.97
          Earnings                                     232     172      118       158      14      0.27
          Discretionary accruals                       232    0.000     118       0.014   -0.01    0.21


Note: This table summarizes t-tests for diﬀerences of means across treatment and control groups. We show all
variables that we observe in the year before IPO approval. The sample is that used in estimation: firms approved to
IPO in the 12 months before an IPO suspension. We naively instrument for delay with a “Treated” indicator that is
defined by an observed discontinuity in delay. For the 2008-9 (2012-14) suspension, it is 1 for firms approved on or
after June 5, 2008 (April 24, 2012).




                                                        48
                 Table 3: Eﬀect of suspension-induced IPO delay on patent activity

                                 Panel 1: Patents filed in year after IPO approval

   Dependent variable: Chinese invention patent applications

   Model:                               Poisson                                OLS

                                (1)        (2)       (3)              (4)       (5)       (6)

   Treated                    -.33***   -.30***    -.35***          -1.7***   -1.4***   -1.8***
                                (.11)     (.11)      (.12)           (.59)     (.54)      (.59)
   Approval date                                    .0042                                 .031
                                                    (.018)                               (.078)
   Approval date2                                    0.00                                 0.00
                                                    (0.00)                               (0.00)

   Controls†                    Y          N          Y               Y         N          Y
   Industry f.e.                Y          Y          Y               Y         Y          Y
   Year f.e.                    Y          Y          N               Y         Y          N

   N                            350       350        350             350       350        350
   [Pseudo]-R2                  .14       .10        .14             .14       .085       .14

   Dependent variable:        Granted Chinese       Granted global               Citations to       Citations per
                              invention patent      (non-Chinese)              granted Chinese        Chinese
                                applications        utility patents           invention patents   invention patent

   Model:                     Poisson     OLS               OLS               Poisson     OLS     Poisson    OLS

                                (7)        (8)               (9)               (10)       (11)     (12)      (13)

   Treated                    -.22**      -.36*            -.041*             -.45***    -11**     -.11*      -1.5
                               (.11)      (.20)            (.023)               (.17)    (5.1)    (.069)     (.92)

   Controls†                    Y          Y                    Y               Y          Y        Y         Y
   Industry f.e.                Y          Y                    Y               Y          Y        Y         Y
   Year f.e.                    Y          Y                    Y               Y          Y        Y         Y

   N                            350       350                350               350        350      200       200
   [Pseudo]-R2                  .10       .13               .072               .20        .11      .04       .09

Note: This panel shows the eﬀects of IPO delay on patenting in the year after IPO approval, within the estimation
sample of firms approved in the 12 months before an IPO suspension. We naively instrument for delay with a “Treated”
indicator that is defined by an observed discontinuity in delay. In columns 3 and 6 we also control for approval date
in a more direct RDD approach. For the 2008-9 (2012-14) suspension, it is 1 for firms approved on or after June 5,
2008 (April 24, 2012) and before the respective suspension start on September 16 2008 (October 19 2012). † Controls
are revenue, leverage, total investment that year, age, and indicators for being state-owned, PE/VC-backed, and
the exchange (SH/SZ). The R2 is pseudo for Poisson models. Errors clustered by industry-quarter. *** indicates
p-value<.01.




                                                           49
                  Panel 2: Patents filed in 3rd and 4th years after IPO approval if firm has listed

 Dependent variable:        Chinese invention patent applications in       Chinese invention patent applications in
                                 3rd year after IPO approval                    4th year after IPO approval

 Model:                          Poisson             OLS                       Poisson                OLS

                                   (1)                (2)                        (3)                  (4)

 Treated                          -.26*             -1.2**                       -.18*             -.91*
                                  (.14)              (.56)                      (.095)              (.5)

 Controls†                          Y                  Y                          Y                   Y
 Industry f.e.                      Y                  Y                          Y                   Y
 Year f.e.                          Y                  Y                          Y                   Y

 N                                 342                342                        320                  320
 [Pseudo]-R2                       .11                .12                        .12                  .11

                             Panel 3: Patents filed in year after and 2nd year after IPO

 Dependent variable:        Chinese invention patent applications in       Chinese invention patent applications in
                                        year after IPO                               2nd year after IPO

 Model:                          Poisson                OLS                    Poisson                  OLS

                                   (1)                     (2)                   (3)                      (4)

 Treated                         -.34***               -1.5**                     -.34                  -1.4
                                   (.13)                (.57)                    (.24)                 (1.4)

 Controls†                          Y                       Y                     Y                         Y
 Industry f.e.                      Y                       Y                     Y                         Y
 Year f.e.                          Y                       Y                     Y                         Y

 N                                 350                     350                   350                      350
 [Pseudo]-R2                       .13                     .13                   .29                      .43

Note: Panel 2 shows the eﬀects of IPO delay on patent applications in the 3rd and 4th year after approval conditional
on the firm having already listed (that is, comparison is within public firms). Before this restriction, the sample is
the estimation sample of firms approved in the 12 months before an IPO suspension. Panel 3 shows the eﬀect of
IPO delay on patent applications in the year after IPO and 2nd year after IPO, but aligning control firms on the
calendar year of the treated firms, so that patents are compared within the same calendar year. This means that
control firms are on average further past their IPO than treated firms. We naively instrument for delay with a
“Treated” indicator that is defined by an observed discontinuity in delay. For the 2008-9 (2012-14) suspension, it is 1
for firms approved on or after June 5, 2008 (April 24, 2012) and before the respective suspension start on September
16 2008 (October 19 2012). † Controls are revenue, leverage, total investment that year, age, and indicators for being
state-owned, PE/VC-backed, and the exchange (SH/SZ). The R2 is pseudo for Poisson models. Errors clustered by
industry-quarter. *** indicates p-value<.01.




                                                            50
         Table 4: Robustness in eﬀect of suspension-induced IPO delay on patenting

                    Panel 1: Continuous delay and patent applications in year after IPO approval

   Dependent variable: Chinese invention patent applications

                                                                                      Placebo tests
                                                    Instrument for       Delay exclusive of        Excluding
                                                  delay with approval       suspensions         pre-suspension
                                                         date                                       periods

   Model:                    Poisson     OLS           IV (2SLS)         Poisson      OLS            OLS

                               (1)        (2)             (3)              (4)         (5)            (6)

   Delay (months)             -.013*    -.067*           -.12**                                       -.071
                             (.0073)    (.039)           (.059)                                      (.047)
   Mock delay (months)                                                     .012       .064
                                                                          (.014)     (.072)

   Controls†                    Y         Y                Y                Y          Y               Y
   Industry f.e.                Y         Y                Y                Y          Y               Y
   Year f.e.                    Y         Y                Y                Y          Y               Y

   N                           350        350             350              350        350            1199
   [Pseudo]-R2                 .14        .13             .13              .14        .13             .11
   First stage F-test±                                    266

Note: This panel shows the eﬀects of IPO delay on patenting in the year after IPO approval, within the estimation
sample of firms approved in the 12 months before an IPO suspension. Columns 1-2 show the eﬀect of continuous
delay in months. In column 3, we instrument for continuous delay with the approval date. Columns 4-5 are placebo
tests that use “mock” delay that excludes months during the IPO suspensions. Column 6 is a placebo test that uses
delay outside of the estimation sample, during periods other than the 12 months before an IPO suspension. † Controls
are revenue, leverage, total investment that year, age, and indicators for being state-owned, PE/VC-backed, and the
exchange (SH/SZ). The R2 is pseudo for Poisson models. Errors clustered by industry-quarter. ± The Cragg-Donald
F-statistic for the excluded instrument (delay) being significantly diﬀerent from zero. *** indicates p-value<.01.




                                                        51
                                     Panel 2: Placebo tests using pre-approval years

               Dependent variable:            Chinese invention patent       Chinese invention patent
                                             applications in year before     applications in 2nd year
                                                   IPO approval                before IPO approval

               Model:                         Poisson            OLS          Poisson               OLS

                                                 (1)              (2)            (3)                (4)

               Treated                          .032             .051           -.037                -.32
                                                (.15)            (.74)           (.2)               (1.1)

               Controls†                         Y                 Y             Y                   Y
               Industry f.e.                     Y                 Y             Y                   Y
               Year f.e.                         Y                 Y             Y                   Y

               N                                350               350           350                 350
               [Pseudo]-R2                      .28               .53           .24                 .42

                               Panel 3: Main results in panel setting with firm fixed eﬀects

               Dependent variable: Chinese invention patent applications
                                            After IPO approval                          After IPO

               Model:                         Poisson            OLS          Poisson               OLS

                                                 (1)              (2)            (3)                (4)

               Treated·Post                    -.4***            -2.1**        -.4***             -1.6
                                               (.038)              (1)          (.04)            (1.5)
               Post                            .81***            3.4***        1.3***           4.9***
                                               (.021)             (.96)        (.024)            (1.3)

               Firm f.e.                         Y                 Y             Y                   Y

               N                                3234             3850           2910                3500
               R2                                 -              .007             -                  .03

Note: Panel 2 shows placebo tests of the eﬀect of IPO delay on patent applications in the years before IPO approval.
We naively instrument for delay with a “Treated” indicator that is defined by an observed discontinuity in delay. For
the 2008-9 (2012-14) suspension, it is 1 for firms approved on or after June 5, 2008 (April 24, 2012) and before the
respective suspension start on September 16 2008 (October 19 2012). Panel 3 shows the eﬀect of suspension-induced
IPO delay on invention patent applications using a panel setting with firm fixed eﬀects. Columns 1-2 consider the five
years around IPO approval. Columns 3-4 consider the five years around IPO. Treated is defined at the firm level as
in previous tables, but the coeﬃcient of interest is now the interaction between being treated and in the post period
(after approval in columns 1-2, and IPO in columns 3-4). † Controls are revenue, leverage, total investment that year,
age, and indicators for being state-owned, PE/VC-backed, and the exchange (SH/SZ). The R2 is pseudo for Poisson
models, but in Panel 3 with panel data there is no pseudo R2 reported. Errors clustered by industry-quarter in Panel
2 and by firm in Panel 3. *** indicates p-value<.01.




                                                            52
            Table 5: Eﬀect of suspension-induced IPO delay on corporate outcomes


                                     Panel 1: Eﬀect in year after IPO approval

      Dependent variable:         PPE         Leverage      Revenue       Return      Earnings     Discretionary
                               investment                                 on Sales                   accruals

                                   (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)

      Treated                    -.038***       .23*            -287      -.56***        -14           -.014
                                   (.013)       (.12)          (2726)      (.094)       (240)         (.015)

      Controls                      Y             Y              Y           Y            Y             Y
      Industry f.e.                 Y             Y              Y           Y            Y             Y
      Year f.e.                     Y             Y              Y           Y            Y             Y

      N                            350           350            350         350          350           340
      R2                           .14           .38            .18          .5          .91           .12

Note: This panel shows the eﬀects of IPO delay on other firm outcomes in the year after IPO approval, within the
estimation sample of firms approved in the 12 months before an IPO suspension. We naively instrument for delay with
a “Treated” indicator that is defined by an observed discontinuity in delay. For the 2008-9 (2012-14) suspension, it is
1 for firms approved on or after June 5, 2008 (April 24, 2012) and before the respective suspension start on September
16 2008 (October 19 2012). † Controls are revenue, leverage, total investment that year, age, and indicators for being
state-owned, PE/VC-backed, and the exchange (SH/SZ). The R2 is pseudo for Poisson models. Errors clustered by
industry-quarter. *** indicates p-value<.01.




                                                          53
                                    Panel 2: Eﬀect in year after IPO

           Dependent variable:        PPE           R&D/          Log       Leverage   Revenue          Board
                                   investment       assets        R&D                                    size

                                        (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)            (6)

           Treated                     -.011         -.0019        -1.1        -.13       211             .55
                                      (.018)        (.0012)       (1.9)       (.22)     (5740)           (.37)

           Controls                     Y             Y             Y          Y           Y              Y
           Industry f.e.                Y             Y             Y          Y           Y              Y
           Year f.e.                    Y             Y             Y          Y           Y              Y

           N                           350           339           339        350         347            350
           R2                          .16           .14           .18        .45         .21            .27

           Dependent variable:       Market        Return        Earnings    Cash/       Discretionary
                                     share         on sales                  assets        accruals

                                        (7)           (8)          (9)        (10)               (11)

           Treated                    .0022          .016          -65        .029               .016
                                      (.003)        (.016)        (721)      (.031)             (.021)

           Controls                     Y             Y             Y          Y                  Y
           Industry f.e.                Y             Y             Y          Y                  Y
           Year f.e.                    Y             Y             Y          Y                  Y

           N                           345           350           350        335                339
           R2                          .34           .33           .24        .34                .16

Note: This panel shows the eﬀect of IPO delay on other outcomes in the year after delayed firms IPO, within the
estimation sample of firms approved in the 12 months before an IPO suspension. We naively instrument for delay with
a “Treated” indicator that is defined by an observed discontinuity in delay. For the 2008-9 (2012-14) suspension, it is
1 for firms approved on or after June 5, 2008 (April 24, 2012) and before the respective suspension start on September
16 2008 (October 19 2012). † Controls are revenue, leverage, total investment that year, age, and indicators for being
state-owned, PE/VC-backed, and the exchange (SH/SZ). The R2 is pseudo for Poisson models. Errors clustered by
industry-quarter. *** indicates p-value<.01.




                                                            54
        Table 6: Heterogeneity in eﬀect of suspension-induced IPO delay on patenting

 Dependent variable: Chinese invention patent applications

                                      (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)         (8)

 Treated·High R&D intensity          -.84*
                                     (.49)
 Treated·PE/VC Backed                          -.45**
                                                (.21)
 Treated·State Owned                                       .32
                                                          (.33)
 Treated·High Market Share                                           .22
                                                                    (.21)
 Treated·High Tech Non-SOE                                                     -.32
                                                                              (.23)
 Treated·Age                                                                             .022
                                                                                        (.033)
 Treated·Sales                                                                                   -.000024
                                                                                                 (.000017)
 Treated·Assets                                                                                               1.4e-07
                                                                                                             (3.3e-06)
 Treated                             -.074     -.068     -.34***     -.3*     -.067      -.57     -.64***     -.31***
                                     (.15)     (.18)       (.11)    (.16)     (.22)     (.39)       (.2)        (.12)

 Control for independent eﬀect        Y          Y         Y          Y        Y          Y          Y           Y
 Industry f.e.                        Y          Y         Y          Y        Y          Y          Y           Y
 Year f.e.                            Y          Y         Y          Y        Y          Y          Y           Y

 N                                    320       350       350        320       350       350        350         350
 Pseudo-R2                            .12       .15       .07        .15       .14       .14        .15         .15

Note: This table shows the eﬀect of IPO delay on patenting in the year after IPO approval, within the estimation
sample of firms approved in the 12 months before an IPO suspension. We report only the interaction coeﬃcient
and not the independent eﬀect of the characteristic of interest (e.g. High R&D intensity) for brevity. Treatment
is interacted with the following variables for the firm having certain characteristics in the IPO year: High R&D
intensity=1 if R&D/assets above median; State Owned=1 if State Owned Enterprise (SOE); High market share=1
if market share above median; High Tech Non-SOE=1 if in a high tech industry and not SOE; PE/VC-backed=1
if received private equity before applying to list; Age=firm’s age in years; Sales=Total sales in millions of RMB;
Assets=firm assets in millions of RMB. In Columns 1 and 3 we use the outcome from Table 3 Panel 2 Columns 1-2
because the covariate in the interaction is only observed after IPO. We naively instrument for delay with a “Treated”
indicator that is defined by an observed discontinuity in delay. For the 2008-9 (2012-14) suspension, it is 1 for firms
approved on or after June 5, 2008 (April 24, 2012) and before the respective suspension start on September 16 2008
(October 19 2012). All models are Poisson. Errors clustered by industry-quarter. *** indicates p-value<.01.




                                                          55
     Appendix A to Policy Uncertainty and Innovation: Evidence from IPO
                           Interventions in China




                                          (for Online Publication)


                                         Table A.1: IPO Suspensions
            Suspension       Rationale               Details
            start - end
            Sept 16, 2008    Global Financial        The United States Subprime Mortgage Crisis
            to July 10,      crisis and prolonged    triggered the international financial crisis, which
            2009             decline in market       resulted in a record low of 1802.33 points of A
                             index.                  shares on September 18th, 2008. Under this
                                                     context, the IPOs witnessed a suspension again.
            Oct 19, 2012     Bearish aggregate       Bearish market conditions despite the fact that
            to Jan 16,       market conditions       indexes in Europe and in the US are performing
            2014                                     well; CSRC started the biggest inspection of
                                                     financial reporting for IPO firms.

Note: Sourced from CSRC Oﬃcially Designated Media Outlet. Hou and Zhu, “A Review of China IPO
Suspensions”, Security Daily, June 19 2013, Published: A3, retrieved from here. See also Finance Daily, here.




                                                 Online Appendix
Table A.2: T-tests for diﬀerences by sample status (firms approved in year before suspensions
vs. all other firms)


                                   Panel 1: Delay (months approval to listing)

                                                       Outside estimation        Estimation
                                                            sample                 sample
                                                        N          Mean          N     Mean    Diﬀ†    2-tailed
                                                                                                       p-value
  Delay (months approval to listing)                   1208         3.31         350   7.65    -4.35     0.00
  Mock delay (months approval to listing omitting      1208         3.36         350   3.16    0.19      0.48
  months during IPO suspensions)


                             Panel 2: Outcome variables in year before IPO approval


                                                       Outside estimation        Estimation
                                                            sample                 sample
                                                        N          Mean          N     Mean    Diﬀ†    2-tailed
                                                                                                       p-value
  Chinese invention patent applications                1208         2.21         350   4.54    -2.33     0.00
  Granted Chinese invention patents                    1208         0.69         350   2.00    -1.31     0.00
  PPE investment                                       1208         0.12         350   0.14    -0.02     0.00
  Leverage                                             1208         1.37         350   1.42    -0.05     0.77
  Revenue                                              1208        1610          350   2194    -584      0.20
  Return on sales                                      1208         0.17         350   0.19    -0.01     0.22
  Earnings                                             1208         147          350   195     -48.0     0.05
  Discretionary accruals                               1208         0.02         350   0.00    0.01      0.03


Note: This table summarizes t-tests for diﬀerences of means across the estimation sample and all IPOs outside of
the estimation sample. We show all variables that we observe in the year before IPO approval. We do not have
citation or global patent data outside of the estimation sample, so they are not included.




                                               Online Appendix
Table A.3: Eﬀect of IPO and delay on monthly patent citations after IPO approval,
comparing listed and unlisted firms (Bernstein comparison)

            Sample: Firm-months in the 36 months after IPO approval

            Dependent variable: Citations to granted Chinese invention patents

                                                                           (1)               (2)

            Public (=1 if month is in or after IPO month)                -.69***           -1.7***
                                                                           (.16)             (.25)
            Delay so far (months) (=total delay once Public=1)                             -.13***
                                                                                            (.018)

            Controls†                                                       Y                 Y
            Industry f.e.                                                   Y                 Y
            Quarter of approval f.e.                                        Y                 Y

            N                                                             14586             14586
            R2                                                             .042              .047

Note: This table shows the eﬀect of being public and delay so far on patent quality using monthly patent data
and a negative binomial model. † Controls are total investment that year, age, and indicators for being state-owned,
PE/VC-backed, and the exchange (SH/SZ). The R2 is pseudo. Errors clustered by firm. *** indicates p-value<.01.




                                               Online Appendix
Table A.4: Eﬀect of suspension-induced IPO delay on patent applications with heterogeneity
by CEO change status

             Dependent variable: Patents filed in year after after IPO

                                                                            (1)                (2)

             Treated·CEO change                                             1.7*              5.2**
                                                                            (.95)             (2.2)
             Treated                                                       -.4***            -1.7***
                                                                            (.13)             (.59)
             CEO change                                                      -1.3            -3.7***
                                                                            (.84)             (1.4)

             Controls†                                                       Y                  Y
             Industry f.e.                                                   Y                  Y
             Quarter of approval f.e.                                        Y                  Y

             N                                                              350                350
             R2                                                             .14                .14

Note: This table shows the eﬀect of IPO delay on patent applications in the year after IPO, aligning control firms on
the calendar year of the treated firms as in Table 3 panel 3 columns 1-2, so that patents are compared within the same
calendar year. This means that control firms are on average further past their IPO than treated firms. We naively
instrument for delay with a “Treated” indicator that is defined by an observed discontinuity in delay. For the 2008-9
(2012-14) suspension, it is 1 for firms approved on or after June 5, 2008 (April 24, 2012) and before the respective
suspension start on September 16 2008 (October 19 2012). CEO change is an indicator for a new CEO in the period
between approval and IPO. † Controls are revenue, leverage, total investment that year, age, and indicators for being
state-owned, PE/VC-backed, and the exchange (SH/SZ). The R2 is pseudo for Poisson models. Errors clustered by
industry-quarter. *** indicates p-value<.01.




                                                Online Appendix
                   Table A.5: Eﬀect of suspension-induced IPO delay on governance


                                                         Number of executives entering the firm by type of role

   Dependent variable:        CEO         Board         All     Finance     Operations     Technology          Human
                             change      members                                                              Resources
                                          entry

                               (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)            (6)              (7)

   Treated                    -.046         .13        .093        -.1       .00038            -.0066           .036
                             (.048)        (.41)       (.46)     (.075)      (.0047)           (.018)          (.086)

   Controls                     Y            Y          Y          Y              Y              Y               Y
   Industry f.e.                Y            Y          Y          Y              Y              Y               Y
   Year f.e.                    Y            Y          Y          Y              Y              Y               Y

   N                           350          350        350        350            350           350              350
   R2                          .21          .38        .33        .19            .079          .078             .25

Note: This panel shows the eﬀect of IPO delay on corporate governance outcomes in the year of IPO, within the
estimation sample of firms approved in the 12 months before an IPO suspension. We naively instrument for delay with
a “Treated” indicator that is defined by an observed discontinuity in delay. For the 2008-9 (2012-14) suspension, it is
1 for firms approved on or after June 5, 2008 (April 24, 2012) and before the respective suspension start on September
16 2008 (October 19 2012). CEO change is an indicator for a new CEO in the period between approval and IPO.
Board members entry is the number of board members added in the year of IPO. The subsequent dependent variables
are the number of executives who enter in each category of management in the year of IPO. † Controls are revenue,
leverage, total investment that year, age, and indicators for being state-owned, PE/VC-backed, and the exchange
(SH/SZ). The R2 is pseudo for Poisson models. Errors clustered by industry-quarter. *** indicates p-value<.01.




         Table A.6: Summary Statistics of Executive Changes (in year following IPO)

                                                            N    Mean     Median        S.d.          Min        Max
   # all executives/board members who join               1247     2.32       1          4.12            0         28
   # all executives/board members who depart             1247     0.09       0          0.48            0            7
   # board members who join                              1247     1.96       1          3.34            0         21
   # board members who depart                            1247     0.09       0          0.43            0            6
   # finance executives who join                         1247     0.16       0          0.42            0            4
   # finance executives who depart                       1247     0.005      0          0.07            0            1
   # operations executives who join                      1247     0.20      0.0         0.51            0.0          5
   # operations executives who depart                    1247     0.01      0.0         0.10            0.0          2
   # HR executives who join                              1247      0.2       0          0.51            0            5
   # HR executives who depart                            1247     0.01       0           0.1            0            2
   # technical executives who join                       1247     0.07       0          0.41            0            8
   # technical executives who depart                     1247     0.002      0          0.08            0            3


Note: This table contains variables about entry and exit of executives by occupational area.



                                                   Online Appendix
    Appendix B to Policy Uncertainty and Innovation: Evidence from IPO
                          Interventions in China




                                  (for Online Publication)



Market Uncertainty Test: Eﬀect on Contemporaneous VC

Intuitively, if the suspensions generated uncertainty in the market about the future of IPOs
in China, they would have depressed contemporaneous VC investment. To see this, note that

VC returns depend on IPOs for liquidity events. During a suspension, investors who believed
China’s IPO market could be jeopardized in the medium term, perhaps through a change in
IPO regulations or stringent future restrictions on the number of IPOs, might be expected

to reduce investment activity. Anecdotal evidence suggests this occurred. According to a
KPMG/CB Insights report following the 2012-2014 IPO suspension,

     “There are approximately 800 companies still waiting for IPO listing approvals in
     China. This has aﬀected the overall deal flow, particularly for Series B and C
     investors considering their exit strategies” (Insights 2016).

Conversely, if the suspensions were perceived as short term hiatuses, we would not expect

an eﬀect, because VC investments in privately held companies are illiquid relative to public
debt and equity investments.


B.1 Empirical Approach

We are interested in the eﬀect of an IPO suspension on VC investment. This exercise relates
to Gompers, Kovner, Lerner & Scharfstein (2008), who document that VCs react rationally to
public market signals about fundamentals. In Equation 4 below, we estimate an association

between periods of IPO suspension and contemporaneous VC, using data at monthly and


                                       Online Appendix
weekly frequencies. Controlling for the market indices, as well as VC investment in the rest
of the world (outside mainland China), help give the coeﬃcient of interest on the indicator

for an IPO suspension being in eﬀect ( 1 ) a more causal interpretation. Nonetheless, a
conservative interpretation is to view the specification as testing for correlation.
      Specifically, the dependent variable is either the amount or number of deals of early

or later stage VC investment. Controls include either the Shenzhen and Shanghai (SZ and
SH, respectively) indices, or an overall China market index. We also control for PCRI’s
rest-of-world VC investment at the relevant stage (early or late). Let 1 | IP O Suspensiont

be an indicator for the IPO market being suspended in month or week t.


                V C Chinat = ↵ +        1   (1 | IP O Suspensiont ) +    1 SH   Indext   (4)

                             +   2 SZ   Indext +     3V   C ROW t + "t


Disturbances are likely autocorrelated, leading to underestimated standard errors.
Therefore, our preferred approach uses heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent

(HAC) standard errors (specifically, Newey-West errors). Note that this analysis is one of
correlation, not causation. The suspensions themselves were not exogenous to Chinese
economic conditions. For example, it may be that during IPO suspensions it is more

diﬃcult for private equity investors to fundraise from limited partners. While we control
for the market index and show similar results for elite United States-based VCs who likely
do not face such fundraising cycles, we cannot rule out this channel.


B.2 Results

We find a correlation between the suspension periods and depressed aggregate VC investment
in China. Appendix Figures B.1-4 show weekly frequencies and investment in real 2010 RMB.

The negative correlation between suspension periods and VC investment in China is obvious,
especially for the 2012-14 suspension.


                                            Online Appendix
      Table B1 confirms this visual evidence in regression estimates, using versions of
Equation 4. In Panel 1, the dependent variable is weekly early stage VC investment in

nominal USD. Columns 1-3 use Newey-West standard errors with an optimal lag. While a
naive regression (column 1) has a strong negative coeﬃcient on the indicator for months in
which an IPO suspension was in eﬀect, the coeﬃcient falls and loses significance with

controls for market indices and VC investment in the rest of the world (Columns 2 and 3).
With less stringent error assumptions (Columns 4 and 5), these eﬀects are significant at the
10% level, and imply that the suspensions reduce weekly early stage investment by about

$25 million, relative to a mean of $74 million. We are surprised to find evidence of any
eﬀect at all on early stage VC investment, as these investments are illiquid and typically
held for 3-8 years (Gompers & Lerner 2004). There is a much stronger relationship for later

stage investment. In our more stringent specifications (Table B1 Panel 2 Columns 2-3), we
find that the suspensions appear to reduce weekly later stage investment by about $53
million, relative to a mean of $181 million, significant at the 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Excluding the 2009 suspension (which was associated with the global financial crisis) leads
the coeﬃcients to increase to -$64 million. We find similar results for both early and late
stage investment using real 2010 RMB, and using monthly rather than weekly data. Note

that the negative coeﬃcient on the Shanghai index is an artifact of controlling for
Shenzhen; it is also positive without the Shenzhen control.
      We turn to investment by the location of the VC firm in Table B2. Panel 1 considers

investment by China-located general partners (GPs) only, and continues to find the reduction
in investment, particularly for later stage investment. The aggregate correlations we measure
could arise from a capital supply shock; GPs may have more diﬃculty raising funds during

suspensions and so reduce their contemporaneous investment. If this were the case, we would
not expect elite foreign firms’ investments in China to be aﬀected by the suspensions. They
presumably have greater access to capital in general, and their access to capital should be

less sensitive to Chinese markets in particular. In Table B.2 Panel 2, the dependent variable


                                       Online Appendix
is the number of VC deals in Chinese companies by elite United States VCs active in China.
Because the PCRI data do not include GP-level investments, we constructed this time series

using data from pedata.cn, which is only available from 2005. The sample is thus smaller.
Even so, Columns 1-2 suggest that IPO suspensions decrease the number of elite United
States-based VC deals in China by a bit more than three deals, relative to a mean of 63.5.

      We conduct several robustness tests in Table B.3. First, a placebo test in Columns
1-2 examines the eﬀect of the suspensions on VC investment outside of China. As expected,
we find no statistically significant eﬀect, though the coeﬃcients are negative. In Columns

3-6, we confirm our main results using the alternative data source, pedata.cn, which is only
available from 2005. We continue to find a strong reduction in overall and later stage VC
investment, of about 26 deals relative to a mean of 152. We confirm that the result is specific

to VC in Table B.4, where we show no eﬀect of the suspensions on monthly aggregate bank
lending.
      In sum, this analysis suggests that the suspensions created uncertainty about the

overall regulatory environment and the future of IPOs in China, and had a chilling eﬀect
on VC investment. Using U.S. data and gubernatorial elections, Tian and Ye (2018) also
document that policy uncertainty reduces VC investment, consistent with our findings.




                                       Online Appendix
               Table B.1: IPO Suspensions and Contemporaneous VC Investment

                                        Panel 1: Early Stage VC Investment

    Dependent variable: Weekly early stage VC investment in Chinese portfolio companies⇤
                                                                                              Excluding 2009
                                                                                                suspension
    Standard error model:                    Newey-West                    Robust             NW        Robust

                                     (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)
    IPO suspension in eﬀect        -67***          -26       -25        -26*        -25*        -27        -27*
                                    (18)          (17)      (15)        (15)        (14)       (20)        (16)
    Shenzhen index†                             .37***                .37***                 .37***      .37***
                                                 (.061)                (.054)                 (.062)      (.054)
    Shanghai index†                            -.084***              -.084***               -.084***    -.084***
                                                  (.02)                (.019)                 (.021)      (.019)
    China index††                                         .11***                 .11***
                                                           (.022)                 (.014)
    VC inv. rest of world‡                      -.0034     -.0016     -.0034*     -.0016     -.0044      -.0044*
                                               (.0024)    (.0026)     (.0021)    (.0023)    (.0028)      (.0024)

    N                                960         860         915        860          915      820          820
    R2                              .0053        .12        .066        .12         .066      .12          .12

                                        Panel 2: Later Stage VC Investment

    Dependent variable: Weekly later stage VC investment in Chinese portfolio companies⇤
                                                                                              Excluding 2009
                                                                                                suspension
    Standard error model:                    Newey-West                    Robust             NW        Robust

                                      (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
    IPO suspension in eﬀect        -111***       -56**     -53***     -56***      -53***      -64**      -64***
                                     (23)         (24)      (20)       (17)        (15)        (28)       (19)
    Shenzhen index†                             .45***                .45***                 .46***      .46***
                                                (.093)                (.095)                 (.094)      (.096)
    Shanghai index†                              -.038                 -.038                   -.04        -.04
                                                (.028)                 (.03)                 (.029)       (.03)
    China index††                                         .22***                 .22***
                                                           (.032)                 (.029)
    VC inv. rest of world‡                      -.0014     .0005       -.0014     .0005     -.00079      -.00079
                                               (.0072)    (.0063)     (.0076)    (.0067)    (.0093)      (.0099)

    N                               960          860        915         860         915       820          820
    R2                              .012          .2        .17          .2         .17        .2           .2

Note: This table shows OLS estimates of the relationship between VC investment and IPO suspensions, using variants
of: V Cm = ↵ + 1 (1 | IP O Suspensionm ) + Xm + "m . ⇤ Data from PCRI; nominal USD value of early stage VC
investment in mainland China companies. † Monthly average of daily closing price for Shenzhen/Shanghai composite.
††
   Monthly overall China market index. ‡ Monthly VC investment in all portfolio companies located outside of China
(source: PCRI). Newey-West standard errors, with optimal lag of 4 (identified using lag order selection statistics via
Stata’s varsoc command). *** indicates p-value<.01.



                                                 Online Appendix
Table B.2: Eﬀect of IPO Suspensions on Contemporaneous Investment by China-located
VCs and top US VCs

                       Panel 1: China-Located VCs; all models use Newey-West standard errors

     Dependent variable:                 Monthly # VC          Monthly VC investment (USD) by
                                        deals by mainland          mainland China GPs††
                                          China GPs††
                                                               Early        Later               All
                                                               stage        stage
                                                                                        Excluding 2009
                                                                                          suspension

                                               (1)               (2)          (3)                 (4)
     IPO suspension in eﬀect                  -1.4*              -81       -146***              -37*
                                              (.76)             (52)         (53)                (19)
     Shenzhen index†                          .0053            1.3***       1.2***               .18*
                                             (.0043)            (.22)        (.2)              (.092)
     Shanghai index†                         .00026           -.27***      -.19***              -.017
                                             (.0013)           (.067)       (.064)             (.028)

     N                                         222              222          222                212
     R2                                        .08              .52          .56                .11

               Panel 2: Elite US VCs active in China; all models use Newey-West standard errors

     Dependent variable: Monthly # VC deals in mainland Chinese companies by elite US VCs‡

                                                                                        Excluding 2009
                                                                                          suspension

                                                (1)             (2)          (3)               (4)
     IPO suspension in eﬀect                   -3.3*           -3.8*         -3.4              -2.2
                                               (1.9)           (2.2)        (2.3)             (2.1)
     Shenzhen index†                         .015***                                       .015***
                                              (.0041)                                       (.0042)
     Shanghai index†                        -.0042***                                     -.0039***
                                              (.0014)                                       (.0014)
     China index††                                              .002        .0023            .002*
                                                              (.0012)      (.0015)           (.001)
     Monthly # VC deals by top                                               .039
     US VCs in US companies
                                                                            (.047)

     N                                         127              127          124               117
     R2                                        .27              .092          .1               .125

Note: This table contains OLS regression estimates of the relationship between VC investment and whether the
government has suspended IPOs. Data is monthly. We use variants of: V Cm = ↵ + 1 (1 | IP O Suspensionm ) +
Xm + "m . † Monthly average of daily closing price for the Shenzhen/Shanghai composite index. †† Data from PCRI.
‡
  Data from pedata.cn (sample smaller as data starts in 2005). Newey-West standard errors, with optimal lag of 4
(identified using lag order selection statistics via Stata’s varsoc command). *** indicates p-value<.01.




                                                Online Appendix
Table B.3: Robustness Tests of Eﬀect of IPO Suspensions on Contemporaneous VC
Investment, Newey-West Standard Errors

                                        Placebo test          Alternative data source:   Monthly number of VC
                                                                              deals in   China⇤
     Dependent variable:           VC investment rest of      Total        By            Early      Later
                                          world‡                        mainland          stage      stage
                                                                           GPs

                                       (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)             (5)        (6)
     IPO suspension in eﬀect          -1119        -1147        -29*        -31*             -2.7     -26**
                                     (1426)       (1408)        (15)        (18)            (8.3)      (11)
     Shenzhen index                    -2.1                    .18***     .29***          .11***     .082***
                                      (3.1)                    (.034)      (.043)          (.021)     (.021)
     Shanghai index                     3.1                       -      -.094***        -.035***   -.019***
                                                              .051***
                                     (2.1)                     (.009)     (.011)         (.0061)     (.0065)
     China index                                   2.7**
                                                   (1.2)

     N                                 222          234         127        127             127         127
     R2                               .043         .037         .42        .49              .4         .29

Note: This table contains OLS regression estimates of the relationship between VC investment and whether the
government has suspended IPOs. Data is monthly. We use variants of: V Cm = ↵ + 1 (1 | IP O Suspensionm ) +
Xm + "m . ⇤ Data from pedata.cn. This variable is the monthly number of VC deals in mainland Chinese portfolio
companies. ‡ Monthly VC investment (nominal USD) in all portfolio companies located outside of China (source:
PCRI). Newey-West standard errors, with optimal lag of 4 (identified using lag order selection statistics via Stata’s
varsoc command). *** indicates p-value<.01.




                                                Online Appendix
Table B.4: Eﬀect of IPO Suspensions on Contemporaneous Monthly Aggregate Bank Lending
to Non-Financial Firms, Newey-West Standard Errors

     Dependent variable: Monthly aggregate bank lending to non-financial firms in China⇤



                                             (1)            (2)
     IPO suspension in eﬀect              1358.68        1234.41
                                          (825.68)       (822.80)
     Shenzhen index†                     2.166***
                                           (.602)
     Shanghai index†                     -1.216***
                                           (.265)
     China index††                                       -0.544.
     N                                      108            108
     R2                                     .16            .07

Note: This table contains OLS regression estimates of the relationship between bank lending and whether the
government has suspended IPOs. Data is monthly. We use variants of: V Cm = ↵ + 1 (1 | IP O Suspensionm ) +
Xm + "m . ⇤ Data from WIND; this variable is the value in nominal USD. † Monthly average of daily closing price for
the Shenzhen/Shanghai composite index. †† Monthly overall China market index, based on Shanghai and Shenzhen
indices. Newey-West standard errors, with optimal lag of 4 (identified using lag order selection statistics via Stata’s
varsoc command). *** indicates p-value<.01.




                     Figure B.1: Monthly Early Stage VC to China Companies




Note: Each point is the monthly value of VC investments in mainland China-based portfolio companies in nominal
USD. Only seed and early stage VC investment included.




                                                  Online Appendix
       Figure B.2: Monthly Early Stage VC to Non-China (Rest of World) Companies




Note: Each point is the monthly value of VC investments in non-China-based portfolio companies in nominal USD.
Only seed and early stage VC investment included.




 Figure B.3: Monthly Early Stage VC Investment in China Companies (Real 2010 RMB)




Note: Each point in this figure is the total value of VC investments in China-based portfolio companies in a given
month in real 2010 RMB. Only seed and early stage VC investment included.




                                               Online Appendix
 Figure B.4: Monthly Later Stage VC Investment in China Companies (Real 2010 RMB)




Note: Each point in this figure is the total value of VC investments in China-based portfolio companies in a given
month in real 2010 RMB. Only growth/expansion stage VC investment included.




                                               Online Appendix
