NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAKE-UP AND TARGETING:
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM SNAP
Amy Finkelstein
Matthew J. Notowidigdo
Working Paper 24652
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24652

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018

We are grateful to Martin Aragoneses, Aileen Devlin, Carolyn Stein, John Tebes and Ting Wang
for excellent research assistance and to Laura Feeney for superb research management. We thank
our excellent partners at Benefits Data Trust, and particularly Rachel Cahill and Matt Stevens
who worked tirelessly and patiently to address our inumerable requests and questions. We thank
Abhijit Banerjee, Stefano DellaVigna, Manasi Deshpande, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Colin Gray,
Nathan Hendren, Henrik Kleven, Kory Kroft, Elira Kuka, Ben Olken, Jesse Shapiro, Chris Udry,
and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments. The experiment reported in this study
is listed in the AEA RCT Registry (#0000902). We gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Amy Finkelstein and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Take-up and Targeting: Experimental Evidence from SNAP
Amy Finkelstein and Matthew J. Notowidigdo
NBER Working Paper No. 24652
May 2018
JEL No. C93,H53,I38
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a framework for evaluating the welfare impact of various interventions
designed to increase take-up of social safety net programs in the presence of potential behavioral
biases. We calibrate the key parameters using a randomized field experiment in which 30,000
elderly individuals not enrolled in – but likely eligible for – the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) are either provided with information that they are likely eligible,
provided with this information and also offered assistance in applying, or are in a “status quo”
control group. Only 6 percent of the control group enrolls in SNAP over the next 9 months,
compared to 11 percent of the Information Only group and 18 percent of the Information Plus
Assistance group. The individuals who apply or enroll in response to either intervention receive
lower benefits and are less sick than the average enrollee in the control group. The results are
consistent with the existence of optimization frictions that are greater for needier individuals,
suggesting that the poor targeting properties of the interventions reduce their welfare gains.

Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics, E52-442
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
afink@mit.edu
Matthew J. Notowidigdo
Northwestern University
Department of Economics
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
noto@northwestern.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/902
An online appendix is available at
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24652

1

Introduction

Enrollment in U.S. social safety net programs is not automatic: individuals must apply and demonstrate eligibility. Often, eligibility rules are complicated, application forms long, and documentation
requirements substantial. Perhaps as a result, incomplete take-up is pervasive (Currie, 2006). The
main explanations typically offered are: lack of knowledge about eligibility and transaction costs
associated with enrollment.1
Various public policy efforts try to increase take-up by increasing awareness of eligibility and
simplifying application processes. For example, for the Supplemental Assistance Nutrition Program
(SNAP), New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio proposed an enrollment campaign that contacted
Medicare recipients about their SNAP eligibility and improved online services (Hu, 2014), the state
of Texas simplified the application process (Aaronson, 2011), and Congress provided funding to
study various models for facilitating access to SNAP among the elderly (Kauff et al., 2014).
However, incomplete take-up may represent a constrained social optimum. For many programs,
eligibility is not measurable in passively-collected administrative data. SNAP, Social Security
Disability Insurance (SSDI), Supplemental Security Income (SSI), and Medicaid are some examples.
As a result, eligibility cannot be assessed without the government incurring administrative costs;
these represent a negative externality which can drive a wedge between privately optimal and
socially optimal application decisions (e.g., Kleven and Kopczuk 2011). In addition, neoclassical
theory has emphasized that informational or transactional barriers to enrollment may serve as
useful screens, allowing a given amount of public spending to be directed to individuals with higher
marginal utility from enrollment (or higher social welfare weights); these theories suggest a tradeoff between productive efficiency and allocative efficiency (e.g., Nichols et al., 1971, Nichols and
Zeckhauser 1982, Besley and Coate 1992).
By contrast, recent work in behavioral economics has conjectured that these barriers may have
exactly the opposite targeting effect to what the neoclassical theory assumes, and discourage the
applicants with the highest marginal utility of enrollment (e.g., Bertrand et al. 2004, Mani et
al. 2013, Mullainathan and Shafir 2013). For example, in their book “Scarcity”, Mullainathan
and Shafir (2013) argue that poverty imposes a “bandwidth tax” that makes poor individuals more
likely to fail to undertake high-net-value activities, such as taking chronic disease medication, paying
regular bills on time, or enrolling in a public benefit program for which one is eligible. Ultimately,
the targeting properties of these barriers and their welfare implications are empirical questions.
This paper formalizes an approach to analyzing the normative consequences of how information
and transaction costs affect the number and type of people who apply and enroll in social safety
net programs, and applies it to a randomized evaluation of interventions aimed at elderly nonparticipants in the SNAP program. SNAP - also known as food stamps - is one of the most
important social safety net programs in the United States. It is the only benefit that is virtually
universally available to low-income households. During the Great Recession, as many as one in
1

A third common explanation - stigma associated with program participation - can be modeled as a form of a
transaction cost (Moffit 1983; Currie 2006).

1

seven individuals received SNAP (Ganong and Liebman, 2013). In 2015, public expenditures on
SNAP were about $70 billion, roughly the same amount as the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC)
and higher than the $60 billion spent on SSI or the $30 billion on cash welfare (TANF).2 Take-up of
SNAP is especially low among the elderly, who are the focus of our study; in 2012, only 42 percent
of eligible elderly enrolled in SNAP, compared to 83 percent overall (Eslami, 2014). And the stakes
associated with non-participation are non-trivial for the elderly; average annual SNAP benefits are
about $1,500, or about 15 percent of household income among the eligible (Center on Budget and
Policy Priorities, 2017).
To explore barriers to enrollment and the types of individuals deterred by these barriers, we
partnered with Benefits Data Trust (BDT), a national not-for-profit organization committed to
transforming how individuals in need access public benefits. BDT in turn has partnered with
the Pennsylvania state government to receive administrative data on applications and enrollment
in a variety of public benefits, including SNAP and Medicaid. BDT uses linked data on SNAP
enrollment and on Medicaid enrollment among elderly individuals (ages 60 and over) to identify
individuals not enrolled in but likely eligible for SNAP. These individuals form the basis of our
study population.
We selected about 30,000 elderly individuals from this population in late 2015 and randomized
them into three equally-sized groups: an Information Only treatment, an Information Plus Assistance treatment, and a status quo control group. The treatments took place in the first half of
2016. Study participants in the Information Only treatment received a mailing - and a follow-up
reminder postcard - from the Secretary of Pennsylvania’s Department of Human Services (DHS),
informing them of their likely eligibility for SNAP, and providing them a phone number at DHS
to call to apply. Study participants in the Information Plus Assistance arm received a virtually
identical letter and reminder postcard, with one key change: they were provided with a phone
number at the PA Benefits Center (the local name of BDT) to call to apply. Callers in this arm
received phone-based application assistance from one of BDT’s Benefits Outreach Specialists; these
BDT employees asked a series of questions that allowed them to inform the caller of their potential
eligibility and likely benefit amount, to fill out the application, to assist the applicant in collecting necessary verification documents, to submit the application, and to assist with any follow-up
questions that arose from DHS. Both intervention arms included sub-treatments that varied the
content of the letter and, in one case, whether or not the reminder postcard was sent; we describe
these in more detail below, although we focus primarily on the main treatments. We tracked calls
from study participants to both BDT and DHS, and received administrative data from DHS on
SNAP applications, enrollments, and benefit amounts after the intervention; we obtained additional
demographic and health data pre-intervention from the study participants’ Medicaid records.
The experiment itself yields two main empirical findings. First, information alone increases
enrollment, while information combined with assistance increases enrollment even more, but at a
2

US Department of Agriculture 2016, US Department of Health and Human Services 2016, US Internal Revenue
Service 2015, US Social Security Administration (2016)

2

higher cost per enrollee. Nine months after the intervention - at which point the initial impact
appears to be fully in place - enrollment is 6 percentage points in the control arm compared to 11
percentage points in the Information Only arm and 18 percentage points in the Information Plus
Assistance arm; these enrollment rates are all statistically distinguishable (p < 0.001). A rough
calculation suggests the intervention cost per additional enrollee is lower in the Information Only
treatment: about $20 per enrollee compared to about $60 per enrollee in the Information Plus
Assistance treatment. We also find that a sub-treatment of the Information Only intervention,
which omits the reminder postcard, reduces its impact by about 20 percent; this suggests a role for
inattention in explaining at least some of the impact of the Information Only intervention.
We observe intervention effects at several intermediate stages. About 30 percent of the participants in each intervention arm call in response to the outreach materials, suggesting a likely ceiling
for the impact of the interventions on enrollment. Similar call-in rates in the two interventions
also suggest that the larger enrollment effects of Information plus Assistance relative to Information Only are likely due to the assistance per se, rather than the anticipation of assistance. Each
intervention increases applications proportionally to its effect on enrollment; the success rate of
applications is about 75 percent in all three arms.
Our second main empirical finding is that the interventions decrease targeting. Seemingly
contrary to the “behavioral” hypothesis that information barriers and transaction costs deter the
neediest eligible individuals, we find that marginal applicants and enrollees in either intervention are
less needy than average applicants or enrollees in the control group. They receive lower benefits from
the progressive benefit formula (if they enroll) and are less sick (as measured by pre-intervention
rates of hospital visits and chronic diseases). Additionally, they are more likely to be white and more
likely to have English as their primary language, suggesting that they may be less socioeconomically
disadvantaged than the control group applicants and enrollees. These targeting results are broadly
similar across the intervention arms; the characteristics of the marginal applicants and enrollees
across intervention arms are statistically and substantively indistinguishable.
We develop a simple model that allows us to assess the normative implications of interventions
that inform individuals about their likely eligibility (“information interventions”) or reduce the private costs of applying (“assistance interventions”). Beyond our particular study, such interventions
are common in enacted and proposed policies (as described above), as well as in previous academic
studies (e.g., Alatas et al. 2016, Bettinger at al. 2012, Bhargava and Manoli 2015). However,
their welfare properties have not been examined in detail. In particular, analyses of targeting have
focused primarily on observable characteristics of affected individuals that are related to poverty
but, as we show, are not necessarily related to the welfare properties of targeting.
A key feature of the model is a fiscal externality on the government from the program, which
creates the standard wedge between private and socially optimal application choices; we model this
as the public costs of processing each application and paying benefits for the marginal enrollees.
In addition, we allow for the possibility that individuals may not make privately optimal application decisions; specifically, we assume they may misperceive the expected benefits from applying.

3

Without such misperceptions, interventions that increase applications have no first-order effect on
marginal enrollees’ private welfare (by the envelope theorem); the information intervention will
strictly decrease social welfare due to the fiscal externality if it increases applications, while the assistance intervention’s effect on social welfare is a priori ambiguous. Moreover, in this “neoclassical
benchmark” with no misperceptions, the targeting properties of the interventions are irrelevant for
private welfare; and contrary to the “folk wisdom” that targeting poorer individuals is desirable,
interventions that improve targeting to poorer individuals will actually decrease social welfare if
the fiscal externality from the intervention is larger for poorer individuals (as would be the case,
for example, with a progressive benefit formula and public costs of processing applications that are
uniform across applicants).
If, however, individuals under-estimate expected benefits from applying - which is presumably
the premise of an information intervention - then marginal applicants who apply as a result of
either intervention have positive private welfare gains, with these gains increasing in the size of
the misperception. A sufficient condition for interventions that increase targeting to be more likely
to increase private welfare is that the under-estimation of expected benefits is (weakly) greater
in percentage terms for the targeted individuals. However, even in this case, the social welfare
impacts of increased targeting remains ambigous. Indeed, we show that the targeting properties of
the intervention have no general relationship to its social welfare impact; analysis of social welfare
requires information not only on how misperceptions vary across individuals, but also how the size
of the fiscal externality varies across these individuals.
We use the empirical findings from the experiment to calibrate the model. The evidence in
our setting is consistent with the “behavioral” hypothesis that individuals underestimate their
expected benefits from applying. This suggests potential private and social welfare gains from each
intervention. Our estimates also suggest that underestimation of expected benefits is greater for
needier individuals, again consistent with leading behavioral theories (e.g., Bertrand et al. 2004,
Mani et al. 2013, Mullainathan and Shafir 2013). However, in contrast to these models and
consistent with neoclassical theory (e.g., Nichols et al., 1971, Nichols and Zeckhauser 1982, Besley
and Coate 1992), we find that our interventions to reduce transaction costs or improve information
target less needy individuals. This bodes poorly for their welfare effects. Indeed, our calibrated
model suggests that if - counterfactually - our intervention had been perfectly targeting, the social
welfare benefits would have been substantially higher. Despite the poor targeting properties of the
interventions, however, our rough, back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that they may still be a
cost-effiective way of redistributing to low-income individuals relative to other safety net programs.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the related literature.
Section 3 presents our theoretical framework. Section 4 provides background information on the
SNAP program and the application and enrollment process. Section 5 describes our experimental
design and data sources. Section 6 presents the experimental results. Section 7 uses the results
to calibrate the model from Section 3 and perform welfare analysis of the interventions. The last
section concludes.

4

2

Related Literature

Our paper relates to two strands of literature: analysis of barriers to take-up and analysis of how
barriers to take-up affect the characteristics of applicants and enrollees. Studies of barriers to takeup have, with the exception of Bettinger et al. (2012), focused on either informational barriers
or transaction costs, rather than analyzing them together as we do here.3 This literature has also
focused primarily on the descriptive, with little of the normative analysis we add here.
Barriers to Take-up
Reductions in informational barriers have been found to be quantitatively important in generating
take-up in some contexts but not others. In a recent series of randomized interventions aimed at
increasing take-up of the EITC among likely eligible individuals, Day Manoli and co-authors have
found that take-up is highly sensitive to both the frequency and nature of reminder letters sent by
the IRS, although the effects of the reminder do not persist into the following year when the individuals would have to sign up again (Bhargava and Manoli 2015, Manoli and Turner 2014, Guyton
et al. 2016). Quasi-experimental studies have also found that information is an important barrier
to take up of SSDI (Armour, forthcoming) and post-secondary enrollment among unemployment
insurance recipients (Barr and Turner, forthcoming). Several of these studies conclude, as we do,
that the results are consistent with misperceptions by individuals (see, e.g., Bhargava and Manoli
2015, Armour forthcoming). However, Alcott and Greenstone’s (2017) randomized evaluation finds
that informational interventions do not affect take-up of home energy efficiency audits, concluding
that lack of awareness is not a contributor to low take-up; likewise, Bettinger et al.’s (2012) randomized evaluation finds that providing low-income families with information about financial aid
eligibility and nearby colleges had no effect on applications to college.
In the SNAP context, a survey of likely eligible SNAP non-participants found that about half
reported that they were not aware of their eligibility (Bartlett et al. 2004). And in an early and
innovative small randomized trial in 1993 in Pennsylvania, Daponte et al (1999) found suggestive
evidence that informing non-participating, eligible households about their SNAP eligibility affected
SNAP applications; however, small sample sizes (32 households were in the treatment arm and
responded to the follow-up survey) as well as loss to follow-up made definitive conclusions difficult.
Reductions in transactional barriers have been found to be important for increasing enrollment
in several different programs. Bettinger et al. (2012) found that while information alone was ineffective, combining information with assistance in completing a streamlined application process
increased aid applications and ultimately college attendance and persistence by low-income individuals. Our findings in the SNAP context suggest, by contrast, that information alone can have
3

The literature has paid comparatively less attention to the role of stigma, but the limited evidence does not
point to a large role for stigma (Currie 2006). Recent efforts at “stigma” interventions have proven less successful at
increasing take-up than informational interventions such as reminders or simplification (Bhargava and Manoli 2015).
In the specific context of SNAP, Currie (2003) describes several pieces of survey evidence consistent with both lack of
awareness and transaction costs in reducing SNAP take-up, but concludes that it does not appear from the existing
survey evidence that stigma is a major deterrent to SNAP enrollment.

5

an effect, but that pairing it with assistance doubles the impact. In addition, Deshpande and Li
(2017) find that the closing of local field offices where SSDI and SSI applications can be submitted substantially reduces both applications and enrollment, and Rossin-Slater (2013) finds that
openings and closings of Women, Infants and Children (WIC) local program office affect program
participation. Alatas et al. (2016) present evidence from a randomized evaluation across Indonesian villages that increasing the transaction cost of applying for a conditional cash transfer program
reduces enrollment. At the extreme of reducing transaction barriers, defaulting to enrollment has
been found to have substantial effects on outcomes such as participation in tax-subsidized 401(k)
savings plans (Madrian and Shea 2001).
In the SNAP context, Schanzenbach (2009) provides evidence from one California county of
a randomized evaluation in which a low-income tax preparer provided assistance to likely SNAPeligible individuals. It found that, among those who expressed interest in learning more about
SNAP, those in offices randomized into full assistance (in which the tax preparer went through a
detailed interview with the client and then filled out and filed the application on the client’s behalf),
were more likely to file an application than those who received help filling out the application but
had to file it themselves, or those who only received a blank application (which might be viewed as
analogous to our “Information Only” intervention).
Targeting
Our paper also relates to a second strand of the literature that investigates how barriers to enrollment affect the characteristics of applicants and enrollees. The existing “targeting” literature has
been primarily descriptive, focusing on the observable characteristics of individuals affected by different barriers. Our theoretical framework, however, suggests that there is no general relationship
between this targeting on observables and the impact of the intervention on either private or social
welfare. We provide additional conditions that need to be examined empirically in order for an
intervention’s targeting properties to yield normative implications.
To our knowledge, our study is the first to examine the targeting properties of both an information intervention and an assistance intervention. From prior information interventions, there
is evidence that complexity disproportionately deters EITC enrollment of lower income potential
recipients (Bhargava and Manoli 2015), and that lower income employees are more likely to choose
dominated health insurance plans, due at least in part to a lack of insurance literacy (Bhargava et
al., 2017). Our findings, by contrast, suggest that information about eligibility disproportionately
encourages enrollment among less needy applicants.
Prior studies have tended to find that transaction costs increase targeting on some but not all
dimensions. Alatas et al. (2016) find that introducing transaction costs by requiring individuals
to apply for a conditional cash transfer in Indonesian villages rather than have the government
automatically screen the individuals for eligibility improves targeting; specifically, it results in
substantially poorer enrollees. However, marginally increasing the transaction costs does not further
affect the characteristics of enrollees. Deshpande and Li (2017) find that increasing transaction costs
6

in U.S. disability programs (SSDI and SSI) worsens targeting among applicants - by increasing
the share of applicants with only moderately severe disabilities - but increases targeting among
enrollees, decreasing the share of enrollees with the least severe disabilities (conditional on being
severe enough to be eligible); however they also find that the increased transaction costs reduce the
share of enrollees with low education levels and low pre-application earnings, suggesting a reduction
in targeting. In our context, by contrast, we find that reducing transaction costs decrease targeting
on all dimensions, and at all stages (application and enrollment).

3

Conceptual framework

We develop a simple model for analyzing effects of interventions that provide information and/or
application assistance. The model is useful for informing the welfare consequences of the impacts
of the interventions, and also for providing sufficient conditions for when a finding that an intervention increases (or decreases) “targeting” translates into higher (or lower) welfare benefits from
the intervention.
We analyze a policy whose purpose is redistribution. The two key assumptions of the model are
that both the potential applicant and the state are uncertain about eligibility and benefit amounts
unless the individual actively applies with the required information, and that the application regardless of outcome - imposes costs on both the applicant and the government. These assumptions
correspond to many U.S. transfer programs, such as SSDI, SSI, Medicaid and - as we discuss in
more detail in Section 4- the SNAP program we study empirically.

3.1

Set-up

Individuals decide whether to apply for benefits in a safety net program. For simplicity, we assume
there are three possible outcomes from applying for the safety net program: (1) enrolling in the
program and receiving a high level of benefits from program, bH , (2) enrolling in the program and
receiving a low level of benefits, bL (< bH ), and (3) being rejected after applying. We assume that
there is ex-ante uncertainty about benefit eligibility both on the part of the potential applicant and
on the part of the government.
For the individuals, we assume for simplicity that there are two types (j ∈ {h, l}) in the
population who are potentially affected by the treatment. Individuals of type j know their income
yj for sure. Note that we use lower case j to refer to individual types and upper case J to denote
benefit amounts, so an individual of type j can either receive benefits bH or bL if his application
is accepted. We denote expected benefits, if the individual applies and is accepted, by Bj = b(yj ).
Uncertainty about benefits can come from several sources: uncertainty about the inputs into the
benefit function, uncertainty about the function b() that maps inputs to benefits, and the potential
for unexpected mistakes in the application process.
We parameterize the uncertainty about benefits for each type j as follows: type h individuals
receive bH with probability πhH and bL with probability πhL , while type l individuals receive bH
7

with probability πlH and receive bL with probability πlL (with πhH > πlH and πlL > πhL and
yl > yh ).4 Thus, an application of a type j individual is accepted with probability πj = πjH + πjL
and rejected with probability 1 − πj . Conditional on an application being accepted, a type j
individual receives expected benefits Bj =

πjH bH +πjL bL
;
πj

expected benefits for type j from applying

are therefore given by πj Bj . We assume that πh > πl so that type h individuals are both more
likely to have application accepted and are more likely to receive high benefits (conditional on
acceptance).
Applying involves both a private and public cost. We denote by c the private application cost,
which captures private costs such as the time and effort spent compiling documents, filling out
forms, and participating in the interview. Within each type j, individuals vary in their private cost
of applying c, which is distributed fj (c) for each type. The government can determine eligibility
and benefit amounts only through reviewing an application, which costs the government gj for each
application processed (whether it is rejected or not). Applications thus generate a fiscal externality
on the government.
Finally, we allow for some possibility of individual “mistakes” - such as misperceived expected
benefits from applying, or inattention. For our baseline model of “mistakes”, we assume that
each type may misperceive their true probability of their application being accepted by j , which
changes the perceived expected benefit of applying for benefits for type j individuals by changing
the perceived probability of acceptance from πj to (1 + j )πj .5 We refer to the special case of no
misperceptions (j = 0) for j ∈ {h, l} as the “neoclassical” benchmark case. While it is possible to
have misperceptions in either direction, we focus on the case of under-estimation of the probability
of acceptance (j < 0); this is both a natural motivation for an information intervention of the type
we study, and - we show later - consistent with the empirical results. With j < 0, misperception
reduces the perceived expected benefit of applying.
Individual application decision and private welfare
In deciding whether to apply for benefits, we assume that individuals maximize their private utility,
given their (possibly incorrect) perceptions of the expected benefits from applying. Individuals of
type j therefore apply if the expected utility of applying is greater than the utility of not applying.
4
Note that there could also be individuals who are likely to be ineligible, but we exclude them from model because
the experiment targeted individuals who are likely to be eligible.
5
For simplicity, we assume that the misperception is “proportional” so that it changes the perceived probability
of acceptance but does not alter the expected benefits conditional on an application being accepted. Our baseline
model also assumes that any misperceptions are the same across individuals within a type; we discuss relaxations
of this in Appendix E. Finally, while our baseline model focuses on misperceived probabilities of acceptance as the
departure from the neoclassical benchmark, in Appendix E we show that our main results are robust to alternative
departures based on misperceptions in cost of applying (rather than in probability of application acceptance) or
based on inattention. Non-behavioral frictions could also exist, such as (in the case of non-elderly applications)
agency issues within the family between the parent (who bears the cost of applying) and the child (who receives some
of the benefits).

8

For an individual with private application cost c this condition is defined as follows:
(1 + j )πj u(yj + Bj − c) + (1 − (1 + j )πj )u(yj − c) > u(yj ).
If we take a first-order Taylor approximation around u(yj ), the decision to apply for the program
simplifies to:
(1 + j )πj Bj > c.

(1)

Equation 1 defines the individual’s application decision. We allow for the possibility that the individual decision is not privately optimal by allowing for the possibility of mispercetion, specifically
under-estimation of the probability of acceptance ( < 0).
We can use the private application decision rule in equation (1) and integrate across the distribution of private costs to get the total private welfare of type j individuals:

Vj

= E[u()|apply] + E[u()|¬apply]
(1+ˆj )πj Bj

ˆ∞

(πj u(yj + Bj − c) + (1 − πj )u(yj − c))fj (c)dc +

=
0

u(yj )fj (c)dc

(1+j )πj Bj
(1+ˆj )πj Bj

u0 (yj )(πj Bj − c)fj (c)dc

≈ u(yj ) +
0

where the last line again uses a first-order Taylor approximation around u(yj ). Note in the above
expression that the j term affects the individual application decision but not realized utility, since
the j term only changes perceived probability of acceptance.
Social welfare
We consider a redistributive social welfare function, which is natural given the redistributive purpose
of the program. Specifically, we consider a utilitarian social welfare function, although we could
easily accommodate alternative individualistic social welfare functions at the cost of additional
notation for the social welfare weights on different types. Because the individual’s private decision
does not internalize the fiscal externality each additional application imposes on the government,
even a privately optimal decision may be socially sub-optimal. This reflects the classic tension
between private and social optimum. In our setting, it stems from the public costs of processing the
application gj as well as the expected benefit payout πj Bj . In other settings there may be alternative
or additional fiscal externalities, such as those that arise if individuals distorting their labor supply
in the presence of means-tested benefits, which in turn reduces the tax revenue for the government.
In such settings, the non-benefit component of public costs gj may vary across individuals. We
therefore keep this generality in the model, even though in our specific application we suspect that
the costs of processing the application do not vary meaningfully with the individual’s type.
9

We define a utilitarian social welfare function W , which is the sum of total (private) welfare of
both types of individuals minus the public cost of processing applications and paying benefits:
W =

V +V
| l {z h}

Private Welfare

−

[(πl Bl + gl )Al + (πh Bh + gh )Ah ]
|

{z

(2)

}

Public Costs (Benefits, Application Costs)

where Aj is the expected number of applications from type j individuals; this is equal to Aj =
1 − Fj ((1 + j )πj Bj ) from the take-up decision in equation (1). The public cost of an application
by type j is gj + πj Bj - the cost of processing the application (which is incurred regardless of
success) plus the expected benefit payout πj Bj .6 For ease of exposition in what follows, we denote
the expected number of enrollees receiving high benefits (bH ) as EH = πhH Ah + πlH Al , and the
expected number of enrollees receiving low benefits (bL ) is EL = πhL Ah + πlL Al . Thus, the total
expected benefits (ignoring application costs) can be written as bH EH + bL EL , which is equal to
πl Bl Al + πh Bh Ah but is easier to measure empirically since we do not necessarily directly observe
types in our data, but we observe the number of individuals receiving different benefit levels.7
Interventions and their targeting properties
We now model two alternative interventions to motivate the design of our experiment. In the Information Only treatment, the treatment increases the perceived probability of the application
being accepted (d), which reduces misperceptions if individuals previously had under-estimated
the probability of acceptance (i.e.,  < 0 initially). In the Information Plus Assistance treatment, both the perceived probability and the actual private cost of applying are affected (d,−dc).
The benefit formula is progressive - i.e., b(yj ) is decreasing in y; therefore we define “targeting”
as the share of enrollees who are high-benefit enrollees (relative to low-benefit enrollees); i.e.,
e = EH /(EH + EL ). We say that a treatment T increases targeting if de/dT > 0.8

3.2

Welfare Impacts of Interventions

We begin with an analysis of the private and social welfare effects of the two interventions defined
above. The treatments affect application decisions of each type of individual, which in turn affect
enrollments. For simplicity, we assume the interventions have zero marginal cost; this would be
the case, for example, for interventions that reduce the complexity of the program in a way that
increases the perceived probability of acceptance, or that simplify the application process to reduce
6
We assume this cost is born by someone with the average marginal utility of consumption in society; implicitly,
our W expression in equation 2 is thus a “money metric” social welfare expression, normalized by the average marginal
utility of consumption in the population.
7
Given these definitions, the total public costs can be re-written as bH EH + bL EL + gh Ah + gl Al , where Ah + Al
is the total applications across all individuals.
8
Another type of targeting that we would be natural to analyze in the context of the model is acceptance rate
targeting - i.e., the expected share of applicants who are accepted. We do not develop this aspect of the model since,
as we will see, neither of our treatments has an effect on acceptance rate targeting. This is consistent with other
recent findings of the (non-)impact of reductions in transaction costs on acceptance rates (e.g., Alatas et al., 2016;
Deshpande and Li 2017, Armour forthcoming).

10

application costs. When we use the model to quantify the normative implications of the experimental results in Section 7 below, we consider both costless interventions such as we model here as
well as interventions with the actual costs of the ones we implemented.
For notational ease we introduce the following definition:
Definition. Define µj ≡ −u0 (yj )(πj Bj )j .
Thus µj denotes (for type j) marginal utility of income times the expected benefit from applying
times the misperception of the application acceptance probability. Note that if individuals underestimate the probability of acceptance (which is the premise of the information interventions), then
j < 0 and thus µj > 0. The effects of each treatment on social welfare can then be summarized
by the following proposition:
Proposition 1. The effect of the Information Only treatment on welfare is given by the following
expression:

dW Inf ormation Only
=
dT

dAl
dAl
dAh
dAh
µl
− (πl Bl + gl )
+ µh
+ (πh Bh + gh )
dT }
dT
dT
| dT {z
{z
}
|
Change in Private Welfare
Change in Public Cost




(3)

And the effect of the Information Plus Assistance treatment on welfare is given by the following
expression:

dW Inf ormation P lus Assistance
dAl
dAl
dAh
dAh
= µl
+ µh
+ u0 (yl )Al + u0 (yh )Ah − (πl Bl + gl )
+ (πh Bh + gh )
.
dT
dT {z
dT
dT
| dT
} |
{z
}
Change in Private Welfare
Change in Public Cost
(4)


Proof: See Appendix E.
To develop intuition for these two expressions, consider first the specific case where individuals
have accurate beliefs (i.e., j = 0). In this case, the Information Only treatment, which affects
the perceived probability of acceptance (d)9 , has no effect on private welfare (since µj = 0). But
since it increases applications, it increases public costs through both processing costs (gj ) and
expected benefit payouts (πj Bj ). The intervention therefore unambiguously reduces social welfare
in this case. This is a stark result, but it can be intuitively understood as a consequence of the
envelope theorem: individuals have accurate beliefs and are already optimizing, so the marginal
applicants who apply as a result of the intervention were close to indifferent to applying before the
intervention.10 Moreover, since there are public costs of processing applications and paying benefits,
9

Even with accurate beliefs, the Information Only treatment may induce individuals to update their beliefs in
response to the information.
10
While this result is obtained in a model where everyone has correct beliefs, in Appendix E we work through an
extension where individuals have heterogeneous (but mean unbiased) beliefs, and we prove a similar proposition in
this extended model. To do so we need several additional technical assumptions: (1) misperceptions are independent

11



any treatment which increases applications raises social costs and therefore reduces social welfare.
Intuitively, individuals do not consider public costs when making their application decisions, so
encouraging more applications for individuals who are (privately) indifferent to applying will reduce
social welfare. Typically benefit payments would “net out” because they would show up both as
a cost and a benefit; here they show up as a pure cost, since the individual has to pay a private
cost c to obtain these benefits, and the marginal individual receives zero benefit (net of private
application costs) from enrolling.
For the Information Plus Assistance treatment - which affects both the perceived probability of
acceptance (d) and the private cost of applying (−dc) - the overall change in welfare is similar to
the Information Only treatment but with two additional terms (u0 (yl )Al + u0 (yh )Ah ) that represent
the additional change in private welfare from reducing costs for the infra-marginal applicants of
both types. In this case, the intervention raises private welfare because it reduces infra-marginal
applicants’ application costs. However, the social welfare effect of the Information Plus Assistance
treatment is ambiguous and depends on the increased public costs from encouraging more applicants
relative to the increase in private welfare from reducing infra-marginal applicants’ private costs of
applying.
These results make sense in light of a model where individuals privately optimize with accurate
beliefs, and there is a fiscal externality due to the public costs of processing applications and paying
benefits. The standard solution to this problem would be to charge a Pigouvian “application tax”
to each applicant equal to the public costs. In the absence of such a policy instrument, both
changing perceptions of probability of application acceptance as well as increasing “hassle costs”
to applicants may serve as alternative instruments for addressing the fiscal externality. Changing
perceptions has no welfare effect on the infra-marginal applicants, so one solution would be to have
a policy that induces under-estimation of expected benefits such that the marginal applicant has
an expected welfare gain from applying equal to the public costs from that application. This is
very similar to the Pigouvian solution (in terms of the actual costs of the marginal applicant). By
contrast, using hassles instead of “manipulating perceptions” imposes additional costs on all of the
infra-marginal applicants. As a result, the second-best solution using “hassle costs” may not be as
effective.
If we move away from the neoclassical benchmark and assume that individuals under-estimate
the probability of acceptance before the intervention (i.e., j < 0), there are now two additional
terms to consider in the welfare expressions: µj

dAj
dT

for j ∈ {h, l}. These two additional terms

represent the change in private welfare for the marginal applicants. Recall that without misperof private application costs; (2) private application costs are symmetrically distributed around the level of expected
benefits; and (3) the heterogeneous misperceptions are symmetrically distributed around 0. Each of these assumptions
is needed for the heterogeneous (but mean unbiased) misperceptions to “cancel out” in the expression for the change
in welfare from Information Only treatment. We also show in the Appendix E that if beliefs are heterogeneous and
mean unbiased and the treatment reduces the variance in beliefs that this will increase private welfare. The intuition
for this result is that with heterogeneity in misperceptions, some individuals are over-estimating benefit of applying
and some are under-estimating benefit of applying. In both cases, this leads to some marginal individuals making
“mistakes” (relative to perfect information benchmark). Reducing variance in beliefs is thus equivalent to reducing
magnitude of these mistakes.

12

ceptions (i.e., j = 0), these terms were zero due to the envelope theorem. However, if individuals
under-estimate the probability of acceptance before the intervention, marginal applicants who apply experience a positive change in private welfare. The magnitude of the expected welfare change
for marginal individuals is increasing in the magnitude of the under-estimation before the intervention.11 Specifically, the marginal enrollee has a non-zero expected private welfare change equal to
his marginal utility of income times the size of his under-estimation of the probability of acceptance
times the benefits he is expected to receive conditional on applying. However, the social welfare
impact of the intervention is ambiguous, given that any private benefits to marginal applicants
(and to infra-marginal ones in the case of the Information Plus Assistance intervention) must still
be balanced against the increased public costs from processing additional applications and paying
benefits.

3.3

Relationship between targeting impacts and changes in welfare

As discussed in the Introduction, a theoretical literature has considered how various barriers to
enrollment may potentially deter those with either higher or lower marginal utility from enrollment,
and two recent empirical studies (Alatas et al. 2016 and Deshpande and Li 2017) have examined how
interventions that increase hassle costs affect the characteristics of applicants and enrollees. These
studies - like ours - examined observable characteristics of the applicants and enrollees that are likely
correlated with marginal utility of consumption - Alatas et al. (2016) directly measure consumption
while Deshpande and Li (2017) analyze health and socioeconomic status. We will follow in this
tradition, examining how our information and assistance interventions affect targeting, which we
have defined as the share of enrollees who are high-benefit (i.e., low net resource and therefore
presumably a higher marginal utility of consumption).
Such analyses rest on the intuition that an improvement in targeting along some observable
dimension due to the intervention will, all else equal, increase the social welfare benefits from that
intervention. We show here that this is not unconditionally true. We then derive sufficient conditions under which an improvement in targeting due to the intervention increases the intervention’s
impact on social welfare.
To see the basic idea, consider the expressions in Proposition 1 for the impact of the intervention on social welfare, and assume that µl > 0 but that µh = 0. In this case, an intervention
that increased applications and enrolled only high-benefit enrollees would unambiguously improve
targeting but would have a negative effect on welfare (because there would be no change in private welfare and social welfare would be reduced due to the increased public costs of processing
applications and paying benefits). Similarly, in this same set up, for µl “large enough”, even an
intervention that reduced targeting by only enrolling low-benefit enrollees could still improve welfare since these individuals could still experience change in their private welfare well in excess of
11
This result is somewhat similar to the recent analysis of optimal Unemployment Insurance in the presence of
biased beliefs in Spinnewijn (2015). In the standard optimal unemployment insurance model, unbiased beliefs and
agent optimization imply that behavioral responses will only matter to the extent that they affect the government
budget (Baily 1978; Chetty 2006).

13

the public costs. As a result, there is no general relationship between changes in targeting and
changes in welfare. However, our model can be used to describe specific situations where changes
in targeting and changes in social welfare go hand-in-hand. This is summarized in the following
result:
Proposition 2. Holding constant the change in applications due to an intervention, the change
in social welfare in response to an improvement in targeting (de/dT > 0) from either intervention
(Information Only or Information Plus Assistance treatment) is given by the following expression:

∂
(de/dT )



dW
dT


dA
dT

= [(µh − µl ) − ((πh Bh + gh ) − (πl Bl + gl ))] (EH +EL )

(EH + EL )
EH (πlL − πhL ) + EL (πhH − πlH )
(5)

Proof: See Appendix E.
This result shows that the ceteris paribus (i.e., holding constant the change in applications)
change in social welfare from a change in targeting is increasing in (µh −µl ). The intuition for why µh
enters positively but µl enters negatively is because the change in total applications is held constant
in the proposition. As a result, to increase targeting while holding the effect of interventions on
applications constant, an application from a type l individual is essentially “swapped out” for
an application from a type h individual. For the improvement in targeting holding applications
constant to increase social welfare, it must be the case that (µh − µl ) - the welfare gain from
“swapping” an l individual’s application for an h individual’s application - exceeds the increased
public cost of that swap, (πh Bh + gh ) − (πl Bl + gl ).
Recall that µj ≡ −u0 (yj )j (πj Bj ). Therefore, in the neoclassical benchmark case (j = 0 and
thus µj = 0 for j = {h, l}), an improvement in targeting does nothing for private welfare. The lack
of private welfare consequences from the intervention’s targeting property follows directly from the
envelope theorem: the enrollees who are marginal to the intervention have no change in private
welfare and thus their type is irrelevant for private welfare. The impact of an improvement in
targeting on social welfare is ambiguous, and depends on how the fiscal externality varies across
types. If (as is the case in our application) benefits are progressive (Bh > Bl ) and non-benefit public
costs are constant across types (gh = gl ), then an increase in targeting reduces social welfare. This
follows directly from the progressive benefit formula: increasing targeting brings in more highbenefit enrollees relative to low-benefit enrollees at higher fiscal cost but with no change in private
welfare. This is the exact opposite of the standard intuition that social welfare increases from an
intervention that increases targeting on observables that are correlated with the marginal utility of
consumption.12
12

The distinction between this result and the “standard intuition” from papers such as Nichols and Zeckhauser
(1982) that ordeals can improve social welfare by disproportionately screening out the high ability types is precisely
that in their setting, enrollment by high ability types comes with a larger fiscal cost on the government (via the greater
loss in tax revenue from their higher labor market earnings). In both settings, if the public cost from enrollment
were constant across individuals, the targeting property of the intervention would be irrelevant for the impact of the
intervention on social welfare.

14

Once we move away from the neoclassical benchmark and allow for the possibility that individuals underestimate the probability of application acceptance (j < 0), then µj is increasing in
three type-specific factors: the marginal utility of consumption (u0 (yj )), the public cost or fiscal
externality (i.e., the expected benefit level plus the application costs) for each type of applicant
(πj Bj + gj ), and the magnitude of the under-estimation (−j ). If the expected benefits are higher
for h types (i.e., a progressive benefit formula) and the application cost is the same for each type,
then the first two type-specific factors are higher for h types than l types. This presumably drives
the standard intuition that the change in welfare due to the intervention would be higher with
increased targeting on observables correlated with the marginal utility of consumption. (Moreover,
with a non-utilitarian social welfare function that puts higher social welfare weights on h, this
would add yet another type-specific factor that would be higher for h than l.) However, these
are not sufficient conditions because the size of under-estimation is also important in determining
relative magnitude of µh and µl . Assuming that the h types have a higher marginal utility of
consumption (or a higher social marginal utility of consumption), then a sufficient condition for an
increase in targeting holding constant the change in applications to increase social welfare is that
under-estimation is non-zero for at least one type and weakly higher (in absolute value) for the
h type (i.e., h ≤ l ≤ 0, with at least one inequality strict). This includes the case where both
types under-estimate the probability of application acceptance by same amount (in a proportional
sense), so that h = l < 0.13
Overall, Proposition 2 provides guidance for specific situations in which improved targeting
properties of the intervention increase the likelihood the intervention is social welfare improving.
In our empirical work below we will show that both the Information Only intervention and the Information Plus Assistance intervention decrease targeting. We will also present evidence consistent
with a departure from the neoclassical benchmark (j 6= 0) and suggestive of h < l < 0. And
as noted, we will also assume that gj is limited to the public application costs, and does not vary
across types. Proposition 2 tells us that, under these conditions, our findings that the interventions
decrease targeting suggest that they are less likely to increase social welfare.
However the proposition also highlights that there is no general relationship between targeting
properties and the likelihood the interventions improve social welfare, and that therefore additional
empirical estimates are required in order to draw normative inferences from targeting results. One
way to see this is to note that the change in social welfare from the intervention depends on the
“net” benefits of individuals affected by the treatment, not the “gross” benefits to individuals (i.e.,
the amount of the benefits times their marginal utility of consumption). If, for example, the l types
under-estimate the probability of acceptance by much more than the h types, the l types could have
a higher net private welfare gain from the intervention and thus the welfare of the treatment could
be larger the more l types brought in, even though they get lower benefits and have lower marginal
This discussion implicitly assumes that u0 (yj ) > 1 for j ∈ {H, L}, so that the marginal utility of consumption
from πj Bj exceeds its social cost. This would follow if, for example, we normalized our expression for dW
by the
dT
average marginal utility of the population, and both eligible types j ∈ {H, L} have higher marginal utility than the
average in the population, as would be expected from any means-tested benefit.
13

15

utility of consumption. This is reminiscent of the distinction between gross and net benefits to
schooling (Card 2001). In that setting, individuals differ both in their return to schooling and
their cost of schooling. As a result, interventions which reduce the costs of schooling will attract
students whose return (net of costs) is close to zero, but the “gross” returns to schooling for these
individuals is not clear; it may or may not be similar to the average (gross) return to schooling in
the population. Similarly, in our model without misperceptions, reduction in costs of applying will
attract individuals with very low net benefit of applying, but their gross benefit could be large or
small.
Thus far we have considered “marginal” interventions and made heavy use of the envelope
theorem. In Appendix E, we develop an extension that considers “non-marginal” changes.14 We
describe how even in this case there is no general relationship between changes in targeting and
changes in welfare. Intuitively, in the non-marginal case the increase in private welfare from a given
change in enrollees depends on the shape of the type-specific cost distribution fj (c). If most of the
individuals induced to apply were close to indifferent before the non-marginal change in costs, then
a non-marginal change in costs can have a non-marginal change in private welfare; however if most
of the individuals induced to apply were close to indifferent to applying after the non-marginal
change, then the non-marginal change in costs will have a negligible effect on their private welfare,
since they are close to indifferent to applying after the intervention. Thus, the cost distribution
functions introduce another “free parameter” that can affect the relationship between improvements
in targeting and changes in social welfare, much as the misperception terms did when we departed
from the neoclassical benchmark.

4

Setting and Background

4.1

SNAP Eligibility and Benefits

SNAP is the second-largest means-tested program in the United States after Medicaid (US Congressional Budget Office 2013). It is a household-level benefit designed to ensure a minimum level
of food consumption for low-income families (Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2016). Our study focuses
on elderly households – i.e., households with an individual aged 60 or over - in Pennsylvania (PA)
in 2016. Appendix G provides more detail on the eligibility and benefit rules; we summarize a few
key features here.
Eligibility may be categorical - if the individual receives a qualifying benefit such as SSI or
TANF - or based on means testing which depends on gross income, assets, and, in some cases,
information on particular types of income and expenditures. Once deemed eligible, an elderly
household is certified to receive SNAP benefits for 24 months, although there are exceptions that
require earlier re-certification.15
14

This extension is similar to Kleven (2018), which extends sufficient statistics analysis to discrete policy changes.
At the time of the intervention, households were required to submit an annual reporting form. Additionally, these
households were required to report certain changes, such as when gross monthly income exceeds 130% of FPIG.
15

16

If eligible, the progressive benefit formula is a decreasing function of net income - gross income
minus certain exempt income and deductions for certain expenses - subject to a minimum and
maximum. Benefits are designed so that - subject to a minimum and maximum - households spend
approximately 30% of their net income (i.e., gross income minus deductions and exemptions) on
food. During our study period, the minimum monthly benefit was $0 or $16 depending on household
type, and the maximum monthly benefit was $194 for a household size of 1, $357 for a household size
of 2, and $511 for a household size of 3. In practice, as we will see in our data, there are distinct
modes of benefit distribution at the minimum and maximum, which influenced our decision to
model a discrete type space in Section 3.
Average monthly benefits per SNAP recipient in elderly households in Pennsylvania were $136
in fiscal year 2013 (Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, 2015). SNAP benefits are a substantial source of potential income for eligible households. About two-thirds of elderly households in
Pennsylvania receiving SNAP had household incomes below the federal poverty line; successful
enrollment entitles the household to benefits for at least 24 months, boosting annual income by
about 15 percent (Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, 2017).

4.2

Application and Enrollment Process

For an elderly household to successfully enroll in SNAP in PA during our study period, the household must complete an application, provide the necessary documents verifying household circumstances, and participate in an interview (phone or in person). The applicant must provide identifying information (such as Social Security Number, name and address), information about each
household member, information on resources and income, and information on various household
expenses such as medical expenses, rent and utilities. They must provide documentation verifying
their identity, proof of residency, and proof of earnings, income, resources and expenses. Applications can be submitted by mail, fax, in person at the County Assistance Office, or on line. The
on-line information and application system in Pennsylvania is considered one of the better state
designs (Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, 2016). The interview is used, among other things,
to make sure the application is complete and, if not, to request additional documentation or request answers to additional questions. The state has 30 calendar days to process an application.16
Successful applicants access their benefits electronically, using plastic cards that can be used to buy
food in authorized food stores.
Given the SNAP program rules, both the individual and state’s determination of eligibility and
benefit amounts require the individual to actively apply with the required information. From the
individual’s perspective, there is uncertainty about the benefit function, the inputs into it (e.g.,
various shelter and medical expenses that serve as deductions to income and affect benefits), and
the potential for mistakes in the process (e.g., not showing up for the interview, not filing the
appropriate documentation of expenses, etc.) which cause an otherwise eligible application to be
16

Households who – by virtue of extreme need – qualify for expedited review must have their application reviewed
within 5 calendar days of application.

17

rejected or assigned a lower benefit amount. From the government’s perspective, the needed information cannot be passively obtained, even if it had access to data on the individual from tax
returns and other public benefit programs. In particular, three specific types of information are not
available from other sources. The first is the definition of a household, which is a SNAP-specific
definition: people who “live together and customarily prepare food together” (Gray et al., 2016).
The household unit is required both to assess eligibility and to determine benefit amounts. Second,
the resource limit that is applied to all non-categorically eligible households requires information
on resources like bank accounts and second properties that are not readily available in other administrative data. Third, the calculation of net income – which is required in some cases to determine
eligibility and in all cases to determine benefits – likewise can be affected by information not otherwise available (like excess out-of-pocket medical expenses and shelter expenses), although of course
one could provide less information here and receive commensurately lower benefits. Underlining
the difficulty of circumventing the active application process is the experience of the tax preparer
Intuit (TurboTax), which in 2015 tried - through a program called Benefits Assist - to submit
applications for SNAP on behalf of their low-income clients, using the information that had been
provided on their tax returns. States encountered substantially increased administrative burden in
response to the noticeable increase in applications, and it appeared that many of these applications
were incomplete and could not be approved as filed.17
The application imposes costs on both the applicant and the state. Survey evidence from the
late 1990s suggests that the average application takes about five hours to complete, including two
trips to the SNAP office or other places, and average out-of-pocket costs were about $10, primarily
for transportation (Ponza et al. 1999). However regulatory changes enacted since the time of that
survey were designed to reduce applicant costs by, for example, allowing a phone interview in lieu
of an in person interview (Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2016).
In addition to the costs on the applicant, the application imposes costs on the government.
The state must process applications to determine eligibility, including verifying self-reported information in various available administrative data systems. Estimates from Isaacs (2008) suggest
that annualized state administrative certification costs are about 10-15 percent of annual benefits.
This is a substantially higher share of benefits than administrative costs for the Earned Income
Tax Credit - where there is concern about ineligible people enrolling; this highlights empirically
the trade-off that Kleven and Kopczuk (2011) analyze theoretically between greater administrative
costs and balancing false rejections and false acceptances.
17
See, e.g., https://fns-prod.azureedge.net/sites/default/files/snap/State-Guidance-on-Intuit-SNAP-Applications.
pdf; http://www.macssa.org/memberlogin/15minutes/selfsufficiency_dec15.pdf; and https://benkallos.
com/press-release/memorandum-automatic-benefits-using-government-data-deliver-better-citizen-services-le.

18

5

Empirical Design and Data

5.1

Design of Interventions

We partnered with Benefits Data Trust (BDT), a national not-for-profit organization based in
Philadelphia that strives to be a “one-stop shop” for benefits access, screening individuals for benefit
eligibility, and providing application assistance. Since its inception in 2005, BDT has submitted over
500,000 benefit applications across multiple states, resulting in approximately $5 billion in benefits
delivered to low-income individuals and families (Benefits Data Trust 2016). Through existing data
share agreements with the Pennsylvania Department of Human Services and other state agencies,
BDT receives application and enrollment data for a variety of public benefits, including SNAP and
Medicaid. An observational study by Mathematica of six different SNAP outreach and enrollment
approaches nationwide concluded that the BDT’s intervention for the elderly in Pennsylvania was
the lowest cost per enrollment of any of the methods studied (Kauff et al. 2014), although the 2009
program studied there was somewhat different than BDT’s 2016 approach, which is what we study
here.
For our study, as with past BDT SNAP enrollment efforts, the state of Pennsylvania supplied
BDT with administrative data that allowed them to identify likely eligible SNAP non-participants.
Specifically, BDT received data on individuals aged 60 and older who were enrolled in Medicaid
but not in SNAP. Such individuals are likely income eligible for SNAP, since Medicaid tends to
have income criteria similar to that of SNAP.
We randomized our study population of approximately 30,000 elderly individuals enrolled in
Medicaid into three equally-sized arms. Individuals in the control group received no intervention.
Individuals in the Information Only intervention received outreach materials informing them of their
likely eligibility for SNAP and the benefits they might receive, and providing them with information
on how to call the Department of Human Services to apply. Individuals in the Information Plus
Assistance intervention received similar outreach materials but with information on how to call
BDT to apply; if they called they then received application assistance. We did not design the
Information Plus Assistance intervention; it follows BDT’s current practices for helping to enroll
individuals in SNAP.18 Estimating the cost of these interventions is difficult because there are both
fixed costs (determining a set of likely eligible individuals, designing letters and setting up a mailing
system, hiring and training staff etc) and variable costs. BDT estimates the variable costs to be
about $1 per attempt for the Information Only intervention; the costs consist primarily of the
mailing costs, but there are also printing costs. BDT estimates the variable cost of the Information
Plus Assistance intervention to be about $7 per attempt, with the higher costs due to the labor
costs of the BDT staff who provide the assistance.
18

Loosely speaking, our information treatment resembles the control arm in Schanzenbach (2009) - in which likely
eligible individuals who expressed interest were handed a blank Food Stamps application with the address of the
county agency where it could be submitted - while our Information Plus Assistance arm lies somewhere in between
the “lighter touch” and “heavier touch” assistance provided in Schanzenbach (2009).

19

Information Plus Assistance
BDT conducts a series of outreach services to inform these individuals of their likely eligibility,
and assist them in applying for benefits. This outreach has two components: information and
assistance. The information component consists of proactively reaching out by mail to individuals
whom they have identified as likely eligible for SNAP, and following up with a postcard after 8
weeks if the individual has not called BDT. Letters and postcards inform individuals of their likely
SNAP eligibility (“Good news! You may qualify for help paying groceries through the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)”) and typical benefits (“Thousands of older Pennsylvanians
already get an average of $119 a month to buy healthy food”), and provide information on how
to apply (“We want to help you apply for SNAP!”), offering a number at BDT to call (“Please
call the PA Benefits Center today. It could save you hundreds of dollars each year”). These
materials are written in simple, clear language for a 4th to 6th grade reading level and are sent
from the Secretary of the Pennsylvania Department of Human Services. Appendix Figure 1 shows
these standard outreach materials. In the framework of Section 3, we think of this intervention as
increasing the perceived probability of an application’s acceptance (d).
The assistance component begins if, in response to these outreach materials, the individual calls
the BDT number. BDT then provides assistance with the application process. This includes asking
them questions so that BDT staff can populate an application and submit it on their behalf, advising
them of what documents they need to submit, offering to review and submit documents on their
behalf, and assisting with post-submission requests or questions regarding the application. BDT
also tries to ensure that the individual receives the maximum benefit for which they are eligible
by collecting detailed information on income and expenses (the latter contributing to potential
deductions). Appendix A provides more detail on the nature of BDT’s assistance. In the framework
of Section 3, we think of this intervention as reducing the private costs of applying (−dc). In our
setting, those costs are born by BDT, so there is not obviously a reduction in the total (private
+ BDT) cost of applying. However one could imagine changes in the application process that
produced a net reduction in costs.
Data from our intervention indicate that BDT submitted about 70 percent of applications made
by individuals in the Information Plus Assistance intervention, and provided their full set of services
(including document review) for about two-thirds of the applications it submitted.19 For callers
who end up applying, BDT has about 2.1 calls, averaging (in total) about 47 minutes across the
calls. For callers who end up not applying, the average time on the phone is about 30 minutes.
Information Only
Our “Information Only” intervention contains only the letters and follow-up postcards to nonrespondents sent as part of the outreach materials. They are designed to be as similar as possible
19

Given that, as we will see in the results below, we estimate that about one-third of applicants are always takers,
this suggests that BDT submits applications for the vast majority of compliers, and provides their full set of services
for about three-quarters of these compliers.

20

to the information content of the Information Plus Assistance intervention: both are sent from
the Secretary of the Pennsylvania Department of Human Services (DHS) and include virtually
identical language and layout. Some minor differences were naturally unavoidable. In particular,
the Information Plus Assistance materials direct individuals to call the PA Benefits Center (the
local name of BDT) while the Information Only materials direct them to call the Department of
Human Services (“Please call the Department of Human Services today. It could save you hundreds
of dollars each year”). In addition, the hours of operation for DHS (8:45am-4:45pm) listed on the
Information Only outreach materials differed slightly from the BDT hours (9:00am-5:00pm) listed
on the Information Plus Assistance outreach materials. Appendix A provides more details, and
Appendix Figure 2 shows the outreach materials in the Information Only arm.
Sub-treatments
Within each treatment, we created additional sub-treatments in the presentation and frequency
with which the information was presented. In practice, most of these sub-treatments had little or
no impact and therefore in most of our analysis we pool them. Appendix A provides more detail of
the sub-treatments and how they were distributed across arms. One sub-treatment we will present
separately in the main text is the one where we found substantial effects: the elimination of the
postcard follow-up in the standard Information Only intervention.

5.2

Study Population

Our study population consists of individuals aged 60 and older who are enrolled in Medicaid
but not SNAP. They are considered likely income eligible for SNAP based on their enrollment
(and hence eligibility) for Medicaid. This is, of course, an imperfect proxy of SNAP eligibility.
This is by necessity; as described in Section 4, exact assessment of SNAP eligibility requires nonincome information that must be actively supplied on an application; eligibility cannot be passively
determined through existing administrative data.
Our study population thus consists of individuals already enrolled in at least one public benefit
program: Medicaid. This is a particular subset of people eligible for but not enrolled in SNAP. For
example, our analysis in the pooled 2010-2015 Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) suggests that
only about 20 percent of individuals aged 60 and over who are not enrolled in SNAP but have income
less than 200 percent of FPL (a rough proxy for potential SNAP eligibility) are enrolled in Medicaid.
Caution is always warranted in generalizing findings beyond the specific study population. In this
particular case, one might be concerned that enrollment in another public benefit program could
be indicative of the study population’s general knowledge about benefit eligibility, or interest and
ability to sign up for government services. This particular issue, however, may not be a major
concern. Many individuals do not actively choose to enroll in Medicaid themselves but rather are
enrolled in Medicaid by social workers at hospitals when they arrive uninsured and ill – a fact that
has led researchers to refer to many of those eligible for Medicaid but not currently enrolled as
“conditionally covered” (Cutler and Gruber, 1996).
21

An ancillary benefit of using Medicaid enrollment as a proxy for likely eligibility is that it enables
us to measure a number of demographic characteristics of our study population, pre-randomization.
In particular, the Medicaid file contains birth date, gender, address, and primary language, as well
as which Medicaid program the individual is enrolled in. Additional characteristics of our study
population come from their 2015 Medicaid enrollment and claims data, which DHS also supplied
for everyone on the outreach list. The 2015 Medicaid enrollment file allows us to measure the
individual’s race, and the individual’s history of prior Medicaid enrollment spells. In addition, the
linked 2015 Medicaid claims file allows us to construct detailed healthcare utilization and health
measures in the year prior to the 2016 intervention.20
Summary statistics
To construct the study population, DHS supplied BDT with a list of approximately 230,000 individuals aged 60 and older who were enrolled in Medicaid as of October 31, 2015; DHS also merged on a
flag for whether the individual was currently enrolled in SNAP. Table 1 illustrates the construction
of our study population and the pre-randomization characteristics of the sample. Column 1 shows
the initial outreach list of 229,584 individuals aged 60 and over enrolled in Medicaid as of October
31, 2015. In column 2 we exclude individuals enrolled in the Long-Term Care Medicaid program
(N= 47,729) and individuals with an address in Philadelphia (N= 37,932). Of the resulting 143,923
individuals on the outreach list after these exclusions, column 3 shows the 84,038 (about 60 percent)
who were enrolled in SNAP or living with someone enrolled in SNAP, while column 4 shows the
59,885 who were not enrolled in SNAP and not living with anyone in SNAP; recall that SNAP is
a household-level benefit. Column 5 shows our final study population of 31,888 individuals. These
are a subset of the individuals not enrolled in SNAP in column 4. From column 4, we randomly
select one individual from each “household” (this excludes 1,842 individuals)21 , and excluded all
individuals to whom BDT had previously sent any outreach materials (N=26,155).22
There is no clear demographic gradient between Medicaid enrollees who do and do not enroll
in SNAP. Columns 3 and 4, respectively, describe some characteristics of each group. Those not
on SNAP (column 4) are older, with similar gender, racial, and language makeup than those not
on SNAP (column 3).
An additional complication is that only about three-quarters of our study population was enrolled in Medicaid for the entirety of 2015. We therefore annualized all of the health care utilization
measures by dividing by the number of days enrolled out of 365. Needless to say this is an imper20

Medicaid in PA is provided either fee-for-service or managed care, determined in large part based on geography.
Our “claims” data are therefore a mix of encounter data from Medicaid Managed Care and Fee for Service claims.
Although there are well-known measurement issues with encounter data - and comparability issues with fee for service
claims data (e.g., Lewin Group 2012) - such measurement issues should not bias our comparisons of these measures
across randomly assigned arms.
21
There is no household identifier in the Medicaid outreach file; BDT therefore created a pseudo-”household” ID
to identify individuals on the outreach list sharing the same last name and address.
22
BDT has comprehensive data on outreach efforts since 2012, and limited data on outreach back to 2007. BDT
started conducting SNAP outreach in 2008.

22

fect approach, since utilization during a partial coverage year may be disproportionately higher (or
lower) than it would be if coverage existed for the full year. However, we are not unduly concerned
given that this adjustment will affect enrollees in randomly assigned arms equivalently, and we
confirm this below.
On some dimensions they appear sicker - they have more hospital days and Skilled Nursing
Facility (SNF) days, but on other dimensions they appear less sick - such as fewer chronic conditions.
One notable difference is that those not on SNAP have been on Medicaid for less time (i.e., only
one third had their last enrollment spell starting before 2011, compared to about one half of those
on SNAP).

5.3

23

Randomization

Our interventions randomize the information and application assistance provided to the study
population. Specifically, the 31,888 individuals in our study population were randomly split into
three equally sized groups: Information Only treatment, Information Plus Assistance treatment,
and control (no intervention). There were separate sub-treatments within each treatment: onequarter of each treatment was randomized into an arm with a variant of the outreach letters and
postcards designed to attract clients by using a “marketing” approach that borrowed language and
graphics from credit card solicitations; in the Information Plus Assistance treatment the remaining
three-quarters received the standard outreach (“standard”); in the Information Only treatment,
one-quarter received the standard outreach, while another one-quarter received the standard letter
but no follow-up postcard (“no postcard”) and another one-quarter received a letter that varied
the description of the expected benefit amounts (“framing”). See Appendix A for more detail.
For practical reasons, the outreach letters were randomly distributed across 11 separate, equallysized weekly mailing batches. The first batch was sent on January 6, 2016, and the last on March
16, 2016; follow-up postcards were sent eight weeks following each mailing, with the last postcards
scheduled to be sent on May 11, 2016.24 Appendix Figure 4 provides more detail on the timing of
the mailings.
We wrote the computer code that assigned individuals to these different treatments and treatment mailing batches by simple random assignment according to the share we wanted in each arm;
this code also randomly assigned the control individuals to (non-) mailing weekly batches, so that
outcomes for all individuals in our study can be measured relative to an initial “mail date”. Imple23

We also used national survey data to compare consumption and income for individuals on Medicaid who either
were or were not on SNAP; measurement of Medicaid and SNAP enrollment likely has more error in such survey
data than in administrative data (Meyer and Mittag 2015). We limited our analysis to individuals 60 and over on
Medicaid in households below 200 percent of the poverty line (a proxy for likely SNAP eligibility). In the pooled 20102015 Consumer Expenditure Survey, those on Medicaid but not on SNAP have higher (mean or median) per capita
consumption across a variety of consumption measures. In the 2016 March CPS, those on Medicaid but not on SNAP
have higher (mean or median) per capital household income; for example, mean per capita annual household income
is about $10,500 among those enrolled in SNAP compared to about $12,700 among those not enrolled. However mean
(or median) total household income is virtually identical between the two groups.
24
Due to an implementation error, postcards for the January 27 and February 3 batches were not mailed when
scheduled and instead were sent on May 26 and May 27, respectively.

23

mentation of the code on the actual, identified data was done by our BDT partner who had access
to these data and oversaw the physical mailings. BDT staff also performed a series of quality assurance tests that we programmed to ensure fidelity of the randomization protocol and the quality
of the de-identified data that we received. Appendix Table A2 shows balance of the characteristics
of our study population across the arms, as would be expected based on our randomized design.
All study materials, including letters, postcards, and envelopes, were approved by BDT and the
Department of Human Services (DHS) before the study was launched. MIT’s Institutional review
board (IRB) approved this research as well as the data sharing outlined in Appendix B (Protocol:
1506106206; FWA: 00004881).25 The trial was registered on the AEA RCT Registry (AEA RCTR
-0000902) in October 2015, prior to our launch - at which point we pre-specified our primary and
secondary outcomes.26 We updated the registry to specify additional detail - such as a 9 month
time frame for the outcomes - and to post the more detailed analysis plan in March 2016, prior to
receiving any data on applications or enrollment.27

5.4

Outcomes data

Applications, Enrollment and Benefit Amounts DHS provided data on SNAP applications
from March 2008 through February 2018. The application data also include disposition codes
and dates, which enable us to determine if and when the application was approved; we use this to
measure enrollment. Our enrollment measure is therefore a flow measure (“did the individual enroll
within n months after the initial mail date”) rather than a stock measure of whether the individual
is enrolled as of a given date. We also observe whether and when an application was rejected, as
well as the reason for rejection. Our main analysis focuses on application and enrollment within
9 months after the intervention; however we also examine the time pattern of effects through 23
months post intervention.
DHS also provided us with monthly benefit amounts for enrolled individuals. We measure the
monthly benefit amount in months enrolled in the 9 months post outreach. The monthly benefit
amount will serve as one of the key measures of enrollee characteristics.
25
Northwestern University’s IRB (FWA: 00001549) ceded approval to MIT’s IRB through an IRB Authorization Agreement. The IRB of the National Bureau of Economics (NBER) judged the protocol to be exempt (IRB
Ref#15_129; FWA: 00003692).
26
Specifically, at that time we wrote: “Primary outcome: number of SNAP enrollees. Secondary outcomes: baseline
characteristics of enrollees (e.g., demographics, measures of economic well-being, measures of health etc); number of
SNAP applications; baseline characteristics of applicants; number of responses to outreach letters (i.e., phone calls to
the number listed on the outreach letter). Outcomes (explanation) We are interested in measuring characteristics of
the enrollees, for example measures of economic well-being, demographics and health status. Which characteristics
we measure and how we measure them will depend largely on the quality and availability of data.”
27
Our analysis hews closely to the analysis plan in terms of the take-up outcomes analyzed (calls, applications, and
enrollment) and the analysis of enrollee benefits and enrollee and applicant demographic and health characteristics.
The exact analysis of study participant characteristics was still left unspecified at that point due to uncertainty on
data availability. However, we were unable to execute on our aspirations to analyze additional characteristics like
earnings and credit report outcomes due to lack of the relevant data.

24

Call-in data BDT tracks all calls it receives, which allows us to measure call-ins to the BDT
number given in response to the outreach letters in the Information Plus Assistance treatment. In
order to capture comparable information on which individuals call in to DHS in response to the
Information Only treatment, we contracted with a call forwarding service, and the informationonly outreach letters provided the 1-800 numbers of the call forwarding service, with a different
call-in number in each sub-treatment arm. Call receptionists were asked to record the individual’s
unique identification number (printed on the outreach materials) before forwarding the call to DHS.
Appendix C provides more details on the call-in data, the call forwarding service, and the script
for the receptionists, which was provided in English and in Spanish. The use of the call forwarding
service allows us to measure for each individual in the Information Only treatment whether (and
when) they called in in response to the outreach. It also allowed BDT to send follow-up postcards to
non-callers in the Information Only intervention, as in the Information Plus Assistance intervention.
We have caller data from January 7, 2016 through October 14, 2016. We use these data to
measure calls in the seven months after the initial mail date. We report the “raw” call-in rates in
each study arm. Because the call forwarding service is not as good at determining the identity of
callers as our BDT partner, the Information Only treatment has a non-trivial number of callers
without a valid study ID. We therefore also report an “adjusted” call-in rate for the Information
Only treatment, which adjusts the measured call-in rate to account for our estimate of the rate of
unrecorded callers. Appendix C provides more details on this adjustment procedure.

6

Results

Our main analysis compares across three groups: the (pooled, equally-weighted) standard and
marketing treatments in the Information Only arm (5,314), the (pooled, equally-weighted) “standard” and “marketing” treatments in the Information Plus Assistance arm (10,629), and the control
(10,630) (see Appendix Figure A3.) In Appendix Tables A4, A5, A12 and A13 we present the full
set of results separately for each sub-treatment; in general these sub-treatments had little or no
impact, except the “no reminder postcard” sub-treatment which we discuss below.

6.1

Behavioral Responses to Intervention

Our primary measure of behavioral response is SNAP enrollment. However, we also examine
intermediate steps toward enrollment: calls in response to outreach and applications submitted.
We measure all of these outcomes over the first nine months after the mail date. As a result, our
outcomes data span the period January 6, 2016 (the date of the first mailing) through December
16, 2016 (nine months after our last mailing). This was chosen to be a sufficiently long window to
capture the full impact of the intervention on these outcomes.28 Someone who enrolls in SNAP over
28
Based on their prior outreach efforts, BDT estimated that initial responses (i.e., calls) if they are going to occur
will happen within the first three months. We wanted to allow sufficient time for applying and for the state’s 30-day
decision time and erred on the side therefore of long time window to make sure we had the full impact.

25

these nine months likely remains enrolled for about 24 months, after which they need to re-certify
their eligibility, although in rare cases they may need to re-certify earlier. Our current data allow
us to extend the analysis out to 23 months; this is not yet long enough to study re-enrollment.
Enrollment, applications, and calls
Table 2 presents the main take-up results of the experiment by intervention arm. All outcomes are
measured in the nine months after the initial mail date. The first row shows results for enrollment.
In the control group, about 6 percent enroll. The Information Only intervention increases enrollment by 5 percentage points, or 83 percent relative to the control. Information Plus Assistance
increases enrollment by 12 percentage points, or 200 percent relative to the control; the impacts of
the intervention are statistically different from the control and from each other (p<0.001).29
Figure 1 shows the time pattern of intervention impacts on enrollment by month, for the 23month period after the initial mail date. The time pattern is similar for both interventions: over
85 percent of the 9-month enrollment effect is present by 4 months, and the impact has clearly
leveled off before 9 months (our baseline time window). The impacts of the intervention appear to
largely persist, as least through the 23 months we can observe post-intervention: About 90 percent
of the 9-month enrollment effect is present by 23 months. This suggests that the interventions are
primarily generating new enrollment, as opposed to merely “moving forward” in time enrollment
that would otherwise happen.
The next two rows of Table 2 show the impact of the interventions on applications, and on their
failure (rejection) rate. The impacts on applications are roughly proportional to the increase in
enrollment. About 22 percent of applications in each arm are rejected; differences across arms are
substantively and statistically indistinguishable.30 This suggests that assistance affects enrollment
(over and above information alone) primarily by affecting individuals’ willingness to apply, rather
than by increasing the success (i.e., approval) rate of a given application. Of course, since assistance
may also change the composition of applicants (including their latent success probability), it is not
possible to directly identify these two separate channels.
In Appendix Table A8 we briefly explored the nature of the “reasons” given by DHS for the
rejections. Naturally these are not always straightforward to interpret. Nonetheless, it appears
29
For some perspective on these numbers, we considered how they compared to other take-up interventions, bearing
in mind that these were different interventions conducted on different programs and populations. In the context of
encouraging low-income high school seniors to apply for aid and attend college, Bettinger et al. (2012) found that
providing information about aid eligibility and nearby colleges had no detectable effect, but combining the information
with assistance in completing a streamlined application process increased college enrollment by 8 percentage points or
about 25 percent relative to the control. In the context of informing low-income tax filers about their likely eligibility
for the EITC, Bhargava and Manoli (2015) found that their average informational outreach increased EITC filing by
22 percentage points (or about 50 percent above baseline).
30
In other contexts, changes in transaction costs have similarly had a small effect on rejection rates of applicants.
Deshpande and Li (2017) find that increasing transaction costs (via closings of Social Security field offices) results
in about a two percentage point increase in rejection rates for SSDI applicants, while Alatas et al. (2017) find
that increasing transaction costs (via requiring individuals to apply for the benefit as opposed to the government
automatically screening potential eligibles) decreases rejection rates by about two percentage points in a conditional
cash transfer program in Indonesia.

26

that relative to the control, the share of rejections in the Information Plus Assistance arm is higher
for reasons that looks like “insufficient interest” on the part of the applicant - e.g., withdrew or
didn’t show up for an appointment - and lower for reasons that look like ineligibility after review
- e.g., failure to meet citizenship or residency requirement. This is consistent with assistance
reducing the error rate on applications, but also pushing marginally motivated individuals to start
the application process.
The last six rows of Table 2 examine call-in rates. A caller is defined as someone calling the
number provided on the outreach material; the caller rate is therefore mechanically zero for those
in the control arm.31 We show the raw caller rate, as well as the adjusted caller rate designed to
account for the lower measurement of callers in the Information Only arm (see Section 5.4 above).
The raw rates show a 30 percent caller rate in response to the Information Plus Assistance outreach
letters, and a 27 percent caller rate in response to the Information Only outreach letters; with the
adjustment, the adjusted caller rate rises to 29 percent in the Information Only intervention, statistically indistinguishable from the response to the Information Plus Assistance.32 The similar call-in
rate is not surprising given the (deliberate) similarity of the outreach materials (recall Appendix
A and Appendix Figures 1 and 2). It suggests that any difference in applications and enrollment
between the Information Only and Information Plus Assistance interventions is attributable to the
assistance itself, rather than to the expectation of assistance.33 Conditional on calling, we find the
average caller made 1.8 calls in the Information Plus Assistance arm and 1.6 calls in the Information
Only arm (results not shown); these differences are statistically distinguishable (p<0.001).
The results in the last four rows suggest that all marginal applicants affected by the interventions
call in response to the outreach materials: the share of people who apply without calling is the
same in all three arms. Such individuals presumably call the state directly (without being routed
through BDT or our tracking service), and/or apply on-line or in person. Caller rates therefore
provide a likely ceiling for the impact of the interventions: less than one-third of individuals appear
to notice and respond to the outreach materials. The other 70 percent likely received the outreach
materials, since less than 1 percent were returned to sender due to bad addresses. It is possible that
they did not open or read the materials, or did so but were not moved by the materials to apply
for SNAP benefits. Presumably at least one-quarter of non-callers are actually ineligible for SNAP,
given that one-quarter of applications are rejected; perhaps an even larger share of non-callers
31

Appendix Table A7shows callers from each intervention arm into each possible number (with a different number
for the Information Plus Assistance arm and for each sub-treatment in the Information Only arms). There is virtually
no cross-contamination.
32
Appendix Figure A7 shows the monthly pattern of callers and applications post intervention. The time patterns
are similar to what we saw for enrollment in Figure 1.
33
As described in more detail in Appendix A, callers receive assistance from a Benefit Outreach Specialist (BOS).
BDT assigns callers to Benefit Outreach Specialists using a rotation system that is similar to how cases are often
assigned to judges (i.e., a rotation system). As a result, we can plausibly assume that the assignment of a BOS to
a caller is quasi-random. Using this assumption, we estimate treatment effect heterogeneity across Benefit Outreach
Specialists using a non-parametric Empirical Bayes approach, and (perhaps surprisingly) we do not find statistically
significant evidence of treatment effect heterogeneity – i.e., we cannot reject that the BOS fixed effect estimates are
all equal to each other.

27

believe themselves (potentially correctly) to be ineligible.34
If we interpret calling as a sign of interest, the results show that, conditional on interest, the
application rate is twice as high when assistance is provided (about 60 percent) than when only
information is provided (about 30 percent). Likewise, enrollment rates (conditional on interest) are
about 45 percent when information and assistance is provided compared to 23 percent when only
information is provided.
All of the results shown in Table 2 are based on comparisons of mean outcomes by intervention
arm. No covariates are needed given the simple random assignment. For completeness however,
we show in Appendix Table A14 that all of the results in Table 2 are robust to controlling for
baseline demographic and health characteristics of the individuals, as well as for the date of their
mail batch.
Cost effectiveness approximation
A rough back of the envelope calculation suggests that the Information Only intervention was
about two-thirds cheaper per additional enrollee than the Information Plus Assistance intervention.
Separating out fixed and marginal costs of the intervention is difficult, but BDT has estimated the
marginal cost of the Information Plus Assistance intervention at about $7 per individual who is
sent outreach materials, and the marginal cost of the Information Only treatment was about $1
per individual who was sent outreach materials; the cost of the latter is primarily composed of the
cost of mailing a first class letter ($0.49 at the time of our intervention) plus the cost of the follow
up postcard ($0.34 at the time of our intervention), plus the costs of printing and assembling the
mailings. These numbers suggest that the cost per additional enrollee is $20 in the Information
Only treatment, compared to $60 in the Information Plus Assistance treatment. Naturally there
are additional costs to the applicants from the time spent applying and to the government from
processing applications and paying benefits.
Because SNAP benefits are financed by the federal government, our results suggest that the
state benefits financially from encouraging take-up, even if it bears the whole intervention cost
as well as the processing costs. As we will see below, new enrollees receive, on average, about
$1,300 per year in annual SNAP benefits. This is paid for by the federal government. Isaacs (2008)
estimated that the annualized administrative costs of the SNAP program (including certification
costs as well as subsequent administrative costs) are about $178 per receipient, or about $134 per
application given our estimate of a 75% acceptance rate; this is paid for by the state government.
Thus, were the state to finance the marginal costs of either the Information Only intervention ($20
per enrollee) or the Information Plus Assistance intervention that BDT currently undertakes ($60
34

We generated a predicted eligibility measure in which we predict eligibility based on the relationship between
application approval and the pre-randomization demographic and health characteristics shown in Table 1. We estimated this prediction using the sub-sample of the study population that applied, and then used the estimates to
predict eligibility rates among non-callers and callers separately. The results suggest that - at least based on the
available observable characteristics - non-callers had only a few percentage points lower predicted eligibility rates
than callers.

28

per enrollee) as well as the administrative costs of processing the applications, these would still be
less than 25 percent of the new federal benefits received by state residents, and presumably spent
largely at local retail outlets. As a result, both of these interventions seem to pass a very simple
cost-benefit test from a state public finance perspective. However, note that this conclusion would
generate a different conclusion if virtually all of new enrollees received minimum benefit level ($16
per month or $192 per year); this would be similar to the state’s administrative costs.
Effects of reminders
We conducted a number of sub-treatments that varied the presentation and frequency of the information sent. Table 3 shows results for two of the information-only sub-treatments. Specifically it
shows results for the standard treatment, which includes an initial letter and a reminder postcard
8 weeks later if the individual has not yet called in (see Appendix Figure A2), and a “no reminder
postcard” sub-treatment in which the follow-up postcard is not sent.35
The results indicate that reminders matter: all behavioral responses decrease by about 20
percent without the reminder postcard. Specifically, the standard Information Only intervention
(with the reminder postcard) had a 30 percent call rate, a 15 percent application rate and an 11
percent enrollment rate. The lack of a postcard reminder reduced the caller rate by 7 percentage
points (p<0.001), the application rate by 3 percentage points (p=0.001) and the enrollment rate
by 2 percentage points (p =0.016). Given the 2 percentage point increase in enrollment with the
reminder postcard, and its marginal cost of roughly $0.35, cost per additional enrollee is similar
with and without the reminder postcard.
The non-trivial impact of a reminder postcard is similar to Bhargava and Manoli’s (2015) finding
that a similar second reminder letter, sent just months after the first, increased EITC take-up. They
interpret the effect of the reminder as indicative of it combating low program awareness, inattention,
or forgetfulness; they present additional survey evidence consistent with low program awareness
among those eligible for the EITC. A similar interpretation seems warranted in our context, where
we estimate that less than 3 percent of our study population had applied for or enrolled in SNAP
in the 10 years prior to our intervention. In addition, surveys suggest that about half of likely
eligible, non-participants in SNAP reported that they were not aware of their eligibility (Bartlett
et al. 2004). In our framework in Section 3, this is modeled as under-estimating the probability
of eligibility (i.e.,  < 0). An alternative explanation - that the impact reflects a high rate of nondelivered mail - does not seem warranted; less than 1 percent of outreach materials were returned
to sender.
35
The results for the Information Only treatment results shown in Table 2 pool the results from the standard
treatment and a “marketing” sub-treatment that varied the content of the outreach letters (see Appendix A and
Appendix Figure A5 for more details); these two sub-treatments are pooled in the same proportions in the Information
Plus Assistance treatment results shown in Table 2.

29

6.2

Characteristics of Marginal Applicants and Enrollees

We examined the characteristics of the marginal applicant or enrollee whose behavior is affected by
the intervention. To do this, we define the outcome in each arm as the average of a specific characteristic among those who (endogenously) apply or enroll. For example, we compare the average
monthly benefits among those who enroll in each arm, or the average healthcare spending in 2015
of individuals who enroll (or, alternatively, apply) in each arm. Differences in the average characteristics of enrollees or applicants in a given treatment arm relative to the control group reveals how
the characteristic of the marginal individual who apply or enroll due to a given intervention differs
from the average applicant or enrollee who would enroll absent the intervention. This approach
to analyzing the characteristics of the marginal person affected by an intervention is analogous to
approaches taken in prior work by Gruber et al. (1999) and Einav et al. (2010).
We have already seen that one characteristic of marginal applicants - their probability of rejection - was similar to control applicants (see Table 2). Here, we present evidence that marginal
applicants and enrollees in either intervention arm are less needy than the average applicants and
enrollees who apply in the absence of the intervention. For brevity, we focus the discussion on a
comparison of characteristics of enrollees in the control group relative to enrollees in either intervention. However, the tables also show that characteristics tend to be similar between the two
intervention arms, and within each intervention arm, between applicants and enrollees (and also
callers - see Appendix Table A11). This suggests that the interventions generated interest (calls)
in different types of individuals than the average applicant or enrollee, but that, conditional on
inducing interest, there was no further differentiation in the characteristics of those who applied or
who successfully enrolled.
Monthly benefits among enrollees
Table 4 shows monthly benefits for individuals who enrolled in the 9 months after the initial mail
date, by study arm. Because the SNAP benefit formula is progressive, a lower benefit amount
implies an enrollee with higher net resources. This is why in Section 3 we defined “targeting” as
the share of enrollees who are high benefit (relative to the share that are low benefit). Average
monthly benefits for enrollees in the intervention arms are 20 to 30 percent lower than for enrollees
in the control arm. Average monthly benefits are $146 in the control compared to $115 in the
Information Only intervention and $101 in the Information Plus Assistance intervention; average
benefits in each intervention arm are statistically different from those in the control (p<0.001) as
well as from each other (p=0.013).36
There are clear modes in the distribution of benefits received, corresponding to minimum and
maximum benefit amounts. Among the controls, 18 percent receive $16 (the minimum monthly
36

Differences in the average characteristics of enrollees in an intervention arm relative to the control arm reflect
differences between the average characteristics of infra-marginal enrollees (or “always takers”) relative to marginal
enrollees (or “compliers”). As another way of presenting the same information, Appendix Table A6 reports the
average characteristics for always takers and compliers; estimation of these objects is standard (see, e.g., Abadie
2002, Abadie 2003, or Angrist and Pischke 2009) and we describe it in more detail in Appendix F.

30

benefit for a household of size 1 or 2 who are categorically eligible) and another 19 percent receive
$194 (the maximum monthly benefit for a household of size 1); see also Appendix Figure A8. Table
4 shows that the interventions increased the share of enrollees receiving the minimum benefit and
decreased the share of enrollees receiving the maximum benefit.
In principle, we should observe benefits for all individuals whose applications have been approved
during our nine-month observation window (our measure of “enrollee”). In practice, we are missing
such information for about 4 percent of enrollees, and this missing rate is not balanced across arms.
As shown in Table 4, 7.3 percent of control enrollees are missing benefit information, compared to
4.3 percent of the Information Only enrollees and 2.8 percent of the Information Plus Assistance
enrollees; differences in missing benefit rates are statistically significantly different between either
intervention arm and the control group. Such non-random attrition could bias our comparison of
enrollee benefits across arms.
Therefore, we also generated a predicted benefit measure in which we predict the benefit
amounts based on the relationship between benefits and the pre-randomization demographic and
health characteristics shown in Table 1; Appendix D provides more detail on the prediction algorithm which follows a standard algorithm in machine learning (Rifkin and Klautau 2004). Table 4
shows that predicted benefits show the same pattern across arms as actual benefits, both among
enrollees with non-missing benefit amounts (second to last row) and among all enrollees (last row).
Another potential concern is that benefits increase in household size. If the interventions disproportionately encourage smaller households to apply, this will lower enrollee benefits without
necessarily reflecting higher per capita resources. Indeed, the penultimate row of Table 4 shows
that the interventions increase the share of enrollees who are in a household size of 1. However, the
bottom row of Table 4 shows that if we limit our analysis to households of size 1, average benefits
for these households are still statistically significantly lower in each intervention arm relative to the
control. An additional attraction of limiting to households with only a single individual is that we
have essentially no missing benefits for such households.
Demographics and health of applicants and enrollees
Table 5 shows the demographic and health characteristics of applicants and enrollees. The first
four columns show these characteristics for applicants, and the last four for enrollees. For a variety
of demographic and health characteristics, marginal applicants and enrollees from the intervention
appear less needy than the average applicant or enrollee in the control group.
Panel A shows results for a summary measure: predicted benefits, where the prediction is based
on the underlying pre-randomization demographic and health information and higher predicted
benefits correspond to lower net resources given the progressive SNAP benefit formula. The results
for enrollees were already seen in Table 4. Results for applicants are similar: applicants in either
intervention arm have lower predicted benefits than applicants in the control arm (p<0.001).
Panel B shows results for health and healthcare, measured in the calendar year prior to the
intervention. We measure health care utilization in three different ways: total medical spending,
31

total number of visits or days (summed across emergency room (ER) visits, doctor visits, hospital
days, and skilled nursing facility (SNF) days), and weighted number of visits or days, where the
weights are set based on the average cost per encounter.37 Total medical spending is noisy - due
to the well-known high variance of medical spending - and conflates variation in utilization with
variation in recorded prices. Our total number of days or visits measures attempt to circumvent both
problems by creating a utilization-based measure. The weighted utilization measure is designed
to account for the fact that a hospital day is substantially more expensive than a SNF day or a
doctor visit. Relative to the control arm, applicants and enrollees in the intervention arms use
less health care.38 For all three health care utilization measures, applicants and enrollees in the
intervention arms have lower pre-randomization health care use than in the control arm, although
these differences are not always statistically different from the control. However, when we pool
across both intervention arms, the total number of visits and days and the weighted total number
of visits and days are statistically different from the control arm (p<0.05) for both applicants and
enrollees (not shown).
In the final row of Panel B we show that the number of measured chronic conditions is also
lower in both intervention arms relative to the control arm for both applicants and enrollees, with
most of these differences statistically significant at conventional levels. A smaller number of chronic
conditions could reflect better underlying health . It could also - partly or entirely - reflect lower
health care utilization; since chronic conditions are only measured if the individuals use the relevant
health care, they are a joint measure of underlying health and health care utilization (Song et al.,
2010; Finkelstein et al., 2017) .
Panel C shows results for demographic characteristics measured pre-randomization. Relative to
the control group, applicants and enrollees in either intervention arm are statistically significantly
(p<0.001) older, more likely to be white, and more likely to have their primary language be English.
For example, 71 percent of control enrollees are white, compared to 78 percent in either intervention
arm.

7

Normative implications

We use the framework from Section 3 to analyze the welfare implications of our empirical findings.
37

Specifically, we sum up the total number of encounters of a given type and the total spending on those encounters
across our study population and divide total spending by total encounters to get a per encounter average “cost”. The
results are: $1,607 for a hospital day, $197 for an ED visit, $147 for a SNF day,and $79 for a doctor visit.
38
As discussed above, many of these health measures are annualized to account for the fact that not everyone was
enrolled in Medicaid for the full year in 2015. The share enrolled for the full year is (as expected) balanced across
control and intervention arms (see Appendix Table A2). Therefore, not surprisingly, we find in Appendix Table A15
that if we limit the analysis to the subset of study participants enrolled in Medicaid for the full year in 2015, the
results remain qualitatively the same (although precision worsens).

32

7.1

Parameterizing the model

To simplify the parameterization of the model, we collapse the distribution of benefits to be only
one of two possible levels: either the minimum benefit of $16 per month, or $178 per month (the
mean benefit for the approximately 80 percent of control group enrollees who do not receive the
minimum). We assume these two benefit levels correspond to the l and h types in the model. In
other words, conditional on their application being accepted, l types receive the minimum benefit
and h types receive the higher benefit level.39 These assumptions imply that type h enrollees receive
$4,272 during the first 24 months of enrollment, while type l enrollees receive $384 over 24 months.
Recall that after 24 months, the individual must re-certify their eligibility; average lifetime benefits
are therefore presumably greater than the 24-month amount, but may not extend indefinitely;
moreover, additional private costs must be incurred to maintain them. For simplicity, we assume
benefits last only 24 months; this is a conservative assumption since, as we will see, higher expected
benefits among enrollees imply larger misperceptions about the probability of successfully enrolling.
To calculate expected benefits from applying, we assume that the probability of rejection is 0.25
for both types (the rejection rate for the controls). We treat this rejection rate as exogenous to the
intervention, given that we found no evidence of an effect of either intervention on rejection rates
of application. Thus, expected benefits conditional on applying (πj Bj ) are about $3, 200 for the h
types and about $290 for l types. This calculation assumes that SNAP benefits are valued dollar
for dollar by beneficiaries.40
The model in Section 3 underscores that a key determinant of the welfare analysis will be
whether the the neoclassical benchmark ( = 0) is a reasonable assumption. It is difficult to definitively reject this neoclassical benchmark. Given that applying takes an estimated five hours (Ponza
et al. 1999), if we (generously) assume the value of time for this low-income elderly population is
roughly twice the minimum wage of $7.25 per hour, this implies the private (time) cost of applying
is about $75. With no misperceptions, rationalizing the decision not to apply therefore requires a
non-time cost of applying of roughly $3,100 for an h type. If we model stigma as a participation
cost (Moffitt 1983), one way to rationalize the decision of non-applicants is to say that they experience stigma costs of participation that are about forty times larger than their transactional costs
of applying. For an l type with no misperception of the probability an application is accepted, the
implied non-time cost of applying is roughly $200. Under this rational benchmark, the Information Only intervention overall unambiguously reduces private and social welfare (Proposition 1);
in addition, the poor targeting properties of the intervention are irrelevant for private welfare and
increase social welfare for a given change in application rate, due to reduction in the average fiscal
cost of enrollees in our setting (Proposition 2, with gj constant across types).
However, our reading of the evidence suggests that individuals under-estimate the probability
39
In other words, πlL = πhH = 0.75 and πlH = πhL = 0, so there is no “type uncertainty” in this setup, only
uncertainty over application acceptance probability.
40
While recent evidence by Hastings and Shapiro (2017) calls into question the standard assumption that SNAP
benefits are fungible with cash for large majority of SNAP-eligible households, it is not immediately clear whether
this implies that SNAP benefits are valued more or less than cash at the margin.

33

their application is accepted (i.e.,  < 0) and hence expected benefits from applying. As noted
previously, existing survey evidence suggests that lack of awareness of expected benefits - e.g., underestimating expected benefits - is a primary barrier to participation among eligible non-participants
(Bartlet et al., 2004); one interpretation of our “Information Only” intervention is that it reduces
such misperception. In addition, the substantial increase in applications and enrollment from a
reminder postcard in the Information Only intervention suggests some form of inattention, lack of
awareness, or forgetfulness; i.e., individual application decisions may not be privately optimal, as
implied by the neoclassical benchmark.
To calibrate the magnitude of the misperceptions, we assume that the time cost is the only
cost of application. To rationalize non-participation with the time cost estimates above requires
h = −0.98 and l = −0.75. In other words, for a type h individuals with a 75 percent chance
of enrolling after applying, the only way to rationalize their not applying for benefits is that their
misperceptions are so great that they perceive virtually no chance (less than 2 percent) of enrolling
in program, or alternatively that they are completely ignorant of the program. For type l individuals
with a 75 percent chance of enrolling after applying not to apply, they must perceive a 25 percent
or lower chance of success. Thus h < l < 0.

7.2

Normative Findings

Proposition 2 indicates that with h < l < 0, a progressive benefit formula, and constant nonbenefit fiscal externalities (i.e., gj constant across types), then our finding that the interventions
decrease targeting bodes poorly for their welfare impacts. However, this is merely a qualitative
comparative static result. Even with h < l < 0, the targeting effects of the intervention are neither
necessary nor sufficient to sign the overall social welfare impact of the intervention. Consider an
intervention that improves targeting (with h < l < 0). Proposition 2 tells us that, all else equal,
this improvement in targeting is good for the social welfare effects of the intervention. Still, the
overall social welfare effect may be negative, for the negative externality from the public application
processing costs and expenditures on benefits may outweigh the private welfare gains to individuals
with misperceptions (see equation (2)). Likewise, if the intervention decreases targeting - thereby
reducing the social welfare benefits from the intervention under our sufficient conditions - it may
still increase social welfare overall if the private welfare gains to individuals with misperceptions
outweigh the public costs.
Proposition 1 tells us that to make quantitative statements about the social welfare impact of
the intervention - i.e.,

dW
dT

- we need estimates of gj , πj Bj ,

dAj
dT

and µj ≡ −u0 (yj )j (πj Bj ) (for

j = {h, l}). We assume that the fiscal externality is the same across types (so that gh = gl = g),
and using Isaacs (2008) we estimate g ∼ $267 (see section 6.1 for more details on this calculation).
Lastly, we parameterize πh Bh ∼ $3, 200, πl Bl ∼ $290, h ∼ −0.98, and l ∼ −0.75.
The impact of the intervention on applications of each type

dAj
dT

comes directly from the exper-

iment. Table 2 shows directly the increase in applications - for the Information Only intervention,
dA
dT

= 0.07 and for the Information Plus Assistance intervention,
34

dA
dT

= 0.16. Appendix Table A6

shows that, for each intervention, 44% of the marginal enrollees are l types (i.e., 44% of the compliers receive the minimum benefit level of $16); this represents a decrease in targeting relative to
the inframarginal enrollees (i.e., the always takers) for whom, Table 2 shows, only about 20% are
l type. Given our assumption of a common, 25 percent, rejection rate for both types, this suggests
that for the Information Only intervention,
Assistance intervention,

dAl
dT

= .07 and

dAh
dT

dAl
dT

= .03 and

dAh
dT

= .04, and for the Information Plus

= .09.

Finally, we still require an estimate of the marginal utility of consumption for recipients (as well
as our assumption of a particular set of social welfare weights on them - in our case, utilitarian).
Consumption is notoriously difficult to measure in a low-income population, and the marginal
utility of that consumption is an even more challenging object, as are social welfare weights. Given
this difficulty, we instead follow Hendren (2016), who offers a way to assess redistributive programs
without having to make assumptions about either individual utility functions or social welfare
functions. He defines the marginal value of public funds (M V P F ) from a marginal expansion of
a program (or in our case, an intervention into that program) as the ratio of marginal benefits to
marginal costs. We adapt Hendren (2016) to our setting and derive:
M V P F Inf ormation Only =
This formula bears a strong resemblance to

dAl
h
−h (πh Bh ) dA
dT − l (πl Bl ) dT
dAl
h
(πh Bh + gh ) dA
dT + (πl Bl + gl ) dT

dW Inf ormation Only
dT

.

(see equation (3)). Beyond the fact

that one is expressed as a ratio and the other as a difference, the key distinction is that the private
welfare changes (the numerator) are expressed as a money metric, rather than multiplied by the
marginal utility of consumption. We therefore have rough estimates of all the elements we need to
evaluation this expression, and these suggest:
M V P F Inf ormation Only =

0.98($3, 200)0.04 + 0.75($290)0.03
= 0.85
($3, 200 + $267)0.04 + ($290 + $267)0.03

An MVPF estimate of 0.85 suggests that for every dollar spent on the intervention (in the form
of benefits and processing costs), low income recipients receive about 85 cents of benefits.41 An
MVPF below 1 is to be expected for a redistributive policy such as SNAP; redistribution inevitably
involves some resource cost (Okun, 1975). A more natural benchmark is to compare this estimate
to the MVPF of other redistributive programs. Although we know of no elderly-specific estimates,
it is interesting to see that this estimate is comparable to the estimate of the MVPF for the Earned
Income Tax Credit, which Hendren (2014) estimates to be about 0.9; this is higher than the likely
MVPF of public subsidies for health insurance for low-income adults (Finkelstein, Hendren and
Shepard 2017), as well as the MVPF of the SNAP program for the non-elderly, which Hendren
(2014) estimates has an MVPF of roughly 0.5-0.7. In other words, an information intervention
about likely eligibility for SNAP among an elderly population transfers more resources to low41
This calculation assumes that the information intervention is itself costless. Accounting for the intervention costs
($1 per outreach, or approximately $7 for the 15 percent of the intervention arm who applied) in the denominator,
however, has no noticeable effect on the calculation.

35

income beneficiaries per dollar of public expenditure than the SNAP program for the non-elderly or
subsidies for public health insurance for low-income adults. Of course, this calculation assumes away
some potential behavioral responses to the intervention (such as decreased labor force participation)
which could increase the fiscal externality on the government. This assumption seems empirically
reasonable in the context of our experimental interventions, but of course might differ if these
interventions were implemented at scale.
We can perform a similar analysis for the Information Plus Assistance intervention using the
following extended formula:

M V P F Inf ormation P lus Assistance =

dAl
h
−h (πh Bh ) dA
dT − l (πl Bl ) dT − (Ah + Al +
h
(πh Bh + gh ) dA
dT + (πl Bl +

dAh
dT
l
gl ) dA
dT

+

dAl dc
dT ) dT

.

The MVPF for the Information Plus Assistance intervention is the same as for the Information
Only intervention, plus one additional term in the numerator, representing the welfare gain from
reducing application costs for both the infra-marginal and marginal applicants. The term dc/dT
is the (money-metric) change in application costs from the intervention, and it is scaled by the
number of total applicants (both infra-marginal and marginal) of either type (i.e., this is the
overall application rate in this treatment arm). The money metric term dc/dT replaces the u0 (yj )
terms multiplying the infra-marginal applicants in the expression for

dW Inf ormation P lus Assistance
dT

(see equation (3)).
Assuming that the application costs are costlessly reduced - which would correspond to removing some pre-existing barrier or ordeal - the MVPF is unambiguously higher for the Information
Plus intervention than the Information Only one. If the intervention costlessly eliminated private
application costs (i.e., reducing them from $75 per application to zero), this would increase the
MVPF from 0.85 in the Information Only intervention to 0.88. If we allow for BDT’s cost per
application estimate of $45 ($60 per enrollee, adjusted for the acceptance rate), the MVPF for the
Information Plus Assistance Intervention would fall to 0.87.
To see the role that targeting plays in affecting MVPF, we calculation the MVPF in the Information Only intervention separately for each type:

M V P FhInf ormation Only =
M V P FlInf ormation Only =

h
−h (πh Bh ) dA
dT
h
(πh Bh + gh ) dA
dT
l
−l (πl Bl ) dA
dT
=
l
(πl Bl + gl ) dA
dT

=

0.98($3, 200)0.04
= 0.90
($3, 200 + $267)0.04

0.75($290)0.03
= 0.39
($290 + $267)0.03

As Proposition 2 predicts, given our estimate of h < l < 0, the MVPF of the intervention is larger
for h types. The difference is substantial, highlighting the potential welfare gains in our setting
from policies that are especially effective at targeting high-benefit types. Policies that primarily
enroll low-benefit types appear to have quite low MVPF (~0.4). In other words, if those deterred

36

by barriers were exclusively the less needy, our interventions would have looked substantially worse.

8

Conclusion

Policymakers often advocate - and academics often study - interventions to increase take-up of
public benefits. We provide a framework for analyzing the welfare impacts of such interventions.
We apply this framework to the results of a randomized field experiment of interventions designed
to increase SNAP take-up. The interventions were designed to reduce potential information barriers
to enrollment as well as potential transaction cost barriers.
We found that both information and transaction costs are barriers to take-up. In the 9 months
following the intervention, the Information Only intervention increased enrollment by 5 percentage
points (or 83 percent relative to the enrollment rate among controls), while the Information Plus
Assistance increased enrollment by 12 percentage points (a 200 percent increase relative to the
controls). The impact of the treatments appears to be fully present by about 6 months; the time
pattern of effects out to 23 months suggests that the treatments primarily generate new enrollment,
rather than merely moving forward in time enrollment that would have happened anyway. A back of
the envelope calculation suggests that the Information Only treatment may be more “cost effective”,
with an intervention cost of about $20 per new enrollee, compared to about $60 per new enrollee
for the Information Plus Assistance intervention.
We also find that reducing informational or transactional barriers decreases targeting: the
marginal applicants and enrollees from either intervention are less needy than the average enrollees
in the control group. The average monthly SNAP benefit (which is based on a progressive formula)
is 20 to 30 percent lower among enrollees in either intervention arm relative to enrollees in the control
group. In addition, relative to the control group, applicants and enrollees in either intervention
arm are in better health, more likely to be white, and more likely to have English as their primary
language. The finding that barriers to take-up deter relatively less needy individuals from enrolling
is consistent with neoclassical theories of ordeal mechanisms (e.g., Nichols et al., 1971, Nichols and
Zeckhauser 1982, Besley and Coate 1992).
The framework we developed highlights that normative implications depend critically on whether
individuals have accurate beliefs about the expected benefits from applying, as well as what types
of individuals have greater misperceptions. We present several pieces of evidence that are consistent with standard behavioral models (e.g., Mullainathan and Shafir 2013) in which individuals
under-estimate expected benefits from applying, with this under-estimation greater among needier
individuals. Under the assumptions in our setting, this is a sufficient condition for a decrease in
targeting to decrease the social welfare gains from intervention. Nevertheless, given the magnitude
of the misperceptions we estimate (particularly for the neediest individuals), our estimates suggest
that increasing awareness and reducing transaction costs for elderly individuals eligible for SNAP
are both relatively cost-effective ways to redistribute to this low-income population.
The framework we developed also clarifies conditions under which the targeting properties of

37

an intervention based on observable characteristics such as poverty may be informative about the
likely welfare impact of the intervention. These conditions suggest the importance of measuring
additional empirical objects - specifically, the size of any misperceptions across individuals with
different observable characteristics as well as the size of the fiscal externality across these individuals
- in order to draw normative inferences from targeting results. This should hopefully be useful for
analyzing the welfare impacts of other interventions designed to increase take-up of social benefits.

9

References

Alberto Abadie, 2002. “Bootstrap Tests for Distributional Treatment Effects in Instrumental Variable Models", Journal of the American Statistical Association 97(457), pp. 284-292.
Alberto Abadie, 2003. "Semiparametric instrumental variable estimation of treatment response
models", Journal of Econometrics 113, pp. 231-263.
Aaronson, B., 2011. Number of Texans Receiving Food Stamps Up Sharply Amid Recession
[WWW Document]. Tex. Trib. URL http://www.texastribune.org/library/data/texas-supplementalnutrition-assistance-program/ (accessed 2.3.15).
Alatas Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin Olken, Matthew Wai-Poi and Ririn
Pernamasari. 2016. “Self-Targeting: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.” Journal of
Political Economy 124 (2): 371-427.
Alcott, Hunt and Michael Greenstone. 2017. “Measuring The Welfare Effects of Residential
Energy Efficiency Programs.” NBER Working Paper 23386.
Armour, Philip. forthcoming. “The Role of Information in Disability Insurance Application:
An Analysis of the Social Security Statement Phase-In.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Jörn-Steffen Pischke, 2009. "Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion.", Princeton University Press.
Baily, Martin N. 1978. "Some Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance", Journal of Public
Economics 10(3), pp. 379-402.
Barr, Andrew and Sarah Turner. “A Letter and Encouragement: Does Information Increase
Post-Secondary Enrollment of UI Recipients?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Benefits Data Trust, 2016. About: Our Model.
Bartlett, Susan, Nancy Burstein, and William Hamilton. 2004. “Food Stamp Access Study:
Final Report”. United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, November.
https://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/pub-details/?pubid=43407 (last accessed July 31, 2017).
Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., 2004. A behavioral-economics view of poverty. Am.
Econ. Rev. 419–423.
Besley, T., Coate, S., n.d. Workfare versus Welfare: Incentive Arguments for Work Requirements in Poverty-Alleviation Programs. Am. Econ. Rev. 82, 249–61.
Bettinger, E.P., Long, B.T., Oreopoulos, P., Sanbonmatsu, L., 2012. The role of application

38

assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA experiment.
Q. J. Econ. 127, 1205–1242.
Bhargava, S., Manoli, D., 2015. Psychological Frictions and the Incomplete Take-Up of Social Benefits: Evidence from an IRS Field Experiment.

Am.

Econ.

Rev.

105, 3489–3529.

doi:10.1257/aer.20121493
Bhargava, S, Loewenstein, G and J. Sydnor. 2017. “Choose to Lose: Health Plan Choices
from a Menu with Dominated Options.” Quarterly Journal of Economics August. Volume 132 (3):
1319-1372.
Cutler, D. and J. Gruber. 1996. “Does Public Insurance Crowd out Private Insurance?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 391-430.
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. 2015. “Pennsylvania: Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, 2015.”
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.

2016.

“SNAP Online: A review of State Gov-

ernment SNAP Websites.” http://www.cbpp.org/research/food-assistance/snap-online-a-review-ofstate-government-snap-websites. Last accessed, June 29 2017.
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. 2017. “SNAP Helps Millions of Low-Income Seniors.”
https://www.cbpp.org/research/food-assistance/snap-helps-millions-of-low-income-seniors
Chetty, Raj. 2006. "A General Formula for the Optimal Level of Social Insurance", Journal of
Public Economics 90(10-11), pp. 1879-1901.
Cunnyngham, K., 2010. State Trends in Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Eligibility
and Participation Among Elderly Individuals. Mathematica Policy Research.
Congressional Budget Office. 2013. “Federal Means-Tested Programs and Tax Credits – Infographic.” https://www.cbo.gov/publication/43935 Last accessed, June 29, 2017.
Currie, J., 2006. The Take Up of Social Benefits. In Alan Auerbach, David Card, And John
Quigley (Eds). Poverty, the Distribution of Income, and Public Policy (New York: Russell Sage),
80-148.
Currie, J., 2003. US food and nutrition programs, in: Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the
United States. University of Chicago Press, pp. 199–290.
Daponte, B.O., Sanders, S., Taylor, L., 1999. Why do low-income households not use food
stamps? Evidence from an experiment. J. Hum. Resour. 612–628.
Deshpande, Manasi and Yue Li. 2017. “Who is Screened Out? Application Costs and the
Targeting of Disability Programs.” Unpublished Miemo. https://docs.google.com/viewer?a=v&
pid=sites&srcid=ZGVmYXVsdGRvbWFpbnxtZGVzaHBhbmRlZWNvbnxneDo3ZTU1MGYyNTdhMWFhNmY3
Einav, L., Finkelstein, A. and Cullen, M.R. 2010. Estimating Welfare In Insurance Markets
Using Variation in Prices. Q. J. Econ.
Eslami, E., 2014. Trends in Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Participation Rates:
Fiscal Year 2010 to Fiscal Year 2012.
Finkelstein A, Gentzkow M, Williams H. 2016. Sources of geographic variation in health care:
evidence from patient migration. Q J Econ;131:1681-726.

39

Finkelstein A, Hendren N, Shepard M. 2017. Subsidizing health insurance for low income adults:
evidence from Massachusetts. NBER Working Paper 23668.
Ganong, P., Liebman, J.B., 2013. The Decline, Rebound, and Further Rise in SNAP Enrollment: Disentangling Business Cycle Fluctuations and Policy Changes (Working Paper No. 19363).
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gray, K., Fisher, S., Lauffer, S., 2016. Characteristics of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program Households: Fiscal Year 2015 (No. Report No. SNAP-16-CHAR). United States Department of Agriculture.
Gruber, J., Levine, P., Staiger, D., 1999. Abortion Legalization and Child Living Circumstances: Who is the Marginal Child? Q. J. Econ. 114, 263–292.
Guyton, John, Dayanand Manoli, Brenda Schafer and Michael Sebastiani. 2016. “Reminders
& Recidivism: Evidence from Tax Filing & EITC Participation Among Low-Income NonFilers.”
NBER Working Paper 21904.
Hastings, Justine and Jesse Shapiro. 2017. “How Are SNAP Benefits Spent? Evidence from a
Retail Panel.” NBER Working Paper 23112.
Hendren, N. (2014). The inequality deflator: Interpersonal comparisons without a social welfare
function. Working Paper .
Hendren, N. (2016). The policy elasticity. Tax Policy and the Economy 30 (1), 51{89.
Hoynes and Schanzenbach. 2016. U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs. in Robert Moffitt (ed)
“Means Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume II.” University of Chicago Press.
Hu, W., 2014. Rations Reduced as Demand Grows for Soup Kitchens. N. Y. Times.
Isaacs, Julia. 2008. “The Costs of Benefit Delivery in the Food Stamp Program.” USDA
Contractor and Cooperator Report No. 39. https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/
2016/06/03_food_stamp_isaacs.pdf.LastaccessedJune29,2017
Kauff, J., Dragoset, L., Clary, E., Laird, E., Makowsky, L., Samaa-Miller, E., 2014. Reaching
the Underserved Elderly and Working Poor in SNAP: Evaluation Findings from the Fiscal Year
2009 Pilots. Mathematica Policy Research.
Kleven, H and W. Kopczuk. 2011. “Transfer Program Complexity and the Take Up of Social
Benefits.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3(1), 54-90.
Kleven, H. 2018. “Sufficeint Statistics Revisited.” Working paper. https://www.henrikkleven.
com/uploads/3/7/3/1/37310663/kleven_sufficientstats_march2018.pdf
Lewin Group. 2012. “Evaluating Encounter Data Completeness.” https://www.ccwdata.org/
documents/10280/19002254/evaluating-encounter-data-completeness.pdf
Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea. 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and Savings Behavior” Quarterly Journal of Economics. CXVI (4): 1149-1187.
Mani, A., Shafir, E., Mullainathan, S., Zhao, J., 2013. Poverty impedes cognitive function.
Science 341, 976–980.
Manoli, Dayand and Nicholas Turner. 2014. “Nudges and Learning: Evidence from Informational Interventions for Low-Income Taxpayers.” NBER Working Paper 20718.

40

Meyer, Bruce and Nikolas Mittag. 2015. “Using Linked Survey and Administrative Data to
Better Measure Income: Implications for Poverty, Program Effectiveness, and Holes in the Safety
Net.” NBER Working Paper 21676
Mills, Gregory, Tracy Vericker, Heather Koball, Kyle Lippold, Laura Wheaton, and Sam Elkin,
2014. “Understanding the Rates, Causes, and Costs of Churning in the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP),” United States Department of Agriculture, (November).
Moffitt, Robert. 1983. “An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma.” American Economic Review
73 (5): 1023-1035.
Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., 2013. Scarcity: Why having too little means so much. Macmillan.
Nichols, A.L., Zeckhauser, R.J., 1982. Targeting transfers through restrictions on recipients.
Am. Econ. Rev. 372–377.
Nichols, D., Smolensky, E., Tideman, T., 1971. Discrimination by Waiting Time in Merit
Goods. Am. Econ. Rev. 61, 312–323.
Okun, A. 1975. Equality and Eciency. Brookings Institution Press.
Pennsylvania Department of Human Services. Online. “Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program Policy Manual”. http://services.dpw.state.pa.us/oimpolicymanuals/snap/ (last accessed
June 28, 2017).
Ponza, Michael, James C. Ohls, Lorenzo Moreno, Amy Zambrowski, and Rhoda Cohen. 1999.
“Customer Service in the Food Stamp Program.” Mathematica Policy Research Inc., Reference
Number 8243-140.
Rifkin, Ryan and Aldebaro Klautau. 2004. “In Defense of One-Vs-All Classification”, Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 5 (January):101-141.
Rossin-Slater, Maya. 2013. “WIC in Your Neighborhood: New Evidence on the Impacts of
Geographic Access to Clinics.” Journal of Public Economics, 102 (March): 51-69.
Schanzenbach, Diane. 2009. “Experimental Estimates of the Barriers to Food Stamp Enrollment.” Instituet for Research on Poverty, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Discussion Paper no.
1367-09.
Song Y, Skinner J, Bynum J, Sutherland J, Wennberg JE, Fisher ES. 2010. Regional variations
in diagnostic practices. New Engl J Med;363:45-53.
Spinnewijn, J. 2015. “Unemployed but Optimistic: Optimal Insurance Design with Biased
Beliefs.” Journal of the European Economic Association 13(1): 130-167. February.
U.S. Congressional Budget Office, 2013. Growth in means-tested programs and tax credits for low-income households. U.S. Department of Agriculture: Food and Nutrition Service,
2015. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP): Eligibility [WWW Document]. URL
http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/eligibility (accessed 2.1.15). U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, 2012. Fiscal year 2011 TANF financial data.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2016. The food assistance landscape: FY 2015 annual report.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2016. FY 2015 Federal TANF & state MOE
financial data.

41

U.S. Internal Revenue Service. 2016. EITC calendar year report.
U.S. Social Security Administration. 2016. Social Security Income program 2016 technical
materials. February.

42

Figure 1: Time pattern of enrollment responses

NOTE: Figure shows, by month, the (cumulative) estimated treatment effects on enrollment (relative to the control)
for the Information Only arm and the Information Plus Assistance arm. 95 percent confidence intervals on these
estimates are shown in the dashed light gray lines.

43

Table 1: Description of Study Population
After Exclusions
Original Outreach List
List, After Exclusions

Receving SNAP

Not Receiving SNAP

Study Population

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

229,584

143,923

84,038

59,885

31,888

72.91
0.00
0.27
0.00
0.35
[0.000]
0.71
[0.000]
0.17
[0.000]
0.04
[0.000]
0.18
[0.000]
0.05
[0.000]
0.45
[0.000]
0.83

70.45
0.00
0.18
0.00
0.36
[0.000]
0.79
[0.000]
0.10
[0.000]
0.03
[0.000]
0.00
[0.000]
0.07
[0.000]
0.47
[0.000]
0.84

69.77
0.00
0.15
0.00
0.36
[0.000]
0.79
[0.000]
0.11
[0.000]
0.03
[0.000]
0.00
[0.000]
0.07
[0.000]
0.55
[0.000]
0.89

71.42
0.00
0.23
0.00
0.36
[0.000]
0.79
[0.000]
0.07
[0.000]
0.03
[0.000]
0.00
[0.000]
0.06
[0.000]
0.36
[0.000]
0.77

68.83
0.00
0.16
0.00
0.38
[0.000]
0.75
[0.000]
0.08
[0.000]
0.04
[0.000]
0.00
[0.000]
0.06
[0.000]
0.33
[0.000]
0.73

Panel B - (Annual) Health Care Measures, 2015

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

Total Health Care Spending ($) b

18,347
[0.000]
5.41
[0.000]
0.41
[0.000]
6.25
[0.000]
66.23
[0.000]
6.50
[0.000]

7,683
[0.000]
1.51
[0.000]
0.41
[0.000]
5.87
[0.000]
1.57
[0.000]
4.93
[0.000]

6,036
[0.000]
1.24
[0.000]
0.41
[0.000]
5.97
[0.000]
0.85
[0.000]
5.08
[0.000]

9,995
[0.000]
1.88
[0.000]
0.40
[0.000]
5.74
[0.000]
2.58
[0.000]
4.70
[0.000]

11,838
[0.000]
2.16
[0.000]
0.50
[0.000]
7.11
[0.000]
2.67
[0.000]
5.45
[0.000]

Observations (N)

Panel A - Demographics
Age (as of October 31, 2015)
Share Age 80+
Male
Share Whitea
Share Blacka
Share Primary Language not English
Share Living in Philadelphia
Share Living in Pittsburgh
Share Last Medicaid Spell Starting before 2011
Share Enrolled in Medicaid for 2015 Full Year

Number of Hospital Days
Number of ER Visits
Number of Doctor Visits
Number of SNF Days
Number of Chronic Conditions

Notes: Observations correspond to a sample of Medicaid enrollees using data from Pennsylvania Dept. of Human
Services (DHS). Column (1) shows the initial outreach list of individuals aged 60 and over enrolled in Medicaid as
of October 31, 2015. In column (2) we make two exclusions from this list: we exclude all individuals enrolled in the
Long-Term Care Medicaid program and individuals with an address in Philadelphia City. Columns 3 and 4 partition
the resulting sample in column 2 into those in "households" enrolled in SNAP and those not, respectively, where a
"household" is defined as individuals on the outreach list sharing the same last name and address; recall that SNAP
is a household-level benefit. Column (5) shows the final study population, which is a subset of the individuals not
enrolled in SNAP in column (4); we excluded all individuals in column (4) to whom BDT had previously sent outreach
materials and randomly selected one individual from each “household”. All data come from Medicaid administrative
data; health care spending and utilization data come from the 2015 Medicaid claims files and all measures are
annualized for individuals with less than a full year of Medicaid enrollment; see Appendix B for more details.
a Omitted category is other or missing race.
b
Total spending is truncated at twice 99.5th percentile of study population, which is 371,620 (99.5th percentile in
study population is 185,810). Amounts greater than the threshold are set to missing.

44

Table 2: Behavioral Responses to “Information Only” and “Information Plus Assistance”

SNAP Enrollees

SNAP Applicants

SNAP Rejections among Applicants

Callers

Adjusted Callers

SNAP Applicants among Non-Callers

SNAP Applicants among Callers

SNAP Enrollees among Non-Callers

SNAP Enrollees among Callers

Observations (N)

Control

Information Only

Information Plus
Assistance

P Value of Difference
(Column 2 vs 3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.058

0.105

0.176

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.077

0.233

0.000

0.000

0.077

0.000

0.058

0.000

10,630

0.147

0.238

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.266

0.255

[0.119]

[0.202]

0.267

0.301

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.289

0.301

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.086

0.081

[0.063]

[0.324]

[0.363]

0.313
[0.000]

0.602
[0.000]

[0.000]

0.061
[0.442]

0.059
[0.713]

[0.688]

0.226
[0.000]

0.450
[0.000]

[0.000]

5,314

10,629

[0.557]

[0.000]

[0.156]

Notes: Columns 1 through 3 shows means by intervention arm with the p-value (relative to the control arm) in
[square brackets]. Column 1 shows the control. Column 2 shows the Information Only arm (for the two equally-sized
pooled sub-treatments). Column 3 shows the Information Plus Assistance arms (weighted so that the two pooled
sub-treatments received equal weight). Column 4 reports the p-value of the difference between the Information Plus
Assistance and Information Only treatment arms. All outcomes are binary rates measured during the nine months
from the initial mail date. All p-values are based on heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. Callers are measured
for the relevant call number and are therefore mechanically zero for the control; see text for a description of the
adjusted caller rate.

45

Table 3: Behavioral Responses to “Information Only” Intervention with and without reminders

SNAP Enrollees

SNAP Applicants

SNAP Rejections among Applicants

Callers

Adjusted Callers

SNAP Applicants among Non-Callers

SNAP Applicants among Callers

SNAP Enrollees among Non-Callers

SNAP Enrollees among Callers

Observations (N)

Control

Information Only
Standard

Information Only
No-Postcard

P Value of Difference
(Column 2 vs 3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.058

0.077

0.233

0.000

0.000

0.077

0.000

0.058

0.000

10,630

0.112

0.092

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.151

0.120

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.224

0.216

[0.751]

[0.536]

0.278

0.212

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.016]

[0.001]

[0.777]

[0.000]

0.300

0.234

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.089

0.074

[0.079]

[0.593]

[0.071]

0.311
[0.000]

0.295
[0.000]

[0.524]

0.064
[0.284]

0.054
[0.492]

[0.172]

0.237
[0.000]

0.234
[0.000]

[0.921]

2,657

2,658

[0.000]

Notes: Columns 1 through 3 shows means by intervention arm with the p-value (relative to the control arm) in
[square brackets]. Column 1 shows the control. Column 2 shows the “standard” Information Only intervention (see
Appendix Figure A2; this “standard” intervention is was half of the sample shown in Table 2 column (3) for the pooled
Information Only analysis). Column 3 shows the results of the Information Only intervention without the reminder
postcard; the outreach materials are otherwise identical to those in Appendix Figure A2. Column 4 reports the
p-value of the difference between the standard Information Only intervention and the Information Only intervention
without the reminder postcard. All outcomes are binary rates measured during the nine months from the initial mail
date. All p-values are based on heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. Callers are measured for the relevant call
number and are therefore mechanically zero for the control; see text for a description of the adjusted caller rate.

46

Table 4: Enrollee Monthly Benefits and Predicted Benefits

Benefit Amount

Share $16 Benefit

Share $194 Benefit

Share $357 Benefit

Share Missing Benefit

Control

Information Only

Information Plus
Assistance

P Value of Difference
(Column 2 vs 3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

145.94

115.38
[0.000]

101.32
[0.000]

[0.013]

0.299
[0.000]

0.357
[0.000]

[0.012]

0.157
[0.131]

0.143
[0.009]

[0.421]

0.050
[0.681]

0.039
[0.115]

[0.285]

0.043
[0.025]

0.028
[0.000]

[0.139]

112.49
[0.000]

102.93
[0.000]

[0.086]

114.01
[0.000]

104.03
[0.000]

[0.068]

0.714
[0.038]

0.760
[0.000]

[0.036]

93.35
[0.000]

85.82
[0.000]

[0.134]

559

1,861

0.178

0.191

0.055

0.073

Predicted Benefit for Enrollees
w/ Actual Benefit

140.20

Predicted Benefit for All Enrollees

138.65

Share of Enrollees in Household Size of 1

Benefit Amount for Enrollees
in Household Size of 1

Observations (N)

0.657

116.97

613

Notes: Sample is individuals who enrolled in the 9 months after their initial mailing. Columns 1 through 3 shows
means by intervention arm with the p-value (relative to the control arm) in [square brackets] for SNAP enrollees.
Column 1 shows the control. Column 2 shows the Information Only arm (with the two equally-sized sub-treatments
pooled). Column 3 shows the Information Plus Assistance arms (weighted so that the two pooled sub-treatments
received equal weight). Column 4 reports the p-value of the difference between the Information Plus Assistance and
Information Only treatment arms. See text for a description of the predicted benefits. All p-values are based on
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. N reports the sample size of enrollees.

47

Table 5: Demographic and Health Characteristics: Applicants and Enrollees
Applicants

Enrollees

Means

Means

P Value

P Value

Control

Info Only

Info Plus
Assistance

Info Plus
Assistance vs
Info Only

Control

Info Only

Info Plus
Assistance

Info Plus
Assistance vs
Info Only

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

148.26

125.65
[0.000]

115.36
[0.000]

138.65
[0.037]

114.01
[0.000]

104.03
[0.000]

[0.068]

8,605
[0.517]

8,334
[0.300]

[0.781]

9,532
[0.661]

8,603
[0.208]

[0.459]

11.67
[0.331]

9.92
[0.018]

[0.166]

10.90
[0.058]

9.92
[0.008]

[0.467]

3,273
[0.128]

2,818
[0.022]

[0.442]

3,288
[0.064]

2,779
[0.011]

[0.461]

5.55
[0.094]

5.27
[0.006]

[0.383]

5.43
[0.019]

5.37
[0.005]

[0.875]

0.11
[0.001]

0.14
[0.000]

[0.042]

0.12
[0.005]

0.14
[0.000]

[0.085]

0.40
[0.983]

0.38
[0.232]

[0.250]

0.42
[0.446]

0.38
[0.444]

[0.104]

0.73
[0.005]

0.74
[0.000]

[0.554]

0.78
[0.004]

0.78
[0.001]

[0.958]

0.08
[0.103]

0.11
[0.577]

[0.011]

0.07
[0.011]

0.10
[0.833]

[0.004]

0.06
[0.141]

0.04
[0.000]

[0.012]

0.05
[0.242]

0.03
[0.002]

[0.067]

0.06
[0.385]

0.07
[0.066]

[0.459]

0.06
[0.374]

0.07
[0.028]

[0.310]

0.30
[0.022]

0.29
[0.017]

[0.704]

0.33
[0.009]

0.31
[0.026]

[0.348]

781

2,519

559

1,861

Panel A - Predicted Benefits
Predicted Benefits

Panel B - (Annual) Health Care Measures, 2015
Total Health Care Spending ($) b

Total Number of Visits and Days

Weighted Total Number of Visits and
Days
Number of Chronic Conditions

9,424

13.33

4,661

6.21

10,238

14.79

5,407

6.54

Panel C - Demographics
Share Age 80+

Male

Share White a

Share Black a

Share Primary Language not English

Share Living in Pittsburgh

0.06

0.41

0.67

0.10

0.08

0.05

Share Last Medicaid Spell Starting
before 2011

0.25

Observations (N)

817

0.07

0.39

0.71

0.11

0.06

0.05

0.26

613

Notes: Columns 1 - 3 and 5 - 7 show means by intervention arm with the p-value (relative to the control arm) in
[square brackets] for SNAP applicants who applied within 9 months of their initial mailing, and SNAP enrollees who
enrolled within 9 months of their initial mailing, respectively. Column 1 and 5 show the control. Column 2 and
6 show the Information Only arms (with the two equally-sized sub-treatments pooled); columns 3 and 7 show the
Information Plus Assistance arms (weighted so that the two pooled sub-treatments received equal weight). Columns
4 and 8 report the p-value of the difference between the Information Plus Assistance and Information Only treatment
arms. All p-values are based on heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.
a Omitted category is other or missing race.
b
Total spending is truncated at twice 99.5th percentile of study population, which is 371,620 (99.5th percentile in
study population is 185,810). Amounts greater than the threshold are set to missing.

48

