                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PRICE RIGIDITIES AND RELATIVE PPP

                                         Andres Blanco
                                         Javier Cravino

                                      Working Paper 24655
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24655


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2018




We thank Ariel Burstein, John Leahy, Andrei Levchenko and Matteo Maggiori along with our
discussant Kei-Mu Yi and seminar and workshop participants at several institutions for very
helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Wenting Song for superb research assistance.
Javier Cravino thanks the International Economics Section at Princeton University for its
hospitality and funding during part of this research. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Andres Blanco and Javier Cravino. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Price Rigidities and Relative PPP
Andres Blanco and Javier Cravino
NBER Working Paper No. 24655
May 2018
JEL No. F31,F41

                                          ABSTRACT

We measure the proportion of real exchange rate movements accounted for by cross-country
movements in relative reset prices (prices that changed since the previous period) using CPI
microdata for five countries. Relative reset prices account for almost the totality of the real
exchange rate movements. This is at odds with the predictions of most workhorse sticky price
models used to generate volatile and persistent real exchange rates. In these models relative reset
prices are sluggish because relative wages are either sluggish or mean revert quickly. We show
that models where movements in relative wages are persistent and track the nominal exchange
rate do replicate the empirical properties of both the real exchange rate and of relative reset
prices.


Andres Blanco
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
308 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
jablanco@umich.edu

Javier Cravino
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street, Lorch Hall 365B
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
jcravino@umich.edu
1     Introduction
Movements in real exchange rates –nominal exchange rates adjusted for relative inflation–
are large, persistent, and closely track movements in nominal rates, while cross-country
differences in inflation rates are small and stable. A classic explanation for these observa-
tions is that prices are sticky and thus respond sluggishly to shocks affecting the nominal
exchange rate. Since Chari et al. (2002), an extensive literature has evaluated this ex-
planation quantitatively using Sticky Price Open Economy (SPOE) models. Under some
extensions, these models have been successful in replicating the properties of the real
exchange rate observed in the data.
     This paper evaluates this explanation using a new real exchange rate decomposition.
In particular, we define the (log) real exchange rate between countries i and n as rerin,t ≡
pi,t + ein,t − pn,t , and decompose it into:

                        rerin,t = p̄i,t + ein,t − p̄n,t + [ pi,t − p̄i,t ] − [ pn,t − p̄n,t ].                  (1)
                                  |        {z        } |                   {z              }
                                          ≡ rerin,t                 ≡ rerin,t −rerin,t


Here p.,t and ein,t are the aggregate price indexes and the nominal exchange rate, and p̄.,t
are price indexes for the subsets of goods that adjusted prices between t − 1 and t.1 The
first term in this decomposition is what we label as the ‘reset exchange rate’, rerin,t . It mea-
sures the cross-country relative price, in a common currency, of the subset of goods that
adjusted between t − 1 and t. The second term captures cross-country differences in reset
prices relative to aggregate prices. The magnitude of these two terms informs whether
sticky prices are an important factor dampening the adjustment of prices to shocks affect-
ing the nominal exchange rate. If they are not, the distinction between reset and non-reset
prices would be irrelevant, and the first term should account for most of the real exchange
rate movements.2
    We evaluate this central prediction of SPOE models using the microdata that under-
lies the construction of the CPIs in Austria, Chile, Finland, Mexico and the UK. These
data contain monthly price quotes for uniquely defined products, sampled in specific
outlets, which can be traced through time. The combined dataset contains over 43 mil-
lion monthly price quotes for the 2006-2015 period. To our knowledge, this is the first
study combining CPI microdata from multiple countries to study the behavior of real ex-
change rates. An advantage of these data is that they cover almost the entire basket of
    1 Thereal exchange rate in equation (1) is thus an index that measures cumulative changes in relative
price levels across countries from a base year.
   2 Appendix E.3 discusses the alternative decomposition rer
                                                              in,t = [ p̄i,t − p̄n,t ] + [rerin,t + p̄n,t − p̄i,t ].




                                                          1
consumption goods and services.3 This is important for the study of price rigidities, as
the frequency of price changes varies significantly across different types of consumption
goods.4 In addition, the data span a long time period, which is important for studying
the persistence of the real exchange rate.
    We show that real exchange rate movements in the data are driven almost exclusively
by movements in the reset exchange rate. We compute changes in the real and the re-
set exchange rates at monthly, quarterly, semiannual and annual frequencies, and show
that for all our country-pairs and frequencies, the real and the reset exchange rates move
one for one with each other. This is despite the fact that reset prices are substantially
more volatile than average prices. The reason for this comovement is that the correlation
between relative reset inflation and changes in the nominal exchange rates is too small
to offset movements in the nominal rate. We show that we obtain similar results from
our decomposition when we focus on subsets of goods that are either tradable or non-
tradable, though reset exchange rates are somewhat less volatile for tradable goods.
    We then apply our decomposition to a wide class of models commonly used in the lit-
erature to study deviations from relative PPP. These models feature Calvo-style nominal
rigidities based on local currency pricing. We first analyze models where cross-country
relative wages expressed in a common currency are sluggish in equilibrium.5 This is a
common feature of models with complete markets and flexible wages, such as those in
Chari et al. (2002), Bergin and Feenstra (2001), Benigno (2004), Bouakez (2005), Steins-
son (2008), Carvalho and Nechio (2011), and Engel (2016). In this class of models, the
stochastic processes of the real and reset exchange rates depend on parameters govern-
ing: (i) the frequency of price changes, (ii) the persistence of the nominal exchange rate,
and (iii) the degree of real rigidities in price setting. While the models can generate large
and persistent real exchange rates movements, only a fraction of these movements arises
from movements in the reset exchange rate. Intuitively, reset prices largely depend on
wages, so models with sluggish relative wages cannot generate large movements in reset
exchange rates. We show that this central prediction holds in models with a large degree
of real rigidities, and to extensions that incorporate multiple sectors as in Carvalho and
Nechio (2011). We conclude that SPOE models with sluggish relative wages are inconsis-
tent with the observed real exchange rate decomposition.
   3 Changes  in final prices may not be a good reflection of changes in producer prices in the presence of
variable retail markups. Gopinath et al. (2011) show that differences in retail markups are not important in
generating real exchange rate movements.
   4 See Nakamura and Steinsson (2010) and Carvalho and Nechio (2011).
   5 Throughout the paper, we refer to relative wages expressed in a common currency simply as ‘relative

wages’. Relative wages are sluggish if nominal wages move to offset movements in the nominal exchange
rate. In contrast, relative wages move with the nominal exchange rate when nominal wages are sluggish.


                                                     2
    We then evaluate models where relative wages track the nominal exchange rate. We
focus on two types of models that have this property. First, we introduce nominal wage
rigidities into the complete-markets SPOE model. We show that even if relative wages
move almost one to one with the nominal exchange rate due to the wage rigidities, the
reset exchange rate does not. This is because the reset exchange rate depends on the
discounted sum of current and future relative wages. Since relative wages in models
with nominal wage rigidities mean revert quickly following a shock, the reset exchange
rate behaves much like in models with flexible wages.
    Finally, we evaluate a model where nominal wages are ‘disconnected’ from nominal
exchange rates, so that movements in relative wages are persistent and track the nominal
rate. Devereux and Engel (2002) showed that a SPOE model with incomplete markets,
deviations from UIP, and small wealth effects from changes in nominal exchange rate can
generate large exchange rate volatility that is disconnected from the rest of the economy.
Jeanne and Rose (2002) and Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) provide micro-founded models
where the UIP fails to hold. More recently, Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017) showed that incor-
porating UIP shocks along with mechanisms that mute the transmission of exchange rate
movements to prices in a DSGE model can help resolve many of the puzzles associated
with the exchange rate disconnect.6 We show that such models are closer to replicating
our empirical decomposition of the real exchange rate than models featuring complete
markets. In these models, shocks affecting the nominal exchange rate do not directly af-
fect nominal wages, and thus can generate movements in relative wages that are very
persistent. In this case, the reset exchange rate does move with the nominal exchange
rate and thus mirrors the real exchange rate.
    In the models that we consider, the marginal cost of producing value added is given by
the wage. In general, these two need not be equal if for example production uses physical
capital, requires working capital, or if there are decreasing returns in production, among
other factors. While incorporating all these ingredients into SPOE models is beyond the
scope of this paper, our analysis suggests that relative marginal costs that are persistent
and track the nominal exchange rate are needed to generate the observed movements in
relative reset prices. In addition, our measure of reset exchange rates can be seen as a
proxy for economy-wide relative marginal costs, which are hard to measure directly in
the data.7
   6 These  mechanisms are significant home bias, pricing to market, weak substitutability between home
and foreign goods, and monetary policy that stabilizes inflation. In early work, Kollmann (2005) showed
that the ’Mussa’ puzzle can be rationalized in a model with incomplete markets and UIP shocks in a context
of large home bias.
    7 See Gali et al. (2005) and the long literature that followed.




                                                    3
    Our paper is related to a large literature that studies large and persistent deviations
from relative PPP. Mussa (1986) argued that the observed volatility of the real exchange
rate favored models with nominal shocks and price rigidities, a view echoed by Rogoff
(1996). Engel (1999) showed that short run fluctuations in the real exchange rate are due
to changes in the cross-country relative price of tradables, rather than to changes in the
relative price of non-tradables. Betts and Devereux (2000) rationalized this finding in a
general equilibrium model where firms price to market and prices are sticky in the buyers’
currency. A more recent literature starting with Chari et al. (2002) quantitatively evaluates
whether SPOE models can generate volatile and persistent real exchange rates.8 Our main
contribution to this literature is to evaluate the mechanisms in these models through a
new decomposition of the real exchange rate applied to a new dataset of consumer prices
across countries.9 In doing so, we provide support to incomplete markets models driven
by shocks that affect international asset demand, such as those developed by Jeanne and
Rose (2002) and Gabaix and Maggiori (2015).
    Our paper is also related to the empirical literature that uses microdata to study ex-
change rate pass-through and deviations from the law of one price across countries, iso-
lating changes in relative prices that are not driven mechanically by nominal rigidities.
Gopinath et al. (2010) study pass-through into US import prices, and show that even
conditional on a price change, pass-through is only about 25 percent for firms pricing in
US dollars. Burstein and Jaimovich (2012) find evidence on the importance of pricing-
to-market using scanner data from a supermarket chain. They show that grocery prices
change frequently,10 so that their US-Canada real exchange rates measures are roughly
unchanged if they exclude products with no nominal price changes from their price in-
dexes. Boivin et al. (2012) use data from three online book sellers in Canada and the U.S.
to show that violations of the law of one price arise even for reset prices.11 Cavallo et
al. (2014) study deviations of the law of one price for online prices of identical goods
sold by four large global retailers. They show that deviations from the law of one price
for countries outside currency unions arise at the time goods are introduced. Relative
to these papers, our empirical results are based on a larger set of goods that by design
   8 See for example Bergin and Feenstra (2001),  Benigno (2004), Bouakez (2005), Steinsson (2008), Carvalho
and Nechio (2011) , and Engel (2016), among many others.
    9 In this sense, our paper complements Kehoe and Midrigan (2008), who show that real exchange rates

are more persistent in stickier sectors, though the observed cross-sectoral differences in persistence are hard
to reconcile quantitatively with the predictions of a multisector sticky price model.
  10 They report a weekly probability of price change of s 0.49.
  11 Gorodnichenko and Talavera (2017) argue that, relative to prices in regular stores, prices in online

markets exhibit stronger pass-through and faster convergence in response to movements of the nominal
exchange rate.



                                                      4
is representative of the universe of consumer prices, and our focus is on understanding
deviations from relative PPP. Our empirical results show that changes in the aggregate
real exchange rate are almost entirely driven by changes in reset exchange rate. We show
that this observation informs about mechanisms at work in workhorse SPOE models.
    Finally, our paper is also related to Bils et al. (2012) who compute an alternative mea-
sure of ‘reset inflation’. Their measure mimics the methodology through which Zillow
estimates prices for unsold houses, which involves imputing the reset price changes ex-
hibited by price changers to all items, those changing and those not. Our reset price in-
dexes measure cumulative log inflation from a base year for the subset of goods showing
a change in price relative to the previous month. We measure reset inflation by comput-
ing changes in these price indexes. Kryvtsov and Carvalho (2016) compute yet another
but related measure of reset inflation and suggest that it is an important driver of aggre-
gate inflation. In models with Calvo pricing, all these measures of reset inflation coincide,
capturing changes in the reset price in the Calvo model.12 Relative to these papers, we
show that relative reset inflation across countries does not offset movements in nominal
exchange rates as most workhorse SPOE models of the real exchange rate would predict.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a partial equilib-
rium SPOE model to derive intuition on the relationship between the real and the reset
exchange rates. Section 3 presents the data and our empirical methodology. Section 4
presents our empirical results. Finally, Section 5 compares the data to quantitative SPOE
models, and Section 6 concludes.


2      A simple SPOE model
Before presenting our data, we describe a partial equilibrium sticky price open economy
model to build intuition on the relation between the real and the reset exchange rates.


Setup: Consider a one-period world economy consisting of two ex-ante symmetric coun-
tries indexed by i and n. The world economy can experience one of infinitely many shocks
or states, s. In each country, there is a final good that is produced by aggregating a contin-
uum of intermediate goods. Using lower case variables to denote logs, we write the price
of the final good in country i as:

                                     pi (s) ≡ µpii (s) + [1 − µ] pni (s) ,
    12 We   discuss the relation between these measures in Appendix E.2.



                                                       5
where pni (s) is the average price across all the intermediate goods produced in country
n and sold in country i, expressed in the currency of country i (i.e. the price of imports in
country i). The parameter µ governs the share of domestic goods in the price index.
   Intermediate goods are produced by a continuum of monopolistically competitive
producers. We introduce price stickiness by assuming that only a fraction 1 − θ of these
producers can observe the realization of the state before setting their prices. These pro-
ducers set the following price denominated in the buyer’s currency:

                                     p̄in (s) = ρ̄ + wi (s) + ein (s) ,

where ρ̄ is a markup, wi (s) is the marginal cost for firms in country i, which for now
we assume is given by the wage, and ein (s) is the nominal exchange rate expressed in
units of currency n per-unit of currency i.13 The remaining producers must set prices in
the buyer’s currency before observing the realization of the state. The price set by these
producers is

                                               pe = ρ̄ + we ,

where we denotes the expected wage.14


Relative prices: We can now write the reset and the real exchange rates in this economy
as functions of relative wages and the nominal exchange rate. The reset exchange rate is
defined as:

                                 rerin (s) ≡ p̄i (s) + ein (s) − p̄n (s) ,

with p̄i (s) ≡ µ p̄ii (s) + [1 − µ] p̄ni (s). Substituting we obtain,

                                                             w
                                     rerin (s) = [2µ − 1] rerin (s) ,                                    (2)

          w ( s ) ≡ w ( s ) + e ( s ) − w ( s ) denotes relative wages expressed in a common
where rerin          i         in         n
currency. Finally, noting that the average price set by producers from country i selling in
country n is pin (s) = [1 − θ ] p̄in (s) + θ pe , we can write the real exchange rate as:

                                                                       w
                           rerin (s) = θein (s) + [1 − θ ] [2µ − 1] rerin (s) ,                          (3)
  13 We relax the assumptions of constant markups and on the cost function in Section 5.
  14 We omit country subscripts since countries are symmetric before the state is realized (and, for the same
reason, set the expected log-exchange rate equal to zero).


                                                     6
where the equality follows from the definitions of rerin , pi , p̄i and from equation (2).


Discussion: Equation (3) shows the determinants of the real exchange rate. Since some
prices are set before the realization of the state, the real exchange rate mechanically tracks
the nominal exchange rate. This is the primary mechanism driving real exchange rates in
the SPOE models with sluggish relative wages described in the introduction. On the other
hand, prices that are set after the realization of the state track nominal wages. Hence, the
real exchange rate also moves with the nominal exchange rate if relative wages move with
the nominal exchange rate.15 If the fraction of firms that observe the state is small, (large
θ), the effect of relative wages on the real exchange rate is small.
    Equation (2) shows the determinants of the reset exchange rate. Compared to the real
exchange rate, the reset exchange rate is more sensitive to movements in relative wages.
In particular, if relative wages are constant, rerin  w = 0, then the reset exchange rate is

constant. In the next section we’ll show that in the data rerin and rerin move one to one
with each other. This implies that models that generate real exchange rate movements
through price stickiness with little movements in relative wages will fail to match the
empirical decomposition between real and reset exchange rates. In Section 5, we show
that this intuition prevails even in quantitative DSGE models featuring a large degree of
real rigidities.


3       Data
This section describes the CPI microdata from Austria, Chile, Finland, Mexico and the
United Kingdom. It then describes how the datasets are harmonized and used to compute
the empirical counterparts of the real and reset exchange rates defined in the previous
section.


3.1      Data sources and description
Our analysis combines the microdata that underly the construction of the Consumer Price
Indexes in five countries: Austria, Chile, Finland, Mexico and the UK. We describe the
sources of the data below.


Austria: The microdata used for the construction of the Austrian CPI was obtained from
Statistics Austria. The dataset spans the 2006-2015 period, and contains about 44,000 el-
    15 Section   5 describes different models where relative wages move with the nominal exchange.


                                                        7
ementary price quotes in the average month. In total, there are roughly six million price
quotes covering about 95 percent of Austrian non-shelter consumption expenditures in
the dataset. The remaining expenditures correspond to the shelter portion of the Aus-
trian CPI, for which Statistics Austria only reports price indexes. Each elementary price
quote corresponds to a unique product sampled in a specific outlet, and contains informa-
tion on the date, the outlet, and the units in which prices are quoted. For confidentiality
reasons the raw dataset has been anonymized with respect to product brands and outlet
identifiers. The majority of the price quotes are sampled from individual outlets across
20 major Austrian cities. For about 40 percent of the product categories, price quotes are
collected centrally.


Chile: We obtain the microdata used to compute the Chilean CPI from the National
Institute of Statistics (INE). This dataset only spans the 2010-2015 period, and contains
over 90,000 price quotes per month. There are over 7.1 million elementary price quotes
over the period, representing 80 percent of the CPI basket in Chile. Each elementary
price quote corresponds to a specific product sampled in a specific outlet, and contains
information on the date, the outlet, the units in which prices are quoted, and the method
used for the data collection. The price quotes are sampled across the regional capitals
and major cites across 15 Chilean regions. As in the other datasets, the data has been
anonymized with respect to product brands and outlet identifiers.


Finland: The microdata used to compute the CPI in Finland is collected by Statistics
Finland. The dataset spans the 2006-2015 period, and contains over 50,000 price quotes
per month. There are over 6 million elementary price quotes in total representing 66
percent of the non-shelter CPI basket in Finland. Items related to housing and telephone
calls are available in index form only and are excluded from our analysis. The remaining
elementary price quote corresponds to a specific product sampled in a specific outlet, and
contains information on the date, the outlet, the units in which prices are quoted, and the
method used for the data collection. The majority of the price quotes are sampled from
individual outlets across six major Finnish regions. The data has been anonymized with
respect to product brands and outlet identifiers.


Mexico: The microdata used to compute the Mexican CPI are collected by the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI). Since January 1994, these data are pub-
lished monthly in the Diario Oficial de la Federacion (DOF), the official bulletin of the
Mexican government. Each elementary price quote in the DOF represents a unique product-


                                            8
outlet combination that can be traced through time. As with our other datasets, for each
elementary product we observe its monthly price, the city in which it is sold and the units
in which prices are quoted. The data for the 2006-2015 period are sampled from 46 Mex-
ican cities and contain about 85,000 monthly price quotes, representing about 84 percent
of consumption expenditures in the average month. The remaining expenditures corre-
spond to shelter and car insurance, which we exclude from our analysis since for these
items the INEGI only reports aggregated price indexes. For the same reasons, we also
exclude computers for the 2011-2016 sub-period. The DOF also publishes a list of prod-
ucts that are added to the CPI basket due to product substitutions or changes in the set of
outlets sampled by the INEGI. Earlier versions of this dataset has been used previously
by Ahlin and Shintani (2007), Gagnon (2009) and Cravino and Levchenko (2017).


United Kingdom: The microdata used to compute the CPI in the UK are collected by
the United Kingdom’s Office for National Statistics (ONS). The product-level price quotes
and item-level price indexes used for the construction of the CPI were made publicly
available in September of 2012. This data has been previously used by Kryvtsov and
Vincent (2014) and Blanco (2017). We use the portion of these data that spans the 2006-
2015 period, containing almost 14 million price quotes. For most item categories, the ONS
collects price quotes of individual products by sampling outlets around 150 locations in
the UK. Each elementary price quote collected through this method represents a unique
product, sampled in a particular outlet. Prices for the remaining CPI items are collected
centrally by the ONS with no field work. Such items include shelter, university tuition
fees, rail fares, and other services. Unfortunately, the ONS only provides item-level price
indexes for these items.16 Since observing individual price trajectories is central for the
study of reset prices, we exclude these items from our analysis. We do include educational
and other services, which are reported in index form but only change once per year.
    For a small subset of items and regions, the ONS does not report outlet identifiers
to comply with confidentiality guidelines. In such cases, there could be multiple price
quotes with the same product-outlet identifier in a given month in the dataset. In most of
these cases, there is no variation in prices that share an identifier in a given month.17 For
the few cases in which we do observe different prices with the same identifier, we use in-
formation provided by the ONS on cumulative inflation at the unique good level and the
  16 For some of these items, such as housing rent, price indexes are obtained from alternative surveys, such

as the household survey. For most items, including rail fares and tuition fees, price indexes are computed by
aggregating price-quotes that are centrally collected the ONS. Unfortunately, the ONS does not disseminate
these quotes.
  17 See Blanco (2017) for a detailed description.




                                                     9
algorithm described in Appendix A.2 to recover: i) a unique price-trajectory associated to
a product-outlet pair, and ii) a weight for each price trajectory reflecting the frequency of
each price under a particular identifier.


3.2    Harmonization and cleaning
As described above, statistical agencies in our sample of countries share similar method-
ologies for collecting consumer prices. The datasets do differ in terms of the number and
the composition of the products sampled. In addition, in each country we had to exclude
different product categories in cases where only aggregated price indexes were available
(the most important category, which we exclude in all five datasets, is shelter). Table 1
and Appendix Tables A1 and A2 summarize these differences in our final sample. The
datasets also differ in other aspects, such as the treatments of temporary sales, product
substitutions, and updates to the basket of goods sampled, which we describe below.


                            Table 1: Summary Statistics, CPI Microdata

                                       Austria        Chile       Finland         Mexico           UK

  Number of price quotes
   Total                              5,200,658     7,104,572     6,075,259     10,180,732      13,845,685
   Average month                       43,339        98,675        50,627         84,839         115,381

  Number of item categories              779           352           487            298             697

  % of non-shelter CPI                    95            80            66             85             74

Note: This table summarizes our final sample of the microdata used for the construction of the CPI in
Austria, Chile, Finland, Mexico and the UK. Each price quote corresponds to a specific product-outlet com-
bination. ‘Item categories’ are the most dissagregated categories for which the statistical agencies construct
price indexes and provide CPI weights.


Temporary sales: Temporary sales are flagged in the UK, Austria, Finland and Chile,
but not in the Mexican data. To maintain consistency across datasets, we create our own
indicator for temporary sales by defining them as a price change that is reverted after one
or two months. In our baseline calculations, we do not consider temporary sales as price
changes (that is, we replace sale prices with regular prices).




                                                     10
Planned changes to the CPI basket: Statistical agencies periodically update the basket
of goods that comprise the CPI to reflect changes in expenditure patterns or the introduc-
tion of new products. In the UK, updates to the CPI basket are introduced every February.
In Austria, the CPI basket was updated every January since January 2011. In Finland the
basket was updated in January 2011. Because some new products are introduced to the
CPI basket with each update, the number of price changes that we can compute in the
month of an update is slightly smaller than in the typically month. Appendix Table A3
summarizes the share of new products that are introduced after each update. In the UK,
in the average update month 13 percent of the price quotes correspond to new products
(relative to 3 percent of new products in the average month). In Austria, in the average
update month only 3 percent of the price quotes correspond to new products. In practice,
the only important update to the Austrian basket is on January 2011, where about 12 per-
cent of the products are new. In our main calculations, we treat update months in these
countries as regular months (the caveat is that we cannot compute price changes for the
new products introduced in the update, so the effective sample in these months is slightly
smaller).
    In Mexico, the CPI basket was updated in January 2011, and in Chile the basket was
updated in 2014. In these two cases, all the product-store identifiers were changed be-
tween December and January of the update year. This means that we cannot compute
inflation between these months with our microdata. In our baseline results, we set the
aggregate and the reset inflation in these two months equal to zero.


Forced substitutions and outliers: In a given month, price inspectors may not be able to
sample some elementary-products in the basket due to unanticipated reasons. Such rea-
sons include changes in product characteristics, products that get discontinued, and in
rare cases outlets that shut down. In such cases, statistical agencies typically sample an-
other product which they consider to be a close substitute to the original product. Forced
substitutions are flagged in all five datasets. Most of these substitutions are flagged as
’comparable’, indicating that the new product is sufficiently close to the one being substi-
tuted. Statistical agencies include changes in prices arising from these substitutions in the
CPI. Some substitutions are flagged as ’non-comparable’, and changes in prices arising
from these type of substitutions are excluded from the CPI. To keep our results com-
parable to the official inflation numbers, we treat non-comparable substitutions as new
products. Finally, to account for rare month-to-month price movements that may arise
from coding errors in the datasets we exclude observations with the largest percentile
of log-price changes in absolute value, following Alvarez et al. (2016) and Kryvtsov and


                                             11
Carvalho (2016).

Weighting and aggregation: The statistical agencies in the UK, Austria, Finland, Mexico
and Chile divide products into Item categories, similarly to how the BLS divides prod-
ucts into ‘Entry Level Items’ (ELIs) for the construction of the US CPI. These are the most
dissagregated categories for which the agencies construct price indexes and provide CPI
weights. From now on we refer to these detailed categories as simply as ‘Items’. The
categorization of products into Items varies across the countries in our sample. For in-
stance, Mexico is the only country that assigns an Item for ’Tortillas’, while Austria is
the only country that assigns an item for ‘Hazelnut Cuts’. In contrast, all countries as-
sign an Item to ‘Beer’. All Items can be grouped into broader categories following the
international standards in the ‘Classification of Individual Consumption According to
Purpose’ (COICOP). In the example above, ‘Tortillas’ and ’Hazelnut Cuts’ are both part
of the COICOP -class category ‘Bread and cereals’, which in turn is part of the broader
COICOP -group category ‘Food’. The number of items groups in each country is listed in
Table 1. In what follows, we use the country-specific Item weights to aggregate the price
quotes from the microdata into measures of inflation at the class-level of the COICOP clas-
sification. We then compute real exchange rates and relative prices for each class-level of
the COICOP classification and aggregate up using a Fisher formula as described below.


3.3   Computing real and reset exchange rates
We now describe how we use the microdata to compute real and reset exchange rates.
To be consistent with the theory in Section 2, we compute inflation between two consec-
utive months as the change in the average log price for the set of goods that continue
in the sample for the two months. We do so following the procedures used to compute
aggregate inflation in the UK.
    First, we normalize the price trajectories in our data to construct elementary-product
level price indexes. In particular, for each product ω, we construct a price index defined
as:
                               h                  i
                            log Pι (ω ) /Pι (ω )            i f t0 = Jan 2006
                                  n,t       n,t0
               pιn,t (ω ) ≡     h                  i                              .     (4)
                            log Pι (ω ) /Pι (ω ) + pι
                                  n,t       n,t0        n,t0 i f t 0 6 = Jan 2006

Here t0 is the first month in which product ω appears in our data. Pn,t  ι ( ω ) and Pι
                                                                                      n,t0 ( ω )
are the raw prices in country n of product ω belonging to Item category ι, at dates t and t0 .
pιn,t0 is the price index for item category ι, normalized to take a value of zero on January

                                              12
2006. Equation (4) defines log price indexes that measure cumulative inflation between
month t and January 2006, the first month in our sample. For a product that is introduced
to the CPI basket in the middle of the sample, the log price index is normalized so that it
takes the value of the Item-level index in the month that the product is introduced (so that
it captures the official cumulative inflation for the item category between t0 and January
2006). In what follows, we take averages of these measures of cumulative inflation across
different set of products.18
    We construct Item-level price indexes as simple averages of the product-level price
indexes in each Item category. That is, for each Item category ι we compute a price index
given by:

                                                  1
                                     pιn,t =
                                                 Ωιn,t
                                                                ∑ι       pιn,t (ω ) ,                     (5)
                                                              ω ∈Ωn,t


where Ωιn,t and Ωιn,t are the set and the number of products in item category ι that are in
the sample at dates t and t − 1. Similarly, we compute a reset price index for each category
as:

                                                  1
                                     p̄ιn,t =
                                                 Ω̄ιn,t
                                                                ∑ι       pιn,t (ω ) ,                     (6)
                                                              ω ∈Ω̄n,t


where Ω̄ιn,t and Ω̄ιn,t are the set and the number of products in item ι for which pιn,t (ω ) 6=
pιn,t−1 (ω ).
     The Item-level price indexes defined in equations (5) and (6) are hard to compare di-
rectly across countries, since each country has its own classification for the Item cate-
gories. To compute real exchange rates, we thus aggregate the Item level prices (5) and
(6) at the class-level of the COICOP classification, and compute ’COICOP-class’ level in-
dexes,

                                             sιn,t                                sιn,t
                                         ∑                                   ∑
                                 j                    j             j
                                pn,t =         j
                                                     pn,t ;        p̄n,t =         j
                                                                                       p̄ιn,t .           (7)
                                         ι∈ j sn,t                           ι∈ j sn,t

        j           j                                                                                 j
Here pn,t and p̄n,t are price indexes for COICOP-class category j, and sιn,t and sn,t ≡
∑ι∈ j sιn,t are the official weights of item category ι and COICOP-class category j in country
n0 s CPI. Since the definition of the COICOP-class categories are harmonized internation-
  18 Kryvtsov   and Carvalho (2016) use an alternative normalization for their measure of reset inflation. In
particular, instead of normalizing by the initial prices of the elementary product, they normalize all prices
relative to an item-strata level mean.


                                                              13
       j                j
ally, pn,t and p̄n,t are comparable across countries.
    To compute real exchange rates we always use the UK as the base country, and obtain
bilateral nominal exchange rates between the Euro area-UK, Mexico-UK and Chile-UK
from the OECD. We construct a log-index for the bilateral nominal exchange rate as

                                                      eiUK,t ≡ log [ EiUK,t /EiUK,Jan06 ] ,

where EiUK,t is the bilateral nominal exchange rate, expressed in terms of pounds per
domestic currency. We then compute real exchange rates for each COICOP-class category
for which the microdata is available in the two countries as

                                                                j          j                j
                                                            rerin,t ≡ pi,t + ein,t − pn,t ,

and

                                                                j          j                j
                                                            rerin,t ≡ p̄i,t + ein,t − p̄n,t .

Finally, we aggregate across all COICOP-level categories to compute the economy-wide
real and reset exchange rates:

                                                           ∑ sin,t rerin,t ;                ∑ sin,t rerin,t ,
                                                                j      j                            j   j
                                               rerin,t =                        rerin,t =                       (8)
                                                            j                                   j

                               j       j
             j               si,t +sn,t
where       sin,t   ≡              j       j    is the average of country i and country n0 s weight in COICOP
                            ∑ j si,t +sn,t
category j, scaled so that the weights add up to 1.19 Note that by construction, these
indexes are zero in January 2006, and reflect cumulative changes relative to January 2006
at other dates.


Comparison with official statistics Before conducting our empirical analysis, we eval-
uate the representativeness of our data by comparing it with official inflation statistics.
With this in mind, we compute aggregate price indexes for each country in our sample
using our microdata, according to pn,t = ∑ι s̃ιn,t pιn,t , where s̃ιn,t ≡ sιn,t / ∑ι sιn,t are country
specific item-level weights that are based on the official weights and are rescaled to add
up to 1 (see footnote 19). Note that, in contrast with our measures presented above, these
formulas use weights that are country-specific (instead of country-pair-specific), and are
  19 The scaling is necessary since the items in our sample represent a fraction of total CPI expenditures (see

Table 1).


                                                                               14
used only in this section with the purpose of evaluating the quality of our data. We com-
pute aggregate inflation from the microdata by taking changes in these price indexes. The
resulting inflation may differ from that reported by official sources because (i) our data
does not cover 100% of CPI expenditures (see Table 1), and (ii) the formulas we use to
compute inflation differ from those used by national statistical offices.
    Appendix Figure A1 compares aggregate inflation computed from the microdata to
the official inflation series in each of the countries in our sample. The figure shows that
our microdata mimics the official inflation extremely well in all countries. We conclude
that despite differences in methodologies and coverage, the inflation and real exchange
rate measures we compute from the microdata are representative of the measures com-
puted from official data.


Changes in aggregate and reset prices Appendix Table A2 reports the average fre-
quency of price changes in each COICOP 2 sector for each of the countries in our sample.
On average, in a given month, the fraction of prices that change is 16 percent in the UK, 17
percent in Austria, and 23 percent in Finland. This is in line with the average frequency of
0.21 reported by Nakamura and Steinsson (2010) for the United States.20 Prices in Mexico
and Chile adjust more frequently, in line with the evidence in Gagnon (2009).
    We conclude this section by comparing our measures of inflation for aggregate and
reset prices. To do so, we first compute aggregate reset prices in each country according
to p̄n,t = ∑ι s̃ιn,t p̄ιn,t . Figure A2 plots monthly changes in aggregate and reset and price
indexes, summary statistics are presented in Table 2. As expected, reset inflation is sub-
stantially more volatile than aggregate inflation. The ratio of the standard deviation of
reset inflation to the standard deviation of aggregate inflation is 5 for UK, 4.5 for Austria,
and 3.2 for Finland. In Mexico and Chile this ratio is ‘only’ about 2.5. This is not surpris-
ing since, as summarized in Table A2, prices adjust more frequently in Mexico and Chile
than in Austria, Finland and the UK.
  20 The median frequency of price changes is lower than this, both in our countries and in the US. Our

quantitative models are all calibrated to match the weighted average duration of price spells.




                                                  15
             Table 2: Empirical properties of aggregate inflation and reset inflation

                                 Austria         Chile        Finland         Mexico           UK

         Relative st. dev.         4.57           2.42           3.29           2.50          5.03
         Correlation               0.44           0.56           0.54           0.59          0.71

Note: ’Relative st. dev.’ is the ratio of the standard deviation of monthly reset inflation to the standard
deviation of monthly inflation, given by σ∆ p̄i /σ∆pi . ’Correlation’ is the coefficient of correlation between
monthly aggregate inflation and reset monthly inflation.




4       Empirical results
This section conducts an empirical decomposition of the real exchange rates according
to equation (1). Figure 1 plots cumulative changes in real exchange rates, reset exchange
rates, and in the difference between these two for each country relative to the UK. The
figure shows that real exchange rate movements are driven almost exclusively by move-
ments in the reset exchange rate in each of the country-pairs in our sample. In particular,
movements in the reset exchange rate are as large and are strongly correlated to those in
real exchange rates. In contrast, the difference between these two is much less volatile
and almost uncorrelated to the real exchange rate. In fact, the cumulative change in this
difference is centered around zero, while sharp movements in the real exchange rate are
persistent.
    Figure 2 compares movements in the real exchange rates (x-axis) to changes in the re-
set exchange rates (y-axis), for changes computed at monthly, quarterly, semiannual and
annual frequencies. We pool all countries-pairs into each figure, so that each point in a
figure represents a country pair in a given month/quarter/semester/year.21 To facilitate
the comparison across country pairs, we normalize all changes by twice standard devi-
ation of the real exchange rate.22 The figure shows that the changes in the real and the
reset exchange rate always line up around the 45 degree line,23 showing that the changes
in these two variables go one to one with each other, independently of the frequency at
which these changes are computed.
    21 For
         this figure we include all possible country pairs in our sample. We do not plot individual figures
for each country pair to conserve space, thought the decomposition looks similar for each country-pair.
  22 This normalization is for presentation purposes only, so that most circles lie in the [-1,1] interval.
  23 The blue line plotted in the figure is a fitted line, almost indistinguishable from the 45 degree line.




                                                      16
                 Figure 1: Empirical decomposition of the real exchange rate
                         (a) Austria-UK                                            (b) Mexico-UK

                                           Real
                                           Reset                    0.2
   0.3                                     Real minus reset


   0.2
                                                                      0

   0.1

                                                                   −0.2
     0


  −0.1
                                                                   −0.4

    2006          2009              2012            2015             2006   2009             2012   2015
                         (a) Finland-UK                                            (b) Chile-UK


                                                                    0.2
   0.3

                                                                    0.1
   0.2


   0.1                                                                0


     0
                                                                   −0.1

  −0.1


    2006          2009             2012             2015             2006   2009            2012    2015


Note: ‘Real’ and ‘Reset’ refer to the real and the reset exchange rates reset, defined in equation (8). The
figure plots cumulative changes relative to January 2006 for Austria-UK, Mexico-UK and Finland-UK, and
cumulative changes since January 2010 for Chile UK.




                                                              17
                         Figure 2: Changes in real vs. reset exchange rates
                             (a) Monthly                                       (b) Quarterly

             1                                                 1



           0.5                                               0.5
 ∆rer t




             0                                                 0



          −0.5                                              −0.5



           −1                                                −1
                 −1   −0.5         0         0.5   1               −1   −0.5         0         0.5    1
                             (c) Semianual                                      (d) Annual

             1                                                 1



           0.5                                               0.5
 ∆rer t




             0                                                 0



          −0.5                                              −0.5



           −1                                                −1
                 −1   −0.5        0          0.5   1               −1   −0.5        0          0.5    1
                                 ∆rert                                             ∆rert


Note: The figure plots changes in real exchange rates (x-axis) and changes in reset exchange rates (y-axis)
computed at monthly, quarterly, semiannual and annual frequencies. Changes in real and reset exchange
rate are both normalized by two times the standard deviation of the change in the bilateral real exchange
rate. Each circle represent a change for a country pair. A fitted line is depicted in solid blue.




                                                       18
Understanding reset exchange rate movements We now evaluate the sources of co-
movement between the reset and real exchange rates. As documented by Mussa (1986),
real exchange rates track nominal exchange rates because movements in relative inflation
rates are small. Table 3 shows that in our data, relative inflation rates are indeed far less
volatile than nominal exchange rates. The standard deviation of relative price changes is
between 0.09 and 0.21 of the standard deviation of nominal exchange rate changes when
computed at a monthly frequency, and 0.1-0.26 when computed at a yearly frequency.
    In contrast Table 3 shows that the volatility of relative reset inflation is sizable, even
relative to the observed changes in the nominal exchange rate. For the Austria-UK pair,
the standard deviation of the monthly relative reset inflation is 0.66 times the standard
deviation of the monthly nominal exchange rate changes, and for the Finland-UK pair this
number is 0.79. This is three times the standard deviation of relative aggregate inflation.
Even at a yearly frequency, the standard deviation of relative reset inflation is 50 percent
larger than that of aggregate relative inflation. Why does the reset exchange rate comove
with the nominal rate? The answer can be gleaned from the second panel of Table 3,
which shows that changes in relative reset prices are uncorrelated to nominal exchange
rate changes at the monthly frequency. That is, while relative reset prices move more than
relative prices, the correlation between relative reset price changes and nominal exchange
rates is still too small to offset movements in the nominal rate.

                      Table 3: Relative inflation and relative reset inflation
     Relative           Austria-UK            Chile-UK             Finland-UK            Mexico-UK
     to ∆e↓          πi − πn π̄i − π̄n    πi − πn π̄i − π̄n     πi − πn π̄i − π̄n     πi − πn π̄i − π̄n

     Std. Dev.
      Monthly          0.17       0.66      0.16       0.67       0.21       0.79       0.09      0.37
      Quarterly        0.17       0.22      0.19       0.31       0.21       0.31       0.10      0.16
      Yearly           0.10       0.14      0.26       0.32       0.14       0.18       0.16      0.20

     Correlation
      Monthly          0.13      0.12       -0.13      -0.12      0.08      0.10        0.16      -0.08
      Quarterly       -0.02      -0.14      -0.34      -0.38      0.18      0.04        0.26      0.11
      Yearly          -0.61      -0.59      -0.56      -0.61      0.02      -0.14       0.32      0.17

Note: ‘Std. dev.’ is the ratio of the standard deviation of relative inflation and relative reset inflation to
the change in the nominal exchange rate. ‘Correlation’ is the coefficient of correlation between relative
inflation (or relative reset inflation) and the change in the nominal exchange rate. Relative inflation rates
are computed as πi − πn ≡ ∆rerin,t − ∆ein,t and π̄i − π̄n ≡ ∆rerin,t − ∆ein,t , where rerin,t and rerin,t are
defined in equation (8).



                                                     19
Differences across tradeable and non-tradeable goods We conclude this section by
evaluating whether our decomposition looks different for alternative subsets of goods.
We focus here in the distinction between tradeable and non-tradeable goods. To do so,
we classify each class-level COICOP category into tradable and non-tradable following
the classification in Berka et al., (forthcoming). We then separately aggregate the trade-
able and non-tradeable categories when computing the aggregate exchange rates defined
in equation (8).
    Appendix Figure A3 reports the changes in the reset vs. the real exchange rates at
different frequencies, computed separately for tradeable and non-tradeable goods. The
figures shows that relation between the real the reset exchange is somewhat less volatile
for tradable than for tradable goods. However, both for tradables and non-tradables the
relative standard deviation of the reset vs. the real exchange rate changes is always close
to one. Thus, the partition between tradable and non-tradables does not alter our conclu-
sions from the previous sections. For both types of goods, real exchange rates are almost
entirely driven by reset exchange rates.


5      Quantitative SPOE models
This section describes various SPOE models that the literature has used to study the joint
dynamics of the nominal and the real exchange rates. It then evaluates their implications
for the real exchange rate decomposition in equation (1). The models that we evaluate
share a pricing block that describes how firms facing nominal rigidities set prices given
demand and costs. The general equilibrium structure differs across models. We start
by analyzing a class of models where relative wages are sluggish or revert quickly in
equilibrium.24 We then analyze a model where shocks driving the nominal exchange rate
do not directly affect nominal wages, so that relative wages in a common currency move
with the nominal exchange rate.


5.1      SPOE models: pricing block
We start by describing the pricing block of the models considered in this section. The
pricing block describes how producers facing nominal rigidities set prices given demand
and costs, and will allow us to write real and reset exchange rates as functions of relative
wages and the nominal exchange rate. We allow for two sources of real rigidities that
    24 Many of the models in the literature fit into this category, including, Bergin and Feenstra (2001), Benigno

(2004), Bouakez (2005), Steinsson (2008), Carvalho and Nechio (2011) and Engel (2016).


                                                        20
the literature has used to generate persistent real exchange rates. We will study a world
economy consisting of two countries, i and n, each inhabited by a producer of final goods
and a continuum of monopolistic intermediate producers indexed by ω ∈ [0, 2].

Final goods producers:      The final good in country i, Yi,t , is produced with according to:

                                                                              ξ
                                 Yi,t = [µYii,t + [1 − µ]Yni,t ] ξ −1 ,                            (9)
                                                          
                                                Yni,t (ω )
                                        Z
                                   1= Ψ                      dω.                                  (10)
                                                  Yni,t

Here Yni,t (ω ) denotes the quantity of intermediate good ω produced in country n and
consumed in country i, µ is the share of domestic goods in absorption in the symmetric
steady state, and ξ is the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods.
Ψ ( x ) is a Kimball (1995) aggregator. In what follows, we adopt the specification of
                                                                             γ
Klenow and Willis (2007) for Ψ ( x ) that yields Ψ0−1 ( x ) = [1 − φx ] φ . Under this spec-
ification, the elasticity of demand for good ω depends its price relative to the price of
                                ∂logΨ0−1 ( x )      γ
its competitors, that is ε ≡ − ∂logx           = 1−φlog (x)
                                                            . This is constant and equal to γ as
φ → 0, and increasing in x if φ > 0. Thus, the parameter φ controls the degree of strategic
complementarities in price setting.

Intermediate good producers: Intermediate producers behave as monopolistic com-
petitors and set prices as in Calvo (1983). Importantly, producers set prices in the cur-
rency of the country where they sell. The probability that a producer can change its price
in any period is given by 1 − θ p . The production function for intermediate goods is

                             Yni,t (ω ) = āNni,t (ω )1−ᾱ Xni,t (ω )ᾱ ,                         (11)

with
                                           Z       1                  η −1
                                                                                    η −η 1
                            Nni,t (ω ) =                nni,t (ω, h)     η    dh              ,   (12)
                                                0


and ā ≡ ᾱᾱ [1 − ᾱ]1−ᾱ . Here Nni,t (ω ) is a labor bundle, and Xni,t (ω ) and nni,t (ω, h) are
the quantities of intermediate inputs and of labor of type h used to produce good ω in
country n to serve market i. ᾱ is the share of intermediate inputs in production, which is
another source of real rigidities in the model: the cost faced by producers depend on all
other prices in the economy.
   The profit maximizing price for an intermediate producer that gets to adjust prices

                                                         21
satisfies:

                                         ∞
                                  (                                                               )
                                        Θi,t+k j
                                                                             
                                                     P̄in,t
             P̄in,t   = arg max Et ∑           θp                1−ᾱ ᾱ
                                                              − Wi,t +k Pi,t+k Yin,t+ j ( P̄ni,t ) .   (13)
                                   k =0
                                         Θ i,t      Ein,t + k

      Θ
Here Θi,t+k is country i’s nominal discount factor between dates t and t + k, Ein,t+k is the
          i,t
nominal exchange rate, expressed in units of currency n per-unit of currency i, Wi,t and
Pi,t are the prices of the labor bundle and of the final good in country i, and Yin,t ( P̄ni,t ) is
the demand function associated with the aggregator (10).


Real and reset exchange rates in partial equilibrium: We now characterize the joint
process of the real and the reset exchange rates as functions of relative wages and the
nominal exchange. We continue with our notation from the previous section and use
lower case to denote the log of a variable, and denote relative wages in a common cur-
            w ≡ w +e
rency by rerin,t    i,t  in,t − wn,t .
   Appendix B shows that under Calvo prices, the laws of motion for the real and reset
exchange rates satisfy:

                               rerin,t = 1 − θ p rerin,t + θ p [reri,t−1 + ∆ein,t ] ,
                                               
                                                                                                       (14)

and

                                         w
                                              + αrerin,t + βθ p Et [rerin,t+1 − ∆ein,t+1 ]
                                                     
                  rerin,t = 1 − βθ p ιrerin,t                                                          (15)

                φ+ᾱ[γ−1][2µ−1]          [1−ᾱ][γ−1][2µ−1]
where α ≡        γ −1+ φ   ,ι≡      γ −1+ φ       , and β−1 is the steady state real interest rate.
    Equation (14) states that the real exchange in period t is a weighted average of the real
exchange rate for reset prices, rerin,t , and the real exchange rate in the previous period
adjusted by the change in the nominal exchange rate, reri,t−1 + ∆ein,t . The weights are
determined by the fraction of producers that reset prices, θ p . Equation (15) states that
the reset exchange rate depends on the discounted present value of current and future
                                                           w + αrer                               w
relative wages and aggregate prices, captured by ιrerin,t             in,t . Note that, given rerin,t
and ∆ein,t , the dynamics of the real and reset exchange rate will depend on the discount
factor, β, the degree of nominal rigidities, θ p , and parameters governing the degree of real
rigidities in the model, ᾱ and φ. In what follows, we describe how rerin,t       w and ∆e
                                                                                             in,t are
determined in equilibrium in various workhorse models used in the literature.




                                                         22
5.2       Models where relative wages are sluggish or mean revert quickly
This section considers a class of models in which relative wages are sluggish or mean
revert quickly. We study an economy that, in addition to the producers described above,
is inhabited by a continuum of households indexed by h ∈ [0, 1], a government, and a
monetary authority.


Households:        Each household in country i has preferences given by

                                            ∞
                                  Ui = E0   ∑ βt [ ϕi,t logCi,t − Ni,t (h)] ,                        (16)
                                            t =0

where Ci,t and Ni,t denote consumption and labor, ϕi,t is a taste shock to the utility of
consumption à la Stockman and Tesar (1995).25
   Households supply differentiated labor services, have monopoly power over their
wage, and face Calvo-type constraints on their ability to adjust wages, as in Kollmann
(2001). The probability that a household can change its wage in a given period is given
by 1 − θw . The date 0 inter-temporal budget constraint is:

                           ∞
                      E0   ∑ Θi,t [ Pi,t Ci,t − Wi,t (h) Ni,t (h) − Υi,t − Ti,t ] = 0.               (17)
                           t =0

Here Pi,t , Wi,t (h), Υi,t , and Ti,t respectively denote the price of consumption, nominal
wages, firm’s profits, and government transfers, all denominated in the currency of coun-
try i. Θi,t is the date t = 0 local-currency price of an arrow security that pays one unit
of the local currency in at time t. By definition, the nominal exchange rate satisfies:
              Θi,t
Ein,t = Ein,0 Θn,t .


Monetary and fiscal policy: As Carvalho and Nechio (2011) we leave the monetary pol-
icy implicit, and assume that aggregate nominal expenditures in each country are ex-
ogenous and given by Zi,t ≡ Pi,t Ci,t .26 Additionally, government expenditures Gt are
exogenous. The government balances its budget every period, Gi,t = Ti,t .
  25 As it will become clear later, the assumption of quasi-linear preferences permits us to solve for all
relative prices in this model in closed form. We show that our quantitative results do not depend on this
assumption on Section 5.2.3.
  26 We make this assumption for tractability following Kehoe and Midrigan (2008) and Carvalho and Ne-

chio (2011). Section 5.2.3 evaluates the case in which the monetary authority follows a Taylor rule.




                                                     23
Equilibrium:         An equilibrium for this economy is a set of allocations for the house-
holds {Ci,t , Wi,t (h)}∀i,h,t , final good producers {Yi,t , Yin,t , {Yin (ω )}ω }∀n,t , and price policy
functions for intermediate producers { P̄in,t }∀i,n,t , such that given prices: (i) households
maximize (16) subject to (17); (ii) final good producers minimize cost according to equa-
tions (9) and (10); (iii) intermediate producers maximize profits according to equation
(13); and (iv) labor and goods markets clear.


Nominal exchange rates and relative wages: The model described above allows for
preference shocks, ϕt , real shocks, Gt , and nominal shocks, Zt . We note however that from
the complete market assumption and the process for nominal expenditures, the nominal
exchange rate is given by

                                               ϕi,t Pn,t Cn,t  ϕ Zn,t
                                     Ein,t =                  = i,t      .
                                               ϕn,t Pi,t Ci,t  ϕn,t Zi,t
                                                                                           h            i
                                                                                                Zi,t
For the analytical results that follow, we will focus on the case where log        and         Zi,t−1
   h     i
      ϕ
log ϕ i,t each follows an AR(1) process with persistence ρ and i.i.d. innovations,27 so
        i,t−1
that the nominal exchange rate satisfies Et [∆ein,t+1 ] = ρ∆ein,t .28 The complete market
assumption and the labor-leisure condition also imply that if wages are flexible, θw =
                                                    w = 0. In this case, movements in
0, relative wages are constant across countries, rerin,t
nominal wages completely offset movements in the nominal exchange rate. If instead
wages are sticky, relative wages depend of previous relative wages and changes in the
nominal exchange rate

                              w                   w
                                                            w
                                                                        ∆e
                                                                                
                           rerin,t = [1 − θw ] rerin,t + θw reri,t −1 +    in,t   ,                         (18)
                             h                       i
where        w
              =
          rerin,t     βθw Et rerin,t
                                w
                                  − ∆ein,t+1 . Appendix B completely characterizes the
                                     +1
stochastic process of the real and the reset exchange rates in this model.


5.2.1    Sluggish relative wages (θw = 0)

We can now study the behavior of the real and the reset exchange rates in models where
wages are flexible. A large literature has studied the persistence of the real exchange rate
in these models, showing that it increases with: (i) the degree of nominal price rigidities,
  27 Alternatively, we can shut down one of these shocks so that the nominal exchange rates are either
driven exclusively by nominal or preference shocks.
  28 We relax this assumption for our quantitative results in Section 5.2.3.




                                                      24
θ p (Chari et al. 2002), (ii) the persistence of the exogenous shocks, ρ, (Benigno 2004, Car-
valho and Nechio 2011 and Engel, 2016), and (iii) the degree of real rigidities, α, (Bergin
and Feenstra 2001, Bouakez 2005). In what follows, we proceed in steps and evaluate
alternative parameterizations that isolate how each of these mechanisms affects the con-
tribution of the reset exchange rate to real exchange rate movements.29 To this end, we
will measure the persistence of the real exchange rate by its autocorrelation, which we
denote by P [rerin ]. We will also study the cumulative impulse response of the real ex-
change rate at period t + k to shocks in period t,30 and evaluate the fraction of this im-
pulse response that is accounted for by the reset exchange rate. We denote this fraction
by χk ≡ Et [rerin,t+k ] /Et [rerin,t+k ]. Appendix B derives the following proposition:

Proposition 1. (Relative prices properties) In the following special parameterizations, P [rerin ]
and χk are given by:

    • Case 1- Only price rigidities: if ρ = α = 0, then P [rerin ] = θ p and χk = 0.
                                                                               θ p +ρ               θ p βρ θ kp+1 −ρk+1
    • Case 2- Persistent shocks: if ρ > 0 and α = 0, then P [rerin ] =         1+θρ     and χk =   1−θβρ        θ p −ρ .

                                                                                                      1−1/Ω(α)
    • Case 3- Real rigidities: if ρ = 0 and α > 0, then P [rerin ] = θ p Ω(α) and χk =                  1− θ p ,
      where Ω(α) is increasing and satisfies Ω(0) = 1 and Ω(1) = 1/θ p .

Proposition 1 evaluates our decomposition under three special cases described below.

Case 1- Only price rigidities: In this case depicted in the solid blue lines in Figure 3,
the autocorrelation of the real exchange rate is given by θ p , and the reset exchange rate
is constant, rerin,t = 0, so χk = 0. Intuitively, the persistence of the real exchange rate
arises only from the infrequent price adjustment, but the relative prices for the firms that
do adjust (i.e. the reset exchange rate) are constant. If we set θ p = 0.85 to match the aver-
age frequency of price changes in the UK microdata, the model cannot generate enough
persistence in the real exchange rate, as noted by Chari et al. (2002).
    Carvalho and Nechio (2011) show that multi-sector models yield more persistent ag-
gregate real exchange rates than a one-sector model calibrated to match the average fre-
quency of price changes. Online Appendix C shows numerically that the multi-sector
model yields very similar results to a one-sector model in which θ p is chosen to match the
   29 After evaluating the role of each parameter in isolation in this section, and after adding sticky wages in

the next section, we will evaluate to a full quantitative model that combines all the mechanisms presented
here. We take our parameter values from the literature, and evaluates the robustness of our results to
alternative parameterizations in Appendix E.
   30 Formally, starting from a symmetric steady state in period t − 1, we evaluate how different parameters

affect CIRt+k [rerin,t ] ≡ Et [rerin,t+k ] /∆ein,t .

                                                      25
average duration of prices, which in our data corresponds to setting θ p = 0.93.31 We use
this value of θ p in all our calibrations.32 While this increases the persistence of the real
exchange rate, the reset exchange rate is still constant in this calibration, χk = 0.


Case 2- persistent shocks: Increasing the persistence of the shocks makes the IRF of the
real exchange rate hump-shaped and more persistent, but also makes the reset exchange
rate negatively correlated to the real exchange rate. This is illustrated in the red x-doted
lines in Figure 3 for ρ = 0.2.33 Intuitively, since producers that reset prices may be unable
to change prices again in the future, they respond more than one to one to a persistent
shock. This implies that increasing the real exchange rate persistence by increasing ρ
moves the reset exchange rate in the opposite direction than in the data.


Case 3- real rigidities: This case is depicted in the green doted lines in Figure 3. Since
Ω(α) is increasing, real rigidities simultaneously increase the persistence of the real ex-
change rate and the contribution of the reset exchange rate to the real exchange rate.
Intuitively, now reset prices track aggregate prices due to the real rigidities, so that reset
exchange rates move with the real exchange rate. We explore quantitatively if real rigidi-
ties alone can replicate our empirical decomposition by calibrating ᾱ and φ following the
literature.34 In this case, χk ' 0.44, well below what is observed in the data.

We conclude that SPOE models with sluggish relative wages can generate persistent real
exchange rates, but are hard to reconcile with the reset exchange rate data. The following
section evaluates whether the behavior of the reset exchange rate can be approximated in
models with sticky wages.


5.2.2   Sticky wages

We now evaluate the model presented above when wages are sticky. Appendix B gen-
eralizes Proposition 1 to the case of θw > 0. To isolate how wage stickiness affects real
and reset exchange rates, we first consider a case with no real rigidities α = 0 and i.i.d
  31 Blanco  and Bailey (Forthcoming) and Alvarez et al. (2016) show that, if shocks are i.i.d and there are no
real rigidities, the effects of monetary shocks in a single-sector vs. a multi-sector closed economy are the
same if the two models are calibrated to match the same average duration of price spells.
  32 We also take β = 0.961/12 and µ = 0.94 from Chari et al. (2002).
  33 We use ρ = 0.2 to match the monthly autocorrelation of the growth rate of the UK-Austria nominal

exchange rate for the 2006-2015 period.
  34 In particular, we set ᾱ = 0.5 to match the share of intermediate inputs in production, φ = 2 to match
                                                                                             γ −1   3
the elasticity of markups following Amiti et al. (2016) . Appendix E shows that our conclusions hold in a
                                                        φ
quantitative model with an extreme calibration of γ−1 = 4.


                                                      26
                                         Figure 3: Impulse responses

                       CIRt+k [rerin ]                                                   ¯ in ] /CIRt+k [rerin ]
                                                                           χk ≡ CIRt+k [rer
1.2                                                                   1
                                          Case 1
                                          Case 2
  1                                       Case 3                   0.75
                                          Case 4
                                          Quantitative
0.8                                                                 0.5

0.6                                                                0.25

0.4
                                                                      0

0.2
                                                               −0.25

  0
                                                                   −0.5
   0            10         20            30              40            0      10          20              30       40
                          Months                                                         Months


Note: The left panel plots the impulse response of the real exchange rate and right panel plots the χk in
equation defined in the main text.


shocks, ρ = 0. Figure 3 depicts this case for θw = 0.90 under ‘Case 4’.35 Introducing wage
rigidities increases the persistence of the real exchange rate. The figure shows that in this
case χk is still below 0.5 at every horizon. Thus, although relative wages track the nom-
inal exchange rate in this model (see eq. 18), the reset exchange rate accounts for only a
fraction of the real exchange rate.


Discussion: Equation (18) shows that if θw is large, relative wages mimic movements
in the nominal exchange rate. From our discussion of the static model in Section (2), one
would expect that this model could replicate the empirical real exchange rate decompo-
sition. However, in the dynamic model the reset exchange rate depends on current and
future relative wages (see equation 14). Because relative wages mean revert, the reset
exchange rate at period t does not track ∆et , even if rerin,t
                                                          w does.

    To emphasize this point, consider the cumulative impulse responses when α = 0 and
ρ = 0. In this case

                                                           k +1
                                             w
                                          Et rerin,t +k = θw ∆ein,t ,
                                                       

  35 We   take this value from Del Negro et al. (2007).




                                                              27
and by equation (14):

                                             1 − βθ p
                                rerin,t =               [2µ − 1] θw ∆ein,t .                            (19)
                                            1 − βθ p θw

Note that in the limiting case of β → 1 and θ p → 1, the reset exchange rate is constant,
rerin,t → 0, even for large values of θw . That is, if producers discount future periods at a
low enough rate, rerin,t behaves like in the flexible wage model, insofar as relative reset
wages mean revert. In contrast, in the limiting case of completely rigid wages, θw → 1,
if θ p < 1 , rerin,t → [2µ − 1] ∆ein,t . In this case, relative wages do not mean revert, so the
reset exchange rate does track the nominal exchange rate.36
     The discussion above highlights that reset exchange rates don’t track the nominal ex-
change rate if wages mean revert quickly relative to the discount rate (i.e. whether θw is
large relative to βθ p ). In our calibration, β is close to 1 and there are large wage and price
                                                [2µ−1]θ
rigidities. If θ p ' θw we obtain rerin,t ' 1+θ ∆ein,t . Thus, if θ and µ are close to 1, then
on impact the elasticity of the reset exchange rate to a change in the nominal exchange
rate is close to 1/2, and so is rerin,t /rerin,t by equation (14). This is what is reflected in
Figure 3.


5.2.3   Quantitative results

We conclude this section by considering different quantitive versions of the model pre-
sented above. The parameters used for each of these models are reported in Table 4,
though we evaluate the robustness to our results to alternative parameterizations in Ap-
pendix E. Here, we first evaluate a model that combines all the mechanisms that were
studied separately under Cases 1-4. The impulse responses of this calibration are plotted
in the circled-black lines in Figure 3 to facilitate comparisons with our previous results.
Combining the different ingredients studied in the literature, the model generates persis-
tent real exchange rates, with a half life that is close to 30 months, in line with the data.37
However, the fraction of the impulse response of the real exchange rate accounted by
the reset exchange rate χk is only around 0.5.38 Business-cycle statistics of this model are
listed in the second column of Table 5, under the column labeled ‘Benchmark’. While the
  36 This is also the case if agents completely discount the future, β → 0, as that model works much like the

static model presented in Section 2.
  37 See i.e. Rogoff (1996) and Burstein and Gopinath (2015).
  38 Note that while both real rigidities and wage stickiness each individually generate a χ of around
                                                                                                 k
almost 0.5, incorporating both simultaneously only produces a marginally higher χk . The reason is that,
when real rigidities are large, reset prices depend more on competitors prices and less on wages, which
mitigates the effects of the nominal wage rigidities.



                                                     28
                                        Table 4: Parameterization
 Parameter Description                                          Value     Target/source


 β           Discount factor                                   0.961/12   Chari et al. (2002)
 µ           Home bias parameter                                 0.94     Chari et al. (2002)
 ξ           Elast. subst. imported vs. domestic goods            1.5     Chari et al. (2002)
   φ
 γ −1        Markup elasticity                                   0.66     Amiti et al. (2016)
 ᾱ          Share of intermediates in production                0.5      VA/Output. WIOD
 ρ           Persistence of nominal exchange rate               0.20      Persistence of nominal exchange rate
 1 − θp      Frequency of price changes                         0.07      Average price duration across items, UK
 1 − θw      Frequency of wage changes                          0.10      Del Negro et al. (2007)

Note: Appendix E evaluates the robustness of our quantitative results to alternative parameterizations.


model is close to matching the autocorrelation of the real exchange rate and its correla-
tion with the nominal exchange rate, it does not produce enough movements in the reset
exchange rate. The slope of the relation between rerin and rerin is about half of that in the
data plotted data in Figure 2.
     Next, we deviate from the restrictions needed for Proposition 1 by introducing more
general preferences and by incorporating money in the utility function, as in Chari et al.
(2002).39 The third Column of Table 5 shows that the results from this model are close
to those in the Benchmark case, though the relation between rerin and rerin is somewhat
closer to the data. This implies that the additional restrictions imposed to derive Proposi-
tion 1 do not seem to be quantitatively important for the results of the models studied so
far.
     Finally, we allow for a more realistic monetary policy by assuming that the mone-
tary authority follows a Taylor Rule as in Steinsson (2008), and focus on a model purely
driven by real shocks. As noted by Steinsson (2008), this version of the model can gen-
erates hump-shaped dynamics in the real exchange rates, which greatly increase the real
exchange rate persistence. In fact, the fourth column in Table 5 shows that this calibration
produces an autocorrelation of the real exchange rate that is close to the data. However,
the dynamics of the nominal exchange rate in this model generate a reset exchange rate
that is much more volatile than in the data.
  39 Appendix   C presents a full description of this model.




                                                      29
                     Table 5: Business cycle moments: models and data

                Moments         Data     Benchmark    CKM2002     STE2008   Disconnect

                Autocorrelations (levels)

                Real            0.971        0.959        0.943    0.987       0.998
                Reset           0.939        0.964        0.937    0.980       0.998

                Slope ∆rer
                        ¯ in,t w.r.t. ∆rerin,t

                Monthly         0.993        0.466        0.637    1.468       0.804
                Quarterly       0.982        0.534        0.632    1.664       0.920
                Semiannual      0.981        0.535        0.628    1.777       0.958
                Annual          0.984        0.523        0.620    1.868       0.980



Notes: The table presents business cycle moments of the data and the simulation series from the models.
The time period in the data and in the model have the same lenght. All the moments in the model are the
median over 5000 simulations.


5.3    A model with persistent movements in relative wages
We now evaluate an alternative model where nominal wages are ‘disconnected’ from the
nominal exchange rate. In this model, relative wages track the nominal exchange rate
not because nominal wages are rigid, but because they are not directly affected by the
shocks driving the nominal rate. This is a common feature of incomplete market models
in which the UIP fails to hold due to shocks to international asset demand, such as those
proposed in Jeanne and Rose (2002) and Gabaix and Maggiori (2015), and quantified in
Devereux and Engel (2002) and Kollmann (2005). More recently, Itskhoki and Mukhin
(2017) show that incorporating this type of shocks into a dynamic general equilibrium
model can help resolve many of the puzzles associated with the exchange rate discon-
nect. In this section, we evaluate whether a version of the model that incorporates these
features can rationalize the observed exchange rate decomposition presented in Section
4.
    We study this question in a version of the model above that closely follows the setup
in Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017): financial markets are incomplete and there is a variable
wedge on the return of country n bonds perceived by households from country i vs. coun-
try n. In particular, the sequential household budget constraint in country i is given by

          Bii,t+1     Bni,t+1                         B
                  +              + Pi,t Ci,t = Bii,t + ni,t + Wi,t Ni,t + Υi,t + Ti,t + Ωi,t .
           Ri,t     Ein,t e Rn,t
                           ψt                         Ein,t


                                                     30
Here, Bii,t+1 is a bond that pays one unit of the currency of country i in period t + 1,
and 1/Ri,t is the price of that bond. Bni,t+1 is bond that pays one unit of the currency
of country n, for which households in country i must pay a date t price in currency n
             
of 1/ eψt Rn,t . As Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017), we make the simplifying assumption
that country n households cannot purchase bonds issued in country i, and can purchase
country n bonds at price Rn,t . They thus face the budget constraint:

                     Bnn,t+1
                             + Pn,t Cn,t = Bnn,t + Wn,t Nn,t + Υn,t + Tn,t .
                      Rn,t

Finally, eψt is a shock to international asset demand. This shock drives a wedge between
the rate of return on bonds issued by country n that is perceived in the two countries.
We assume that this wedge follows an AR(1) process, ψt = ρψ ψt−1 + et , andh that the  i
                                                                               B
proceeds from this wedge are rebated to country i households, Ωi,t ≡ E ni,tR+n,t
                                                                              1   1
                                                                                 eψt
                                                                                     −1 .
                                                                         in,t
Market clearing in bonds implies Bii,t+1 = Bni,t+1 + Bnn,t+1 = 0.
    Appendix C presents the full model and its calibration, which is taken mostly from
Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017). There we show that changes in the nominal exchange rate
are given by:

                                Et [∆ein,t+1 ] = ii,t − in,t + ψt .

where i.,t denotes the (net) nominal interest rate. Thus, by design the UIP does not hold
in this model.
    To understand why this model may be able to replicate the empirical decomposition
of the real exchange rate, note that if there are no shocks in the model other than those
to ψt , the labor-leisure condition associated with (16) together with our rule for aggregate
nominal expenditures yields,

                                        Z̄ = PC = W̄.

If nominal expenditures are fixed, then nominal wages are fixed, which implies that
∆rertw = ∆et . In contrast to the sticky wage model with θ w < 1, relative wages do not
revert in this limiting version of the model with constant nominal demand. In this case,
the properties of the reset exchange rate resemble the limiting case of the sticky wage
model where θ w = 1, which as discussed above can replicate our empirical decomposi-
tion.
    We conclude by presenting a quantitative version of this model with a more realistic
monetary rule. In particular, we assume that the monetary authority follows a Taylor rule

                                                31
that targets inflation, as Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017). The fifth column in Table 5 summa-
rizes the dynamic properties of the real and the reset exchange rate in this model. The
model produces very persistent real exchange rates that are almost perfectly correlated
to the nominal exchange rates. It also does a much better job in replicating the relation
between rerin and rerin .
    Figure 4 compares movements in the real exchange rates (x-axis) to changes in the reset
exchange rates (y-axis), in the data, the benchmark model, and in the incomplete markets
model (labeled ‘Disconnect’), for changes computed at monthly, quarterly, semiannual
and annual frequencies. In each case, we normalize the growth rates of the real and the
reset exchange rate by twice the standard deviation of the change in the real exchange
rate. Note that in the Benchmark model, the slope of this relation is close to one-half for
all frequencies, consistent with the impulse responses presented above, while in the data
the slope is always close to one. In contrast, the model with incomplete markets generates
a larger slope that is close to one at low frequencies.


6    Conclusion
Addressing the PPP puzzle is one of the central questions in international economics. This
paper sheds light on the puzzle by showing that real exchange rates movements are pri-
marily driven by movements in what we label as the ‘reset exchange rate’, i.e. relative re-
set prices across countries. This empirical finding is at odds with the predictions of Sticky
Price Open Economy models where relative wages are sluggish or mean revert quickly.
These models can generate volatile and persistent real exchange rates, but only through
cross-country movements in the difference between reset and non-reset prices. Models
where movements in relative wages are persistent and track the nominal exchange rate
do replicate the empirical properties of both the real exchange rate and of relative reset
prices.


References
Ahlin, Christian and Mototsugu Shintani, “Menu costs and Markov inflation: A theo-
 retical revision with new evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, April 2007, 54 (3),
 753–784.




                                             32
                  Figure 4: Changes in real vs. reset exchange rates: Models vs. Data
                               (a) Monthly                                                (b) Quarterly

             1                                                            1


           0.5                                                          0.5
 ∆rer t




             0                                                            0


          −0.5                                                         −0.5
                                                     Data
                                                     Benchmark
           −1                                        Disconnect         −1
                 −1    −0.5          0         0.5           1                −1   −0.5         0         0.5   1
                              (c) Semiannual                                               (d) Annual

             1                                                            1


           0.5                                                          0.5
 ∆rer t




             0                                                            0


          −0.5                                                         −0.5


           −1                                                           −1
                 −1    −0.5        0           0.5           1                −1   −0.5        0          0.5   1
                                  ∆rert                                                       ∆rert


Note: The figure plots movements in real exchange rates (x-axis) and changes in reset exchange rates (y-
axis), for changes computed at monthly, quarterly, semiannual and annual frequencies. Each circle repre-
sent a change for a country pair. ‘Benchmark’ refers to data simulated from our benchmark model. ‘Discon-
nect’ refers to data simulated from the incomplete markets model based on Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017).




                                                                  33
Alvarez, Fernando, Herve Le Bihan, and Francesco Lippi, “The Real Effects of Mone-
  tary Shocks in Sticky Price Models: A Sufficient Statistic Approach,” American Economic
  Review, October 2016, 106 (10), 2817–2851.

Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings, “International Shocks and Domestic
 Prices: How Large Are Strategic Complementarities?,” NBER Working Papers 22119,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc March 2016.

Benigno, Gianluca, “Real exchange rate persistence and monetary policy rules,” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, April 2004, 51 (3), 473–502.

Bergin, Paul and Robert Feenstra, “Pricing to Market, Staggered Contracts and Real Ex-
  change Rate Perisistence,” Journal of International Economics, 2001, 54 (2), 333–359.

Berka, Martin, Michael Devereux, and Charles Engel, “Real exchange rates and sectoral
  productivity in the Eurozone,” American Economic Review, Forthcoming.

Betts, Caroline and Michael B. Devereux, “Exchange rate dynamics in a model of
  pricing-to-market,” Journal of International Economics, February 2000, 50 (1), 215–244.

Bils, Mark, Peter J. Klenow, and Benjamin A. Malin, “Reset Price Inflation and the
  Impact of Monetary Policy Shocks,” American Economic Review, October 2012, 102 (6),
  2798–2825.

Blanco, Andres, “Optimal Inflation Target in an Economy with Menu Costs and Zero
  Lower Bound,” Working Paper, January 2017.

   and Isaac Bailey, “Menu Costs, Uncertainty Cycles, and the Propagation of Nominal
  Shocks,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Forthcoming.

Boivin, Jean, Robert Clark, and Nicolas Vincent, “Virtual borders,” Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics, 2012, 86 (2), 327–335.

Bouakez, Hafedh, “Nominal rigidity, desired markup variations, and real exchange rate
  persistence,” Journal of International Economics, May 2005, 66 (1), 49–74.

Burstein, Ariel and Nir Jaimovich, “Understanding Movements in Aggregate and
  Product-level Real Exchange rates,” Mimeo, UCLA and Duke University, October 2012.

Burstein, Ariel T. and Gita Gopinath, “International Prices and Exchange Rates,” in Ken-
  neth Rogoff Elhanan Helpman and Gita Gopinath, eds., Handbook of International Eco-
  nomics, Vol. 4, Elsevier, 2015, chapter 7, pp. 391 – 451.

                                           34
Calvo, Guillermo A., “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 1983, 12 (3), 383–398.

Carvalho, Carlos and Fernanda Nechio, “Aggregation and the PPP Puzzle in a Sticky-
  Price Model,” American Economic Review, October 2011, 101 (6), 2391–2424.

Cavallo, Alberto, Brent Neiman, and Roberto Rigobon, “Currency Unions, Product In-
  troductions, and the Real Exchange Rate,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129
  (2), 529–595.

Chari, V.V., Patrick Kehoe, and Ellen McGrattan, “Can Sticky Price Models Generate
 Volatile and Persistent Exchange Rates?,” Review of Economic Studies, 2002, 69 (3), 533–
 63.

Cravino, Javier and Andrei A. Levchenko, “The Distributional Consequences of Large
  Devaluations,” American Economic Review, November 2017, 107 (11), 3477–3509.

Devereux, Michael B. and Charles Engel, “Exchange rate pass-through, exchange rate
 volatility, and exchange rate disconnect,” Journal of Monetary Economics, July 2002, 49
 (5), 913–940.

Engel, Charles, “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes,” Journal of Political
  Economy, June 1999, 107 (3), 507–538.

  , “Real Exchange Rate Convergence: The Roles of Price Stickiness and Monetary Pol-
  icy,” Working Paper, September 2016.

Gabaix, Xavier and Matteo Maggiori, “International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dy-
 namics,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (3), 1369–1420.

Gagnon, Etienne, “Price Setting During Low and High Inflation: Evidence from Mexico,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2009, 124 (3), 1221–1263.

Gali, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J. David Lopez-Salido, “Robustness of the estimates of
 the hybrid New Keynesian Phillips curve,” Journal of Monetary Economics, September
 2005, 52 (6), 1107–1118.

Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki, and Roberto Rigobon, “Currency Choice and Exchange
 Rate Pass-through,” American Economic Review, September 2010, 100 (1), 306–336.




                                           35
  , Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Nick Li, “International Prices,
  Costs and Markup Differences,” American Economic Review, October 2011, 101(6), 2450–
  86.

Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Oleksandr Talavera, “Price Setting in Online Markets: Basic
 Facts, International Comparisons, and Cross-Border Integration,” American Economic
 Review, January 2017, 107 (1), 249–282.

Itskhoki, Oleg and Dmitry Mukhin, “Exchange Rate Disconnect in General Equilib-
   rium,” NBER Working Papers 23401, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc May
   2017.

Jeanne, Olivier and Andrew K. Rose, “Noise Trading and Exchange Rate Regimes,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (2), 537–569.

Kehoe, Patrick and Virgiliu Midrigan, “Sticky Prices and Real Exchange Rates in the
 Cross-Section,” 2008. Mimeo, University of Minnesota and New York University.

Kimball, Miles S, “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model,” Jour-
  nal of Money, Credit and Banking, November 1995, 27 (4), 1241–1277.

Klenow, Peter and Jon Willis, “Sticky Information and Sticky Prices,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 2007, 54 (1), 79–99.

Kollmann, Robert, “The exchange rate in a dynamic-optimizing business cycle model
 with nominal rigidities: a quantitative investigation,” Journal of International Economics,
 2001, 55 (2), 243–262.

  , “Macroeconomic effects of nominal exchange rate regimes: new insights into the role
  of price dynamics,” Journal of International Money and Finance, March 2005, 24 (2), 275–
  292.

Kose, M. Ayhan and Kei-Mu Yi, “Can the standard international business cycle model
 explain the relation between trade and comovement?,” Journal of International Eco-
 nomics, March 2006, 68 (2), 267–295.

Kryvtsov, Oleksiy and Carlos Carvalho, “Price Selection, Monetary Non-neutrality, and
  Sticky-Price Models,” Technical Report 2016.

   and Nicolas Vincent, “On the Importance of Sales for Aggregate Price Flexibility,”
  Technical Report 2014.


                                            36
Mussa, Michael, “Nominal exchange rate regimes and the behavior of real exchange
 rates: Evidence and implications,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
 January 1986, 25 (1), 117–214.

Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson, “Monetary Non-Neutrality in a Multi-Sector Menu
 Cost Model,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010. forthcoming.

Negro, Marco Del, Frank Schorfheide, Frank Smets, and Rafael Wouters, “On the Fit of
 New Keynesian Models,” Journal of Business Economic Statistics, 02 2007, 25, 123–143.

Rogoff, Kenneth, “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle,” Journal of Economic Literature,
 1996, 34, 647–668.

Steinsson, Jon, “The Dynamic Behavior of the Real Exchange Rate in Sticky Price Mod-
  els,” American Economic Review, March 2008, 98 (1), 519–533.

Stockman, Alan C and Linda L Tesar, “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model
  of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements,” American Economic Re-
  view, March 1995, 85 (1), 168–185.




                                           37
                                                                    Table A1: CPI weights

                                              Austria                        Chile                   Finland                    Mexico                   UK
                                        Microdata    Official      Microdata         Official   Microdata   Official     Microdata   Official   Microdata     Official

      Food & non-alc. beverages            0.12         0.12          0.19            0.19        0.14         0.14          0.22        0.22     0.11         0.11
      Alc. beverages & tobacco             0.03         0.03          0.02            0.02        0.02         0.05          0.02        0.02     0.04         0.04
      Clothing & footwear                  0.06         0.06          0.05            0.05        0.05         0.05          0.08        0.08     0.06         0.06
      Housing & utilities                  0.14         0.18          0.04            0.13        0.07         0.22          0.05        0.07     0.06         0.13
      Furnishings                          0.08         0.08          0.05            0.07        0.06         0.06          0.08        0.10     0.06         0.06




38
      Health                               0.05         0.05          0.06            0.06        0.04         0.05          0.05        0.05     0.02         0.02
      Transport                            0.14         0.14          0.17            0.18        0.08         0.14          0.11        0.11     0.06         0.15
      Communication                        0.02         0.02          0.03            0.05        0.02         0.02          0.02        0.02     0.01         0.03
      Recreation & culture                 0.12         0.12          0.07            0.07        0.08         0.12          0.05        0.05     0.09         0.15
      Education                            0.01         0.01          0.05            0.07        0.00         0.00          0.08        0.08     0.02         0.02
      Restaurants & hotels                 0.08         0.08          0.04            0.04        0.06         0.06          0.07        0.07     0.11         0.13
      Miscellaneous                        0.10         0.10          0.04            0.06        0.04         0.07          0.07        0.07     0.08         0.10
      Aggregate                            0.96         1.00          0.81            1.00        0.65         0.99          0.91        0.95     0.74         1.00

     Note: ‘Microdata’ refers to the weights in our sample of the CPI data. ‘Official’ refers to the official CPI weights.
                     Table A2: Monthly frequency of regular price changes

                                           Austria        Chile     Finland        Mexico        UK

       Food & non-alc. beverages             0.10         0.40        0.19          0.46        0.14
       Alc. beverages & tobacco              0.08         0.27        0.13          0.27        0.23
       Clothing & footwear                   0.14         0.14        0.13          0.26        0.16
       Housing & utilities                   0.19         0.44        0.52          0.54        0.16
       Furnishings                           0.09         0.16        0.10          0.32        0.14
       Health                                0.26         0.13        0.16          0.19        0.10
       Transport                             0.31         0.47        0.38          0.23        0.19
       Communication                         0.12         0.27        0.38          0.15        0.35
       Recreation & culture                  0.24         0.17        0.17          0.25        0.17
       Education                             0.06         0.20        0.07          0.17        0.13
       Restaurants & hotels                  0.09         0.10        0.10          0.14        0.09
       Miscellaneous                         0.07         0.14        0.26          0.32        0.11
       Aggregate                             0.17         0.30        0.23          0.31        0.15

Note: ’Frequency’ is the fraction of products that change price in a given month. All statistics are computed
after excluding sales.




                                                     39
                                                          Table A3: Updates to the CPI basket

                                                             Austria                                                             UK
                                          Fraction of       CPI weight       Frequency                       Fraction of    CPI weight      Frequency
                                         new products      of new items                                         new          of new
                                                                                                              products        items

      Months of basket update
       Average                                0.03              0.01            0.26                            0.13            0.03            0.17
       Minimum                                0.00                -             0.24                            0.07            0.02            0.10




40
       Maximum                                0.12              0.05            0.29                            0.22            0.10            0.25

      Regular months
        Average                               0.00                -             0.14                            0.03            0.00            0.17
        Minimum                                 -                 -             0.09                              -               -             0.10
        Maximum                               0.01                -             0.30                            0.22            0.10            0.40

     Note: ’Months of basket update’ refers to every February for the UK, and every January starting in January 2011 for Austria. ’Regular months’ refers
     to every other month. ’Fraction of new products’ is the ratio of the number of new products over the total number of products. ’CPI weight new
     of new items’ refers to the expenditure share of new item categories. ’Frequency’ is the is the share of price changes relative to the number of price
     quotes in the month.
                            Figure A1: Inflation: Official sources vs. microdata
                       (a) UK                              (b) Austria                          (c) Mexico
 0.02
          Micro data
          Official
                                          0.01                                     0.01
 0.01


                                             0                                        0
    0



−0.01                                    −0.01                                    −0.01


   2006      2009         2012    2015       2006   2009          2012    2015        2006   2009     2012   2015
                                     (d) Finland                                 (e) Chile
                        0.02

                                                                0.015
                        0.01
                                                                 0.01

                           0                                    0.005

                                                                   0
                       −0.01
                                                             −0.005


                          2006    2009     2012     2015           2006   2009       2012    2015


Note: The figures report monthly inflation computed from the microdata and monthly inflation obtained
from official sources.




                                                           41
                   Figure A2: Empirical inflation and reset inflation (monthly)
                   (a) UK                              (b) Austria                          (c) Mexico

                              Reset        0.05
  0.04                                                                         0.02
                              Aggregate


  0.02                                     0.03                                0.01


    0                                         0                                   0


−0.02                                     −0.03                              −0.01


−0.04                                     −0.05                              −0.02

    2006    2009      2012        2015       2006   2009      2012   2015         2006   2009     2012   2015
                                     (d) Finland                            (e) Chile

                     0.05                                   0.02


                     0.03                                   0.01


                       0                                       0


                   −0.03                                   −0.01


                   −0.05                                   −0.02

                       2006        2009      2012   2015      2006   2009        2012    2015


Note: The figures report monthly aggregate and reset inflation defined in the main text.




                                                       42
     Figure A3: Changes in real vs. reset exchange rates, Tradeables vs Non-Tradeables
                                   (a) Monthly                                       (b) Quarterly

             1    tradables                                          1
                  non-tradables


           0.5                                                     0.5
 ∆rer t




             0                                                       0



          −0.5                                                    −0.5



           −1                                                      −1
                 −1       −0.5           0         0.5   1               −1   −0.5         0         0.5   1
                                  (c) Semiannual                                      (d) Annual

             1                                                       1



           0.5                                                     0.5
 ∆rer t




             0                                                       0



          −0.5                                                    −0.5



           −1                                                      −1
                 −1       −0.5         0           0.5   1               −1   −0.5        0          0.5   1
                                      ∆rert                                              ∆rert


Note: The figure plots changes in real exchange rates (x-axis) and changes in reset exchange rates (y-axis)
computed at monthly, quarterly, semiannual and annual frequencies, for tradeable and non-tradeable ex-
change rates. Changes in real and reset exchange rate changes are both normalized by two times the stan-
dard deviation of the change in the aggregate bilateral real exchange rate. Each circle represent a change
for a country pair.




                                                             43
Online Appendix - Not for Publication -




    Price rigidities and the relative PPP



  Andres Blanco and Javier Cravino




                     44
Appendix A               Data
A.1    Algorithm used to define temporary sales
We now describe the algorithm used to filter sales. For that we need to identify dates ts
and te at which a sale starts and ends. With this in mind, we first define for every good ω
the set Fs,ω of all the dates where a sale starts, where a sale is defined as a period where,
following a price change at date t, the cumulative price change between dates t and t + k
is close to zero:

           Fs,ω = {ts :    |∆pi,t (ω ) + · · · + ∆pi,t+k (ω ) ≤ e ,    ∆pi,t (ω ) 6= 0} .

Similarly, we also define the set Le,ω of all the dates where a sale ends:

           Le,ω = {t :    |∆pi,t−k (ω ) + · · · + ∆pi,t (ω ) | ≤ e ,   ∆pi,t (ω ) 6= 0} .

We identify as a sale all the price changes between (ts , ω ) and (te , ω ), if te − ts ≤ 2.


A.2    Algorithm used in the UK data
For a small subset of items and regions, the United Kingdom’s Office for National Statis-
tics does not report outlet identifiers to comply with confidentiality guidelines. In such
cases, there could be multiple price quotes with the same product-outlet identifier in a
given month in the dataset. In most of these cases, there is no variation in prices that
share an identifier in a given month. For the few cases in which we do observe different
prices sharing an identifier in multiple dates, we must decide on how to link these prices
across time period. We do so by using information on cumulative inflation for each good
that is reported to us by the ONS.
    Consider an non-unique identifier ω̃ that includes multiple price quotes at both dates
t1 and t2 . Let Pt1 (ω̃ ) denote the set of price quotes reported in date t1 . We would like
to link each of these prices quotes with another price quote belonging to the set Pt2 (ω̃ ).
The mapping is non-trivial because the elements in Pt1 (ω̃ ) and Pt2 (ω̃ ) don’t share a
unique identifier that can be traced through time. We thus proceed in the following steps:

   i. Take and element from Pt2 and use the data on cumulative inflation to back up the
      price that this element should have had in t1 . Label this ‘backed-up’ price x.

  ii. Find the price in the set Pt1 that coincides with x.

  iii. Repeat steps 1 and 2 for every element in Pt2 .

We repeat this algorithm for all dates in which we observe the identifier ω̃.




                                                45
Appendix B                Proofs and formulas
B.1    Derivation of equations (14) and (15)
We start by deriving the equations (14) and (15). To a first order, we can write the price
indexes associated with (9) and (10) as:

                                          pi,t = µpii,t + [1 − µ] pni,t .

Under calvo pricing, the laws of motion for average prices are:
                                          
                            pni,t = 1 − θ p p̄ni,t + θ p pni,t−1 ,

and optimal reset prices satisfy:

                               p̄ni,t = 1 − βθ p p̃ni,t + βθ p Et [ p̄ni,t+1 ] .
                                               


Here, p̃ni,t is the ‘optimal spot price’, which satisfies

                                           Γ           1
                               p̃ni,t =       pni,t +     [mcn,t − ein,t ] ,                     (B.1)
                                          1+Γ         1+Γ

where Γ ≡ γ−1 is the elasticity of markups implied by the aggregator in (10), and mcn,t =
              φ

ᾱwn,t + [1 − ᾱ] pn,t are marginal costs for firms from country i. Combining these equations
with the definition of the real exchange rate we obtain:

                           rerin,t = 1 − θ p rerin,t + θ p [reri,t−1 + ∆ein,t ] ,
                                           


and

                                            f in,t + βθ p Et [rerin,t+1 − ∆ein,t ] ,
                                         
                        rerin,t = 1 − βθ p rer

     f in,t ≡ p̃i,t + ein,t − p̃n,t . In combination with (B.1) we obtain:
with rer
                                                                  w
                                          f in,t = αrerin,t + ιrerin,t
                                          rer                          ,

           Γ+ᾱ[2µ−1]             [1−ᾱ][2µ−1]
with α ≡      1+ Γ      and ι ≡       1+ Γ     ,   which coincides with the expressions in the text.


B.2    Derivation of equation (18)
In each country, the marginal utility of consumption satisfies:

                                           ∂u j (Cj,t , X j,t )
                                      βt                        = λi Pi,t Θi,t ,
                                                 ∂Cj,t
where λi is the Lagrange multiplier on country-i’s budget constraint. Taking log-differences
across countries and using the definition of the nominal exchange rate, assuming Ein,0 = 1


                                                          46
we have that
                                                     c
                                          rerin,t = ui,t − ucn,t .
   The Calvo assumption for wage setting implies that the law of motion for wages is

                                    wi,t = [1 − θw ] w̄i,t + θw wi,t−1 ,

where reset wages satisfy

                              w̄i,t = [1 − βθw ] w̃i,t + βθw Et [w̄i,t+1 ] ,

with
                                                            c
                                            w̃i,t = pi,t − ui,t ,
       c is the utility of consumption. Relative wages are then:
where ui,t
                            w                   w
                                                          w
                                                                 −1 + ∆ein,t ,
                                                                            
                         rerin,t = [1 − θw ] rerin,t + θw reri,t

and
                                   w
                                                 w
                                        = βθw Et rerin,t +1 − ∆ein,t .
                                                                    
                                rerin,t


B.3    Proof of Proposition 1
We now derive Proposition 1. We start by deriving a more general result that character-
izes the laws of motion of the real and reset exchange rates under any combination of
parameters. Proposition 1 is a special case of this results.

Stochastic processes for rerin,t and rerin,t in general equilibrium Collecting the results
derive above, we list the set of equilibrium conditions that from which we will derive
Proposition 1:

            rerin,t = 1 − θ p rerin,t + θ p [reri,t−1 + ∆ein,t ] ,
                             
                                                                                       (B.2)
               w                   w             w
                                                    −1 + ∆ein,t ,
                                                              
            rerin,t = [1 − θw ] rerin,t + θw reri,t                                    (B.3)
                                        w
            rerin,t = 1 − βθ p ιrerin,t + αrerin,t + βθ p Et [rerin,t+1 − ∆ein,t+1 ] ,
                                                   
                                                                                       (B.4)
               w
                              w
            rerin,t = βθw Et rerin,t+1 − ∆ein,t+1 ,
                                                     
                                                                                       (B.5)
       Et [∆ein,t+1 ] = ρ∆ein,t .                                                      (B.6)

Combining equations B.3, B.5 and B.6 yields the following stochastic in difference equa-
tion:
                            w
                         rerin,t = b1w rerin,t
                                          w          w           w        w
                                               −1 + b2 ∆ein,t + b3 Et [rerin,t+1 ]




                                                    47
                                1− βρ                                                          [1−θ ][1− βθ ]
where b1w ≡ Υ1w , b2w ≡ Υw , b3w ≡ Υw and Υw ≡ 1 + β +
                                                   β             w      w
                                                                   θw     . We can solve
                                                                                    w =
this equation by guessing and verifying the answer. In particular, guessing that rerin,t
     w
Crerin,t −1 + D∆ein,t , we have that

          w                    w    w         w           w 2    w         w
      Crerin,t −1 + D∆ein,t = b1 rerin,t−1 + b2 ∆ein,t + b3 C rerin,t−1 + b3 [C + ρ ] D∆ein,t .

Which implies that

                                                   Υw ±        Υ2w − 4β
                                                            p
                                           C=                           .
                                                              2β

Using the Viete’s rule it is easy to see that the two roots over C, (C1 , C2 ) satisfy

                                                       Υw                            1
                                        C1 + C2 =                ,   C1 C2 =           ;
                                                        β                            β

Now we show that for all β ∈ (0, 1), the solution satisfies 0 < C1 < 1 < C2 . To see this
                                                                       1/β
property notice that using the previous two equations, f (C ) = C + C = 1 + β1 + H = ∆
where H = θw − 1 θw − β /β. f (C ) has an unique minimum at β−1/2 . Since f (C ) is
             −1       −1     

decreasing between (0, β−1/2 ) and f (1) ≤ ∆, there exist a C1 < 1 s.t. f (C1 ) = ∆. Since the
the function is increasing after the minimum, there exist other root with C2 > β−1/2 > 1.
Thus if we discard the explosive root, we have

                                        Υw − Υ2w − 4β
                                             p
                                    C=
                                               2β

and
                                                 2 [1 − βρ]
                                        D=                       .
                                             Υw + Υ2w − 4β − 2βρ
                                                 p

Thus the solution for the real exchange rate is given by
                                        w             w
                                     rerin,t = A1w rerin,t −1 + A2w ∆ein,t ,                                           (B.7)
                     √
              Υw −    Υ2w −4β
with A1w ≡           2β         and A2w ≡              √2[12− βρ]               .
                                               Υw +      Υw −4β−2βρ
  We proceed in a similar way to characterize the dynamics of the real exchange rate.
Combining equations (B.2), (B.4) and (B.6) we obtain the following difference equation:
                                 p   w         p                        p                  p
                     rerin,t = b0 rerin,t + b1 rerin,t−1 + b2 ∆ein,t + b3 Et [rerin,t+1 ]
           h        ih         i
                         −1 − β ι /Υ , b p ≡                                p       1− βρ      p
where b0w ≡ θ − 1−1                                              1
                                                                                                           and Υ p ≡ 1 + β +
                                                                                                      β
              p        θ p       p  p 1                          Υp ,   b2 ≡         Υp ,      b3 ≡   Υp




                                                            48
[1−θ p ][1− βθ p ][1−α]
          θp              . Doing a guess and verify as before, we obtain

                                                 w
                                rerin,t = A0p rerin,t + A1p rerin,t−1 + A2p ∆ein,t ,                                  (B.8)
                                                          √
              [θ −1 −1][θ −p 1 − β]ι p              Υp−    Υ2p −4β                 2[1− βρ(1− A0,p A2w )]
with A0p ≡ p                           , A1p , ≡                     and A2p ≡            √                 . Finally, sub-
               Υ p − β[ A1w + A1p ]                       2β                        Υp+       Υ2p −4β−2βρ
stituting (B.8) into (B.2) we obtain:

                                  A0,p     w      A1,p − θ p             A2,p − θ p
                     rerin,t =          rerin,t +            rerin,t−1 +            ∆ein,t .                          (B.9)
                                 1 − θp            1 − θp                 1 − θp

Equations (B.7), (B.8), and (B.9) completely characterize the stochastic processes for the
relative wages, the real exchange rate, and the reset change rate.

Proposition 1. Iterating forward expression (B.7) for relative wages and using the defi-
nition of the cumulative impulse response we can write:
                                       h          i
                                     Et rerin,t+k
                                           w                k
                               w
                    CIRt+k [rerin ]≡                = A2w ∑ A1wi
                                                                 ρ k −i
                                        ∆ein,t            i =0
                                                         k +1
                                                        A1w   − ρ k +1
                                                  = A2w                .
                                                         A1w − ρ

Following the same steps using equation (B.8), for the real exchange rate we obtain

                              Et [rerin,t+k ]         k                              k
    CIRt+k [rerin ] ≡                         = A0p ∑ A1pk−l            w
                                                             CIRt+l [rerin ] + A2p ∑ A1pi
                                                                                          ρ k −i
                                  ∆ein,t            i =l                           i =0
                                    k                                         k
                           = A0p ∑ A1p
                                    k −i            w
                                         CIRt+k [rerin ] + A2p ∑ A1p
                                                                  i
                                                                     ρ k −i
                                   i =0                                     i =0
                                      k +1                                      k +1    k +1          k +1
                                             − ρ k +1                                                      − ρ k +1
                                                                     "                                                #
                                   A1p                    A0p A2w             A1p    − A1w           A1p
                           = A2p                        +                A1w                    −ρ                        .
                                        A1p − ρ           A1w − ρ              A1p − A1w               A1p − ρ

Finally, using (B.9) we obtain:

                               A0,p             w     A1,p − θ p                       A2,p − θ p k
    CIRt+k [rerin ] =                CIRt+k [rerin ]+            CIRt+k [rerin,t−1 ] +           ρ
                              1 − θp                   1 − θp                           1 − θp

Case 1- Only price rigidities: In this case, θ w = 0, then A1w = A2w = 0, and rerin,t       w = 0.
                                               p     p
In addition, if α = 0, and ρ = 0 then A1 − A2 = θ. Substituting in (B.8) and (B.9) we get,
rerin,t = θ [rerin,t−1 + ∆ein,t ] , and rerin,t = 0. Note that if ρ = 0, then E [∆ein,t+1 ] = 0 and
the persistence of the real exchange rate is θ.



                                                              49
Case 2- Persistent shocks: In this case, θ w = 0, then A1w = A2w = 0, and rerin,t
                                                                             w = 0. In
                               p                    p       −θβρ
addition, if α p = 0, then A1 = θ and A2 =                 1−θβρ .     The autocorrelation of the real exchange
               θ +ρ
rate is P = 1+p ρθ p .

Case 3- Real rigidities: In this case, θ w = 0, then A1w = A2w = 0, and rerin,t      w = 0. In
                              p     p
addition, if ρ p = 0, then A1 = A2 > θ p and the autocorrelation of the real exchange rate
        p
is P = A1 . Note that Υ p is increasing in 1 − ᾱ, so both the persistence and χ j increase with
α.


Appendix C                 Quantitative models
This section describes and analyzes the quantitative models from Section 5.


C.1     Setup
Chari et al. (2002) The Chari et al. (2002) model is analogous to the model in Section 5,
except that household preferences are given by
                                                                                                      
                                                                       − 1
                                                                             ξ [1− σ ]
                                                                      ξ           − 1
                  ∞
                                                                                ξ
                                                                                          Nn,t (h)1+ ϕ 
                                                                   
                     t 1
                                          ξ −1              Mn,t (h) ξ 
  Un (h) = E0 ∑ β 
                      
                               κCn,t (h)   ξ  + [1 − κ ]                               −              ,
                t =0    1 − σ                                Pn,t                           1  +  ϕ    

                                                                                  (C.1)
where Cn , Nn , and MPn
                       n
                          denote consumption,  labor and real money  balances in the n-
country. Note that we are now introducing money explicitly in the utility function. We
follow CKM and assume that the only shocks in the model are shocks to the money sup-
ply in each country Mi,t , which we assume follow an AR(1) process in growth rates.

Taylor rule with real shocks This extension uses a Taylor rule to describe the monetary
policy as in Steinsson (2008). In this model, we assume that preferences are given by (C.1),
but replace the assumption that nominal demand in each country follows an AR(1) for a
Taylor rule. In particular, we follow Steinsson (2008) and assume use the Taylor rule
                                       1− ρ i                        "                     φc #1−ρi
                                  Π̄                                       Πt
                                                                               φπ 
                                                                                        Ct
                         1 + it =                [ 1 + i t −1 ] ρ i                                      .
                                  β                                        Π̄           C̄
                                                                                                             h               i
                                                                                                                 exp[ ḡ]
The real shocks in this model are shocks to government expenditures, Gt = Yt 1 −                                 exp[ gt ]
                                                                                                                                 ,
where gt = ρ g gt−1 + ε g .

Incomplete markets and UIP shocks We now describe how to extend the model to
allow for incomplete markets and deviations from UIP, as in Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017).


                                                            50
In particular, we maintain the structure of the model described in Section 5, but assume
financial markets are incomplete. Household supply differentiated labor services and
have monopoly power over their wage. They face Calvo-type constraints on their ability
to adjust wages, the probability that a household can adjust its wage in a given period is
given by 1 − θ w , but they can insure with state contingent securities An,t (h) at time t. In
country n the flow budget constraint is:

         Bn,t+1      Bni,t+1                    B
Pn,t Cn,t +     +              + Mn,t+1 = Bn,t + ni,t + Mn,t + An,t (h) + Wn,t (h) Ln,t (h) + Tn,t .
          Rn,t    Ein,t e Ri,t
                         ψn,t                   Ein,t
                                                                                         (C.2)
The flow budget constraint in country i is:

                            Bi,t+1
              Pi,t Ci,t +          + Mi,t+1 = Bi,t + Mi,t + Ai,t (h) + Wi,t (h) Li,t (h) + Ti,t .            (C.3)
                             Ri,t

Following Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017), we assume that the monetary authority follows
the Taylor rule given by
                                              1− ρ i                                   [1− ρ i ] ϕ p
                                         Π̄                                       Πt
                                                                             
                                                                         ρi
                                1 + it =                [ 1 + i t −1 ]                                   .
                                         β                                        Π̄

C.2     Calibrations
All the parameters are calibrated following the original papers, with the exception of
those that come from the UK microdata. Table A5 list the calibrated parameters. The
discount factor, β, the intertemporal and intratemporal elasticities of substitution, and
the degree of home bias, σ, γ, ζ and µ are all taken from Chari et al. (2002). The per-
sistence of the monetary shocks ρ is calibrated to match autocorrelation of the change in
the Austria-UK bilateral exchange for the 2006-2015 period. The persistence of the gov-
ernment expenditure shocks used for the model with real shocks is taken from Steinsson
(2008). Finally, for the model with incomplete markets we set a persistence of the shocks
to ρφ = 0.97. The frequency of price changes, 1 − θ p , is chosen to match the average price
duration observed in the UK microdata. We take the parameters in the Taylor rule from
Steinsson (2008) and Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017), respectively.


Appendix D Numerical result claimed in Footnote 31
This section shows numerically two claims made in the main text. First, we show that un-
der the conditions of Footnote 31, the impulse-response function of the one-sector model
is quantitatively equivalently to the multi-sector model if both models are calibrated to
match the same average duration of price changes. Second, we show that this result also
holds in the full-quantitative model.
    We start by extending the model to allow for multiple sectors that differ in the extent
of price stickiness following Carvalho and Nechio (2011). With this in mind, we con-
sider an economy where final goods producers aggregate the output of j different sectors

                                                           51
                                 Table A5: Parameter values

Parameter Description                                          Value     Target/source


                                              Benchmark model

β         Discount factor                                     0.961/12   Chari et al. (2002)
µ         Home bias parameter                                   0.94     Chari et al. (2002)
ξ         Elast. subst. imported vs. domestic goods              1.5     Chari et al. (2002)
  φ
γ −1      Markup elasticity                                     0.66     Amiti et al. (2016)
ᾱ        Share of intermediates in production                  0.5      VA/Output. WIOD
ρ         Persistence of nominal exchange rate                 0.20      Persistence of nominal exchange rate
1 − θp    Frequency of price changes                           0.07      Average price duration across items, UK
1 − θw    Frequency of wage changes                            0.10      Del Negro et al. (2007)

                             Additional parameters for Chari et al. (2002) model

γ         Elasticity subst: varieties same country (prices)     10       Chari et al. (2002)
σ         Inter temporal elasticity of substitution              5       Chari et al. (2002)
κ         weight on consumption vs real balance                0.94      Chari et al. (2002)
ξ         Elasticity of subst.: consumption-real balances      0.34      Chari et al. (2002)
ρ∆M       Persistence of monetary shocks                       0.90      Chari et al. (2002)
ϕ         Elasticity of leisure                                0.5       Chari et al. (2002)

                              Additional parameters for Steinsson (2008) model

ρi        Interest smoothing coefficient                       0.95      Steinsson (2008)
φπ        Inflation coefficient                                 2        Steinsson (2008)
φc        Consumption coefficient                              0.5       Steinsson (2008)
ρg        Persistence of government expenditure shock          0.96      Steinsson (2008)

                                Additional parameters for disconnect model

ρi        Interest smoothing coefficient                       0.95      Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017)
φπ        Inflation coefficient                                2.15      Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017)




                                                 52
according to
                                              "                          #     η
                                                     J    1       η −1       η −1

                                                    ∑ ω j Yj,t
                                                          η
                                       Gt =                         η               .
                                                  j =1

Here, Yj,t is a bundle of goods from sector j, η is the elasticity of substitution across sectors,
and the parameter ω j controls the share of sector j in total the final good. Sectorial output
is produced by aggregating a continuum of differentiated products, with the aggregator
described presented in equation (9). As in the benchmark model, intermediate producers
are monopolistic competitors and set prices as in Calvo (1983), and prices are sticky in the
buyers’ currency. Importantly, the probability that a producer can change its price in any
period is sector specific, and given by 1 − θ j . Finally, technologies in the foreign country
are defined analogously.
    We calibrate the multi-sector model with J = 12, where each j represents a COICOP-2
and set θ j to match the observed COICOP-2 frequencies price changes. We follow Car-
valho and Nechio (2011) and set η = 3. For the one-sector model we set the frequency
                h       i −1
equal to θ = ∑ ω j θ1        .
                      j
    Figure A4 shows the impulse-response function for the one-sector model presented
5.2 in the main text and the multi-sector version of this model. As we can see, both mod-
els generate the same impulse-responses. Figure A5 shows the two models continue to
deliver similar impulse responses under the more general assumptions of the full quanti-
tative model presented in section C.

        Figure A4: Aggregate vs multi-sector models with constant relative wages

                    CIRt+k [rerin ]                                                 χk ≡ CIRt+k [rer
                                                                                                  ¯ in ] /CIRt+ j [rerin ]
1.2                                                               1
                                           Case 1
                                           Case 2
  1                                                            0.75


0.8                                                             0.5

0.6                                                            0.25

0.4
                                                                  0

0.2
                                                              −0.25

  0
                                                               −0.5
   0         10         20            30             40            0                    10         20               30       40
                       Months                                                                     Months


Note: The left panel plots the impulse response of the real exchange rate and right panel plots the χk in
equation defined in the main text.



                                                          53
                      Figure A5: Aggregate vs multi-sector models: quantitative

                        CIRt+k [rerin ]                                   χk ≡ CIRt+k [rer
                                                                                        ¯ in ] /CIRt+ j [rerin ]
1.2                                                                  1
                                               Case 1
                                               Case 2
  1                                                               0.75


0.8                                                                0.5

0.6                                                               0.25

0.4
                                                                     0

0.2
                                                              −0.25

  0
                                                                  −0.5
   0             10         20            30            40            0      10          20               30       40
                           Months                                                       Months


Note: The left panel plots the impulse response of the real exchange rate and right panel plots the χk in
equation defined in the main text.


Appendix E Robustness
E.1     Alternative parameterizations
This section performs a series of robustness test with respect to the structural parameters
used in subsection 5.2.3. We report the results of these alternative parameterization in
Table A6. For each parameterization, we report the persistence of the real and the reset
exchange rates, along with the slope of the relation ∆rerin = χk ∆rerin computed at differ-
ent frequencies. The first two rows in the table report repeat the results of the calibrations
used in the main text for the ‘Benchmark’ and ‘Disconnect’ models. The remaining rows
evaluate the sensitivity of these slopes to changes in parameter values.
    As noted by Kose and Yi (2006), in a two country model the parameter 1 − µ controls
both the aggregate and the bilateral trade shares. Calibrating 1 − µ to match bilateral
shares would imply a very large degree of home bias.40 With this in mind, we re-evaluate
our exercise by setting µ = 0.97. As shown in the Table, a larger µ increases the relation
between reset and real exchange rates, although the model with complete markets still
falls short of matching our empirical decomposition.
    Next, we set θw = 0.95, to increase the persistence of relative wages in the Benchmark
model (see equation 19 in the main text). The results are reported in rows 5 and 6 of Table
A6. Rows 7 and 8 show the effect of increasing the super-elasticity of demand φ in the
                                                                    φ
Kimball (1995) aggregator so that the elasticity of markups is γ−1 = 4. This calibration
is meant to be extreme, we are increasing the degree of complementarities estimated by
  40 This   is the strategy pursued by Kollmann (2005).


                                                             54
Amiti et al. (2016) by a factor of 6. The increase in the wage stickiness and in the real
rigidities both increase the fraction of the real exchange rate accounted for by the reset
exchange rate. However, even under these extreme calibrations, in the benchmark model
is always well below one.
    Finally, in the last two columns we increase the persistence of the structural shocks,
which increase persistence of the nominal exchange rate. In the Benchmark model, this
increment reduces the slope in the two models and in the Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017) has
small quantitative effect.


                  Table A6: Robustness in Benchmark and IM2017 models
                                                                 Slope ∆rer
                                                                         ¯ in,t w.r.t. ∆rerin,t
    Moments                   P[rer ]       ¯ ]
                                         P[rer         Monthly    Quarterly Semiannual            Annual

    Benchmark Calibration

    (1) Benchmark             0.958      0.964          0.466        0.534          0.535         0.523
    (2) IM2017                0.998      0.999          0.804        0.921          0.959         0.981

    µ = 0.97

    (3) Benchmark             0.959      0.963          0.497        0.559          0.559         0.545
    (4) IM2017                0.999      0.999          0.908        0.974          0.988         0.995

    θw = 0.95

    (5) Benchmark             0.962      0.967          0.562        0.621          0.625         0.617
    (6) IM2017                0.997      0.998          0.875        0.933          0.957         0.972

       φ
     γ −1   =4

    (7) Benchmark             0.966      0.969          0.675        0.718          0.720         0.715
    (8) IM2017                0.998      0.998          0.897        0.961          0.982         0.995

    Persistence of Nominal Exchange Rate (shocks)

    (9) Benchmark (ρ = 0.0)   0.936      0.924          0.569        0.559          0.547         0.530
    (10) IM2017 (ρφ = 0.95)   0.997      0.998          0.904        0.962          0.979         0.989




Notes: The table presents business cycle moments of the simulated series from the Benchmark model and
the Mukhin and Itskhoki (2017) model. The time period in the model is 10 years. All the moments in the
model are the median over 5000 simulations. The benchmark calibration is the same as the main text.




                                                  55
                                 Table A6: Constructing reset inflation: Example

                                                                           Period 0             Period 1   Period 2

           Price of Good A                                                       1                1.22       1.22
           Inflation for Good A                                                                    0.2         0
           Reset price BKM for Good A                                            1                1.22       1.22
           Reset inflation BKM for Good A                                                          0.2        0

           Price of Good B                                                       1                  1        1.22
           Inflation for Good B                                                                     0         0.2
           Reset price BKM for Good B                                            1                1.22       1.22
           Reset inflation BKM for Good B                                                          0.2         0

           Reset price index defined in (6), p̄i,t                               1                1.22       1.22

           Inflation, πt                                                                          0.1        0.1
                                  ∗
           Reset inflation BKM, πi,t                                                              0.2         0
           Reset inflation Blanco-Cravino, p̄i,t − p̄i,t−1                                        0.2         0

Note: This example was taken from Table 1 in Bils et al. (2012). ‘Reset price BKM’, ‘Reset inflation BKM for Good A,B’ and ‘Reset
inflation BKM’ refers to the reset prices and reset inflation measures of Bils et al. (2012).



E.2       Alternative measures of reset inflation
We now describe how our measure of reset prices relates to the measure of reset inflation
in Bils et al. (2012). In particular, Bils et al. (2012) define the log reset price level for good
ω as                              (
                       ∗            pi,t (ω )             if pi,t (ω )6= pi,t−1 (ω )
                      pi,t (ω ) =    ∗                ∗
                                                                                          ,
                                    pi,t −1 ( ω ) + π i,t ifp i,t ( ω ) = p i,t − 1 ( ω )
where starred variables denote reset values, and variables without stars are the (log of)
the actual variables. Their estimate of reset inflation is
                                        h                       i
                              ∑ω st (ω ) pi,t (ω ) − pi,t−1 (ω ) Ii,t (ω )
                                                      ∗
                        ∗
                       πi,t =                                              ,
                                            ∑ω st (ω ) Ii,t

where Ii,t (ω ) is an indicator that takes the value of one if pi,t (ω ) 6= pi,t−1 (ω ).
    The example in Table A6, taken from Bils et al. (2012), shows how their measure of
reset inflation works. The example has two goods, A and B. We start by describing how
to compute inflation following Bils et al. (2012). In period 1, Good A’s price increases by
0.2 log points, while good B’s price does not change. This yields an aggregate inflation
of 0.1 log points (assuming both goods have equal weights in the basket). Reset inflation,
as computed by Bils et al. (2012), is 0.2 log points, though note that the change in Good
A also changes the base reset price for good B to 1.22. When B’s actual price increases to

                                                                     56
1.22 log points in period 2, it does not add to reset inflation (since Good B’s ’reset’ price
in period 1 was already set to 1.22, to account for the inflation in Good A). Reset inflation
as computed by Bils et al. (2012) , πi,t      ∗ , thus equals 0.2 in period 1, and 0 in period 2.

      The reset price index defined in (6) measures average cumulative inflation for the sub-
set of goods that do change in a given period. In this example, this set of goods consists of
good A in period 1 and of good B in period 2. The reset price index defined in (6) would
then be p1A = 1.22 in period 1, and p2B = 1.22 in period 2. Thus, our measure of reset
inflation would also equal 0.2 in period 1, and 0 in period 2.
      We conclude this section by noting that both measures of reset inflation would coin-
cide and capture changes in the reset price if the data was generated by the Calvo model.
To see why this is the case for our measure, let t0 define the base year. Changes in re-
set prices in the calvo model between dates t = 1 and t = 2 are given by p̄2 − p̄1 =
[ p̄2 − p̄t0 ] − [ p̄1 − p̄t0 ] , which coincides with the changes in the reset price index defined
in p̄i,t .


E.3    Alternative decompositions
This paper shows that relative reset prices account for all of the real exchange rate move-
ments. As noted in the paper, this follows because changes in p̄i,t − p̄n,t are uncorrelated
to changes in the nominal exchange rate, so that both rerin,t and rerin,t track ein,t . We could
also evaluate an alternative decomposition:

                    rerin,t = p̄i,t − p̄n,t + [[ pi,t − p̄i,t ] − [ pn,t − p̄n,t ] + ein,t ].
                                              |                     {z                    }
                                                          ≡ rerin,t −[ p̄i,t − p̄n,t ]

In this decomposition, we moved the nominal exchange rate into the second term. Ap-
pendix Figure A6 shows the relation between changes in rerin,t and changes p̄i,t − p̄n,t
both in the data and in the benchmark model. The figure shows that, as hinted in Table 3,
changes p̄i,t − p̄n,t are uncorrelated to changes in rerin,t . In contrast, the benchmark model
produces a strong negative correlation between changes in p̄i,t − p̄n,t and changes in rerin,t .
Thus, our main conclusion, that the benchmark SPOE model is at odds with the data on
reset prices clearly does not depend on how we group terms in the decomposition.




                                                      57
                         Figure A6: Changes in real vs. reset exchange rates: Models vs. Data
                                        (a) Monthly                                           (b) Quarterly

                     1                                                        1


                   0.5                                                      0.5
              
∆ pi,t − pn,t




                     0                                                        0
 




                  −0.5                                                     −0.5
                                                              Data
                                                              Benchmark
                   −1                                         Disconnect    −1
                         −1     −0.5          0         0.5           1           −1   −0.5         0         0.5   1
                                       (c) Semiannual                                          (d) Annual

                     1                                                        1


                   0.5                                                      0.5
              i
∆ pi,t − pn,t




                     0                                                        0
 h




                  −0.5                                                     −0.5


                   −1                                                       −1
                         −1     −0.5        0           0.5           1           −1   −0.5        0          0.5   1
                                           ∆rert                                                  ∆rert

                                                                                h        i
Note: The figure plots movements in real exchange rates (x-axis) and changes pi,t − pn,t (y-axis), for
changes computed at monthly, quarterly, semiannual and annual frequencies. Each circle represent a
change for a country pair. ‘Benchmark’ refers to data simulated from our benchmark model. ‘Disconnect’
refers to data simulated from the incomplete markets model based on Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017).




                                                                      58
