                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 DISCLOSURE AND SUBSEQUENT INNOVATION:
          EVIDENCE FROM THE PATENT DEPOSITORY LIBRARY PROGRAM

                                        Jeffrey L. Furman
                                         Markus Nagler
                                        Martin Watzinger

                                       Working Paper 24660
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24660


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2018




We thank Sharon Belenzon, Ben Jones, Abhishek Nagaraj, Ariel Dora Stern, Scott Stern, Toby
Stuart, Rosemarie Ziedonis, Bo Zhao, and participants at the NBER-AIEA Hong Kong, NBER-
PIE program meeting, NBER Productivity, REER Atlanta, TILEC Tilburg, and UT-Austin
Empirical Patent Law conferences, and numerous seminars for helpful comments and
suggestions. We thank Regina Seibel for excellent research assistance. We also thank Christopher
Dillon, Eileen Fischlschweiger, and Larayne Dallas for their helpful and patient replies to all our
questions. Markus Nagler and Martin Watzinger gratefully acknowledge financial support from
the DFG through CRC TR 190. Nagler gratefully acknowledges financial support by the Elite
Network of Bavaria through Evidence-Based Economics and by the DAAD through a scholarship
for doctoral students. Jeff Furman gratefully acknowledges financial support from NSF SciSIP
grant, SES-1564368. Parts of this paper were written while Markus Nagler was visiting MIT
Economics and while Martin Watzinger was visiting the Questrom School of Business at Boston
University. We thank both departments for their hospitality. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Jeffrey L. Furman, Markus Nagler, and Martin Watzinger. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Disclosure and Subsequent Innovation: Evidence from the Patent Depository Library Program
Jeffrey L. Furman, Markus Nagler, and Martin Watzinger
NBER Working Paper No. 24660
May 2018
JEL No. H4,L3,O3,O34,O38,R1

                                           ABSTRACT

How important is information disclosure through patents for subsequent innovation? Although
disclosure is regarded as essential to the functioning of the patent system, legal scholars have
expressed considerable skepticism about its value in practice. To adjudicate this issue, we
examine the expansion of the USPTO Patent and Trademark Depository Library system between
1975 to 1997. Whereas the exclusion rights associated with patents are national in scope, the
opening of these patent libraries during the pre-Internet era yielded regional variation in the costs
to access the technical information (prior art) disclosed in patent documents. We find that after a
patent library opens, local patenting increases by 17% relative to control regions that have
Federal Depository Libraries. A number of additional analyses suggest that the disclosure of
technical information in the patent documents is the mechanism underlying this boost in
patenting: the response to patent libraries is significant and of important magnitude among young
companies, library opening induces local inventors to cite more geographically distant and more
technologically diverse prior art, and the library boost ceases to be present after the introduction
of the Internet. We find that library opening is also associated with an increase in local business
formation and job creation, which suggests that the impact of libraries is not limited to patenting
outcomes. Taken together, our analyses provide evidence that the information disclosed in patent
prior art plays an important role in supporting cumulative innovation.

Jeffrey L. Furman                                 Martin Watzinger
Boston University                                 Department of Economics
Questrom School of Business                       University of Munich
595 Commonwealth Ave - #653a                      Akademiestr. 1/III,
Boston, MA 02215                                  80799 Munich, Germany
and NBER                                          martin.watzinger@lrz.uni-muenchen.de
furman@bu.edu

Markus Nagler
Department of Economics
University of Munich
Akademiestr. 1/III
80799 Munich, Germany
markus.nagler@econ.lmu.de
 Patent law requires disclosure for the same reason that innovators dislike it: it is the
          vehicle by which technical knowledge is passed from the patenting firm to its
                                                                           competitors.

                                                                       Scotchmer (1991)


1         Introduction
The disclosure of technical information is one of the patent system’s central economic
functions (e.g., Machlup and Penrose 1950; Scotchmer and Green 1990; Scotchmer
1991; Romer 1990). In legal debate, the U.S. Supreme Court has labeled disclosure
the, “quid pro quo of the right to exclude.” 1 In economics, it has been described as
a potential microfoundation for the knowledge spillovers that drive economic growth
(Romer, 1990). Ideally, patent disclosure will facilitate follow-on innovation by trans-
mitting useful knowledge and by avoiding unnecessary duplication of investment in
innovation. In practice, however, intellectual property lawyers have expressed doubts
about whether patent disclosure is, in fact, effective in fostering cumulative innova-
tion (e.g. Roin, 2005; Lemley, 2012). Skeptical scholars argue that strategic behavior
in crafting patent documents can make it difficult for follow-on inventors to extract
key information from prior art searches and that many inventors do not even read
patents because this increases the legal risk of “willful infringement.” As a result, such
researchers are doubtful that, in practice, patent disclosures transmit truly valuable
information to potential future inventors.
    Answering the question of how important information disclosure through patents
is for subsequent innovation is of first order importance for the design of the patent
system and for our understanding of how to increase cumulative innovation. There
is, however, a paucity of empirical evidence on this question because of a fundamental
challenge for causal analysis: The patent system makes the right to exclude competitors
dependent on disclosing technical information. This leaves little variation to measure
the “enablement effect” of disclosure, i.e., the value of information provision on subse-
quent innovation separately from the effects of exclusion (Graham and Hegde, 2015;
Hegde and Luo, 2017; Williams, 2017; Gross, 2018; Baruffaldi and Simeth, 2018).
    In this paper, we analyze the large scale expansion of the USPTO Patent and
Trademark Depository Library (PDL or patent libraries) system from 1975 to 1997 to
    1
        Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U.S. 470 (1974).

                                                   1
investigate the effect of disclosure of patent information on regional innovation. Before
the internet, such patent libraries were the only places outside of USPTO headquarters
in Washington DC that provided public access to the full range of technical information
available on patent documents and that provided tools to search for prior art. Opening
a patent depository library in a particular region may, therefore, have reduced by a
substantial degree the costs local inventors had to bear to access prior art. While
exclusion rights remain national (and constant across region), the opening of patent
libraries yields effective variation across regions in the extent of ‘patent disclosure’
during the pre-Internet era.
    With the aim of information diffusion in mind, the patent library system was
founded in the 1870s to provide patents and innovation-related resources for inven-
tors, entrepreneurs, and incumbent firms. By 1975, 20 libraries had been established,
primarily in New England and East of the Mississippi. Beginning in 1975, the USPTO
embarked on an effort to open at least one patent library in each of the U.S. states
to increase the percentage of U.S. citizens with a patent collection in their commuting
zone. This goal was achieved in 1997. We focus our analysis on this period of library
system expansion. Although we refer to patent library “opening,” establishing Patent
Depository Libraries did not require the construction of new facilities. Instead, open-
ing required that existing libraries dedicated sufficient space, staff, and resources for
patent library materials and received official designation as a USPTO Patent Deposi-
tory Library.
    To estimate the impact of opening up a patent library on regional innovation, we
compare the change in the number of ultimately-granted patents (by year of appli-
cation) filed in the region proximate to the newly-opened library after opening with
the change in the number of patents in the regions around a matched control sam-
ple of Federal Depository Libraries (FDLs). The 1,252 Federal Depository Libraries
make government documents such as laws and Acts of Congress freely available to the
public. As the missions of patent libraries and FDLs are similar, i.e., providing the
public with official documents, nearly all patent libraries are also Federal Depository
Libraries. According to one librarian, “a factor that would influence a library in be-
coming a patent library is whether they had been involved with government documents
in another capacity.” Patent libraries typically served initially as FDLs and only later
became patent libraries, making FDLs in the same state a natural control group.
    FDLs are a control group that will provide a valid counterfactual if, in the absence


                                           2
of the opening of the patent library, the number of patents in the region would have
followed the same trend as those of the regions around the control libraries. One
potential concern about this identification approach is that in the period from 1975 to
1997, libraries could apply to become Patent Depository Libraries. As a consequence,
our results could be spurious if the local librarian or the USPTO based their decisions
regarding library opening on expected future patenting. While we cannot exclude this
threat completely, we document that this is only a concern if the librarian submitting
the application (or the USPTO) is able to correctly predict the exact year and place
of an increase in future patenting of start-ups that are active in technologies where
patent disclosure is important.
    In our main specification, we find that the number of patents within 15 miles of
newly-opened patent libraries increased by 17%, an average of around 2.5 patents per
100,000 persons per year. We do not find a negative effect on patent quality, which
suggests that the additional patents induced by PDL opening are not of lesser economic
value than those produced prior to library opening. This effect of library opening
is, however, highly localized and becomes insignificant outside of the typical library
commuting distance of 15 miles. Consistent with the prospect that improved access to
patent technical information is driving the main effect, we find that patenting increases
to a greater degree among young companies, which plausibly face larger barriers to
access patents than did larger enterprises during this period. The increase in patenting
is most pronounced among patent libraries that are also university libraries, implying
a complementarity between access to patent knowledge and technical education for the
production of innovation.
    We demonstrate that it is unlikely that concurrent shocks drive these effects. In
the years before library opening, the number of patents per capita are similar in the re-
gions around the control and to-be-treated libraries. This is consistent with the parallel
trends assumption of differences-in-differences analyses. There is also no differential
trend between control libraries, suggesting that the libraries do not simply relocate in-
novative activities from nearby regions. Our results are robust to the use of alternative
control groups, including analyses using only ultimately-treated libraries, in which we
use not-yet-treated regions as a control group.
    In additional analyses, we find three pieces of evidence that the mechanism driving
the effect is most likely improved access to patented technical information. First,
the effect is most pronounced in chemical technologies, for which patent disclosure


                                            3
matters most for follow-on innovation. This is consistent with prior survey research
that documents the importance of patenting for these technologies, in which patents
report valuable and specific knowledge that is, indeed, read by follow-on innovators
(Mansfield, 1986; Levin et al., 1987; Cohen et al., 2000; Gambardella et al., 2011).
Second, inventors start to cite more geographically and more technologically distant
prior art after a patent library is opened. After a library opening, inventors thus start
to use knowledge that is less local and the geography of innovation becomes more
dispersed. This suggests that patent libraries facilitate the recombination of ideas
across fields and contribute to like-minded inventors building on each others’ ideas.
Third, we find that the effect is strongest after patent libraries introduced computer
databases to search for prior art and that the effect vanishes after the internet made
patent literature universally available and readily-searchable. This result suggests that
simple trends are not driving the results and is consistent with the prospect that
access to prior art is a key factor in explaining patenting patterns proximate to patent
libraries.
    To ascertain whether library opening affects economic outcomes other than purely
patenting, we examine data from the U.S. Census on regional business dynamics. We
find that Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) in which patent libraries were es-
tablished experienced significantly greater rates of small firm entry and exit than did
MSAs with comparable FDLs that did not receive such libraries. In addition, local job
creation accelerated in regions with patent library openings and this effect was driven
by new entrants. These results suggest that the impact of PDLs is not simply an ar-
tifact of increased patenting, but is consistent with the prospect that patent libraries
affected local entrepreneurial environments.
    Our study demonstrates that patent disclosure contributes to subsequent innovation
and that this effect appears only if patents are informative. We therefore contribute to
the discussion on the benefits of patent disclosure and the merits of the patent system
as a whole (Williams, 2017). Our evidence is consistent with the argument that a
patent, “serves to disseminate technological information, and that this accelerates the
growth of productivity in the economy” (Machlup, 1958, p.76).2 By finding particularly
strong effects in chemical innovations but weaker in other areas, a technological area in
which disclosure is thought to be particularly effective, our study also offers qualified
   2
    In a similar vein, Romer (1990, p.84) writes that patent disclosure increases economic growth
because, “other inventors are free to spend time studying the patent application for the widget and
learn knowledge that helps in the design of a widget.”


                                                4
support for critics that argue that the usefulness of disclosure through patents is limited
(e.g., Roin, 2005; Lemley, 2012; Chien, 2016) and that the benefits of reading patents
are mixed (Arora et al., 2008; Gambardella et al., 2011; Cohen et al., 2002; Hall and
Harhoff, 2012; Ouellette, 2012, 2017).3 Normatively speaking, our empirical analysis
shows the potential upside for innovation of more stringent disclosure (Bessen and
Meurer, 2008; Fromer, 2008).
    More generally, our study contributes to the literature on research-enhancing insti-
tutions by showing that investments in patent libraries helped to fuel regional innova-
tion. Research enhancing institutions lower the cost of access to useful knowledge and
thus help to foster geographical and intertemporal spillovers on which economic growth
is based (Mokyr, 2002). For example, Furman and Stern (2011) demonstrate that bi-
ological resource centers, libraries of living organisms, can foster follow-on innovation
by providing open and low cost access to life sciences research materials. In recent
work, Biasi and Moser (2016) show that reducing the access costs to science books
during World War I increased scientific output particularly in those regions in which
libraries bought these books. Our research contributes to this literature by showing
that patent libraries increased innovation across U.S. states by improving access to
patent documents.
    Historical analyses of the U.S. patent system have noted its role in democratiz-
ing innovation, i.e., in enabling innovation to take root in various geographic regions,
across socioeconomic groups, and among different types of enterprises (Machlup, 1958;
Scotchmer and Green, 1990; Lamoreaux and Sokoloff, 1999; Khan, 2005). Our results
provide evidence that, though its 1975-1997 Patent Depository Library program, the
USPTO continued to play a role in spreading innovation across regions and organiza-
tional types. In an age before the internet, searching patent documents at a close-by
patent library provided an accessible way to study such prior art, especially for resource
constrained inventors.4
   3
     Newer studies on the American Inventor Protection Act show that many inventors voluntarily
disclose their inventions, leading to earlier licensing deals (Graham and Hegde, 2015; Hegde and Luo,
2017). Current work by Gross (2018) documents several effects suggesting that technologies whose
disclosure was inhibited by the U.S. World War II patent secrecy program experienced a decrement
to follow-on innovation.
   4
     For example, in his autobiography, independent inventor Geoffrey Ball stressed the importance
of technical information in prior patents for his efforts at innovation in human hearing devices. In
particular, he described the Sunnyvale CA patent library as the “only place to research patents” and a
place without which his ultimate innovation and business success would not have been possible (Ball,
2012).



                                                  5
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the U.S.
Patent Depository Library Program and the Federal Depository Library Program. In
Section 3 we describe the data and the empirical strategy. In Section 4, we show
that opening a patent library increased innovation in its close vicinity and present
robustness checks. In Section 5, we present evidence on the underlying mechanism.
Section 6 presents evidence on the impacts of patent libraries on small businesses.
Section 7 concludes.


2       The U.S. Patent Depository Library Program5
The Establishment of the Patent Deposit Library Program

In the years following the Civil War, the U.S. Congress acknowledged that the increas-
ingly industrial and innovation-focused country could benefit from expanding access
to technical information contained in patent documents. In the early 1870s, Congress
enabled the creation of a nationwide network of Patent and Trademark Depository
Libraries. Prior to 1871, official patent documents were housed and available for
widespread perusal only at the Patent Office in Washington DC. In that year, federal
statute 35 USC 12 officially entitled The Patent Office to distribute copies of patents
to designated libraries outside the capital. In addition, the Patent Office began in 1872
to publish and disseminate weekly the Official Gazette, which reported a brief abstract
and a representative drawing of each patented invention.6 These efforts were partic-
ularly important in stimulating the spread of technical information at a time when
the cost of traveling to Washington DC effectively limited access to patent prior art.
According to Lamoreaux and Sokoloff (1999), patent agents and solicitors emerged in
the 1800s as an important institution that inventors and firms outside of Washington
could use in order to obtain information about and build upon new inventions. The
patent depository libraries were another key institution aiming to support innovation
via information diffusion.
    The first set of patent depository libraries were established in the 1870s at The New
    5
    The history section follows the descriptions in Sneed (1998) and Jenda (2005).
    6
    The Gazette was one of a number of publications that provided limited information about patented
inventions. For example, the journal Chemical Abstracts began publishing abstracts of chemical
patents in 1907 and the periodical Scientific American, which began publication in 1845, featured
patent summaries throughout its history. Like the Gazette, however, each of these sources published
only patent abstracts and up to one drawing and, did not, therefore, provide the rich source of technical
information available in original patent documents or in patent depository libraries.


                                                   6
York State Library, the Boston Public Library, The Public Library of Cincinnati and
Hamilton County, the Science and Engineering Library at Ohio State University, the
Detroit Public Library, the Los Angeles Public Library, the New York Public Library,
and The St. Louis Public Library. New libraries were slowly added over the next few
decades and, by 1976, the number of patent libraries had grown to 20, most of which
were located in the industrial Midwest and eastern seaboard. By the 1970s, each library
received weekly shipments of unbound paper patents, the Official Gazette of the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office, and two search indices.

The Expansion of USPTO Patent Library System 1976-1997

Because access to patent documents remained limited to paper-based methods, indi-
vidual inventors and small and medium-sized enterprises engaged with patent prior
art in the early 1970s in much the same way as they had in the 1870s, i.e., through
intermediaries, including patent agents, or via travel to locations with complete patent
records. Recognizing the need for expanded facilities after one hundred years of rela-
tive inactivity, the USPTO began an aggressive expansion of the patent library system
beginning in 1975.7 The revived program established goals of increasing the number
of patent libraries by at least three per year and, ultimately, operating at least one
patent library in each state. This latter aim was achieved in 1997. The map in Fig-
ure 1a identifies the twenty libraries in operation before 1975, while Figure 1b lists
all patent libraries opened after 1975. Figure 2 shows the expansion of the patent
depository library system over time.8 Currently, about half of the PDLs are based in
academic libraries and nearly as many are affiliated with public libraries.9 After 1997,
the patent library system adopted a new goal of controlled growth in areas with high
population combined and high patent and trademark activity (Sneed, 2000).

How (and why) Libraries Joined the Patent Depository Library Program

Beginning in 1975, existing library facilities became eligible to apply to become PDLs
if they fulfilled a set of requirements. First, libraries had to demonstrate that they had
   7
     This effort was initiated by USPTO Assistant Commissioner William I. Merkin, beginning with
an assessment of the patent library system in 1974.
   8
     Table A-1 and Table A-2 in the appendix list patent libraries up to 2002.
   9
     Since 1871, six PDLs have withdrawn for various reasons, including library closing, no funding
for the back file, and a change in institutional priority creating a lack of ability to perform required
services.



                                                   7
                   Figure 1: Location of all Patent Libraries in the US
                                   (a) Opened from 1870 to 1974




                                   (b) Opened from 1975 to today




Note: Figure 1a shows the position of patent libraries in the continental United States opened before
the major expansion in 1977. Figure 1b indicates the location of patent libraries opened in or after
1977.




                                                 8
                                   Figure 2: The Expansion of the Patent Depository Library Program


                                                                                                                                       Cheyenne
                                                                                                                                      San Antonio
                                              Expansion sample                                                                        Dayton
                                                                                                                                     Rochester
                                   80                                                                                                Las Vegas
                                              Before and after                                                                      Stony Brook
                                                                                                                                    New Haven
                                                                                                                                    Hartford
                                                                                                                                   Concord
                                                                                                                                   Burlington
                                                                                                                                  Portland
                                                                                                                                  Lubbock
                                                                                                                                  Akron
                                                                                                                                 San Francisco
                                                                                                                                 Rapid City
                                                                                                                                 Orono
                                                                                                                                Clemson
                                                                                                                               Wichita
                                                                                                                               West Lafayette
                                                                                                                               Morgantown
                                                                                                                               Big Rapids
                                                                                                                              Tampa
                                                                                                                              Jackson
                                                                                                                              Grand Forks
                                   60                                                                                        Piscataway
                                                                                                                             Honolulu
                                                                                                                            Orlando
Number of patent libraries in US




                                                                                                                            Louisville
                                                                                                                            Des Moines
                                                                                                                           Washington
                                                                                                                           Philadelphia
                                                                                                                          Richmond
                                                                                                                          Nashville
                                                                                                                          Little Rock
                                                                                                                         Springfield
                                                                                                                         San Diego
                                                                                                                         Salt Lake City
                                                                                                                         Miami
                                                                                                                         Fort Lauderdale
                                                                                                                         College Park
                                                                                                                         Butte
                                                                                                                         Anchorage
                                                                                                                         Amherst
                                                                                                                        Reno
                                   40                                                                                   Moscow
                                                                                                                        Indianapolis
                                                                                                                        College Station
                                                                                                                        Austin
                                                                                                                        Auburn
                                                                                                                        Ann Arbor
                                                                                                                        Albuquerque
                                                                                                                      Baton Rouge
                                                                                                                      Newark
                                                                                                                      Minneapolis
                                                                                                                     University Park
                                                                                                                     Sacramento
                                                                                                                    Lincoln
                                                                                                                   Seattle
                                                                                                                   Raleigh
                                                                                                                   Houston
                                                                                                                   Denver
                                                                                                                   Dallas
                                                                                                                   Birmingham
                                                                                                                  Madison
                                   20                                                                     Sunnyvale
                                                                                                    Stillwater
                                                                                               Milwaukee
                                                                                             Kansas City
                                                                                             Atlanta
                                                                                    Toledo
                                                                  Pittsburgh
                                                                 Providence
                                                         Cleveland
                                                   Newark
                                               Chicago
                                            Detroit
                                            Cincinnati
                                            Buffalo
                                           Saint Louis
                                           New York
                                           Los Angeles
                                           Columbus
                                           Boston
                                           Albany
                                    0
                                           1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020
                                                                               Opening year



                                                                                9
the physical capacity (space) to acquire and make available for use a collection of all
U.S. utility patents issued twenty years prior to the date of library designation. Second,
each patent library had to commit to employing and training sufficient staff to assist
the public in the search for prior art. To ensure adequate training, each patent library
had to send a representative to the annual PDL Training Seminar in Washington DC.10
Third, they had to provide free public access and a collection of search tools for the
public. According to the USPTO, the first library in each state that (a) applied for
PDL status and (b) successfully fulfilled these criteria would receive a designation as
a patent depository library.
    These criteria implied that larger libraries, such as university libraries and city
public libraries, were able to fulfill the resource requirements of becoming a patent
depository library. Over time, however, the space requirement became less a concern
after the introduction of microfilm. Indeed, the conversion from paper to microfilm
distribution has been cited as a reason why many new libraries joined the program
after 1982. The fact that the process of becoming a patent library during the 1975-
1997 period was initiated by the library itself rather than solicited by the USPTO,
may explain, in part, why patent libraries were not opened in the sequence one might
expect a priori. For example, Honolulu HI and Big Rapids MI each received patent
libraries before either New Haven CT or San Francisco CA (Figure 2). The librarians
that we interviewed reported a number of reasons that their institutions applied to join
the PDL community during this period. Some librarians we interviewed suggested that
their libraries applied to join as a result of their institutional missions or out of a sense
of duty to their patrons. These factors may reflect local demand for patent information.
However, interviewees also mentioned factors more idiosyncratic and less predictable
in driving their library’s participation, including the perceived attractiveness of annual
PDL trainings in Washington DC and the professional benefits of participating in the
PDL librarian community.11
    Most patent libraries had prior experience handling government documents as Fed-
eral Depository Libraries before applying to become patent depository libraries. Fed-
  10
      Indeed, several of the librarians we interviewed mentioned that the opportunity to participate
in the annual training was a nontrivial reason for their association with the Patent Deposit Library
program.
   11
      The annual PDL trainings in Washington DC appear to have been both highly valued profes-
sionally and personally enjoyable to the PDL librarian community. Both the professional lessons
and personal reflections are documented in the Patent and Trademark Resource Center Association
Newsletters, which are available for review at http://ptrca.org/newsletters.



                                                10
eral Depository Libraries make U.S. federal government publications available to the
public at no cost. As of 2008, there were 1252 Federal Depository Libraries, at least
two in each of the 435 U.S. Congressional Districts.12 Because of this structure and
the requirements associated with serving as in either library program, we believe that
Federal Depository Libraries constitute a natural control group for patent depository
libraries.13

What Services did Patent Depository Libraries Provide (and to whom)?

The main aim of the patent deposit libraries, both in the modern era and in the 1800s,
was to provide access to technical information to potential users and to help them with
prior art searches. Patent librarians have, however, been embargoed from providing
legal advice or other legal services. Thus, their services have focused on information
provision. The records of the annual conference document the dedication of the library
professionals to these tasks (see., e.g., Sneed, 1998, and Oliver, 2002). Surveys of
patent depository library users in the 1990s suggest that the libraries served mainly
local users and inventors in particular. Specifically, the 1991/1992 survey suggests that
nearly 50% of users were inventors, while only 8% were attorneys. The 1997 survey
notes that the median user reported traveling between 11-20 miles to use the library,
while 38% of users traveled fewer than ten miles (Brown and Arshem, 1993; Patent
and Office, 1999).


3     Empirical Setup
Identification: Federal Depository Libraries as Control Group
To measure the impact of opening of a patent library on regional innovation, we need
a counterfactual estimate of what would have happened to patenting in region if the
library had not opened. To do this, we develop a control group that includes regions
  12
     There are two ways in which a library may qualify for FDL status: First, each member of Congress
may delegate two qualified libraries or a library may be designated. Second, all libraries at land-grant
colleges and universities, libraries of federal agencies, the highest appellate court of a state, and
accredited law schools automatically qualify for the status of Federal Depository Library.
  13
     The USPTO continues to operate the patent library program even after the advent of freely avail-
able patent document search engines, like Google Patents. The librarians we interviewed suggested
that the current libraries, now called Patent and Trademark Resource Centers, aim to create value for
the communities they serve by assisting with the search for prior art and by helping users negotiate
databases that offer more sophisticated prior art search capabilities than publicly-available resources.


                                                  11
that are geographically proximate to newly-opened patent depository libraries, that
have medium or large Federal Depository Libraries (FDLs), and that are within the
same state as the treated patent library.14
    Regions around Federal Depository Libraries are particularly attractive as control
group for three reasons: First, FDLs already handle government documents, which is
one of the key criteria for becoming a patent library. Second, there are at least two
FDLs in each congressional district and can, therefore, serve as control group in each
state. Third, medium and large FDLs satisfy the formal requirement for becoming
patent libraries. They are the likely to possess the space, human capital, and library
infrastructure required to become patent libraries. Indeed, 82% (53 of 64) of new
patent libraries after 1975 are FDLs.
    In our main specification, we focus on patent libraries that are also Federal Deposit
Libraries, as this enables us to work with a well-matched control group. In our estima-
tion sample, we drop all patent libraries that were opened before 1975 or after 1997,
all patent libraries that are not Federal Depository Libraries and all libraries without
a control between 15 miles and 250 miles. We also drop the library in Burlington VT,
because we cannot find a suitable control region within its state. Burlington hosted a
primary research facility of IBM during the sample period and its patents per capita
ratio vastly exceeded that of other regions. Over the sample period, the Burlington
library region averaged more than 295 patents per 100,000 persons, while sample aver-
age was just less than fifteen and the region with the second highest patents per capita
was less than one hundred (Newark DE, home of a Dupont primary research facility).
Our primary estimation sample, thus, includes 48 patent libraries that opened after
1975, along with 406 control libraries. In Table 1 we show how each of these selection
steps influences the sample composition. Figure 3a shows the position of all patent
libraries and all Federal Depository Libraries in our sample.
    FDLs will be a valid control group if the number of patents in patent library re-
gions would have followed the same trend as the number of patents around the control
libraries were patent libraries not opened. Our identification assumption would be
threatened if librarians or administrators had applied to become Patent Depository Li-
braries (or were selected by the USPTO) in the expectation that innovative activities
were about to burgeon in their regions. Although we cannot rule out this possibility,
  14
    The Federal Depository Library program classifies libraries as small if they contain fewer than
250,000 volumes in the library, medium if they contain 250,000 to one million volumes, and large if
they possess more than one million volumes of public materials.


                                                12
                               Table 1: Sample Selection

 Sample          Patent Libs    FDLs    Libraries dropped
 All patent           84         661
 libraries
 Only Patent          59         493
 Libraries
 after 1975
 and before
 1997
 Only Patent          49         408    Anchorage (AK), Concord (NH), Des Moines
 Libraries                              (IA), Hartford (CT), Jackson (MS),
 that are also                          Minneapolis (MN), New Haven (CT),
 FDLs                                   Piscataway (NJ), Springfield (IL),
                                        Washington (DC)
 Estimation           48         406    Burlington (VT)
 sample


three factors suggest that this may not be a substantial threat to causal interpretation.
First, to condition their application for becoming a patent library on future innova-
tion, local librarians must be able to predict accurately near-term changes in local
private sector innovation. While librarians likely have local insights, they would need
to anticipate coming boosts in local patenting that do not involve pre-trends, compile
their applications, and have them approved at precisely the time that local patenting is
about to increase. Considering the mix of idiosyncratic reasons that librarians report
as having played important roles in libraries’ application decisions, we consider this
unlikely. Second, the program expansion from 1975 to 1997 aimed at opening one li-
brary in each state, with the goal of supporting equal access to patent materials across
the country. Thus, it seems less likely that the USPTO accepted library applications
based on changes in expected future patenting. Indeed, according to the USPTO,
patent library status was supposed to be conferred upon the first qualified library in
each state that applied for program participation. After 1997, however, the USPTO
switched to favoring regions with high patenting per capita. Third, while most centers
of innovation ultimately receive patent libraries, the key to our identification strategy
is that the timing with which the libraries are opened must be random with respect
to innovation trends. The particular dates on which regions receive libraries does not
follow a pattern of increasing or decreasing innovation importance, either in levels or


                                           13
in changes.15


Data Sources
For our empirical analysis, we combine data on libraries with geolocated patent data
and population data from the U.S. census. The data on the opening dates of each patent
library is from Jenda (2005) and the complete list of Federal Depository Libraries
is from the online Federal Depository Library Directory.16 We obtain Patent data
from PATSTAT. To identify the geographic location of the inventors and inventor
disambiguation we rely on the data of Balsmeier et al. (2017) and of Morrison et al.
(2017). If there are several inventors on a patent, we allocate each location a share of
the patent.17 Appendix A gives a complete list of patent libraries with opening dates
and provides a step-by-step description of the data processing.
    Figure 3b plots the patent libraries together with patent data across space. To aid
visualization we also plot the centroid of each county in light gray and places with
more patents have larger dots. There is an apparent correlation between the location
of patent libraries and the number of patents. Yet, places with many patents are also
places with a larger population and thus more potential inventors. Thus, to adjust for
different city sizes, we normalize the number of patents by the population in the area.
For the population data we use the U.S. Census data for incorporated places at the
end of the sample period in 2010.
    Table 2 shows summary statistics for patent libraries and matched Federal Depos-
itory Libraries in the year before the opening of the patent library in levels. Some
of the means of the treated observations are close to being statistically significantly
  15
     To explore whether the assumptions underlying our identification strategy are reasonable, we
conduct several robustness checks in Subsection 4.2. First, we show that before the patent library
was opened, the trend in the number of filed patents per capita was the same around the soon to be
designated patent library and the control libraries. This speaks in favor of (counterfactual) parallel
trends. Second, we find little effect if we assign pseudo treatments to the closest control library. This
speaks in favor of the stable unit treatment value (SUTVA) assumption. Third, we use a host of
different specifications for the control group and find that our results are robust.
  16
     The        Federal        Depository        Library      Directory        is     available       on
https://catalog.gpo.gov/fdlpdir/FDLPdir.jsp (last accessed 2017-07-30).
  17
     Using patents as an indicator for innovative output is standard but not uncontroversial. In our
particular case, patent libraries also might increase patenting without increasing innovation because
they might make it easier to file a patent or because the librarians might give advice on how to
structure a patent. Yet, this seems unlikely because a U.S. patent application can be mailed from any
post office and the employees of patent libraries are only allowed to help with the search for prior art
but not with the preparation of a patent filing.



                                                   14
                       Figure 3: Libraries and Patenting Across Space
                             (a) Locations of Patent and Control Libraries




                  (b) Number of Patents and Patent Libraries by Location of Patent




Note: In Figure 3a, the red dots show the position of patent libraries. The hollow dots show the
positions of control libraries. In Figure 3b, the red dots identify the position of patent libraries. The
blue dots show the positions of patents. A larger dot signifies that there are more patents at the same
place. To aid visualization we plot the centroids of each U.S. county in light gray.




                                                   15
different from those of the control group. This is due to some outlier regions that do
not show patenting activity in some years. In Section B.1 in the Appendix, we show
that balancing improves when we drop these observations. All results hold when using
this alternative control group.18


4        Do Patent Libraries Increase Local Innovation?
It is unclear a priori whether the opening of a patent library will have an impact on
innovation in the library’s geographic region. On the one hand, improved access to
patent literature could induce local innovation if inventors were to read the patent
literature, draw valuable information from it, and, as a result, innovate at lower cost,
greater rapidity, or with greater effect than would have been the case in the absence
of the library (Machlup and Penrose, 1950; Scotchmer and Green, 1990; Scotchmer,
1991; Landes and Posner, 2003). On the other hand, a number of scholars doubt that
increasing the local availability of patent technical information could have such an im-
pact because they expect that effectively-written patents will be opaque and because
inventions whose inventive steps cannot be obscured in patent filings can be kept secret
rather than shared with competitors via patent disclosures (Levin et al., 1987; Moser,
2011, 2013). Further, legal scholars point out that inventors may wish to avoid reading
patents even if they were potentially helpful, because reviewing patent prior art may
expose innovators to willful infringement, which increases their legal exposure to en-
hanced financial penalties (Roin, 2005; Lee and Cogswell III, 2004). We evaluate these
opposing viewpoints empirically in the section that follows, by investigating whether
data on regional patenting suggest that patent libraries contributed to local innovation
during the 1977-1997 period.


4.1      Primary Analysis: Patenting Increases After Library Open-
         ing
We begin by asking whether patent library opening impacts patenting within 15 miles
around the new library. In Figure 4, we plot the yearly difference in the number of
newly filed patents in the 15 miles radius around the control and the patent libraries.
    18
     Further, in Table 4 we find that matching libraries by previous patenting or by population does
not change our estimates qualitatively and that using different control groups (such as only using the
differential timing of PTDL openings within the set of future libraries) yields the same result.


                                                 16
                  Table 2: Summary Statistics in the Year before Opening


  Main sample
                                    Patent Libraries       Control Libraries         Diff     P-Value
  Population in 100k                        7.60                   7.41             -0.19       0.93
  Uni Library                                0.67                   0.69             0.03       0.73
  # Patents                                128.29                  81.82           -46.46       0.09
  # Patents/100k                            15.68                  11.53            -4.15       0.11
  Citation-weighted patents                226.76                 173.58           -53.18       0.25
  Dollar-weighted patents                  83.80                  115.90            32.10       0.46
  # Pat. small firms/100k                   7.25                    6.03            -1.22       0.26
  # Pat. big firms/100k                      8.43                   5.49            -2.94       0.14
  # Pat. young firms/100k                   5.45                    4.35            -1.09       0.23
  # Patents old firms/100k                 10.23                    7.17            -3.06       0.15
  Number of libraries                         48                    406

  Patents by field
                                    Patent Libraries       Control Libraries         Diff     P-Value
  Electrical Engineering                    2.23                   1.94             -0.28       0.60
  Instruments                               2.27                   1.69             -0.58       0.14
  Chemistry                                 4.02                   2.01             -2.01       0.11
  Process Engineering                       2.02                   2.14             0.12        0.78
  Mechanical Engineering                    2.98                   2.07             -0.92       0.26
  Other Fields                              2.14                   1.67             -0.47       0.27

Note: This table shows the averages of the data for patent libraries and associated control libraries
in the year prior to patent library opening. The last two columns show differences with the associated
significance levels. A firm is defined as young if its first patent was filed less than three years before
the opening of the patent library. Otherwise it is old. A firm is defined as small if it has no more than
20 patents before the opening of the patent library. Otherwise it is large. The p-values result from a
t-test with unequal variances.




                                                    17
                                                       Figure 4: Non-parametric Evidence


                                        6
   Excess Patents per 100'000 persons




                                        4


                                        2


                                        0


                                        -2


                                        -4
                                             -5   -4   -3    -2      -1        0     1       2   3   4   5
                                                                  Year relative to opening

Note: This figure shows the yearly average treatment effects on the treated of opening up a patent
library on the average number of patents within 15 miles of patent libraries relative to the average
number of patents around matched federal depository libraries. The 90% confidence intervals are
based on bootstrapped standard errors. We use the weights of Iacus et al. (2012) to arrive at the
average treatment effect on the treated. We assign each patent library and all Federal Depository
Libraries within the same state and within 250 miles as control group. We exclude the patent library
of Burlington VT.


For each library region, we consider the five years before and the five years after the
library opening and we normalize the number of new patents to zero in the year of
initial operation. We use weights to adjust for the different number control libraries
per patent library to arrive at the average treatment effect on the treated (Iacus et al.,
2012).
    The data suggest that the number of newly filed patents around the patent library
increases significantly after opening. This effect is relatively smaller in the first two
years and is larger and statistically significant in each of the third through fifth years
after library opening. Prior to the opening of the patent library, the number of patents
per capita is similar for treatment and control libraries. This is consistent with the
parallel trends assumption it and provides some confidence that the estimated coeffi-

                                                                          18
cient represents a causal effect. In Appendix B.2 we compare the simple averages for
new patents around treatment and control libraries and find the same result.
    To quantify the size of the effect of opening a patent library, we estimate the
following difference-in-differences specification:

  #P atentsit
               = β1 · P ostt + β2 · P atLibi · P ostt + Library F E + Y ear F E + εi     (1)
  P opulationi

    where i indexes each library (i.e., the 15 miles region around each library), P atLibi
is an indicator equal to one if the library in that region is a patent library, and P ostt is
an indicator equal to one in the years following patent library opening. We incorporate
both library and year fixed effects as controls.19 The coefficient of interest, β2 , measures
the average yearly increase in the number of patents around a patent library in the
five years after it was opened relative to the period before it was opened and relative
to the controls in that period.
    We report the results for estimating Equation (1) in Table 3. Column (1) shows
that the number of patents per capita (patents per 100,000 persons) in the region
around of the patent library increased on average by 2.5 relative to the control group.
This implies an increase of 17% relative to the average. This estimate is the primary
result in the paper. If we can interpret the regression as causal, it implies that patent
library opening induces local innovation in the area proximate to the libraries. The
estimate may underestimate the impact of patent disclosure on subsequent innovation,
as some patent technical information may have already diffused to these areas, through
means other than the patent libraries, including the publication of patent abstracts,
the operation of internal patent libraries by large firms, and the ability of firms to
access patent information by other means.
    The increase in newly filed patents we find in (1) does not go hand in hand with a
decrease in patent quality. In column (2) we use citation weighted patents, a common
way to account for quality in patent studies, and find an increase by 44 citations,
which implies an increase of around 20 percent relative to the mean number of citations
received. In column (3) we weight each patent by the value of the patent estimated by
Kogan et al. (2017). The result implies that the average region experiences a boost in
patenting whose value is approximately $42 million per year accruing to the inventor
privately. This compares favorably with the operating costs of a library. For example,
  19
       The baseline effect of P atentLibi is taken up by the library fixed effects.



                                                      19
                       Table 3: Patent Libraries and Local Innovation


                         (1)          (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)     (9)
                                  Baseline                     Age                Size            University
                       Patents    Citations     Dollars    Young Old          Small Large         Yes    No
 Post                    -0.2        -17.3        -7.8      -0.7∗∗     0.4      -0.3     0.1      -0.4    -1.0
                        (0.6)       (17.2)       (8.9)       (0.3)    (0.5)    (0.4)    (0.4)    (0.7)   (1.1)
 Pat Lib x Post         2.5∗∗       44.0∗∗      42.2∗∗∗      1.1∗∗     1.4     0.9∗      1.6     3.0∗     1.1
                        (1.2)       (16.7)      (15.0)       (0.5)    (0.8)    (0.5)    (1.0)    (1.6)   (1.3)
 Mean Dep.              14.5        200.9        93.4         4.9      9.6      7.2      7.3     13.9    15.8
 R2 (within)            0.09         0.10        0.14        0.23     0.05     0.12     0.03     0.08    0.17
 Obs.                   4994         4994        4994        4994     4994     4994     4994     3630    1364

Note: This table shows the results from a difference-in-differences estimation with five years before
opening as pre-period and five years after opening as post-period. The estimation equation is:
            #P atentsit
                        = β1 · P ostt + β2 · P atLibi · P ostt + Library F E + Y ear F E + εi
            P opulation
where P atLibi is an indicator if the library i is a patent library and P ostt is an indicator for all years
after the opening of the patent library. As controls we use library and year fixed effects. In column
(1) we use Federal Depository Libraries (FDLs) within 250 miles as controls. In column (2) we weight
each patent with its forward citations. In column (3) we use the patent values from Kogan et al. (2017)
to weight each patent with its dollar value. We windsorize the Dollar values at the 90th percentile to
adjust for outliers. In columns (4) and (5) we split the dependent variable by young and old assignees.
An assignee is young if it filed its first patent no more than three years before the opening of the
library and old otherwise. In the following two columns we split the dependent variable by the size
of assignee. An assignee is defined as large if it has more than 20 patents before the opening of the
patent library. In column (8) and (9) we consider the subsample where the patent library is also a
university library and where it is not. In all regressions, we use the weights suggested by Iacus et al.
(2012) to identify the average treatment effect on the treated. Standard errors are clustered on the
(assigned) patent library level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%
levels, respectively.




                                                    20
the Boston Public Library reported a fiscal year 2015 budget of $41.6 million, while
the San Antonio Public Library and the Free Library of Pittsburgh reported 2015
fiscal year budgets of $34.9 million and $48 million, respectively. Considering that
patent collections constitute only a small fraction of the total operating expenses of
each patent deposit library affords some confidence that the boost in patenting induced
by access to patent technical documents is, across the program, justified by the cost.
However, note that the costs and benefits accrue to different stakeholders. One key
caveat of this analysis is that the Kogan et al. (2017) values are based on publicly-held
firms, whereas our data include patents issued to all assignee types. In addition, as
Kogan et al. (2017) note, their measure might be upward biased as a result of their
econometric choices.
    In columns (4) to (7) we split the dependent variable by the type of assignee. We find
that young companies play an important role in the boost in patenting. In our analysis,
we consider firms to be young if their first patent was filed less than three years prior
to the library opening.20 These young firms may be entrepreneurial ventures, but they
may also be existing firms that had not previously applied for patents. The opening
of the average patent library increases the number of patents by young companies by
1.1 patents per 100,000 residents, an increase of 22 percent relative to the mean. The
effect for old companies, reported in column (7) is larger in magnitude than that of
young firms relative to the mean but is not statistically different from zero.
    In columns (8) and (9), we split the result by the type of library. We compare
the impact of library opening at universities relative to public libraries and find that
the impact on innovation is greater among the former. This suggests a potential com-
plementarity between access to prior art and university innovation ecosystems. In
Appendix B.3 we demonstrate that the effect is mostly driven by patents assigned to
firms and that there is only a small effect associated with patents assigned to uni-
versities. There is no clear difference between regions with historically high or low
patenting levels, even though the effect is only statistically significant for the latter.
We also show in Appendix B.7 that this effect is robust to controlling for the local
number of registered patent attorneys.
  20
     This result is robust to using alternative cutoffs, such as defining young firms as those which file
their first patent after patent library opening.




                                                   21
4.2    Auxiliary Analysis: Increase in Patenting is Likely Causal
The principal concern for our estimation strategy is whether regions that receive a new
patent library would have experienced equal boosts in patenting even if they had not
received patent depository library facilities. This could occur if the patent librarians
were to have accurately anticipated the timing of local innovation bursts and, in this
expectation, applied to become a patent library. An analysis of patenting under such
circumstances might yield observationally equivalent results, though these additional
local patents would not have been induced by the library opening. In this section we
report the results from auxiliary analyses that shed light on this possibility. We report
the results of these additional analyses in Table 4, comparing new specifications to our
preferred specification, which is replicated in column (1). Our conclusion is that such
a coincidence is not likely.

No Effect Before Patent Libraries Opened nor Outside of Local Region

Figure 4 demonstrates that in the five years before the patent library opening, there
are no systematic differences in patenting between regions with Federal Depository
Libraries that are about to receive a patent library and those regions with Federal
Depository Libraries that do not obtain patent libraries. The number of patent appli-
cations that are ultimately granted increases in the years after patent library opening.
In addition to not being present prior to the arrival of patent deposit libraries, the
effects we find in (1) are also not evident in regions outside of the patent library’s com-
muting radius. Column (2) of Table 4 shows that the increase in patents is localized in
the geographic region most proximate to the arriving patent library. For patents filed
between 15 and 50 miles away we do not find any effect. In Appendix B.4 we report
different distance bands and find no effect more than 15 miles away.
    If a library had applied to become a patent depository library based on an expected
increase in its local innovative capacity, the responsible librarians must have been able
to pick exactly the right time and the right geographic location where patenting among
local firms, including, in particular young firms, some of which were not yet founded,
would increase. This foresight strikes us as less likely than the possibility that access to
patent technical information supports the translation of ideas into patent applications.




                                            22
                                                               Table 4: Auxiliary Results


                             (1)             (2)               (3)           (4)     (5)        (6)                       (7)       (8)        (9)           (10)
                                                                            Control group: Add matching on                       Control group
                            Base-       Patents in          Pseudo         Univer-     University       University       < 100        5         Within       All
                             line        15-50 mi           opening         sity       Patents          Patents           mi        clos-       treated      libs
                                                                                       p.c.             p.c. Popu-                   est
                                                                                                        lation
      Post                   -0.2           -0.2               0.1            0.0      0.2              0.2               -1.2      -2.2∗         -0.0        0.1
                            (0.6)          (0.4)              (0.5)          (0.7)     (0.5)            (0.6)            (1.2)      (1.3)        (0.0)       (0.5)
      Pat Lib x Post        2.5∗∗            0.2               -0.3          3.2∗∗     2.3∗∗            2.3∗∗            3.2∗∗      4.9∗∗         1.5∗        5.5
                            (1.2)          (0.5)              (1.5)          (1.4)     (1.1)            (1.1)            (1.3)      (2.3)        (0.8)       (4.1)
      Mean Dep.             14.5            3.2               14.0           13.4      12.0             12.4             15.7       13.8          13.3       15.7
      R2 (within)           0.09           0.07               0.10           0.08      0.11             0.11             0.12       0.10          0.15       0.11
      Obs.                  4994           4994               4290           2937      2783             2618             3542       2464         11685       5896




23
     Note: This table shows the results from a difference-in-differences estimation with five years before opening as pre-period and five years after
     opening as post-period. The estimation equation is:

                               #P atentsit
                                            = β1 · P ostt + β2 · P atLibi · P ostt + Library F E + Y ear F E + εi
                               P opulationi
     where P atLibi is an indicator if the library i is a patent library and P ostt is an indicator for all years after the opening of the patent library.
     As controls we use library and year fixed effects. In column (1) we use Federal Depository Libraries (FDLs) within the same state as controls.
     In column (2) we use the number of patents between 15 and 50 miles as outcomes. In column (3) we assign a treatment indicator to the FDL
     closest to the patent library and drop all patent libraries from the sample. In column (4) we additionally use only FDLs that are also university
     libraries as controls if the patent library is also a university library. If the patent library is not a university library we only use FDLs that are
     not university libraries as controls. In column (5) we match on state, being a university and in addition we do a coarsened exact matching
     (CEM) with 5 bins on patent per capita in the year before the opening. In column (6) we add repeat the analysis of column (5) but also employ
     coarsened exact matching with 5 bins on population. Thus only FDLs in similar sized cities, with similar number of patent per capita and the
     same type of library are used as controls. In column (7) we do not match on state but take all FDLs within a 100 miles as controls. In column
     (8) we use the 5 closest FDLs as controls. In column (9) we use not-yet opened patent libraries as control for patent libraries. In column (10)
     we extend the sample to contain all libraries from 1975 to 1997. This means we add libraries that are not FDLs, we use also small FDLs as
     controls and add Burlington. Therefore this analysis includes 56 libraries. We use the weights suggested by Iacus et al. (2012) to identify the
     average treatment effect on the treated. Standard errors are clustered on the (assigned) patent library level. *, **, and *** denote statistical
     significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
No Effect of Pseudo Treatment of Closest Control Library

Another prospect that threatens the interpretation that patent library opening induces
an innovation response is the possibility that library opening causes inventors to move
geographically with no associated effects on net innovation. Were inventors to relo-
cate to patent library regions, our results could reflect a simple change in the spatial
distribution of patenting rather than an increase in innovation. If this were the case,
the treatment assignment would then violate the stable unit treatment value assump-
tion (SUTVA), as the opening up of the patent library would decrease innovation in
control library regions. To test this possibility, we re-run our analysis assuming that
the inventors most likely to relocate to the patent library regions are those in the geo-
graphically closest control regions. We therefore replicate (1) omitting patent libraries
and, instead, assigning a fake treatment indicator to the Federal Depository Library
closest to each dropped patent library. We report the result in column (3). The fact
that the coefficient is neither statistically significant nor of a substantial magnitude
suggests that there is no differential trend between closer control libraries and libraries
that are further away. We conclude, therefore, that this type of interference is not a
primary concern for this study.

Effect is Robust to Alternative Control Groups and Sample Construction

In columns (4) through (6) we explore the robustness of the results to the use of
increasingly strict control groups. In column (4) we match on both state affiliation
and on the status of being a university library. In column (5) we match on state and
university and employ coarsened exact matching to ensure similarity in patenting per
capita in the year before the opening, using five bins for patents per capita. In column
(6) we use the same matching approach as in column (5) and also match on population
within 15 miles of the library using five bins. In each case, the narrower control sample
yields a reduction in the number of observations but a similarly-sized mean effect. In
column (7) and (8) we do not condition on state but rely on a control group of FDLs
defined by their distance to the patent library. In column (7) we use the closest FDLs
that are within 100 miles. In column (8) we use the five closest control libraries. In
both cases we find similar effects.
    Thus far, our analysis relies on the assumption that treatment and control regions
differ only as a result of treated regions receiving patent libraries and, hence, the
control regions enable us to estimate a counterfactual for the patenting that would

                                            24
have occurred in the absence of the patent libraries. We explore the robustness of
our results to the relaxation of this assumption, using only treated libraries in the
analysis in column (9). Specifically, we report the results of a model that identifies the
impact of patent library opening using regions around not yet opened patent libraries
as controls for patent libraries that were opened earlier. In some sense, this is our
strictest test since the identification here relies only on the timing of the treatment and
not on any differences between libraries that receive patent collections and those that
do not. Again we find similar results. In Section B.6 in the Appendix, we calculate
the “synthetic development” of patent library regions by holding their share of a region
among all U.S. patents constant. Again, we find that after a library opened, patenting
increased.
    In the final column (10), we use all libraries between 1975 and 1997 as the treatment
group. This means that we also use patent libraries that are not FDLs and we add
small FDLs as the control group. As a result, we have 56 rather than the baseline
sample of 48 libraries in the treatment group. The effect is more than twice as high as
in our main specification, but the coefficient becomes insignificant. In Appendix B.5
we drop each library in turn and find that the effect does not depend on any particular
library in our main sample.21


5        Mechanism: Better Access to Patented Knowledge
Our prior analyses document that the opening of patent libraries induces an increase
in local patenting. In this section, we explore whether better access to technical infor-
mation disclosed in patents plays a key role driving these effects. We first recount the
story of the development of Zithromax to illustrate that, if patents are informative,
easier access to patents might improve the ability to build new technologies based on
prior patented knowledge. Consistent with this disclosure mechanism, we find that
the effect is driven by patents in the field of chemistry, in which patents provide ex-
tremely clear disclosure, and that inventors started to build on more geographically
and technologically distant patents after a library opened. We then document that
the impact of patent libraries on local innovation varies with the introduction of in-
formation technologies that affected the ease of prior art searches. Finally, one could
    21
    In unreported regressions, available upon request, we have explored the data using count models,
log specifications and different weighting schemes and find that the results do not depend on the
particularities of the estimation method.


                                                25
be worried that patent libraries just substitute patent attorney activity. In Appendix
B.7, we show that the number of local registered patent attorneys did not change in
response to patent library openings.


5.1     An Illustrative Example: Patent Disclosure and the Devel-
        opment of Zithromax
In the early days of patent libraries, even Thomas Edison made use of them to search
for prior art (Sneed, 1998). Romer (1990) quotes the reading of patents as a potential
microfoundation of intertemporal knowledge spillovers and innovation in endogenous
growth models: “[O]ther inventors are free to spend time studying the patent appli-
cation for the widget and learn knowledge that helps in the design of a widget [an
improved widget].” The case of Zithromax provides an example of how this mecha-
nism might work in practice (Idris, 2002; Li, 2009). Beginning in 1974, Pfizer had
undertaken a program to develop a new microlide, an antibiotic of the same type as
erythromycin, but with greater antimicrobial effect. Despite significant investment,
more than 2000 tested compounds and eight human trials, the firm did not make ma-
terial progress. As a result, the firm was on the verge of closing down the program
in 1980. While reviewing patent documents at the United States Patent and Trade-
mark Office, Pfizer’s chemists stumbled upon a patent for a molecule with precisely
the features they desired, which had been granted to the then-Yugoslavian firm, Pliva.
Building directly upon the initial patent, two Pfizer chemists, G. Michael Bright and
Dick Watrous, methylated an amine of Pliva’s drug, thus creating a slightly-modified
version of the molecule, which Pfizer then patented. The time between the publication
date of Pliva’s patent and the application date of Pfizer’s patent was only six months.
Subsequent to its patent filing, Pfizer reached a licensing agreement with Pliva and in
1991 received FDA approval to offer Azithromycin, for sale in the United States under
the branded name, Zithromax. During the 1990s, it became one of the best selling
branded antibiotics in the United States and worldwide, with total sales peaking at
US$2 billion in 2005.22
  22
    Similar explanations of the value of patent documents arise from other users. Jack Kilby, the
co-inventor of the integrated circuit, is said to have read every patent document issued by the U.S.
government: “You read everything- that’s part of the job. You accumulate all this trivia, and you
hope that someday maybe a millionth of it will be useful” (quoted in Stephan, 2012, p.226, from Reid,
1985). Avid patent library user and hearing aid innovator, Geoffrey Ball, stresses in his autobiography
the importance of technical information in prior patents to his own work, in which he lauded the



                                                  26
5.2     Technology: Effect is Concentrated in Chemistry
If the effect in our principal analyses is, indeed, driven by improved access to patent
prior art, we would expect the effect would be concentrated in technologies where
patents are particularly informative. Evidence on this is presented by Gambardella
et al. (2011), who report the results of surveys asking inventors how much time they
saved by reading patents in various fields. They find that the average inventor claims
to save twenty-five hours by reading patents in Chemistry, eight hours in Process
Engineering, five hours in Instruments and Mechanical Engineering, three hours in
Electrical Engineering, and eight hours in Other Fields. These results suggests that
patents are most informative in chemistry. One reason may be that patents on chemical
compounds display the specific molecular formations, thus fully disclosing the invention
at hand. To illustrate this point, Appendix C.1 shows the patent on Acetyl Salicylic
Acid, commonly known by its trade name, Aspirin, and displays the formula for the
molecule. Due to the clarity of chemical disclosure and the clarity of the associated
patent rights, chemistry is a field in which patents have been documented to be valuable
and important for appropriability (Cohen et al., 2000).
    In Figure 5 we report the results of estimating Equation (1) using patents by tech-
nological fields as outcome variable. To define technology fields we use a classification
that aggregates IPC technology classes to larger sub fields (Schmoch, 2008). This is
the same technology classification as in Gambardella et al. (2011). We find that the in-
crease in patents is most pronounced in the field of Chemistry.23 There is also smaller
effect in Instruments. Consistent with the prospect that patent disclosure is a key
mechanism driving the results, the effect is largest for inventors in fields where patents
are most informative.24
Sunnyvale CA patent library as the “only place to research patents” available to him when he was
initially researching his inventions (Ball, 2012).
   23
      Note that this specification splits the main dependent variable by field. Thus, the coefficients
represent impacts on subsets of the number of patents per capita and therefore add up to the main
effect.
   24
      We replicate these results in Appendix C.2, using a different technology classification scheme that
is more detailed and includes a larger number of fields.




                                                   27
                           Figure 5: Effect by Technology Category

                     Baseline


                   Chemistry


                 Instruments


       Electrical Engineering


     Mechanical engineering


                 Other Fields


         Process engineering
                                -2                    0                    2                    4

Note: This figure shows the results from a difference-in-differences estimation with five years before
opening as pre-period and five years after opening as post-period. The estimation equation is:
           #P atentsitτ
                        = β1 · P ostt + β2 · P atLibi · P ostt + Library F E + Y ear F E + εi
           P opulation
where #P atentsitτ is the number of patents within 15 miles of the library in year t and technological
field τ . P atLibi is an indicator if the library i is a patent library and P ostt is an indicator for all
years after the opening of the patent library. As controls we use library and year fixed effects. The
technological fields follow the ISI-OST-INPI classification of 1995 as defined in Schmoch (2008). The
range plots indicate the 90% confidence intervals for the coefficient that are plotted with a hollow
diamond if the coefficient is not significantly different from zero or a full diamond if the coefficient
is significantly different from zero. In Appendix C.2 we report the results for more detailed and
alternative classifications of technological sub fields.




                                                   28
5.3    Structure of Patents: Citation Distance Increases, Patent
       Quality is Unchanged
If the arrival of patent libraries in a region truly induces innovation, such changes may
be observable in changes in patent bibliometrics following patent library opening. For
example, if these libraries extend the geographic reach of knowledge of distant patents,
we would expect that this would make itself evident in an increase in the average
distance to cited patents.
    To investigate this possibility, we compare bibliometric features of patents associ-
ated with inventors in patent library regions with control patents of the same technology
field and the same filing year but that were filed by inventors in Federal Depository Li-
brary regions. We again use the difference-in-differences specification in Equation (1),
estimating now at the patent level, and asking how the nature of backward references
and forward references change after library opening. We estimate each specification
once for all patents of young companies (Panel A) and once for old companies (Panel
B). We cluster standard errors at the patent library level.
    Table 5 reports the results of models assessing the impact of library opening on the
nature of patents in affected regions for young and old companies. Column (1) shows
that the average number of backward citations increased for young firms. Induced
patents may thus have profited more from prior art. We explore the geographical range
of patent citation in column (2) by examining how library opening affects the mean
geographic distance between citing and cited inventor.25 Patents of young companies
experience an increase in backward citation distance, consistent with the interpretation
that library opening eased the difficulty that they previously faced in accessing prior
art. The effect size corresponds to an increase of around 4% in distance across the set
of patents in a region. There is an insignificant negative effect for old companies in
Panel B. These results are consistent with what we would expect if patent access for
previously-inhibited inventors was the driving mechanism behind the core findings, i.e.,
that patent libraries improve the access to distant and therefore less likely to be known
patents. The results in columns (3) and (4) suggest that patents produced after patent
library opening are also more original, i.e., cite more technologically-distant prior art.26
We interpret these results as suggesting that the mechanism behind the post-library
  25
     In Appendix C.4 we show the backward citation results for young firms by percentiles in the
distance distribution.
  26
     We define patent originality based on Hall et al. (2001).



                                              29
               Table 5: Impact of Patent Libraries on Structure of Patents


                             (1)                   (2)                (3)        (4)            (5)
                                                       Young companies
                        Backward           Mean backward            Origi-        #          Forward
                        citations             distance              nality      Fields       citations
 Pat Lib x Post            0.2*                  40.8**             1.8**        3.7            1.3
                           (0.1)                 (19.4)             (0.9)       (4.1)          (1.5)
 Obs.                     144446                 144446            144446      144013         144446

                                                         Old companies
                        Backward           Mean backward            Origi-        #          Forward
                        citations             distance              nality      Fields       citations
 Pat Lib x Post             -0.1                  -18.6             1.0*         -0.8           -0.3
                           (0.2)                 (13.4)             (0.5)       (1.6)          (0.9)
 Obs.                     218177                 218177            218177      217462         218177

Note: This table shows the results from a difference-in-differences estimation with five years before
opening as pre-period and five years after opening as post-period. The estimation equation is:

                   Outcomejt = β1 · P ostt + β2 · P atLibj · P ostt + Controls + εi

where Outcomejt is the outcome for the patent j that is filed in year t. P atLibj is an indicator if
patent j is around a patent library and P ostt is an indicator for all years after the opening of the
patent library. In column (1) we use the sum of backward citations. In column (2) we use the mean
distance between the location of the inventor of the cited patent and the citing patent j. In column
(3) we use originality of the patent as defined by Hall et al. (2001) and in column (4) we count the
number of technical fields cited by the patent. In column 5 we use the sum of forward citations. The
classification of technical fields follows Schmoch (2008). In column (1) we use a fixed effect for each
combination of patent library, technology area and filing year as controls. In column (2) to (5) we
use a fixed effect for each combination of patent library, technology area, filing year and number of
backward citations as controls. In Panel A we use only companies with their first patent less than
three years before the opening of the patent library. An old company is a company with a patent
more than three years before the opening. Standard errors are clustered on the patent library level.
*, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                  30
patent boost is the improved access to previously-distant and expensive-to-access prior
art.
     One other issue worth exploring is the possibility that library opening does not
induce innovation, but may simply cause a rush to submit any patentable invention.
If library openings were to induce low quality patents, we would expect post-library
patents to receive fewer forward citations than before. We investigate this question
in column (5). The results evidence no decline in the number of forward citations,
suggesting that induced patents are of similar quality (and value) to those produced
before library opening.


5.4     Over Time: Effect Decreases when Patents Become Avail-
        able on the Internet
If, indeed, the disclosure of technical information is the relevant mechanism driving
post-library patenting, we expect that access to information technology would enhance
the impact of patent libraries on local innovation. Prior to 1982, most documents
in patent libraries were available either on microfilm or on paper but were not eas-
ily searchable. In 1982, the patent libraries introduced the computer-based database
“CASSIS” to support prior art searches (Oliver, 2002, p.101). The search capabilities
were “minimal in today’s time frame, but a quantum leap in 1982” (Sneed, 1998). Be-
ginning with the patent database of the USPTO in the mid-1990s and the Espacenet
database of the EPO in 1998, patent information became widely-available without
cost via the internet.27 On December 14, 2006 Google Patents launched and initiated
the era of ubiquitous access to easily searchable patent information. Considering this
timeline, we hypothesize that the effect of opening patent libraries would be stronger
beginning with the introduction of CASSIS in 1982 and that it would disappear around
1995, as a result of the release of the first USPTO patent database.
    To investigate whether the effect of opening a patent library evolves over time, we
estimate the Equation (1) separately for these different milestones of patent search
capabilities. In Figure C-4 we report the resulting treatment effects. For the period
1976 to 1981, the effect is indistinguishable from zero. During the period from 1982
  27
    As late as 2004, however, experts said that both free databases “still tend to have primitive search
engines and in some cases rather cumbersome mechanisms to download patents – deliberately so, on
the part of the USPTO and EPO, who have said they do not wish to compete unfairly with commercial
vendors,” implying that the library databases retained advantages relative to the free, internet-based
versions (Lambert, 2004).


                                                  31
to 1994, during which on-site databases were available but online databases are not,
the effect is similar in magnitude to the baseline effect and statistically significant.
The effect declines when online patent databases become available. These results are
consistent with the expectations we outlined above, i.e., that the impact of libraries
increased when patent depository libraries added searchable databases in the 1980s
and then declined when patent information became available over the internet. It is
important to note that, although the availability of patent information outside of PDL
facilities changed in the late 1990s, patent libraries continued to operate in that period
as they had in the early 1990s.28


6        Did Patent Libraries Affect Small Businesses?
If patent libraries improved the innovative productivity of local companies, we would
expect to see this affect business statistics other than simply patenting. In particular,
we would expect to see increased entry, survival, and growth of young and/or small
enterprises. We investigate this question using U.S. Census data that report business
statistics for Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA) between 1977 and 2005.29 These
data report MSA-level establishment entry, exit, job creation, and job destruction.
We focus on firms with fewer than ten employees and on the subset of data that are
not imputed for confidentiality reasons Miranda and Vilhuber (2014). We scale each
variable by population (in 100,000). As we do not observe the exact location for each
company, we compare MSAs with new patent libraries to MSAs with FDLs within
the same state. While this approach results in a less precise comparison than our
prior analyses, it nonetheless provides interesting insights into the potential effects of
innovation as a result of improved local access to patent technical information.
    To estimate the impact of library opening on the battery of outcomes available in
the 1977-2005 MSA-level Census data, we use our standard differences-in-differences
model. We plot the coefficient for the treatment effect for each outcome variable,
along with its associated 90 percent confidence interval, in Figure 7. Panel A reports
the results for establishments of firms with less than 10 employees. We find that
library openings generate more establishment entries and job creation, in particular
    28
     In Appendix C.3 we interact the specification in Equation (1) with opening years with filing years
and find a similar pattern. In Appendix C.5, we additionally show that the long-run effects of opening
patent libraries are substantial.
  29
     The data are available via https://www.census.gov/ces/dataproducts/bds/data_estab.html.


                                                  32
  Figure 6: Treatment Effect by Time Period in which Patent Library was Opened


                                            6
    Effect of opening up a patent library




                                            4


                                            2


                                            0


                                            -2


                                            -4


                                            -6
                                                 No search tools   On-Site Database    Online Patent
                                                  (Until 1981)       (1982-1994)      Database (1995-)

Note: This figure shows the average treatment effects on the treated of opening up a patent library
on the average number of patents relative to the average number of patents around matched federal
depository libraries separately for the period before the introduction of on-site databases (until 1981),
during the availability of these databases (1982-1994) and after the introduction of online patent
databases (from 1995). For the time period after 1995, we include patent libraries that were not FDLs
to have sufficient observations. We drop the library of Rochester NY because it has an extremely high
patent per capita ratio as Rochester hosts Kodak, Xerox, and Bausch & Lomb and thus we cannot
find a suitable control library.




                                                                     33
for new companies.30 However, the effects for exit and job destruction (particularly by
continuing firms) are also positive. As a result, net job creation has a positive mean
coefficient but is not statistically different from zero. In Panel B, we consider firm
establishments with more than 10 employees. Consistent with the expectation that
access to patent documents had a greater effect for smaller firms than for larger firms,
we find no significant effect on entry or exit for these larger organizations. In Appendix
C.8, we show selected regression results from these specifications.
    Together, these results suggest that patent libraries facilitated small firm growth
and the reallocation of workers and assets among firms. This is consistent with a
process of creative destruction following increased innovative activity. In response to
the opening of patent libraries, some entrants appear to have grown at the expense of
incumbents. In these data, there seems to be a slight net positive effect for job creation
in small companies and an increase in the number of small companies. Consistent
with Furman and Stern (2011) and Biasi and Moser (2016), we conclude that patent
deposit libraries act as knowledge-enhancing institutions whose arrival constitutes an
improvement in, and potentially a catalyst for, the local innovation environment.
    In Appendix C.6 we show the time-varying effects using establishment entries in
the years before and after an MSA receives a patent library. We find that, consistent
with our identification assumption, the number of small establishments does not rise
in the years before the opening of the library. Following patent library entry, however,
the number of small establishment entries increases significantly in MSAs that receive
patent libraries in comparison to those that do not. In unreported regressions, we use
the level of firms and establishments as dependent using long differences and find a
small positive effect.


7        Conclusion
The grand bargain in the patent system is that inventors disclose their ideas in exchange
for exclusive rights to market their invention for a limited period. Courts and scholars
argue that disclosure is a significant benefit of the patent system as it helps inventors
to avoid duplication and gives them new ideas to recombine with their own. However,
    30
    To show the robustness of these estimates, in Section C.7 in the Appendix we repeat our leave-
one-library-out analysis for our main result on establishment entry. The effects do not depend on any
particular library. The results on all other significant measures are robust as well and are available
on request.


                                                 34
                           Figure 7: Difference in Difference: Census Data
           (a) Smaller than 10 Employees                               (b) Larger than 10 Employees

        # Establishments Entry                                     # Establishments Entry


         # Establishments Exit                                       # Establishments Exit


    # Establishments Net Entry                                  # Establishments Net Entry


               Net job creation                                           Net job creation


                   Job creation                                               Job creation


            Job creation births                                         Job creation births


         Job creation continuer                                     Job creation continuer


                Job destruction                                            Job destruction


         Job destruction deaths                                     Job destruction deaths


      Job destruction continuer                                  Job destruction continuer
                                  -20   0   20   40   60                                      -100   0   100 200 300 400


Note: This figure shows the results from a difference-in-differences estimation with five years before
opening as pre-period and five years after opening as post-period. In Subfigure a) the sample are all
establishments smaller than 10 employees and in Subfigure b) all establishments larger than 10. The
estimation equation is:
            #Outcomei,t
                        = β1 · P ostt + β2 · P atLibi · P ostt + Library F E + Y ear F E + εi
            P opulation

where #Outcomei,t are the various outcome variables from the census in the MSA of the patent
library. P atLibi is an indicator if the library i is a patent library and P ostt is an indicator for all
years after the opening of the patent library. As controls we use library and year fixed effects.




                                                           35
there is very little evidence whether or not disclosure resulting from the patent system
affects innovation. By leveraging geographic variation in access to patent prior art
during a key period of expansion in the USPTO Patent Depository Library Program,
we are able to shed light on this issue. Specifically, we document that the opening of
patent libraries from 1975 to 1997 increased innovation in the regions in which those
libraries opened. Consistent with the expectations of Machlup (1958) and Scotchmer
and Green (1990), we find that the enablement effect resulting from the disclosure of
knowledge contained in patents is quantitatively important for subsequent innovation
and, further, that this effect is focused in those fields in which patent disclosure appears
to provide valuable information to future innovators.
    In addition to providing evidence regarding a key question in the economics of
intellectual property, our study contributes to the literature on research enhancing
institutions. While economists generally agree that institutions that lower the costs of
access to useful knowledge may support innovation (Mokyr, 2002), empirical research
has provided few examples (Furman and Stern, 2011; Biasi and Moser, 2016; Waldinger,
2016). In this work, we document the value of patent libraries as knowledge hubs whose
operation contributes to follow-on innovation, enhances local innovation systems, and
facilitates the democratization of innovation by supporting innovation among relatively
younger and smaller enterprises. In addition to their direct benefits, these institutions
create opportunities for resource-constrained firms to act in a strategic manner to
benefit disproportionately from public investments.


References
Arora, A., Ceccagnoli, M. and Cohen, W. M. (2008). R&d and the patent
 premium. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 26 (5), 1153–1179.

Ball, G. (2012). No more laughing at the bad boy: A technological adventure between
 Silicon Valley and the Alps. Haymon.

Balsmeier, B., Li, G.-C., Chesebro, T., Zang, G., Fierro, G., Johnson, K.,
 Kaulagi, A., Lueck, S., O’Reagan, D., Yeh, B. et al. (2017). Machine learn-
 ing and natural language processing on the patent corpus: Data, tools, and new
 measures. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy.



                                            36
Baruffaldi, S. and Simeth, M. (2018). Patents and knowledge diffusion: The effect
 of early disclosure.

Bessen, J. and Meurer, M. J. (2008). Patent failure: How judges, bureaucrats, and
 lawyers put innovators at risk. Princeton University Press.

Biasi, B. and Moser, P. (2016). Effects of copyrights on science: Evidence from the
  wwii book republication program. Available at SSRN 2542879.

Brown, W. H. and Arshem, J. A. (1993). Survey of patent and trademark depository
 libraries 1991/92. U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, Washington D.C.

Chien, C. V. (2016). Contextualizing patent disclosure. Vanderbilt Law Review,
 69 (6), 1849–1890.

Cohen, W. M., Goto, A., Nagata, A., Nelson, R. R. and Walsh, J. P. (2002).
 R&d spillovers, patents and the incentives to innovate in Japan and the United
 States. Research Policy, 31 (8), 1349–1367.

—, Nelson, R. R. and Walsh, J. P. (2000). Protecting their intellectual assets:
 Appropriability conditions and why u.s. manufacturing firms patent (or not). NBER
 Working Paper 7552.

Fromer, J. C. (2008). Patent disclosure. Iowa L. Rev., 94, 539.

Furman, J. and Stern, S. (2011). Climbing atop the shoulders of giants: The impact
 of institutions on cumulative research. American Economic Review, 101, 1933–1963.

Gambardella, A., Harhoff, D. and Nagaoka, S. (2011). The social value of
 patent disclosure, mimeo.

Graham, S. and Hegde, D. (2015). Disclosing patents’ secrets. Science, 347 (6219),
 236–237.

Gross, D. P. (2018). Suspended benefits: Evidence on the incentive and disclosure
 functions of patents from the u.s. patent secrecy program in world war ii. Working
 Paper.

Hall, B. H. and Harhoff, D. (2012). Recent research on the economics of patents.
 Annual Review of Economics, 4, 541–565.

                                        37
—, Jaffe, A. B. and Trajtenberg, M. (2001). The nber patent citation data file:
 Lessons, insights and methodological tools. NBER Working Paper No. 8498.

Hegde, D. and Luo, H. (2017). Patent publication and the market for ideas. Man-
 agement Science, 64 (2), 652–672.

Iacus, S. M., King, G. and Porro, G. (2012). Causal inference without balance
  checking: Coarsened exact matching. Political Analysis, 20 (1), 1–24.

Idris, K. (2002). Intellectual property: a power tool for economic growth, vol. 888.
  WIPO.

Jenda, C. A. (2005). Patent and trademark depository libraries and the united states
  patent and trademark office: A model for information dissemination. Resource Shar-
  ing & Information Networks, 18 (1-2), 183–201.

Khan, B. Z. (2005). Democratizing Innovation. Cambridge University Press: Cam-
 bridge UK.

Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Seru, A. and Stoffman, N. (2017). Technological
 innovation, resource allocation, and growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 132 (2), 665–712.

Lambert, N. (2004). Internet patent information in the 21st century: A comparison of
  delphion, micropatent, and qpat. In Proceedings of the 2004 International Chemical
  Information Conference.

Lamoreaux, N. R. and Sokoloff, K. L. (1999). Inventors, firms, and the market
  for technology in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, University of
  Chicago Press, chap. Learning by Doing in Markets, Firms and Countries, pp. 19 –
  60.

Landes, W. M. and Posner, R. A. (2003). Indefinitely renewable copyright. The
  University of Chicago Law Review, 70 (2), 471–518.

Lee, W. F. and Cogswell III, L. P. (2004). Understanding and addressing the
  unfair dilemma created by the doctrine of willful patent infringement. Houston Law
  Review, 41, 393.



                                        38
Lemley, M. A. (2012). The myth of the sole inventor. Michigan Law Review, 110 (5),
  709–760.

Levin, R. C., Klevorick, A. K., Nelson, R. R., Winter, S. G., Gilbert, R.
  and Griliches, Z. (1987). Appropriating the returns from industrial research and
  development. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1987 (3), 783–831.

Li, J. J. (2009). Triumph of the heart: the story of statins. Oxford University Press.

Machlup, F. (1958). An economic review of the patent system. 15, US Government
 Printing Office.

— and Penrose, E. (1950). The patent controversy in the nineteenth century. The
 Journal of Economic History, 10 (1), 1–29.

Mansfield, E. (1986). Patents and innovation: An empirical study. Management
 Science, 32, 173–181.

Miranda, J. and Vilhuber, L. (2014). Using partially synthetic data to replace
 suppression in the business dynamics statistics: early results. pp. 232–242.

Mokyr, J. (2002). The gifts of Athena: Historical origins of the knowledge economy.
 Princeton University Press.

Morrison, G., Riccaboni, M. and Pammolli, F. (2017). Disambiguation of patent
 inventors and assignees using high-resolution geolocation data. Scientific Data, 4.

Moser, P. (2011). Do patents weaken the localization of innovations? evidence from
 world’s fairs. The Journal of Economic History, 71 (2), 43–74.

— (2013). Patents and innovation: Evidence from economic history. Journal of Eco-
 nomic Perspectives, 27 (1), 23–44.

Oliver, J. (ed.) (2002). Celebrating 25 years of libraries and USPTO cooperation:
 1977-2002. United States Patent & Trademark Office.

Ouellette, L. L. (2012). Do patents disclose useful information? Harvard Journal
 of Law & Technology, 25 (2), 546–602.

— (2017). Who reads patents? Nature Biotechnology, 35 (5), 421–424.


                                          39
Patent, U. S. and Office, T. (1999). Survey of Patent and Trademark Depository
  Libraries: 1997 Customer Satisfaction Survey. No. Bd. 21 in Survey of Patent and
  Trademark Depository Libraries: 1997 Customer Satisfaction Survey, U.S. Patent
  and Trademark Office.

Reid, T. (1985). The chip: How two Americans invented the microchip and launched
 a revolution. Random House.

Roin, B. (2005). The disclosure function of the patent system (or lack thereof). Har-
 vard Law Review, 118, 2007–2028.

Romer, P. M. (1990). Endogenous technological change. Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, 98 (5, Part 2), S71–S102.

Schmoch, U. (2008). Concept of a technology classification for country comparisons.
  Final report to the world intellectual property organisation (wipo), WIPO.

Scotchmer, S. (1991). Standing on the shoulders of giants: Cumulative research and
  the patent law. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5 (1), 29–41.

— and Green, J. (1990). Novelty and disclosure in patent law. RAND Journal of
 Economics, 21 (1), 131–146.

Sneed, M. C. (1998). 125 years of patent information to the people: the us patent
  and trademark depository library program.

— (2000). Fully disclosed yet merely descriptive: Intricacies of training the patent
 and trademark information professional. Journal of Library Administration, 29 (1),
 59–78.

Stephan, P. E. (2012). How economics shapes science. Harvard University Press.

Waldinger, F. (2016). Bombs, brains, and science: The role of human and physical
 capital for the production of scientific knowledge. The Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 98 (5), 811–831.

Williams, H. L. (2017). How do patents affect research investments? NBER Working
 Paper No. 23088.




                                         40
    FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY


A      Appendix to Sections 2 & 3
A.1      List of All Opened Patent Libraries
Table A-1 and Table A-2 show a list of all Patent Depository Libraries in our data,
following Jenda (2005).


A.2      Construction of Dataset
We process the patent data and the data on libraries in the following steps to arrive
at our final dataset.

Patent Data

    1. We use patent data from the PATSTAT Database of the EPO that contains the
       universe of U.S. patents.

    2. We delete all patents that pertain to foreign inventors.

    3. We geolocate all patents using the data of Balsmeier et al. (2017) and Morrison
       et al. (2017).

    4. We account for patents with inventors in multiple cities by using city-weighted
       patents.

    5. To calculate citation distance, we assign the address of the first inventor on the
       citing or cited patent to the entire patent. When there is no primary inventor,
       we keep the first one in the list. We use only citations that are within the U.S.

    6. We use population data from U.S. Census at the level of the incorporated city
       and compute yearly patent and citation rates per capita in circles around all
       library locations.




                                           41
                        Table A-1: List of all Patent Depository Libraries

City, State                  Name of Library                                                     Opening
                                                                                                  Year
Albany, New York             New York State Library Cultural Education Center                     1870
Boston, Massachusetts        Boston Public Library                                                1870
Columbus, Ohio               Science and Engineering Library. Ohio State University               1870
Los Angeles, California      Los Angeles Public Library                                           1870
New York, New York           New York Public Library                                              1870
St. Louis, Missouri          St. Louis Public Library                                             1870
Buffalo, New York            Buffalo and Erie County Public Library                               1871
Cincinnati, Ohio             The Public Library of Cincinnati and Hamilton County                 1871
Detroit, Michigan            Great Lakes Patent and Trademark Center. Detroit Public Library      1871
Chicago, Illinois            Chicago Public Library                                               1876
Newark, New Jersey           Newark Public Library                                                1880
Cleveland, Ohio              Cleveland Public Library                                             1890
Providence, Rhode Island     Providence Public Library                                            1901
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania     The Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh                                   1902
Toledo, Ohio                 Toledo/Lucas County Public Library                                   1934
Atlanta, Georgia             Library and Information Center. Georgia Institute of Technology      1946
Kansas City, Missouri        Linda Hall Library                                                   1946
Milwaukee, Wisconsin         Milwaukee Public Library                                             1949
Stillwater, Oklahoma         Patent and Trademark Library. Oklahoma State University              1956
                             Sunnyvale Center for Innovation, Invention
Sunnyvale, California                                                                             1963
                             & Ideas, Sunnyvale Public Library
Madison, Wisconsin           Kurt F. Wendt Library. University of Wisconsin-Madison               1976
Birmingham, Alabama          Birmingham Public Library                                            1977
Dallas, Texas                Dallas Public Library                                                1977
Denver, Colorado             Denver Public Library                                                1977
Houston, Texas               Fondren Library. Rice University                                     1977
Raleigh, North Carolina      D.H. Hill Library. North Carolina State University                   1977
Seattle, Washington          Engineering Library. University of Washington                        1977
Lincoln, Nebraska            Engineering Library. University of Nebraska, Lincoln                 1978
Sacramento, California       California State Library                                             1979
University Park,             Schreyer Business Library. Paterno Library. Pennsylvania State       1979
Pennsylvania                 Library
Minneapolis, Minnesota       Minneapolis Public Library                                           1980
Newark, Delaware             University of Delaware Library                                       1980
Baton Rouge, Louisiana       Troy H. Middleton Library. Louisiana State University                1981
Albuquerque, New Mexico      Centennial Science and Engineering Library. The University of New    1983
                             Mexico
                             Media Union Library.
Ann Arbor, Michigan                                                                               1983
                             The University of Michigan
Auburn, Alabama              Ralph Brown Draughon Library. Auburn University                      1983
Austin, Texas                McKinney Engineering Library. The University of Texas at Austin      1983
College Station, Texas       Sterling C. Evans Library. Texas A&M University                      1983
Indianapolis, Indiana        Indianapolis-Marion County Public Library                            1983
Moscow, Idaho                University of Idaho Library                                          1983
Reno, Nevada                 University Library. University of Nevada-Reno                        1983
Amherst, Massachusetts       Physical Sciences and Engineering Library. University of             1984
                             Massachusetts
Anchorage, Alaska            Z. J. Loussac Public Library. Anchorage Municipal Libraries          1984
Butte, Montana               Montana Tech Library of the University of Montana                    1984
College Park, Maryland       Engineering and Physical Sciences Library. University of Maryland    1984
Fort Lauderdale, Florida     Broward County Main Library                                          1984
Miami, Florida               Miami-Dade Public Library System                                     1984
Salt Lake City, Utah         Marriott Library. University of Utah                                 1984
San Diego, California        San Diego Public Library                                             1984
Springfield, Illinois        Illinois State Library                                               1984




                                                    42
                      Table A-2: List of all patent libraries (continued)

City, State                  Name of Library                                                 Opening
                                                                                              Year
Little Rock, Arkansas        Arkansas State Library                                           1985
Nashville, Tennessee         Stevenson Science and Engineering Library. Vanderbilt            1985
Richmond, Virginia           James Branch Cabell Library. Virginia Commonwealth University    1985
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania   The Free Library of Philadelphia                                 1986
Washington, District of      Founders Library. Howard University                              1986
Columbia
Des Moines, Iowa             State Library of Iowa                                            1988
Louisville, Kentucky         Louisville Free Public Library                                   1988
Orlando, Florida             University of Central Florida Libraries                          1988
Honolulu, Hawaii             Hawaii State Library                                             1989
Piscataway, New Jersey       Library of Science and Medicine. Rutgers University              1989
Grand Forks, North Dakota    Chester Fritz Library. University of North Dakota                1990
Jackson, Mississippi         Mississippi Library Commission                                   1990
Tampa, Florida               Patent Library. Tampa Campus Library. University of South        1990
                             Florida
Wichita, Kansas              Ablah Library. Wichita State University                          1991
Big Rapids, Michigan         Abigail S. Timme Library. Ferris State Library                   1991
Morgantown, West Virginia    Evansdale Library. West Virginia University                      1991
West Lafayette, Indiana      Siegesmund Engineering Library. Purdue University                1991
Clemson, South Carolina      R. M. Cooper Library. Clemson University                         1992
Orono, Maine                 Raymond H. Fogler Library. University of Maine                   1993
Rapid City, South Dakota     Devereaux Library. South Dakota School of Mines and              1994
                             Technology
San Francisco, California    San Francisco Public Library                                     1994
Akron, Ohio                  Akron-Summit County Public Library                               1995
Lubbock, Texas               Texas Tech University Library                                    1995
Mayaguez, Puerto Rico        General Library. University of Puerto Rico-Mayaguez              1995
Portland, Oregon             Paul L. Boley Law Library. Lewis & Clark Law School              1995
Burlington, Vermont          Bailey/Howe Library                                              1996
Concord, New Hampshire       New Hampshire State Library                                      1996
Hartford, Connecticut        Hartford Public Library                                          1997
New Haven,Connecticut        New Haven Free Public Library                                    1997
Stony Brook, New York        Engineering Library. Melville Library SUNY at Stony Brook        1997
Las Vegas, Nevada            Las Vegas Clark County Library District                          1999
Rochester, New York          Central Library of Rochester and Monroe County                   1999
Bayamon, Puerto Rico         Learning Resources Center. University of Puerto Rico-Bayamon     2000
                             Campus
Dayton, Ohio                 Paul Laurence Dunbar Library. Wright State University            2000
San Antonio, Texas           San Antonio Public Library                                       2000
Cheyenne, Wyoming            Wyoming State Library                                            2001




                                                 43
Library Data

    1. Data on patent libraries (see tables A-1 and A-2) are from Jenda (2005) and the
       complete list of Federal Depository Libraries is from the online Federal Depository
       Library Directory.

    2. We drop the Federal Depository Libraries in offshore areas, including Pago Pago
       AS; Mangilao GU; Saint Thomas VI; Kolonia, Pohnpei FM; and Saint Croix VI.
       We obtain the library location information based on their city and state.

    3. We geolocate patent libraries and Federal Depository Libraries using patent data,
       as all patent libraries are in places with at least one patent between 1975 to 2005.
       We match all Federal Depository Libraries within 250 miles to a patent library.
       If a Federal Depository Library can be assigned to multiple patent libraries, we
       match it to the geographically closest patent library.

    4. We drop all patent libraries that are not Federal Depository Libraries. To obtain
       a better match of treatment and control library we delete all small federal deposi-
       tory libraries because patent depository libraries are usually either medium sized
       or large federal depository libraries. Of the patent libraries that were opened in
       our sample period that are also FDLs, 96% are considered medium sized or large,
       and only three patent libraries are considered small.

In a last step we cross all inventor locations with our library data to obtain pair-wise
combinations of locations between inventors and patent libraries. For each inventor
location, we thus have a closest library. Using this, we can assign a closest patent
library to each inventor-patent combination.


B      Appendix to Sections 3 & 4
B.1      Summary Statistics without Outlier Regions
In Table B-1 we show summary statistics of the sample when deleting outlier control
regions that report zero patenting in at least one year. While the mean differences do
not affect our assumptions in the difference-in-differences setup, deleting these regions
improves the balancing. Our results are identical when excluding these outlier regions
from our regressions.

                                            44
                Table B-1: Summary Statistics in the Year Before Opening


  Main sample
                                     Patent Libraries       Control Libraries         Diff     P-Value
  Population in 100k                        7.60                    8.26              0.66        0.78
  Uni Library                                0.67                    0.69             0.03        0.72
  # Patents                                128.29                   90.72            -37.56       0.18
  # Patents/100k                            15.68                   12.56             -3.12       0.23
  Citation-weighted patents                226.76                  197.06            -29.70       0.54
  Dollar-weighted patents                  83.80                    63.54            -20.26       0.36
  # Pat. small firms/100k                   7.25                     6.22             -1.03       0.35
  # Pat. big firms/100k                      8.43                    6.34             -2.08       0.30
  # Pat. young firms/100k                   5.45                     4.48             -0.96       0.30
  # Patents old firms/100k                 10.23                     8.08             -2.15       0.31
  Number of libraries                         48                     342

  Patents by field
                                     Patent Libraries       Control Libraries         Diff     P-Value
  Electrical Engineering                     2.23                    2.19             -0.04       0.95
  Instruments                                2.27                    1.97             -0.30       0.46
  Chemistry                                  4.02                    2.19             -1.82       0.15
  Process Engineering                        2.02                    2.33             0.31        0.49
  Mechanical Engineering                     2.98                    2.09             -0.89       0.28
  Other Fields                               2.14                    1.77             -0.37       0.38

Note: This table shows the averages of the data for patent libraries and control libraries without
outlier regions that report zero patenting in some years. The last two columns shows differences with
the associated significance levels. A firm is defined as young if its first patent was filed less than three
years before the opening of the patent library, otherwise it is old. A firm is defined as small if it has
no more than 20 patents before the opening of the patent library, otherwise it is large. The p-values
result from a t-test with unequal variances.




                                                    45
B.2    Compare Averages
In Figure B-1a we compare the raw difference in the average number of patents per
100,000 persons around treatment and control libraries. In Figure B-1b we subtract
from each series its value in the year before the opening of the library to account for
different levels. In both cases, the two series begin to diverge in the period after the
patent library opened.


B.3    Further Sample Splits and Robustness
In Figure B-2 we report further results for our main specification. We first split the
dependent variable by the type of assignee and find that the effect is driven by patents
assigned to companies. To a smaller degree, the effect is also present for patents
assigned to universities. In the last two lines, we split the sample in historically high
and low patent regions. The effect is statistically significant only in historically low
patenting regions.




                                           46
                                                                         Figure B-1: Compare Averages
                                                                                            (a) Raw

                                                         25        Patent Libraries
             Average number of patents within 15 miles

                                                                   Federal Deposit Libraries




                                                         20




                                                         15




                                                         10
                                                              -5   -4      -3       -2       -1        0       1       2       3       4   5
                                                                                     Year relative to library opening


                                                                         (b) Normalized in the Opening Year

                                                         6
             Average new patents p.c. within 15 miles




                                                         4



                                                         2



                                                         0



                                                         -2


                                                              -5   -4     -3        -2       -1        0       1       2       3       4   5
                                                                                     Year relative to library opening

                                                                               Patent Libraries            Federal Deposit Libraries



Note: This figure plots the average number of patents within 15 miles of the patent library (red solid
line) and around Federal Depository Libraries (blue dashed line) in the five years before and after
the opening of the library. Figure B-1a shows the raw average and in Figure B-1b we normalize the
average relative to its value in the year of the opening.



                                                                                                  47
                                    Figure B-2: Further Main Results

                                                    Baseline



                     Patents assigned to Individual Inventor



                             Patents assigned to Companies



                             Patents assigned to Universities



      Patents assigned to Government / Military / Non-Profit



                        Historically High Patenting Regions



                         Historically Low Patenting Regions

                                                                0     2         4         6          8

Note: This figure shows the results from a difference-in-differences estimation with five years before
opening as pre-period and five years after opening as post-period. The estimation equation is:
             #P atentsit
                         = β1 · P ostt + β2 · P atLibi · P ostt + Library F E + Y ear F E + εi
             P opulation
where P atLibi is an indicator if the library i is a patent library and P ostt is an indicator for all
years after the opening of the patent library. As controls we use library and year fixed effects. In
the first line we report the point estimate for β2 along with 90% confidence intervals. The confidence
intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered on the patent library level. In lines (2) to (5)
we split the dependent variable by the type of assignee. We show results separately for independent
inventors, patents assigned to companies, patents assigned to universities, and patents assigned to the
government, military or non-profits. In lines (6) and (7) we split the sample by an indicator if the
region of the patent library has historically many or historically few patents. We define a region as
having many patents if the average yearly number of patents per capita is above the median.



B.4      Alternative Distances
In addition to not being present prior to patent deposit library opening, the effects
that we find in (1) are not evident in regions outside of the patent library’s commuting
radius. Column (2) of Table 4 and Figure B-3 show that the increase in patents
is localized in a geographic region most proximate to the arriving patent library. For


                                                           48
patents filed by inventors whose addresses are further than 15 miles from opened patent
libraries, the impact of library opening is neither of substantial economic magnitude
nor does it have a statistically significant effect. In this analysis, we consider the
outcome variable to be the number of patents in a variety of distance bands around
the treatment and the control libraries. This result implies that the number of patents
only increases around the patent library but not in the wider area. Further, the finding
increases our confidence that regions are not receiving patent libraries in anticipation
of increasing innovation potential. If a region was chosen to get a patent library based
on an expected increase in its innovative capacity, the government must have been able
pick exactly the right spot where patenting will increase.


B.5     Leave-one-out Estimation: The Impact of Individual Patent
        Depository Libraries
In our final set of analyses of the robustness of the results to alternative samples, we
explore the role of single library regions. In Figure B-4 we run our main analysis,
dropping individual library regions one by one. With the exception of the library in
Ann Arbor MI, we find that the coefficient indicating the post-patent library effect does
not change. Dropping Ann Arbor reduces the coefficient from 2.5 to around 1.7, while
making the estimate more precise but still within the initial confidence interval. As
we described above, our main sample excludes the patent libraries of Burlington VT.
This region has an extremely high patent per capita ratio because Burlington VT was
the home of IBM’s major research facility. This constitutes a substantial innovation
outlier in its local area and, indeed, in the entire dataset. As a result, we could not
identify a control region within 250 miles and within the same state that achieved even
remotely similar levels of per capita patenting. When we add the library to our main
analysis, we find a post library opening effect size greater than that in our preferred
specification, but also that the additional noise renders the coefficient indistinguishable
from zero.


B.6     Synthetic Development of Patenting if Share Among U.S.
        Patents had Remained Constant
To use an alternative benchmark to quantify the impacts of patent libraries, we assess
how many patents would have been expected in library regions if patenting relative to

                                            49
                                                            Figure B-3: Effect of Patent Libraries by Distance



                                             4
   Increase in patents per 100k population




                                             2




                                             0




                                             -2
                                              0-15 mi                        15-50 mi                    50-100 mi                      100-150 mi
                                                                          Distance of inventor to patent library

Note: This figure shows the coefficient β2 from a difference-in-differences estimation with five years
before opening as pre-period and five years after opening as post-period. The estimation equation is:
                                                  #P atentsitd
                                                                = β1 · P ostt + β2 · P atLibi · P ostt + Library F E + Y ear F E + εi
                                                  P opulationid
where #P atentsit is the number of patents in distance d of the library in year t. P atLibi is an
indicator if the library i is a patent library and P ostt is an indicator for all years after the opening
of the patent library. As controls we use library and year fixed effects. For each plotted coefficient
we use the distance band reported on the horizontal axis. We report 90% confidence intervals for the
coefficient. The confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered on the patent
library level.




                                                                                          50
                                                Figure B-4: Stability: Leave-one-library-out Estimation

                                      5
   Coefficient dropping one library




                                      4


                                      3


                                      2


                                      1


                                      0
                                               Ann Arbor
                                                  Portland
                                           West Lafayette
                                                  Clemson
                                             Baton Rouge
                                             Morgantown
                                                  Lubbock
                                                  Amherst
                                             Grand Forks
                                                Rapid City
                                                    Austin
                                             Albuquerque
                                                    Akron
                                                     Dallas
                                           College Station
                                                   Auburn
                                                San Diego
                                                  Madison
                                          University Park
                                                 Honolulu
                                             College Park
                                              Sacramento
                                                   Raleigh
                                                    Miami
                                             Birmingham
                                               Little Rock
                                          Fort Lauderdale
                                                   Denver
                                                      Reno
                                                    Orono
                                                  Orlando
                                             Philadelphia
                                                   Lincoln
                                                Richmond
                                                     Butte
                                                 Louisville
                                                    Tampa
                                             Indianapolis
                                            San Francisco
                                                   Wichita
                                              Stony Brook
                                            Salt Lake City
                                                  Moscow
                                                  Houston
                                                Big Rapids
                                                   Newark
                                                    Seattle
                                                 Nashville
Note: This figure shows the coefficient β2 from a difference-in-differences estimation with five years
before opening as pre-period and five years after opening as post-period. The estimation equation is:
                                          #P atentsit
                                                      = β1 · P ostt + β2 · P atLibi · P ostt + Library F E + Y ear F E + εi
                                          P opulation
where #P atentsit is the number of patents within 15 miles of the library in year t. P atLibi is an
indicator if the library i is a patent library and P ostt is an indicator for all years after the opening
of the patent library. As controls we use library and year fixed effects. For each plotted coefficient
we leave out the patent library on the horizontal axis. The range plots indicate the 90% confidence
intervals for the coefficient.




                                                                                 51
other regions had remained constant. To do this, we fix the share of patents around
libraries among all U.S. patents to its average in the five years before the library
opened. We then compare the actual to this counterfactual number of patents, on a
per-capita-level, that the region actually obtained following library opening. As can
be seen in Figure B-5, the results resemble earlier conclusions: Relative to what would
have been expected under constant shares among all patents, regions around patent
libraries clearly increase their patenting.

                                                Figure B-5: Synthetic Libraries: Constant Share Among U.S. Patents
   Average number of patents within 15 miles




                                               22



                                               20



                                               18



                                               16



                                               14
                                                    -5   -4    -3     -2      -1        0     1       2       3    4   5
                                                                       Year relative to library opening

                                                                    Patent Libraries         Synthetic Libraries


Note: This figure shows the actual number of patents per capita (in red) relative to the counterfactual
number of patents per capita had the share of patents around PTDLs among all U.S. patents remained
constant (blue). To arrive at these, we use the average share of patents around PTDLs in the five
years before the library opening.



B.7                                             Patent Attorney Results
In Figure B-6 we use data from the historical rosters of registered patent attorneys at
the USPTO to provide evidence on the impact of patent libraries on the local number
of active patent attorneys. In line with our identification assumption, the number of
patent attorneys in treatment and control group is similar prior the opening of libraries.

                                                                                   52
                                                           Figure B-6: Impact on Number of Patent Attorneys p.c.


                                                 4
   Excess Patent Attorneys per 100'000 persons




                                                 2




                                                 0




                                                 -2
                                                      -5     -4     -3     -2      -1        0     1       2   3   4   5
                                                                                Year relative to opening

Note: This figure shows the yearly average treatment effects on the treated of opening up a patent
library on the average number of patent attorneys within 15 miles of patent libraries relative to the
average number of patent attorneys around matched federal depository libraries. The 90% confidence
intervals (in blue) are based on bootstrapped standard errors. We use the weights of Iacus et al.
(2012) to arrive at the average treatment effect on the treated. Data on patent attorneys comes from
the historical rosters of registered patent attorneys from the USPTO.


In addition, there is no clear effect of the opening of patent libraries on the number of
registered attorneys at the USPTO.
    We also show the robustness of our results to controlling for the number of local
patent attorneys in Table B-2. The first column replicates our baseline estimates. The
second column does so for the subsample of library-year observations where patent
attorney data is available. The third column shows that for this subsample, controlling
for the number of patent attorneys per capita does not affect our estimates. If anything,
this increases the estimated impact of opening a library. In line with what we would
expect, the number of patent attorneys per capita in a region positively predicts local
patenting. In the fourth column, we analyze the impact of opening a patent library on
the number of patent attorneys per capita. In line with Figure B-6, patent libraries do


                                                                                        53
                              Table B-2: Patent Attorney Results


                                               (1)    (2)    (3)       (4)
                                                      Dependent Variable
                                                  Patents p.c.   Attorneys p.c.
                Post                          -0.2  0.6   1.1                -0.2∗∗
                                             (0.6) (0.8) (0.9)               (0.1)
                Pat Lib x Post               2.5∗∗ 2.3∗ 2.7∗∗                 -0.1
                                             (1.2) (1.1) (1.0)               (0.2)
                Patent Attorneys p.c.                    2.7∗∗
                                                         (1.3)
                Mean Dep.                    14.5 15.3 15.3                   2.0
                R2 (within)                  0.09 0.11 0.23                  0.15
                Obs.                         4994 2848 2848                  2848

Note: This table shows the results from a difference-in-differences estimation with five years before
opening as pre-period and five years after opening as post-period. The estimation equation is:

                    Outcomejt = β1 · P ostt + β2 · P atLibj · P ostt + Controls + εi

where Outcomejt is the number of patents per capita (columns 1-3) and the number of patent attorneys
per capita (column 4) around library j that is filed in year t. P atLibj is an indicator if patent library
j is a patent library and P ostt is an indicator for all years after the opening of the patent library. As
controls we use a fixed effect for each combination of patent library, technology class and filing year in
columns (1), (2) and (4). In column (2), we only use those observations where patent attorney data
is available. In column (3), we control for the number of patent attorneys per capita. Data on patent
attorneys stems from the historical rosters of registered patent attorneys at the USPTO. Standard
errors are clustered on the patent library level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.


not seem to affect the number of active patent attorneys.


C      Appendix to Sections 5
C.1      Example for Chemical Patents: Aspirin
Figure C-1 shows the patent for Acetyl Salicylic Acid, commonly known by its trade
name Aspirin.




                                                     54
                                          Figure C-1: Aspirin




               UNITED STATES PATENT QFFICE.
        FELIX IIOFFMANN, OF ELBERFELD, GERMANY, ASSIGNOR TO THE FARIiEN
                     FABRIKEN OF ELBERFELD COMPANY, OF NEW YORK.

                                       ACETYL SALICYLIC ACID.

             SPECIFICATION forming part of Letters Patent No. 644,077, dated February 27, 1900.
                               Application ?led August 1, 1898; Serial No. 687,385. (Specimens)

      ’ T0 etZZ whom it may concern:
                                                    cause Kraut does not give the melting-point
         Be it known that I, FELIX HOFFMANN, doc of his compound. It follows from these de
       tor of philosophy, chemist, (assignor to the tails that the two compounds are absolutely 55
       FARBENFABRIKEN on ELBERFELD COMPAN r, different.
       of New York,) residing at Elberfeld, Germany,   In producing my new compound Ican pro
       have invented a new and useful Improvement    ceed as follows, (without limiting myself to
       in the Manufacture or Production of Acetyl the particulars given:) A mixture prepared
       Salicylic Acid; and I hereby declare the fol from ?fty parts of salicylic acid and seventy- 6o
       lowing to be a clear and exact description of ?ve parts of acetic anhydride is heated for
 IO    my invention.                                 about two hours at about 150° centigrade in
         In the Amzalcn der Chemie und Pha-rmacie,             a vessel provided with a re?ux condenser.
       Vol. 150,-pages 11 and 12, Kraut has described          Thus a clear liquid is obtained, from which
       that he obtained by the action of acetyl chlorid        on cooling a crystalline mass is separated, 65
       on salicylic acid a body which he thought to            which is‘ the acetyl salicylic acid. It is freed
       be acetyl salicylic acid. I have now found              from the acetic anhydride by pressing and
       that on heating salicylic acid with acetic an           then recrystallized from dry chloroform. The
       hydride a body is obtained the properties of            acid is thus obtained in the shape of glitter
       which are perfectlydiiferent from those of the ing white needles melting at about 135° cen- 7o
       body described by Kraut. According to my tigrade, which are easily soluble in benzene,
 20    researches the body obtained by means of my
       new process is undoubtedly the real aeetyl alcohol,  glacial acetic acid, and chloroform,‘
                                                   but di?‘icultly soluble in cold water. It has
       salicylic acid                              the formula                         .          -


                     o .H / ococn,                                       ooooH,       ‘         75
 25                   (J 4\ coon.                                   H       .
                                                                   6 4\coon
      Therefore the compound described by Kraut and exhibits therapeutical properties.
      cannot be the real acetyl salicylic acid, but  Having now described my invention and in 80
      isanothercompound. In thefollowinglpoint what      manner the same is to be performed,
      out speci?cally the principal differences be what I claim as new, and desire to secure by
      tween my new compound and the body de Letters Patent, is
      scribed by Kraut.                              As a new article of manufacture the acetyl
        If the Kraut product is boiled even for a salicylic acid having the formula:                              85
   long while with water, (according to Kraut’s
35 statement,) acetic acid is not produced,while                                          0.00011.
      my new body when boiled with water is read                                 on/              3
      ily split up, acetic and salicylic acid being                                    \coon
      produced.    The watery solution of the Kraut being when crystallized from drychloroform 9c
      body shows the same behavior on the addi in the shape of white glittering needles, easily
      tion of a small quantity of ferric chlorid asa soluble in benzene, alcohol and glacial acetic
   watery solution of salicylic acid when mixed acid, dif?cultly soluble in cold water, being
   with a small quantity of ferric chlorid-that split by hot water into acetic acid and salicylic
   is to say, it assumes a violet color. On the acid, melting at about 135° centigrade, sub- 95
   contrary, a watery solution of my new body stantially as hereinbefore described.
45 when mixed with ferric chlorid does not as        In testimony whereof I have signed my
   sume a violet color. If a melted testportion name in the presence of two subscribing wit
   of the Kraut body is allowed to cool, it begins nesses.
      to solidify (according to Kraut’s statement)
   at from 118° to 1l8.5° Centigrade, while a                                           FELIX HOFFMANN.
50 melted test portion of my product solidi?es at               lVitnesses:
      about 70° centigrade. The melting-points of                   R. E. JAHN,
      the two compounds cannot be compared, be                      OTTO Konre.




                                                           55
                                  Figure C-2: Effect by Technology Category

                          Electrical Engineering                                                        Process Engineering
                            Electrical machinery                                                       Chemical engineering
                         Audi-visual technology
                                                                                         Materials processing, textiles, paper
                           Telecommunications
                        Information Technology                                                            Handling, printing
                                Semiconductors                                   Agricultural and food processing machinery
                                                                                                  Environmental technology
                                   Instruments
                                         Optics
   Analysis, measurement and control technology                                                    Mechanical Engineering
                            Medical technology                                                               Machine tools
                           Nuclear engineering                                                     Engine, pumps, turbines
                                                                                           Thermal processes and apparatus
                                     Chemistry
                        Organic fine chemistry                                                        Mechanical elements
            Macromolecular chemistry, polymers                                                                   Transport
                   Pharmaceuticals, cosmetics                                                   Space technology, weapons
                                 Biotechnology
                   Agriculture, food chemistry
                                                                                                                 Other Fields
                     Basic materials chemistry
                   Surface technology, coating                                              Consumer goods and equipment
                          Materials, metallurgy                                           Civil engineering, building, mining
                                                   -.5 0   .5   1   1.5 2                                                        -.4   -.2   0   .2   .4



Note: This figure shows the results from a difference-in-differences estimation with five years before
opening as pre-period and five years after opening as post-period. The estimation equation is:
             #P atentsitτ
                          = β1 · P ostt + β2 · P atLibi · P ostt + Library F E + Y ear F E + εi
             P opulation
where #P atentsitτ is the number of patents within 15 miles of the library in year t and technological
field τ . P atLibi is an indicator if the library i is a patent library and P ostt is an indicator for all
years after the opening of the patent library. As controls we use library and year fixed effects. The
technological fields follow the ISI-OST-INPI classification of 1995 as defined in Schmoch (2008). The
range plots indicate the 90% confidence intervals for the coefficient that are plotted with a hollow
diamond if the coefficient is not significantly different from zero or a full diamond if the coefficient is
significantly different from zero. In Appendix C.2 we report the results for alternative classifications
of technological sub fields.


C.2       Alternative Technology Classifications
In Figure C-3 we use two alternative technology classification to show the effects across
fields. In Subfigure C-3a we use the NBER subcategory that are based on the USPTO
technology classes. In Subfigure C-3b we use the 1995 version of the ISI-OST-INPI
Technological Categories that are based on IPC classes. In both cases fields related to
chemical and pharmaceutical drive the effect.




                                                                            56
                              Figure C-3: Alternative Technology Classifications
        (a) By NBER Subcategory (USPTO)                                         (b) ISI-OST-INPI Technological Categories 2008

                     Category: Chemical                                            Electrical machinery, apparatus, energy
                                  Overall                                                          Audio-visual technology
               Agriculture, Food, Textiles
                                  Coating                                                             Telecommunications
                                     Gas
                    Organic Compounds                                                               Digital communication
                                   Resins                                                  Basic communication processes
                          Misc−chemical
                                                                                                     Computer technology
    Category: Communication & Computer                                                        IT methods for management
                                Overall
                       Communications                                                                      Semiconductors
          Computer Hardware & Software                                                                               Optics
                   Computer Peripherals
                    Information Storage                                                                       Measurement
                        Misc−Computer                                                       Analysis of biological materials
              Category: Drugs & Medical                                                                             Control
                                  Overall
                                   Drugs                                                                Medical technology
           Surgery & Medical Instruments                                                            Organic fine chemistry
                          Biotechnology
                      Misc−Drugs&Med                                                                         Biotechnology
          Category: Electrical & Electronic                                                                Pharmaceuticals
                                    Overall                                          Macromolecular chemistry, polymers
                         Electrical Devices                                                                 Food chemistry
                        Electrical Lighting
                     Measuring & Testing                                                         Basic materials chemistry
                       Nuclear & X−Rays                                                               Materials, metallurgy
                           Power Systems
                  Semiconductor Devices                                                        Surface technology, coating
                      Miscellaneous−Elec
                                                                                    Micro-structural and nano-technology
                    Category: Mechanical                                                             Chemical engineering
                                  Overall
          Material Processing & Handling                                                        Environmental technology
                           Metal Working                                                                           Handling
                  Motors Engines & Parts
                                   Optics                                                                    Machine tools
                           Transportation                                                         Engines, pumps, turbines
                        Misc−Mechanical
                                                                                               Textile and paper machines
                                       11
                                  Overall                                                           Other special machines
            Agriculture, Husbandry, Food                                                 Thermal processes and apparatus
                     Amusement Devices
                       Apparel & Textiles                                                             Mechanical elements
                  Earth Working & Wells                                                                           Transport
                Furniture, House Fixtures
                                 Heating                                                                  Furniture, games
                            Pipe & Joints                                                           Other consumer goods
                              Receptacles
                            Misc−Others                                                                   Civil engineering

                                              −.5   0   .5   1   1.5   2                                                       -.5   0   .5   1   1.5   2


Note: These figures shows the results from a difference-in-differences estimation with five years before
opening as pre-period and five years after opening as post-period. The estimation equation is:
              #P atentsitτ
                           = β1 · P ostt + β2 · P atLibi · P ostt + Library F E + Y ear F E + εi
              P opulation
where #P atentsitτ is the number of patents within 15 miles of the library in year t and technological
field τ . P atLibi is an indicator if the library i is a patent library and P ostt is an indicator for all
years after the opening of the patent library. As controls we use library and year fixed effects. The
technological fields in Subfigure a) are defined following the NBER Subcategories of Hall et al. (2001)
and in subfigure b) following the ISI-OST-INPI classification of Schmoch (2008). The range plots
indicate the 90% confidence intervals for the coefficient that are plotted with a hollow diamond if the
coefficient is not significantly different from zero or a full diamond if the coefficient is significantly
different from zero. In Appendix C.2 we report the results for alternative classifications of technological
subfields.


C.3        Alternative Estimation of the Effects over Time
In the results section we estimate the effect of opening a patent library separately for
different opening years. In this section we estimate the effect for each filing year. We
use the following equation to arrive at the effect over time:


                                                                           57
              1999
#P atentsit   X
            =      [β1τ ·P ostt +β2τ ·P atLibi ·P ostt ]·Y earF Et +LibraryF Ei +Y earF Et +εi
P opulation τ =1976

    where Y ear F Et is an indicator that is one if τ is equal to the filing year t. In
addition we transform the regression from time relative to opening to filing year time.
We look at the five years before and after the opening of the patent library. β2t
measures how much the patent libraries that were opened in t − 5 to t increases the
average number of patents relative to their associated control libraries in year t.31
    In Figure C-4 we report the coefficients of β2t over time. From 1976 to 1982, the
effect is zero and is not significant. Starting with the introduction of on-site searchable
databases, the effects become significantly different from zero. This reverses in the mid
1990s, after the introduction of online patent databases. These results speak in favor
of a temporary increase in the importance of patent libraries due to new databases and
a decrease in importance when patent information became available over the internet.


C.4      Structure of Patents: Backward Distance Percentiles
In Figure C-5 we show the effect by percentiles of backward citation distance for young
firms. There is a significant positive effect across almost the entire distribution.


C.5      Long Run Effects of Opening a Patent Library
While patent libraries opened in the Internet era did not have the same impact on
patenting as those opened in earlier periods, it is possible that the impact of earlier
patent libraries was, nonetheless, long-lived. For example, it is possible that library
opening and the concomitant boost in regional innovation may have improved the
overall environment for R&D and commercialization, attracting new innovators and,
potentially supporting a longer-term increase in innovative capacity. Figure C-6 sug-
gests that this, indeed, is the effect of patent library opening. It plots the average
number of patents per 100,000 persons around patent and control libraries over time.
  31
     The interpretation of these yearly coefficient of this regression is different from the standard
difference-in-difference set-up. β1t identifies the difference between the group of patent libraries (and
their associated control libraries) that in year t are already opened relative to those that are not. β2t
identifies within for the set of opened patent libraries the difference in number of patents to their
control libraries.



                                                   58
                                                   Figure C-4: Effect of Opening a Patent Library Over Time

                                           20
   Effect of opening up a patent library




                                            10




                                            0




                                           -10




                                           -20
                                                 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05
                                                                                            Year

Note: This figure shows the average treatment effects on the treated of opening up a patent library
on the average number of patents in a particular filing year within 15 miles of patent libraries relative
to the average number of patents around matched federal depository libraries. We drop the library
of Rochester NY because it has an extremely high patent per capita ratio as Rochester hosts Kodak,
Xerox, and Bausch & Lomb and thus we cannot find a suitable control library. We assign each patent
library and all Federal Depository Library within the same state and within 250 miles as control group
and use the ten years before and after the library opened as estimation sample. To estimate this effect
we use the following equation
               1999
#P atentsiτ    X
            =       [β1t · P ostt + β2t · P atLibi · P ostt ] · Y ear F Et + Library F Ei + Y ear F Et + εi
P opulation   t=1976

and report β2t for each filing year τ . We report 90% confidence intervals.




                                                                                       59
         Figure C-5: Effect on Backward Citations by Percentile, Young Firms


                                100
            Increase in miles



                                50




                                 0




                                -50
                                      0       20             40             60             80        100
                                          Quintile of within patent citation distance distribution


Note: This figure shows the increase in distance for each percentile of the within patent distance
distribution for young firms. Young firms are those patenting for the first time no more than three
years before the library opening.


To aid comparison we keep the sample constant over time, i.e., we include regions with
patent libraries before they are opened. Patenting in the treated vs. control regions
diverges significantly over time. The difference remains consistent and substantial be-
ginning in the year 2000, although no new patent library is opened after 2001 and
patents are freely available online during this time period. These results are consistent
with the prospect that patent libraries provide a persistent boost to regions’ innovation
potential.32
  32
     Note, that this difference in patent numbers is (at best) the upper bound of the effect of the
patent library program. The effect in our main regression is identified under the assumption that
nothing else changes at the same time that increases patenting and is correlated with the opening of
the patent library. This assumption is more credible in a short period before and after the opening
of the patent library but less credible in the following 20 years. For example, large companies might
reallocate their R&D to places that already have a cluster of inventors: Xerox PARC opened in Palo
Alto in 1970 because there was already much research on computers in the Silicon Valley. Similarly,
General Electric opened industrial labs in places with a strong knowledge base. Such relocations
in space might reinforce the concentration of patents around patent libraries but they do not count
toward the causal increase in innovation resulting from patent libraries.




                                                                  60
                                                          Figure C-6: Averages Over Time

                                              55
                                              50
                                              45

               Average # of patent per 100k   40
                                              35
                                              30
                                              25
                                              20
                                              15
                                              10
                                               5                                              Patent Library
                                                                                              Control Library
                                              0
                                                   1975    1980   1985        1990     1995   2000         2005
                                                                         Filing year




C.6    Census: Time-varying Entry Regressions
Figure C-7 reports the results of OLS models of establishment entry per capita in the
years before and after an MSA receives a patent library. The figure documents that,
consistent with our identification assumption, the number of small establishments does
not rise in the years before the opening of the library. Following patent library entry,
however, the number of small establishment entries increases significantly in MSAs
that receive patent libraries relative those that do not.


C.7    Census Results: Robustness
To show that the real industry effects do not depend on any patent library in particular,
we repeat our leave-one-out analysis for our main result on business dynamics, namely
the entry of new establishments. Figure C-8 shows results when we drop libraries one
by one. The coefficient does not change qualitatively, showing the robustness of our
estimates.


C.8    Census Results: Selected Regression Results
Table C-1 shows the estimation results for selected outcomes of the difference-in-
differences regressions underlying Figure 7.



                                                                         61
                                                         Figure C-7: Business Dynamics: Establishment Entry

                                                        15
             Establishment entry per 100'000 persons




                                                       10



                                                        5



                                                        0



                                                       -5



                                                       -10
                                                             -5   -4   -3   -2      -1        0     1       2   3   4   5
                                                                                 Year relative to opening



Note: This figure shows the yearly average treatment effects on the treated of opening up a patent
library on entry (Panel a) and exit (Panel b) of establishment of companies with less than 10 employees
in MSAs of patent libraries relative to MSAs of federal depository libraries in the same state. The
90% confidence intervals are based on bootstrapped standard errors. We use the weights of Iacus et al.
(2012) to arrive at the average treatment effect on the treated. For each patent library, we construct
a control group, which consists of all Federal Depository Libraries within the same state and within
500 miles but outside of the PDL’s MSA. Consistent with prior analyses, we exclude Burlington VT
patent library.




                                                                                         62
                                                  Figure C-8: Stability: Leave-one-library-out Estimation


                                      10
   Coefficient dropping one library




                                      8


                                      6


                                      4


                                      2


                                      0
                                                 Ann Arbor
                                              Albuquerque
                                                Sacramento
                                                   Moscow
                                                    Orlando
                                                   Portland
                                            College Station
                                                  Nashville
                                               College Park
                                                   Clemson
                                              San Francisco
                                               Indianapolis
                                                 Little Rock
                                                   Houston
                                                    Newark
                                             Salt Lake City
                                                    Wichita
                                            University Park
                                                 San Diego
                                                   Madison
                                                  Louisville
                                                     Denver
                                                      Dallas
                                                     Raleigh
                                               Birmingham
                                                     Lincoln
                                                      Seattle
                                                 Big Rapids
                                                    Auburn
                                               Baton Rouge
                                                      Akron
                                                      Orono
                                              Morgantown
                                                      Austin
                                                     Tampa
                                                       Butte
                                             West Lafayette
                                               Philadelphia
                                                   Amherst
                                                 Richmond
                                               Stony Brook
                                               Grand Forks
                                                   Lubbock
Note: This figure shows the results from a difference-in-differences estimation with five years before
opening as pre-period and five years after opening as post-period. The sample are all establishments
smaller than 10 employees. The estimation equation is:
                                           Estab.Entryit
                                                         = β1 · P ostt + β2 · P atLibi · P ostt + Library F E + Y ear F E + εi
                                            P opulation

where Estab.Entryit is the establishment entry variable from the census in the MSA of the patent
library. P atLibi is an indicator if the library i is a patent library and P ostt is an indicator for all
years after the opening of the patent library. As controls we use library and year fixed effects.




                                                                                   63
               Table C-1: Impact of Patent Libraries on Census Outcomes


                                                   Small Companies
                          (1)               (2)           (3)                  (4)             (5)
                        Estab.            Estab.           Job               Job              Job
                        Entry              Exit          Creation          Creation          Destr.
                                                                           (Births)
 Post x Pat lib          5.8**              2.1          28.8**              22.4**            7.4
                         (2.4)             (2.6)         (12.9)               (9.2)          (13.7)
 Mean Dep.              176.79            149.59        1067.94              620.62          918.54
 Obs.                    3026              3026           3026                3026            3026
                                                   Large Companies
                          (1)               (2)            (3)                 (4)             (5)
                        Estab.            Estab.           Job               Job              Job
                        Entry              Exit          Creation          Creation          Destr.
                                                                           (Births)
 Post x Pat lib           1.0              1.2             172.1             116.2            83.1
                         (1.0)            (0.8)           (107.1)            (79.6)          (67.0)
 Mean Dep.               44.84            34.93           3828.18           1248.78         3289.34
 Obs.                    3887             3887             3887               3887            3887

Note: This table shows the results from difference-in-differences estimations with five years before
opening as pre-period and five years after opening as post-period. In the upper panel we use small
firms and in the lower panel large firms. Small companies are those with less than ten employees.
Large companies are all companies with more than ten employees. As controls we use library and
year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered on the associated patent library level. *, **, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                   64
