                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               BUILDING NATIONS THROUGH SHARED EXPERIENCES:
                      EVIDENCE FROM AFRICAN FOOTBALL

                                  Emilio Depetris-Chauvin
                                      Ruben Durante
                                    Filipe R. Campante

                                     Working Paper 24666
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24666


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2018


We thank Alberto Alesina, Sam Bazzi, Francesco Drago, Leopoldo Fergusson, Matthieu
Couttenier, Quoc-Anh Do, Marcel Fafchamps, Ignacio Munyo, Wolfgang Stojetz, Jorge Tovar,
Oliver Vanden Eynde, David Yanagizawa-Drott, Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, Jeff Staton, and
especially Leonard Wantchekon for insightful comments. We also thank seminar participants at
BU, Brown, FGV São Paulo, GWU, Harvard, Lausanne, Messina, Nottingham, NYU-Abu Dhabi,
PSE, PUC Chile, PUC Rio, Sciences Po, SMU, Universidad Adolfo Hurtado, Universidad de
Chile, Universidad Diego Portales, Universidad de Los Andes, Universidad del Rosario and
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, and participants in the 2017 NBER Summer Institute in
Development Economics, APSA Annual Meeting, the 20th Annual Conference of the SIOE, the
2016 Barcelona Summer Forum, the 2017 Oxford CSAE Conference, the 2016 MIPP Workshop
in Political Economy and Political Science, the 2016 NEUDC, the 2016 LACEA Meeting, the
2016 RIDGE-LACEA Workshop in Political Economy, and the 2016 AL CAPONE meeting, and
the 2018 Harvard Political Economy of Religion Seminar for helpful discussion. Christine Cai,
Florin Cucu, Carlos Molina Guerra, Sebastian Melo, Francisco Eslava, and Catalina Morales,
provided excellent research assistance. Emilio Depetris-Chauvin acknowledges financial support
from CONICYT, FONDECYT Iniciación 11160290. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Emilio Depetris-Chauvin, Ruben Durante, and Filipe R. Campante. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Building Nations Through Shared Experiences: Evidence from African Football
Emilio Depetris-Chauvin, Ruben Durante, and Filipe R. Campante
NBER Working Paper No. 24666
May 2018
JEL No. O12,Z20

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine whether shared collective experiences can help build a national identity, by looking
at the impact of national football teams’ victories in sub- Saharan Africa. Combining individual
survey data with information on official matches played between 2000 and 2015, we find that
individuals interviewed in the days after a victory of their country’s national team are less likely
to identify with their ethnic group than with the country as a whole and more likely to trust
people of other ethnicities than those interviewed just before. The effect is sizable and robust and
is not explained by generic euphoria or optimism. Crucially, we find that national victories not
only affect attitudes but also reduce violence: using plausibly exogenous variation from close
qualifications to the African Cup of Nations, we find that countries that (barely) qualified
experience significantly less conflict in the following six months than countries that (barely) did
not. Our findings indicate that, even when divisions are deeply rooted, shared experiences can
work as an effective nation-building tool, bridge cleavages, and have a tangible effect on
violence.

Emilio Depetris-Chauvin                          Filipe R. Campante
Department of Economics                          Harvard Kennedy School
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile         79 JFK Street
Santiago de Chile                                Cambridge, MA 02138
edepetris@gmail.com                              and NBER
                                                 filipecampantehks@gmail.com
Ruben Durante
Sciences Po
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
IPEG, and CEPR
rubendurante@gmail.com
       “What has made sport so uniquely effective a medium for inculcating national
     feelings [...] is the ease with which even the least political or public individuals
     can identify with the nation as symbolized by young persons excelling [...]. The
         imagined community of millions seems more real as a team of eleven named
      people. The individual, even the one who only cheers, becomes a symbol of his
                                                                         nation himself.”
                                                               Eric Hobsbawm (1990, p.143)



1. I NTRODUCTION
Many countries feature strong ethnic, linguistic, or regional cleavages, which can lead to
tensions and even outright violence, with clearly detrimental consequences for economic
development.1 Overcoming such cleavages has long been a crucial challenge in the consol-
idation of modern states, from 19th century Europe to present-day developing countries and
even developed ones (e.g. Spain, Belgium).
This has led many countries to adopt so-called “nation-building” policies, aimed at forging a
common identity, making citizens see themselves as part of the nation as a whole rather than
of their specific group, and “feeling a sufficient amount of commonality of interests, goals
and preferences [that] they do not wish to separate from each other” (Alesina and Reich,
2015; Alesina et al., 2017).
Examples of such policies typically include the provision of public services, from mass
schooling to military conscription to infrastructure building (Tilly, 1975; Weber, 1976; Finer,
1975; Ramirez and Boli, 1987; Bandiera et al., 2018; Conversi, 2008; Bel, 2011).2 Imple-
menting such policies, however, requires a substantial level of state capacity, and, as such,
poses a clear conundrum: if internal fractionalization is an obstacle to the consolidation of
a capable state, it can itself become a major hurdle for the adoption of policies that could
overcome it.
In light of this challenge, countries also resort to other “softer” and less tangible nation-
building tools which involve the use of symbols - such as the national flag or the national
anthem - meant to evoke and reinforce national identity (Billig, 1995). Yet, while such
“banal nationalism” may help maintain a national identity that has already been established,
it is unlikely to be strong enough to make one emerge.
 1   For example, extensive evidence indicate that more ethnically diverse communities tend to experience more
     corruption and conflict, and less social cohesion, public good provision, and growth (Easterly and Levine,
     1997; Alesina et al., 1999; Alesina and La Ferrara, 2005; Miguel and Gugerty, 2005).
 2   Other countries attempted to integrate geographically segregated ethnic groups through large resettlement
     programs. See Bazzi et al. (2018) for a thorough empirical investigation of the effects of such a program
     for the case of Indonesia.



                                                       1
Standing between these two extremes lie the experiences perceived by the citizens of a coun-
try as being collectively shared between them. Indeed, as pointed out by Anderson (1983) in
his seminal work on nationalism, nations are fundamentally “imagined communities,” and
highly symbolic and emotionally charged experiences are crucial to make the image of the
national communion live in each citizen’s mind. Yet, to what extent such shared experi-
ences can forge national identity, and how strong and long-lasting their effect might be, is an
empirical question that remains under-explored.
We examine this issue by looking at one particular type of shared experiences: the success
of national sports teams. Indeed, few realms of human endeavor are as effective as sports at
creating imagined experiences, and it is not surprising that, from Hitler to Mandela, political
leaders have frequently tried to harness the power of sports to strengthen national identities
(Hilton, 2011; Carlin, 2008; Hobsbawm, 1990; Allison, 2000). We focus, in particular, on the
impact of football – perhaps the one sport most associated with nationalistic fervor around the
world – in Sub-Saharan Africa, a context marked by low levels of state capacity and where
nation building, and the tension between particular versus national identities, are especially
salient.3
We investigate how national football team victories in major international competitions af-
fect the strength of ethnic identification, as opposed to national identity, as well as attitudes
towards other ethnicities, and actual inter-ethnic violence.4 To this end, we combine differ-
ent empirical approaches and use data from a variety of sources. First, to study the impact
of national team victories on individual attitudes, we match data from four waves of the
Afrobarometer survey with information on over 70 official matches by African teams held
between 2000 and 2015. Our identification strategy exploits plausibly exogenous differences
in the timing of the interviews relative to the timing of the matches. Specifically, we com-
pare self-reported attitudes between individuals interviewed in the days immediately before
a victory of their national team and individuals with the same ethnic background and in the
 3   See Miguel (2004) for a careful discussion of the mixed success of nation-building policies in post-
     independence Africa.
 4   Indeed, sports in general, and football in particular, has traditionally played a key role in nation-building in
     Africa. As argued by Darby (2002), football has greatly contributed to “construct a sense of national identity
     and to create a feeling of bonded patriotism cutting across tribal and ethnic allegiances.” A prominent ex-
     ample of the unifying power of football in Africa is represented by the historical qualification of Ivory Coast
     to the 2006 FIFA World Cup under the charismatic leadership of Didier Drogba which, many argue, paved
     the way to a peaceful solution of the civil war that had ravaged the country for over five years (Stormer,
     2006; Mehler, 2008). Looking beyond football, another notable example is the unexpected success of the
     South African national rugby team, the Springboks, in the 1995 Rugby World Cup, which president Nelson
     Mandela masterfully exploited in his effort to bridge racial divisions in the post-apartheid period. Outside
     of Africa, other cases of sports victories that spurred great patriotic fervor and primed national unity over
     racial and regional cleavages include the surprising victory of the U.S. ice hockey team against the USSR
     in the 1980 Winter Olympics (the so-called “Miracle on Ice”), and the success of France and Spain in the
     1998 and the 2010 editions of the FIFA World Cup, respectively.


                                                          2
same country, but interviewed in the days immediately after that same match, two groups
that, we show, are comparable along most dimensions.
Applying this approach to over 28,000 respondents in 18 countries, we find that individuals
interviewed after a national team victory are 4% less likely to report a strong sense of ethnic
identity than those interviewed just before the match. This effect is sizable, corresponding
to a 20% decrease in the average probability of ethnic self-identification, and quite persistent
within the limited time window for which data are available (i.e., up to 30 days before and
after the match), becoming even larger several days after the match.
Additional results further support the view that national team performance galvanizes sup-
porters and tilts the balance between ethnic and national identity in favor of the latter. First,
only a win affects ethnic sentiments and not the mere occurrence of an important match
or any other outcome, including a defeat. Second, the effect is driven only by victories in
high-stakes official games (i.e., Africa Cup of Nations and FIFA World Cup qualifiers and
finals), as opposed to friendly matches. Third, the effect is substantially larger for victories
against traditional rivals which are likely to trigger a stronger emotional reaction. Fourth,
the effect is similar for wins in home and in away games, which indicates it is not driven by
respondents’ direct participation in the event.
We also find that the effect is weaker where the state is more present, specifically in ways
that might lead to a stronger connection to the nation – roads, post office, schools. This
suggests that shared experiences can work as a substitute for other forms of nation building.
By the same token, the impact is stronger when there is greater ethnic diversity at the national
level, as well as when the composition of the national team itself is more representative of
that diversity. This is in line with a “role model” mechanism, where victories showcase how
inter-ethnic cooperation can lead to achievement against a foreign opposing group.
These results are further corroborated by the fact that post-match respondents are also signif-
icantly more likely to trust other people, particularly members of other ethnicities. Crucially,
respondents’ lower emphasis on ethnic identity and higher trust in others do not merely re-
flect a generally positive mood due to post-victory euphoria. In fact, we find no effect of
national team’s victories on either trust in the ruling party or approval for the incumbent,
a result which suggests that politicians’ effort to use national teams’ achievements to boost
their own popularity may not pay off. Furthermore, we find that national team’s victories do
not affect respondents’ optimism about their own or the country’s economic prospects.5
We then explore whether, in addition to people’s attitudes, national team victories have a
tangible impact on violence and conflict. We combine the football data with data on the
 5   To better interpret our findings on respondents’ attitudinal changes, we relate them to previous work in
     social psychology which has discussed various ways in which sports results may influence social identity.



                                                       3
occurrence and severity of political violence events, available from the Armed Conflict Lo-
cation & Event Data Project (ACLED) for the period 1997-2013. Our approach exploits
the quasi-randomness of qualification to the final tournament of the Africa Cup of Nations
(ACN) for teams that, prior to the last game of the group stage, could still qualify. In other
words, for each two teams in the same group that, going into the very last game, could
still qualify, we attribute the one that actually qualified to the treatment group, and the one
that barely failed to do so to the control group – two groups which, we show, are ex ante
comparable along many dimensions.
We find that countries whose teams (barely) qualified to the ACN tournament experience
significantly less conflict in the following six months than countries whose teams (barely)
did not. This effect is sizable and significant, and robust to controlling for the intensity of
conflict in the months prior to qualification. Interestingly, the effect is stronger for teams that
had never qualified before or that had not qualified in a long time, and whose success was
rather unexpected.6 Crucially, the reduction in conflict intensity that follows a successful
qualification campaign appears to be quite persistent, up to several months after the event.
Taken together our findings indicate that shared collective experiences - such as important
sports achievements - can be effective at priming sentiments of national unity and at attenuat-
ing even deeply-rooted ethnic mistrust, illustrating that soft tools can be effective in fostering
a national identity. Moreover, we find that this has tangible effects on the prevalence of con-
flict. Even if the effect of these events is transient, our results suggest that it may last long
enough to open a precious window of opportunity for political dialogue, negotiations and
reforms capable of producing long-lasting improvements.
Our research contributes to various streams of literature, besides the aforementioned work
on nation building. First, it relates to previous work on the determinants of ethnic identifi-
cation which indicates that the strength of ethnic identification may be malleable by factors
such as electoral competition, economic modernization, or whether an ethnic group holds
power (Eifert et al., 2010; Robinson, 2014; Green, 2017). Yet, due to data limitations and
identification issues, it has been difficult for these contributions to go beyond correlations
and draw causal conclusions. Our paper fills this gap by providing robust causal evidence
that the patriotic sentiments primed by important sports events can affect the strength of eth-
 6   Our finding that unexpected results are more consequential than expected ones is in line with previous
     evidence on the effect of sports events on various outcomes. For example, in their study on the impact of
     NFL games on intra-household violence Card and Dahl (2011) find that upset losses are associated with a
     10% increase in violence toward female partners while expected ones have no impact. Similarly, Munyo and
     Rossi (2013) find that upset losses increase violent property crime whereas unexpected victories strongly
     reduce it, though both effects are extremely short-lived and mainly due to incapacitation.




                                                       4
nic identity.7 We also add to the literature that has shown how shared collective experiences
can affect individual attitudes in politically relevant ways (Madestam and Yanagizawa-Drott,
2012; Kaplan and Mukand, 2014).
Our paper also relates to previous work on the determinants of interpersonal trust which
has documented how historical episodes, such as the slave trade, the introduction of the
Napoleonic civil code, or the East German system of mass surveillance, had long-lasting
effect on contemporary trust attitudes (Nunn and Wantchekon, 2011; Buggle, 2016; Jacob
and Tyrell, 2010). Our findings indicate that other, more transitory factors, can also have
a substantial impact on trust attitudes, particularly towards people of other ethnicities. In
this respect, our results are especially related to recent work by Robinson (forthcoming) who
shows that manipulating the salience of national identity in a ‘lab-in-the-field” experiment
improves inter-ethnic trust, and by Miguel (2004) who argues that nation-building policies
can improve inter-ethnic cooperation.
Finally, our work contributes to the vast literature on the determinants of civil conflict, by
documenting that priming national identity can contribute to reducing violence.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the data. Sections 3 and 4 present
and discuss the empirical strategy and results for the individual- and country-level analysis,
respectively. Section 5 concludes.

2. DATA
2.1. NATIONAL F OOTBALL T EAMS ’ M ATCHES
We collect information on all official matches played by men’s national teams of various
sub-Saharan African countries over the period 1990-2015; these data are available from the
FIFA statistical office.8 In particular, we focus on matches played for both the qualifying and
the tournament phases of the two most important competitions for African national football
teams: the Africa Cup of Nations (ACN) and the FIFA World Cup (WC).9 For each match
we have information on the date, the location, the opponent, the competition, the phase,
and the final score. We use the information on the date of the match to combine the data
with both the individual survey data and the conflict data described below. Overall, for the
individual-level analysis, we use information from nearly 70 official matches played between
2002 and 2013 while the Afrobarometer surveys were administered. For the country-level
 7   For experimental evidence that sports affiliation can reduce ethnic identification, see Kurzban et al. (2001).
     Relatedly, looking at the specific case of cricket in India, Lowe (2018) finds that participation in team sports
     alongside people of other castes favors cross-cast friendships and integration.
 8   We disregard countries from the Maghreb region because, for these countries, Afrobarometer surveys did
     not include questions on ethnic identity.
 9   We also collect information on friendly matches, which we use for a robustness check reported below.



                                                          5
conflict analysis, we also collect information on teams’ standings in nine ACN qualifying
rounds held between 1997 and 2013. In particular, we record all teams’ standings before and
after the final match of the group stage to identify teams that, prior to the last game, could
still qualify to the tournament phase, and, among these, those that eventually did.10

2.2. S URVEY DATA ON I NDIVIDUAL ATTITUDES
We use individual survey data from four waves of the Afrobarometer conducted between
2002 and 2013. The Afrobarometer is a series of nationally representative surveys covering
several African countries. Interviews are conducted in the local languages, and questions are
standardized so that responses can be compared across countries. Questions are designed
to assess respondents’ attitudes on a range of issues, including attitudes towards democracy,
political actors, markets, and civil society. For our analysis we focus on the questions regard-
ing individuals’ identification with the nation and with their own ethnic group, and trust in
others, particularly in people from other ethnicities. In addition, we also use information on
a range of respondents’ personal characteristics, with particular regard to the main language
spoken at home which, following Eifert et al. (2010), we use as a proxy for ethnic back-
ground.11 Overall, we use data from 47 survey rounds conducted in 24 sub-Saharan African
countries.
Our main outcome variable is a measure of ethnic identification, which captures the strength
of an individual’s ethnic identity relative to national identity. The variable is based on re-
sponses to the following question:“Let us suppose that you had to choose between being a
[National] and being a [respondent’s ethnic group]. Which of these two groups do you feel
most strongly attached to?”. While in round 2 of the Afrobarometer respondents could only
choose between the options “national identity” and “group identity”, in rounds 3 through 5
they could pick any of the following five options: 0 (“only [National]”), 1 (“more [National]
than [Ethnic group]), 2 (“equally [National] and [Ethnic group])”, 3 (“more[Ethnic group]
than [National]”), and 4 (“only [Ethnic group]”). In order to compare respondents’ answers
across rounds, we construct a binary measure of ethnic identity that takes value 1 for all
respondents in round 2 who chose the option “group identity”, and for all respondents in
rounds 3 through 5 who reported feeling “only ethnic” or “more ethnic that national”.
10   The qualification phase for the 2013 ACN did not involve a group stage but sequential two-legged knock-
     out pairs. We thus consider in our analysis only the last two-legged knock-out stage. Nonetheless, our
     quantitative and qualitative results do not depend on the inclusion of the 2013 qualification phase.
11   Language is the best proxy for ethnic background available in all the waves of the Afrobarometer we use
     in our analysis. In fact, the Afrobarometer questionnaires did not include explicit questions about the
     respondent’s ethnicity until recently. In Appendix Table A.2 we show that, for the waves for which data on
     ethnicity are available, our results are analogous if we include ethnic group fixed effects instead of language
     group fixed effects.


                                                         6
        F IGURE 1: E THNIC I DENTIFICATION OVER T IME AND ACROSS C OUNTRIES




In Figure 1 we plot the share of respondents that reported stronger ethnic than national iden-
tity, separately for the sample of countries and years we exploit in our analysis. As shown,
the relative strength of ethnic identity varies considerably across countries, and even in the
same country over time, possibly also due to the impact of the type of major sports events
we investigate. One suggestive example in this regard is given by Mali, where more than 30
percent of the individuals interviewed in 2002 emphasized ethnic over national identity, but
where less than 15% did so in 2013, when the Malian national football team achieved the
third place in the Africa Cup of Nations, its best performance in the history of the competi-
tion.12 The strength of ethnic identity appears to be lower and more stable in other countries:
for example in Tanzania, a country known for its effective nation-building policies (Miguel,
2004), less than 10% of respondents in any round emphasize ethnic over national identity.
To explore the impact of national team’s victories on respondents’ trust in others, we use
four additional variables. First, we construct a measure of generalized trust computed as the
12   Similarly, the typically high share of Zambians who report a strong sense of ethnic identification was greatly
     reduced in 2013, a year after the country’s historical and unexpected victory in the 2012 ACN. Incidentally,
     the final took place in Libreville near the place where, twenty years earlier, most of the Zambian national
     football team died in an air crash, a circumstance which further strengthened the emotional valence of the
     victory.


                                                         7
average score in four separate questions regarding trust in i) relatives, ii) other acquaintances,
iii) neighbors, and iv) fellow countrymen, all defined on a 4-point scale ranging from 0 (“not
at all”) to 3 (“a lot”). Second, using questions on respondents’ trust in people within and
outside their own ethnic group, we construct measures of inter-ethnic and intra-ethnic trust,
also defined over the same 4-point scale, as well as measure of inter-ethnic trust premium
given by the difference between the two.13 To assess the effect of national team’s victories on
support for the government, we code two additional variables: trust in the ruling party (with
answers ranging from 0 “not at all” to 3 ‘a lot”) and approval of the president (with answers
ranging from 1 “strongly disapprove” to 4 “strongly approve”). Finally, to examine whether
victories influence respondents’ overall mood, we code two measures of respondents’ assess-
ment of their current living conditions and of the country’s economic situation (indicating 1
for "fairly good" and "very good", and 0 otherwise), and two measures of how they expect
these conditions to evolve in the future (indicating 1 for "better" and "much better", and 0
otherwise).

2.3. C OUNTRY-L EVEL C ONFLICT DATA
To study the impact of national teams’ victories on actual violence, in the last part of our
analysis we use country-level data on conflict from the Armed Conflict Location and Event
Data Project (ACLED). The data, available for the period 1997-2013, include information
on the date and location of any episode of political violence - i.e., battles, killings, riots -
that involve either the government, rebel groups, militias, or civilians. The data also include
information on the severity of the events, measured by the number of associated fatalities.
Based on this information we construct three measures of conflict intensity at the country-
week level: i) a dummy for whether any conflict event occurred, ii) the number of conflict
events occurred, and iii) the number of casualties associated with these events.
We also construct analogous measures specifically for ethnically-related conflict. Though
the ACLED data do not explicitly distinguish between ethnic and non-ethnic conflict, some
of the information in the ACLED records can be used to indirectly make this distinction.
Specifically, we code as ethnically-relevant conflict events that involves the participation of
actors classified as ethnic militia or whose denomination refers to an ethnic faction (e.g.
“Bete Ethnic Group”), or any event for which the ACLED records include a specific ref-
erence to ethnic tensions as cause of violence. Such procedure is of course vulnerable to
substantial measurement error, namely to the risk of coding as non-ethnic episodes that are
in fact driven by ethnic motives. Yet, to the extent that it affects the dependent variable and is
13   Because the question on inter-ethnic trust was only included in round #3 of the Afrobarometer, the analysis
     on this aspect is based on a substantially smaller sample.



                                                       8
unrelated to the timing of qualification, measurement error should only reduce the precision
of our estimates. According to our classification, about 6% of the observations in our sample
can be classified as ethnically-related (i.e., observations for which at least one ethically-
related conflict event occurred in a given country in a given week). Summary statistics for
the different measures of conflict used in our analysis are reported in Table A.8.

3. I NDIVIDUAL -L EVEL A NALYSIS : E THNIC I DENTIFICATION AND T RUST
3.1. E MPIRICAL S TRATEGY
Our empirical strategy to estimate the impact of national team’s victories on individual atti-
tudes is summarized by the following equation:

               Outcomei,e,c,t = α + β PostVictoryc,t + γ 0 Xi + Γc,t + ∆e,t + εe,t         (1)

where i, e, c, and t denote respectively individual, language group (a proxy for ethnicity),
country, and year. Outcome is one of the attitudinal variables described in the previous
section; Post-Victory is the main regressor of interest and takes value 1 if the respondent
was interviewed in the days after a victory of her national team in an official match, and
0 otherwise; Xi is the vector of baseline individual controls (i.e., education, gender, age,
age squared, unemployment status and an indicator for leaving in a rural area); Γ, and ∆,
are country×year and language group×year fixed effects, respectively; εe,t is an error term
which is heteroscedasticity-robust and is clustered by language group×year. Since we run
our econometric model on multiple outcomes, in Tables 2 to 6 we report False Discovery
Rate (FDR) adjusted p-values following Anderson (2008).
We also estimate an alternative and more demanding specification summarized by the fol-
lowing equation:

             Outcomei,e,c,m,t = α + β PostVictoryc,m,t + γ 0 Xi + Θc,m + ∆e,t + εe,t       (2)

where m denotes the match, and Θc,m the country-match fixed effects. Hence, while when
estimating equation (1) we identify the effect of Post-Victory by comparing respondents in-
terviewed after any victory of their national team in a given year with all other respondents
of the same country and language group interviewed in the same year, with equation (2) we
compare respondents interviewed after a given match with others of the same country and
language group interviewed before the same match.
We mainly focus on the sample of individuals interviewed in the 15 days before and after




                                               9
official matches of their national football team.14 We consider, in particular, the sample of
respondents exposed to only one match, which includes over 28,000 individuals between
treatment and control groups.15 For purpose of robustness, we also look at the larger sample
of respondents potentially exposed to one or more matches, which includes more than 35,000
individuals. Descriptive statistics for the first sample for all variables used in our analysis are
presented in Table A.1. Half of the individuals were exposed to a match in the 15 days prior
to the interview; of these roughly 36 percent experienced a victory, while 44 percent and 20
percent saw their national team losing and drawing, respectively.16
Our identification strategy relies on the quasi-random nature of the date and final result of
matches relative to the timing of the Afrobarometer interviews. Hence, our identifying as-
sumption is that national teams’ matches did not interfere with the implementation of the
survey, or, more precisely, that victorious matches did not interfere differently than non vic-
torious ones. Such possibility seems especially unlikely since, as emphasized by Eifert et al.
(2010), the logistics involved in the implementation of the Afrobarometer survey – selection
of the enumeration sites, setting up of the field teams etc. – requires many months if not
years of preparation, and are hardly related to the occurrence of sports events let alone to
their unpredictable result.
To assess the validity of our identification strategy, we conduct a balance test for several re-
spondent’s characteristics that may potentially correlate with the timing of the interview and
the outcomes of interest. These include: gender, education, age, unemployment status, reli-
gious membership, whether the respondent belongs to the country’s ethnic majority, whether
(s)he lives in a rural area, and whether (s)he lives in an area where basic public goods are
available.17 To control for the possibility of social desirability bias, we also test that sev-
eral characteristics of the interviewer are not systematically different between treatment and
control groups. These include: gender, education, whether the interviewer speaks the same
language as the respondent, and whether the interviewer thought anyone influenced the re-
14   The choice of this rather tight time window is to avoid having the same individual be in the treatment group
     for one game and in the control group for another one. We later show that our results remain virtually
     unchanged when replicating the analysis using a larger time window (i.e., 30 days).
15   Focusing on individuals treated by just one game makes the analysis and the interpretation of the results
     easier, since it does not require aggregating the potentially contrasting results of subsequent games (e.g.
     one win followed by one loss).
16   In a robustness exercise we increase the length of the time window up to 30 days before and after a match.
     In that case the sample size increases to nearly 44,000.
17   Evidence suggests that these characteristics can potentially affect ethnic sentiments. For instance, Robinson
     (forthcoming) shows that urban status, education, gender, and formal employment all positively predict
     national identification (relative to ethnic). Regarding age, instead, Eifert et al. (2010) find no evidence that
     young people are more likely to self-identify in ethnic terms.




                                                         10
spondent during the interview.18 Specifically, we perform two separate balance tests: one
comparing individuals interviewed before and after a match, regardless of the outcome of
the match (i.e. played), and another one comparing individuals interviewed before and after
a victory. To ensure that we compare respondents from the same country interviewed around
the same match, we regress each variable on either treatment including country-match fixed
effects, and cluster standard errors at the same level.
The results are reported in Table 1. We first show that individual characteristics are largely
balanced between respondents interviewed before and after the same match (panel A). A
similar pattern holds when comparing individuals interviewed before and after a victory of
the national team (panel B). The only exceptions are education, gender, and rural status. Re-
garding the first two variables, the marginally significant differences between treatment and
control group are very small: on average individuals interviewed after a victory were only
0.9 percent more likely to be men than women, and displayed lower educational attainment
by just 12% of a standard deviation (or 8% of its mean value). Furthermore, the potential
biases from these imbalances are likely to operate in opposite directions, since women and
less educated people generally tend to display higher levels of ethnic identification (Robin-
son, 2014). Regarding rural status, the comparison indicate that individual in rural areas are
somewhat more likely to be interviewed after a game, in general, and after a victory, in par-
ticular. As with the other variables, this imbalance should work against finding a negative
effect of wins on ethnic identification, since people in rural areas are generally more likely
to identify themselves with their ethnicity than people in urban areas(Robinson, 2014).19 In
any event, in all the regressions presented below we control for the entire set of respondents’
individual characteristics, though their inclusion does not affect our results. Finally, regard-
less of whether they are defined based on all matches or just victorious ones, treatment and
control groups are also balanced with respect to all interviewer-related variables.

3.2. R ESULTS : NATIONAL T EAM ’ S V ICTORIES AND E THNIC I DENTIFICATION
In Table 2 we test the empirical relationship between national team’s victories and ethnic
identification on the baseline sample of all respondents exposed to just one match. In col-
umn 1 we regress the dummy for stronger ethnic than national identity on a dummy for being
interviewed after a victory, controlling for country-year dummies. The inclusion of country-
18   A large literature argues that interviewers’ observable traits such as race, ethnicity, and gender can influence
     respondent’s answers (see West and Blom (2017) for a summary). In particular, using Afrobarometer data
     Adida et al. (2016) find that respondents give systematically different answers to coethnic and non-coethnic
     interviewers.
19   We find consistent patterns in our data as depicted by the coefficients on education, gender, and rural status
     reported in Tables 4 and A.6.



                                                         11
                               TABLE 1: BALANCE IN C OVARIATES

                                                   Panel A: Played                  Panel B: Victory
Covariate                            N          Estimate Std. Errors              Estimate Std. Errors
Male                    28758                      0.006         0.004             0.009*          0.005
Education               28758                     -0.213         0.134            -0.291*          0.153
Age                     28758                      0.799         0.687              1.109          0.777
Unemployed              28758                      0.003         0.015             -0.008          0.014
Major Ethnicity         28758                     -0.024         0.055             -0.028          0.041
Rural                   28758                    0.156**         0.070            0.176**          0.083
Religious Group Member 28647                      -0.025         0.020             -0.020          0.026
Public Goods            28758                      0.007         0.024             -0.021          0.017
Same Language           28758                     -0.046         0.038             -0.022          0.045
Influenced By Others    28710                     -0.002         0.006             -0.000          0.008
Male Interviewer        28758                     -0.002         0.014             -0.005          0.018
Interviewer’s Education 28728                     -0.037         0.052             -0.072          0.062
Interviewer’s Age       28758                      0.109         0.118              0.194          0.141

*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at country-match level.
Each panel presents point estimates and standard errors for 13 regressions of a covariate (listed at the left)
on Played (Panel A) and Victory (Panel B). Played takes value 1 if the respondent was interviewed within
15 days after a game (regardless of the result), 0 otherwise. Victory takes value 1 if the respondent was
interviewed within 15 days after a victory, 0 otherwise. All estimates are based on OLS regressions using
55 country-match dummies to ensure that the comparison in the covariates is made between respondents in
the proximity of the same game and in the same country.




                                                     12
year fixed effects, allows to control for all country-level confounds that vary between years,
such as political or economic events (e.g., national elections, ethnic conflicts, nation-wide
economic policies, yearly variation in commodity prices, etc.). The results indicate that na-
tional team’s victories have a significant negative effect on the probability of self-identifying
with one’s own ethnicity as opposed to the country as a whole.
The coefficient becomes slightly larger and more significant in column 2, where we include
the baseline set of individual controls. Results are even stronger and more significant in
column 3, where we include language group×year fixed effects and cluster standard errors
at the same level. The estimated effect is quite large: individuals interviewed after national
team’s victories are 4.4% less likely to report a strong sense of ethnic identity than other
respondents of the same language group interviewed just before; this corresponds to over a
20% decrease in the average probability of ethnic self-identification.
In column 4, we include country-match fixed effects, hence restricting the comparison to
fellow countrymen interviewed before and after the same victorious game of their national
team. Even under this more restrictive specification the magnitude and significance of the
coefficient of interest remain largely unchanged. In column 5 we examine the effect of
different results of national team’s matches; the results indicate that while the successful
performance of the national team weakens national identity, loosing or drawing a match has
no particular effect. The lack of an effect of national team’s defeats is especially interesting,
as it suggest that negative collective experiences do not necessarily undermine national unity.
Finally, in column 6 we show that the results are qualitatively similar when estimating a non-
linear probit model instead of the linear probability model used in the previous columns.20
Next we examine how the effect on ethnic identification evolves in the days after a victory.
In Figure 2 we plot the estimated coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for dummies
for 3-day periods before and after the victory. The coefficients are estimated from a unique
regression in which we control for individual characteristics, country×year and language
group×year fixed effects, and for the proximity to draws or defeats.21 Since we normalize
the coefficient for the three days before the victory to zero, the other coefficients indicate how
ethnic identification changes over time relative to the eve of the event. The figure confirms
that individuals are less likely to report a strong sense of ethnic identification after a victory
of the national team, and indicate that the effect persists and, if anything, becomes stronger
several days after the match. In contrast, ethnic identification does not seem to evolve in any
20   We obtain similar results using, as dependent variable, the original 5-point measure of ethnic identification,
     which, however, is not available for all rounds of the Afrobarometer. The results, both OLS and ordered
     probit estimates, are reported in Appendix Table A.3.
21   Appendix Figure A.1 reports the coefficients obtained when including country×match instead of
     country×year fixed effect; the coefficients are very similar in magnitude though somewhat less precisely
     estimated due to the lower statistical power.


                                                        13
       TABLE 2: NATIONAL T EAM ’ S V ICTORIES AND E THNIC I DENTIFICATION

                              Dependent Variable: Ethnic over National Identity (0-1 dummy)

                              (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                             OLS           OLS            OLS          OLS          OLS         Probit
                           -0.017**     -0.023***       -0.046***   -0.038**     -0.038**     -0.177***
Post-Victory
                            (0.008)       (0.008)         (0.014)    (0.015)      (0.015)       (0.067)
                             [0.06]        [0.02]          [0.01]     [0.02]       [0.02]          —
                                                                                   -0.007
Post-Draw
                                                                                  (0.033)
                                                                                   -0.015
Post-Defeat
                                                                                  (0.015)

Country × Year FE             Yes          Yes            Yes          No           No            No
Individual Controls           No           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Language × Year FE            No           No             Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Country × Match FE            No           No             No           Yes          Yes           Yes
Observations                28,758        28,758         28,758      28,758       28,758        27,118
R-squared                    0.059         0.071          0.116       0.117        0.117          —

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses in columns 1 and 2, clustered by
language group×year in the other columns. False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted p-values are reported
in square brackets (Anderson, 2008). Sample includes respondents interviewed within 15 days before and
after an official game. Post − Victory, Post − Draw and Post − De f eat take value 1 if the respondent was
interviewed in the 15 days after a victory, a draw or a loss respectively, and 0 otherwise.




                                                   14
 F IGURE 2: E THNIC I DENTITY B EFORE AND A FTER NATIONAL T EAM ’ S V ICTORIES




 The figure plots the coefficients and the 95% confidence intervals for nine dummies indicating 3-day
 blocks from 15 days before to 15 days after a victory of the national football team. The coefficient for
 the period between 3 to 1 days before the match is normalized to zero. Confidence intervals are based
 on heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by language group. The coefficients are estimated
 from a unique regression in which we control for individual characteristics, country×year and language
 group×year fixed effects, and for the proximity to draws or defeats.




particular way in the days prior to the match.22


3.3. I NTERPRETATION
What drives the effect of national team victories on strengthening national identity? To shed
light on that question, we first explore what types of victories are more likely to affect the
strength of ethnic sentiments. In the first column of Table 3, we look at whether friendly
22   Our baseline results – based on a 15-day time window before and after a victory – are robust to the choice
     of alternative time windows (5, 10, 20, 25 or 30 days before and after a match) as shown in Table A.4 for the
     baseline specification with country×match fixed effects. The effect of national team’s victories on ethnic
     sentiments is remarkably stable, with a somewhat larger coefficient when focusing on the days immediately
     before and after the match.



                                                        15
matches affect ethnic identity, and how this compares to the impact of victories in official
matches documented above. The results indicate that victories in friendly matches have
virtually no effect on ethnic identification, consistent with the view that low-stakes games
are less effective than high-stakes ones at spurring patriotic fervor.
We then test the hypothesis that victories against traditional rivals are more consequential
than other victories. To do so, we interact our post-victory variable with an indicator of ri-
valry.23 The results indicate that, though all victories negatively affect ethnic identification,
the effect is considerably larger for victories against traditional rivals which arguably trig-
ger a stronger emotional reaction. This is consistent with the idea that national identity is
strengthened in opposition to a salient foreign outside group.
In column 3 we focus on the heterogeneous effect of victories in matches played at home.
The fact that the interaction term is not statistically significant, and that post-victory is still
associated with a significant decline in ethnic identification, suggests that the effect is not
driven by respondents’ direct participation in the event. This underlines the imagined aspect
of the shared experiences triggered by national team performance.
In column 4 we examine whether winning by a large margin boosts pride in the national team
and reduces ethnic identification even further. To do so, we interact the post-victory dummy
with a dummy for whether the team won by two goals or more (i.e., the top 20% of the
distribution). The large and negative coefficient on the interaction term, though marginally
insignificant (p-value: 0.14), provides some support for this hypothesis.
Finally, in column 5, we examine whether victories in matches in which a large number of
goals were scored are associated with a larger effect. This exercise allows us to test whether
our baseline effect is driven by enthusiasm for witnessing a particularly spectacular game
rather than a genuine increase in national pride. We find that the interaction between the
post-victory dummy and the number of total goals scored is small and insignificant, a result
which provides little support for this alternative hypothesis.
We then turn attention to whether certain segments of the population are more responsive
to the patriotic influence of national teams’ victories. In particular, interacting the dummy
Post-Victory with various individual characteristics, we test whether the effect is larger for
men vs. women, for younger vs. older cohorts, for more vs. less educated individuals, and
for people belonging to the largest ethnic group in the country. The results, presented in
Appendix Table A.6, indicate that none of these attribute is associated with a stronger effect
23   Most traditional rivalries in Sub-Saharan Africa are determined by the presence of a shared frontier
     or by previous conflict. The most prominent and uncontroversial ones include: Benin-Togo, Burk-
     ina Faso-Ivory Coast, Cameroon-Egypt,Cameroon-Nigeria,Cape Verde-Guinea-Bissau, Congo DR-Ghana,
     Congo DR-Rwanda,Ghana-Egypt,Ghana-Ivory Coast, Ghana-Congo DR, Ghana-Nigeria, Guinea-Guinea-
     Bissau, Ivory Coast-Senegal, Ivory Coast-Mali, Nigeria-Algeria, Senegal-Nigeria, South Africa-Zambia,
     and Zambia-Zimbabwe.


                                                    16
           TABLE 3: NATIONAL T EAM V ICTORIES AND E THNIC I DENTITY:
      S TAKES , L OCATION , M ARGIN OF V ICTORY AND E NTERTAINMENT VALUE

                                     Dependent Variable: Ethnic over National Identity (0-1 dummy)
                                        (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
                                        0.009       -0.032**     -0.038***      -0.034**      -0.035**
Post-Victory
                                       (0.012)       (0.014)       (0.015)       (0.015)       (0.016)
                                        [0.55]        [0.04]        [0.02]        [0.04]        [0.04]
Post-Victory× Rivalry                                -0.095*
                                                     (0.051)
Post-Victory × Home Game                                            0.018
                                                                   (0.029)
Post-Victory× Wide Margin                                                        -0.047
                                                                                 (0.030)
Post-Victory× # Goals in Game                                                                  -0.006
                                                                                              (0.009)
Individual Controls                      Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
Language FE                              Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
Country-Match FE                         Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
                                      Friendly
Sample:                                             Baseline      Baseline      Baseline      Baseline
                                      Matches
Observations                           28,767        28,758        28,758        28,758        28,758
R-squared                               0.093         0.117         0.117         0.117         0.117

*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors clustered at the language group level in paren-
theses. False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted p-values are reported in square brackets (Anderson, 2008).
Victory takes value 1 if the respondent was interviewed within 15 days after a victory, 0 otherwise.




                                                    17
of national team victories, which suggests that important sporting achievements influence the
public as a whole and not just sports fans or people who are more likely to have a coethnic
in the national team.
An important exception is the distinction between individuals in urban vs. rural areas. As
shown in column 1 of Table 4, while we reproduce the standard finding that those in rural
areas are more likely to identify with their ethnic group, the interaction with rural status
displays a negative coefficient. This implies that the impact of national team victories is
even stronger away from urban centers where, arguably, individuals are less likely to come
into contact with people of other ethnicities.24
24   On the effect of individual interaction across ethnic groups, see Boisjoly et al. (2006), Burns et al (2015),
     Lowe (2018), and references therein.




                                                        18
    TABLE 4: V ICTORIES AND E THNIC I DENTIFICATION : H ETEROGENOUS E FFECTS

                               Dependent Variable: Ethnic over National Identity (0-1 dummy)
                                 (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)
                             -0.045***        -0.036**         -0.034**         -0.036***       -0.054***
 Post-Victory
                               (0.014)         (0.014)          (0.014)           (0.013)         (0.014)
                                [0.01]          [0.03]           [0.03]            [0.02]          [0.01]
                               -0.026*         0.057**         -0.332**          -0.277**        -0.321*
 Interaction
                               (0.015)         (0.028)          (0.166)           (0.126)         (0.191)
                              0.022***        -0.025**
 Uninteracted Term                                                 —                —                —
                               (0.012)         (0.013)
                                                 State           Share          National          Team
 Interaction Term               Rural
                                               Presence        Ethnic ID        Diversity        Diversity
 Country×Match FE                Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
 Individual Controls             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
 Language×Year FE                Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
 Observations                  28,758           25,478           28,758           28,758          24,271
 R-squared                      0.116            0.117            0.113            0.119           0.153

 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Robust standard errors clustered at the language group r×year level in
 parentheses. False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted p-values are reported in square brackets (Anderson,
 2008). Post-Victory takes value 1 if the respondent was interviewed in the 15 days after a victory, 0 other-
 wise. To ease the comparison with previous tables, variables in the interaction terms were demeaned. State
 presence is computed as the mean value of three indicators coded by Afrobarometer’s interviewer at the
 enumeration area: presence of schools, post offices, and paved roads. Share of ethnic ID is the proportion
 of individuals with strong ethnic identification before a match in given country. National diversity is based
 in the ELF index from Fearon and Laitin (2003). Team diversity is computed as a ELF index based in the
 ethnic composition of the national team in the same year of the Afrobarometer’s wave.




To further investigate the link between these results and nation-building, we examine how
the effect of national team victories depends on the presence of the state at the local level.
We use the availability of basic public goods as a proxy for state presence since poor public
good provision may arguably generate a sense of disconnect from the rest of the nation.
Specifically, we use information from the Afrobarometer surveys regarding the presence of
public schools, post offices, and paved roads in the area where the respondent is located, and
consider the average of these three indicators.
As shown in column 2 of Table 4, state presence is, unsurprisingly, associated with reduced
ethnic sentiment in general. However, state presence also dampens the impact of national
team victories in reinforcing national identity over ethnic allegiances. This result is sugges-


                                                        19
tive of how different forms of nation building might interact with each other. The indicators
that we include in our measure are very much the sort of public goods that are often seen
as vehicles for nation building: inculcation via schooling, as well as easier connection with
the rest of the country. In our context, these seem to operate as substitutes for the impact
of shared experiences: perhaps there is less scope for further reinforcing national identity
where that is stronger to begin with, through other means.
We further test this idea by looking at how the effect of national team victories varies ac-
cording to the strength of ethnic identification at the national level. Column 3 indicates that
the effect is indeed stronger when a larger share of the country’s respondents identify with
their ethnic group. Similarly, more ethnic diversity at the national level, as measured by the
Fearon and Laitin (2003) ELF index, is also associated with a bigger impact, as shown in
column 4.
Last but certainly not least, we ask wether the impact of national team performance may
be related to a “role modeling” effect: the idea that showcasing how different groups can
cooperate to achieve success against a common foreign adversary. For that we use the data
we collected on the ethnic composition of the national team rosters.25 Column 5 in Table
4 shows that greater team diversity is associated with a stronger impact of national team
victories.
In sum, the heterogeneity analysis indicates that shared experiences help build national iden-
tity in specific ways that are most effective in environments where other nation building
strategies are less so.

3.4. NATIONAL T EAM ’ S V ICTORIES AND I NTER -E THNIC T RUST
We next turn to the question of whether national teams’ victories also affect individual
propensity to trust others, particularly people from other ethnicities. First, we look at the
effect of victories on trust towards other people in general. In column 1 of Table 5 we es-
timate our baseline specification with country × match fixed effects using generalized trust
as the dependent variable. The result indicate that, following a victory of the national team,
individuals tend to generally trust others more. In column 2 we test whether this effect is
stronger for inter-ethnic trust, using as dependent variable the self-reported measure of trust
in people of other ethnic groups. Again the coefficient on Post-Victory is negative and sig-
nificant; furthermore, it is larger than the one for generalized trust, which suggests a stronger
effect on trust outside one own ethnicity. The estimated coefficient is economically mean-
ingful since its represents an increase in trust equivalent to one fifth of its mean value in our
25   In Table A.7 we report the list of all the team-years for which we were able to collect information on players’
     ethnicity.



                                                         20
               TABLE 5: NATIONAL T EAM ’ S V ICTORIES AND T RUST IN OTHERS

                                                   (1)                 (2)                  (3)
                                             Generalized        Inter-Ethnic  Inter-Ethnic
                                               Trust                Trust    Trust Premium

                                              0.099***             0.228**               0.056*
            Post-Victory
                                               (0.031)             (0.105)               (0.029)
                                                [0.01]              [0.04]                [0.07]
            Country × Match FE                    Yes                 Yes                   Yes
            Individual Controls                   Yes                 Yes                   Yes
            Language × Year FE                    Yes                 Yes                   Yes
            Observations                        25,475               7,992                 7,979
            R-squared                           0.244                0.195                 0.056

            *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1. Robust standard errors clustered at the language group
            × Year level in parentheses. False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted p-values are reported
            in square brackets (Anderson, 2008). Post-Victory takes value 1 if the respondent was
            interviewed in the 15 days after a victory, 0 otherwise. Generalized trust is the average
            level of trust in relatives, other acquaintances, other countrymen, and neighbors. Inter-
            ethnic trust is the self-reported score of trust in people of other ethnicities, while Inter-
            ethnic premium is the difference between the latter and trust in co-ethnics.




sample.26 To further test for the larger effect on trust across rather than within ethnic groups,
in column 3 we use as dependent variable a measure of inter-ethnic trust premium, given by
the difference between trust outside and within one’s own ethnic group. Consistent with the
previous findings, national teams victories’ improve respondents’ relative propensity to trust
people of other ethnicities.

3.5. NATIONAL T EAM ’ S V ICTORIES AND OTHER ATTITUDES
An important question is whether weaker ethnic identity and higher inter-ethnic trust reflect
a genuine change in attitudes or, rather, a generally euphoric mood due to national team’s
achievements. One way to test this hypothesis is to examine whether victories are also as-
sociated with changes in other attitudes unrelated to ethnic sentiments. We perform this
exercise in Table 6. In column 1 we start by assessing whether national team’s victories are
26   The implied standardized beta coefficient is 0.05. This effect is quite large compared to other determinants
     of trust examined in the literature. For example, it corresponds to more than half the long-term effect of
     historical exposure to slave trade on inter-ethnic trust estimated by Nunn and Wantchekon (2011).


                                                         21
associated with an increase in respondents’ trust in the ruling party.27 When estimating our
most complete specification we find that Post-Victory has no significant effect on the out-
come of interest. A similar pattern emerges in column 2 when we use as dependent variable
the respondent’s approval rate for the president. These results indicate that football-driven
patriotic shocks do not necessarily translate into generally more positive political attitudes
and into higher support for incumbent rulers.
To further rule out that the effect of national team victories is driven by general euphoria,
we test whether victories affect respondents perception of the country’s and of their own
economic situation and prospects. In column 3 and 4 we estimate our baseline specification
using as dependent variable dummies for whether a respondent reports having a positive as-
sessment of the country’s current economic conditions, and positive expectations of whether
they will improve in the near future, respectively. In column 5 and 6 we do the same using
as dependent variables dummies for whether a respondent has a positive assessment of her
own living conditions, and expects these to improve in the future. The lack of significant
coefficients in any column further corroborates the view that football-driven patriotism does
not make individual more optimistic in general, and does not alter their perception of the
conditions they live in.
All the results presented so far are based on the sample of individuals exposed to just one
game. In Appendix Table A.5, we replicate the results on the larger sample of individuals
who, in the days prior to the interview, may have experienced more than one match of their
national team, which is rather common in the case of back-to-back matches. In this case,
the treatment is less clear-cut since a team may have contrasting results in different matches
(e.g. win one but loose another one). To address this issue we use as main regressor of
interest either the share of all matches won or the share of available points won (with a win
corresponding to 3 points, a draw to 1, and a loss to 0). The results confirm that a more
successful performance by the national team is associated with a reduction in the strength of
ethnic identification, and an increase in generalized and inter-ethnic trust, while there is no
effect on other opinions or expectations.

4. C OUNTRY-L EVEL A NALYSIS
4.1. E MPIRICAL S TRATEGY
The results presented so far indicate that football-driven positive shocks contribute to reduc-
ing ethnic identification and inter-ethnic mistrust. An important related question is whether
27   Evidence that sports victories, and the resulting euphoria, can boost support for the incumbent is available,
     for example, from Healy et al. (2010) who find that victories in US college football games lead to an increase
     in the incumbent’s vote share in Senate, gubernatorial, and presidential elections.



                                                        22
             TABLE 6: NATIONAL T EAM ’ S V ICTORIES AND OTHER ATTITUDES

                                   (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)
                                Trust in   President’s           Assess Country’s             Assess Own
                              Ruling Party Approval            Economic Conditions         Living Conditions
                                                               Present    Future           Present Future
                                  -0.006          -0.005        -0.020        -0.004        -0.010      -0.032
  Post-Victory
                                 (0.033)         (0.034)       (0.019)       (0.020)       (0.017)     (0.022)
                                  [0.88]          [0.88]        [0.34]        [0.88]        [0.59]      [0.18]
  Country × Match FE               Yes              Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes
  Individual Controls              Yes              Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes
  Language × Year FE               Yes              Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes
  Observations                   27,270           27,330       28,752        28,746         28,725      28,733
  R-squared                       0.186            0.241        0.121         0.160          0.125       0.162

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Robust standard errors clustered at the language group × year level in paren-
theses. False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted p-values are reported in square brackets (Anderson, 2008).Post-
Victory takes value 1 if the respondent was interviewed in the 15 days after a victory, 0 otherwise. Trust in
Ruling Party is a dummy variable that takes value 1 if the respondent reports trusting the ruling party (either
“somewhat” or a “lot”) and 0 otherwise. President’s Approval is a dummy that takes value 1 if the respon-
dent reports approving the president’s performance in the previous 12 months (either “approve” or “strongly
approve”) and 0 otherwise. The other dependent variables are dummies for whether the respondent’s has a
positive assessment of the current economic conditions of her own living conditions respectively (“good” or
“very good”), or positive expectations about the evolution of the country’s and of their own conditions in the
future respectively (“better” or “much better”).




                                                     23
the documented attitudinal change may contribute to decrease actual violence, and how long-
lasting this effect may be. To shed light on this issue we analyze how civil conflict in Sub-
Saharan African countries evolves following important achievements of the national football
teams.
Specifically, we attempt to exploit quasi-experimental variation in whether a team qualified
for the tournament phase of the African Cup of Nations (ACN), the most important conti-
nental competition for African national teams which generates widespread popular attention.
The ACN involves two phases: i) a qualifying stage in which all teams compete, and ii) a
final (or tournament) stage in which only the teams that ranked highest in the qualifying
round compete for the title. In the qualifying round teams are divided into groups, each
teams plays each of the others twice (one at home and one away) with each match assigning
a certain number of points, and the team(s) with more points (usually one or two) qualify to
the final round. The qualifying stage is usually very competitive, and qualification is often
decided only in the last match day based on just a narrow point margin or goal difference.
Our strategy consists in i) identifying teams in the same group that, until the last match day
of the group stage, were both in the position to qualify, but one of which barely did while the
other did not, and ii) compare the evolution of conflict in the two countries in the six months
before and after the qualification.28
Our identification strategy is summarized by the following equation:
                                                   4                        25
              Con fc,q,t = α + β Qual c,q,t + ∑ δ kCon f c,q,t−k +          ∑     Γt + ∆c,q + εc,q           (3)
                                                  k=1                     t=−25

where c, q, and t denote country, qualification, and week to and since qualification (-25 to
+25). Con f is one of the three measures of conflict intensity described above. Qual, our
regressor of interest, is a dummy variable that equals 1 for countries of teams that qualified
                                                         25
only in the weeks after qualification, and 0 otherwise. ∑t=−25 Γt is a set of dummies for each
of the weeks before and after the qualification, while ∆c,q are country × qualification fixed
effects. To control for possible auto correlation in conflict events, we also control for the
occurrence of conflict in the previous weeks (up to four). Heteroscedasticity-robust standard
errors are clustered by country × qualifier.
28   Qualification to the FIFA World Cup provides a similar experiment, but poses challenges regarding the
     definition of control and treatment groups (e.g. Angola barely qualified to the ACN in 1997, while barely
     missing out in the WC in the same year) and adds relatively little variation. This is because there are few
     WC spots for African countries, and most of those are typically taken by a very small number of historically
     strong teams, many of which are from North Africa. In any case, we will show our results are robust to
     including WC qualifiers into the sample.




                                                        24
        F IGURE 3: E XAMPLE OF C LOSE Q UALIFICATION : G ROUP A, ACN 2012




4.2. Q UALIFICATION TO ACN        AND   S OCIAL C ONFLICT
For our analysis we use data from ACLED on the occurrence and severity of violent conflict
events in Sub-Saharan African countries between 1997 and 2013, with a particular focus on
the months before and after each ACN qualification campaign. As mentioned above, our key
comparison is between countries that barely qualified to the ACN finals (our treatment group)
and those that did not (our control group). The underlying identification assumption is that
if two teams in the same group got to the last match day with concrete chances of qualifying,
which one would actually qualify will be determined by quasi-random circumstances, such
as a goal scored in the final minutes of the last match by one side or the other. One example
of such scenario, depicted in Figure 3, is available from 2012, when three teams in qualifying
group A, Mali, Zimbabwe, and Cape Verde, were in position to qualify until the last match
day while only one team, Liberia, was already eliminated. In the last two matches while Cape
Verde defeated Zimbabwe, Mali was not able to beat Liberia but still managed to qualify due
to a one-goal difference. In this case Mali would be included in the treatment group while
both Cape Verde and Zimbabwe in the control group.
Table A.9 reports the countries included in the control and treatment group (46 and 55 re-
spectively) for each qualifying campaign. In Table A.10 we test whether the countries in the
two groups are balanced along a range of characteristics that may affect conflict. We focus
in particular on the following variables, measured in the year prior to qualification: GDP per
capita, poverty rate, income inequality, life expectancy, population density, share of urban
population, political corruption index of political, and autocracy index, as well as two mea-


                                             25
sures of past conflict intensity, i.e., the number of active conflicts, and a dummy for whether
the country experienced a civil war in the 1990s.29 In column 1 and 2 we report the mean
for each variable separately for treatment and control group, and in column 3 the p-value for
the difference. The only two variables that are somewhat unbalanced (differences significant
at the 10% level) are autocracy and political corruption, which are both somewhat higher for
treatment than for control countries. The differences are however rather small corresponding
to respectively a third and a fourth of a standard deviation on the sample of Sub-Saharan
African countries for the period of interests. In column 4 we test whether covariates are
balanced between countries that did and did not qualify in the same qualifying campaign; to
this end, we report the coefficients from separate OLS regressions of each covariate on our
treatment variable and on a set of nine qualification campaign dummies. The results indicate
that the difference is insignificant for all but three variables: political corruption, autocracy,
and poverty rates. Yet, in our empirical analysis we control for country × qualifier fixed
effects which capture all observable and unobservable factors specific to a country in a given
year that may affect conflict.
To further corroborate our identification strategy, we also test that conflict was not evolving
differently in the treatment and in the control group prior to qualification, a situation that
would threaten our Diff-in-Diff approach. To do so, we estimate a variant of equation 3
pooling observations for treatment and control groups and assigning a fictitious treatment
for the pre-qualification period to countries that will eventually qualify. Specifically, this
variable takes value 1 for the 12 weeks prior to qualification and 0 otherwise. If conflict
was evolving differently in the two groups in the pre-qualification period, we would expect
the fictitious treatment to display a significant coefficient. The results, reported in Table 7,
seem to rule out this possibility: regardless of what measure of conflict is used and whether
we control for conflict in previous weeks, we find no evidence that conflict was evolving
differently in the three month pre-qualification in countries that would eventually qualify
relative to countries that would not.

4.3. Q UALIFICATION           TO   ACN    AND   C ONFLICT
In Table 8 we examine the effect of national teams’ (close) qualification on conflict preva-
lence and intensity. We start by estimating, in column 1, our baseline specification with
country×qualifying campaign and week fixed effects (equation 3), using as dependent vari-
29   Data on GDP, poverty rates, income inequality, life expectancy, population density, and share of urban pop-
     ulation are from the 2017 version of the World Development Indicators (2017); data on political corruption
     are from Varieties of Democracy (V-Dem, v6.2); data on autocracy index are from the Polity IV project; data
     on civil conflicts in 1990s are fromFearon and Laitin (2003); the indicator of active conflict is constructed
     based on the UCDP PRIO Conflict dataset.



                                                        26
                                 TABLE 7: PARALLEL T RENDS T EST

                                             (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                             Dummy for              Number of                Number of
 Dependent Variable:
                                             Any Conflict          Events (log+1)         Fatalities (log+1)
                                           0.036       0.040       0.048       0.040      -0.107      -0.103
 12 Weeks Before Qualification
                                          (0.038)     (0.037)     (0.067)     (0.056)     (0.104)     (0.081)
 Country × Qualifier FE                     Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Week FE                                    Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 4 Lags of Conflict                         No          Yes         No          Yes         No          Yes
 Observations                              2,525       2,121       2,525       2,121       2,525       2,121
 R-squared                                 0.010       0.023       0.008       0.040       0.008       0.033

 *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier
 level. Sample covers 25 weeks before the end of qualification process (i.e. pre-treatment period). The
 variable 12 Weeks Before Qualification takes value 1 during the 12 weeks immediately before the end of
 the qualification process for the countries that will eventually qualify to the ACN, 0 otherwise. Conflict data
 comes from the ACLED dataset.




able a dummy for whether any conflict event occurred in the country in a given week. The re-
sults indicate that the probability of experiencing conflict is significantly lower in the months
following the qualification; the effect is sizable corresponding to a 9% decrease in the prob-
ability of conflict in a given week. The effect remains largely unchanged in column 2 where
we control for conflict in each of the previous four weeks.30 The results are qualitatively
similar in columns 3 and 4 when we use the two measures of conflict intensity, i.e., (log+1
of) the number of conflict events occurred, and (log+1 of) the number of fatalities associated
with them, respectively. The effect is economically sizable: countries whose teams barely
qualified experience a reduction of 18% in the number of conflict episodes and of 20-23
% in the number of fatalities relative to countries whose teams barely did not. The table
also reports the long-run impact of the qualification, which takes into account the effect of
a reduction in today’s conflict on future violence. As reported in Table A.12, we obtain
analogous results using the number of conflict episodes and the number of victims as depen-
dent variables (rather than the log) and estimating maximum likelihood negative binomial
regressions.
30   The results are virtually the same if we include the four lags of conflict occurrence one by one or in any
     combination. Also they are very similar when estimating a Probit model rather than a linear probability
     model (results shown in Table A.11).



                                                      27
            TABLE 8: I MPACT OF ACN Q UALIFICATION ON C ONFLICT

                                   (1)           (2)              (3)                    (4)
                                Conflict      Conflict      Number of              Number of
                                Dummy         Dummy        Events (log+1)       Fatalities (log+1)
                               -0.078**      -0.068**         -0.105***              -0.147**
Post-Qualification
                                (0.031)       (0.026)           (0.038)               (0.058)
Conflict variable t−1                        0.112***         0.261***               0.163***
                                              (0.021)          (0.024)                (0.032)
Conflict variablet−2                           0.012          0.069***               0.129***
                                              (0.019)          (0.026)                (0.024)
Conflict variablet−3                           0.023            0.041*                0.051**
                                              (0.017)          (0.021)                (0.021)
Conflict variablet−4                           0.009          0.076***                 -0.018
                                              (0.018)          (0.020)                (0.032)
Long-Run Impact                  -0.078        -0.081           -0.190                 -0.218
Country × Qualifier FE             Yes           Yes              Yes                   Yes
Week FE                            Yes           Yes              Yes                   Yes
Observations                     5,050         4,646             4,646                 4,646
R-squared                        0.010         0.024             0.118                 0.070

The sample includes the 25 weeks before and after the close qualification for 101 country × qualifier
pairs. The variable Post-Qualification takes value 1 for the team that qualified for the weeks after
the qualification and 0 otherwise. The dependent variables are respectively a dummy for whether
any conflict event was recorded in the country in a given week (columns 1 and 2), the log (+1) of
the number of conflict events recorded in a given week (column 3), and the log (+1) of the number
of fatalities associated with those events (column 4). All conflict data are from the ACLED dataset.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1. Robust standard errors clustered by country × qualifier reported in
parentheses.




                                                28
In Figure 2 we provide additional graphical evidence of the impact of qualification on con-
flict and examine the duration of this effect. To this end, we plot the estimated coefficients
and 95% confidence intervals of the interaction terms between the treatment variable and
dummies for eleven four-week periods in the months before and after the qualification. The
coefficients are obtained from a regression which also include 50 week dummies and 101
country×qualifier dummies. To facilitate the interpretation of the results, we normalize to 0
the coefficient on the four-week periods immediately before qualification.
The results indicate clearly that the occurrence and the number of conflict events (top and
bottom panel respectively) decrease sharply in the weeks following the qualification to the
ACN tournament. Indeed, all the coefficient for the post-qualification periods are signifi-
cantly different than 0 at the 10% level and most of them at the 5% level. Two additional
patterns emerge quite clearly. First, none of the coefficients for the periods before qualifi-
cation is significantly different than zero, confirming the absence of any differential trend
in countries that would later qualify. Second, the effect of qualification on conflict persists
and, if anything, becomes stronger as more time elapses since qualification, especially three
months after it.
To further test the persistence of the effect in Table 9, we re-estimate our diff-in-diff spec-
ification splitting the post-qualification period in two sub-periods: the first 12 weeks after
qualification, and the following 13 weeks. The results document a reduction in conflict oc-
currence and intensity of a similar magnitude for the two periods; in fact, the point estimates
for the second period are somewhat larger and more significant when using the dummy and
the number of events as dependent variables (columns 1-4), but slightly smaller for the num-
ber of fatalities (columns 5-6). Results are largely similar when controlling for the lags of
conflict (columns 2, 4, and 6). Combined with the results on attitudes, these findings provide
robust evidence that, by priming a sentiment of national unity and by alleviating inter-ethnic
cleavages, important achievements of the national team can contribute to reduce violence in
a tangible and rather persistent way.

4.4. E FFECT OF Q UALIFICATION       ON   C ONFLICT: H ETEROGENEITY
We then examine whether unexpected qualifications have a stronger effect on conflict. In-
deed, it seems plausible that qualification to the ACN tournament may be perceived as an
especially important achievement for teams that never qualified in the past or that had not
qualified in a long time, as opposed to teams that usually do. This would be in line with
previous findings on the effect of sports results on violence and crime which indicate that
unexpected outcomes are more consequential than expected ones (Card and Dahl, 2011;
Munyo and Rossi, 2013).


                                              29
F IGURE 4: O CCURRENCE OF C ONFLICT AND N UMBER OF C ONFLICT E PISODES
                   B EFORE AND A FTER Q UALIFICATION

             F IGURE A: O CCURRENCE OF C ONFLICT (4- WEEK BANDWIDTHS )




          F IGURE B: N UMBER OF C ONFLICT E PISODES (4- WEEK BANDWIDTHS )




     Figures plot coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for interactions between the
     dummy for countries that barely qualified to the ACN and 11 dummies for 4-week
     period included between 25 weeks before and after the qualification. The coefficient
     for the 4 weeks immediately before the qualification is normalized to zero. The de-
     pendent variable for the top panel is a dummy for whether any conflict event has
     been recorded in the country in the week, while for the bottom panel is (log+ 1) the
     number of conflict events recorded in the country in the week. The regressions also
     include week and country × qualifier dummies. Confidence intervals are based on
     heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by country × qualifier.




                                             30
               TABLE 9: E VOLUTION OF C ONFLICT A FTER Q UALIFICATION

                                        (1)              (2)    (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                                              Conflict           Number of                 Number of
Dependent Variable:
                                              Dummy             Events (log+1)          Fatalities (log+1)

1-12 Weeks Post-Qualification        -0.061*       -0.056** -0.149**     -0.107***    -0.238**    -0.169**
                                     (0.032)        (0.027)  (0.069)       (0.038)     (0.100)     (0.069)
13-25 Weeks Post-Qualification      -0.090**       -0.078** -0.214**      -0.116**     -0.229*     -0.144*
                                     (0.040)        (0.035)  (0.098)       (0.054)     (0.121)     (0.080)
Country × Qualifier FE                 Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
Week FE                                Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
4 Lags of Conflict                     No            Yes        No          Yes          No          Yes
Observations                          5,050         4,646      5,050       4,646        5,050       4,646
R-squared                             0.010         0.024      0.014       0.119        0.012       0.070

*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier
level. Sample covers +/- 25 weeks around the end of qualification process for 101 country×qualifier pairs.
The variable 1-12 Weeks Post-Qualification takes value 1 during the 12 weeks immediately after the end of
the qualification process for the countries that barely qualify to the ACN, 0 otherwise. The variable 13-25
Weeks Post-Qualification takes value 1 starting the 13th week after the end of the qualification process for
the countries that barely qualify to the ACN, 0 otherwise. Conflict data comes from the ACLED dataset.




                                                         31
To test this hypothesis in Table 10 we estimate our baseline specification separately for i)
countries that had not qualified in three years or more (i.e., the sample mean) and ii) coun-
tries that had never qualified. The results provide strong support for the above-mentioned
hypothesis: the reduction in the occurrence and intensity of conflict is generally larger and
more significant for overdue and first qualifications, with the exception of the decrease in the
number of fatalities which is marginally insignificant for first qualifications.
This pattern also sheds light on the natural experiment induced by WC qualification.31 Table
A.15 in the Appendix shows that our results are essentially unaltered if we add instances of
last-round qualification for the WC to our sample. The coefficients become slightly smaller
in magnitude (though statistically indistinguishable), consistent with the fact that WC qual-
ification generates a rather different kind of variation: there are relatively few Sub-Saharan
countries qualifying, and many of them are traditional continental footballing powers such
as Nigeria and Cameroon. In fact, Table A.16 shows that WC qualification also has a much
stronger effect on conflict in first-time or “overdue” cases.
Finally, in Table A.17 we verify that the decline in conflict due to the national team qualifying
to the ACN tournament applies to both urban and rural areas, with a slightly larger effect in
cities for the occurrence and frequency of conflict events, and in rural areas for the number
of associated fatalities (which is generally higher in these areas).32




31   See Table A.14 for a list of countries involved in last-round qualification.
32   To code conflict events as either urban or rural we used polygons from urban areas of dense human habita-
     tion at 1km resolution as defined in Kelso and Patterson (2012). Consequently, all conflict events in ACLED
     intersected with the urban polygons were coded as urban and the others as rural.

                                                       32
                                            TABLE 10: OVERDUE AND F IRST Q UALIFICATION E FFECTS

                                    (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)             (5)              (6)        (7)            (8)            (9)
     Dependent Variable:                    Conflict Dummy                           Number of Events (log+1)                Number of Fatalities (log+1)
     Sample                        Full     Overdue qualif.   1st qualif.     Full       Overdue qualif.   1st qualif.     Full     Overdue qualif.   1st qualif.
                                 -0.068**       -0.114**       -0.158**     -0.105***       -0.168***      -0.218***     -0.147**     -0.224***         -0.082
     Post-Qualification
                                  (0.026)        (0.044)        (0.072)       (0.038)         (0.059)        (0.102)      (0.058)       (0.082)        (0.047)
     Country × Qualifier FEs       Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes              Yes              Yes        Yes           Yes             Yes
     Week FEs                      Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes              Yes              Yes        Yes           Yes             Yes




33
     4 lags of conflict            Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes              Yes              Yes        Yes           Yes             Yes
     Observations                 4,646          2,346            828         4,646           2,346           828         4,646         2,346            828
     (Pseudo) R-squared           0.024          0.031           0.090        0.118           0.161          0.221        0.070         0.077           0.092

     *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier level. Sample covers +/- 25 weeks around the
     end of qualification process. Post-Qualification takes value 1 during the 25 weeks following the qualification to ACN, 0 otherwise. Conflict data comes
     from the ACLED dataset. An overdue (first-time) qualification is defined as reaching the last match-day with chances of qualifying to the ACN finals after
     3 or more years (for the very first time). See Table A.9
                            TABLE 11: I MPACT ON E THNIC C ONFLICT

                                              (1)                 (2)                    (3)
                                        Dummy for          Number of               Number of
         Dependent Variable:
                                        any Conflict      Events (log+1)        Fatalities (log+1)
         Post-Qualification               -0.024**             -0.022*               -0.066**
                                           (0.012)             (0.011)                (0.031)
         Long-Run Impact                    0.029               0.034                  0.086
         Country × Qualifier FE               Yes                Yes                    Yes
         Week FE                              Yes                Yes                    Yes
         4 Lags of Conflict                   Yes                Yes                    Yes
         Observations                       4,646               4,646                  4,646
         R-squared                          0.029               0.083                  0.055

        *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the
        country×qualifier level. Sample covers +/- 25 weeks around the end of qualification process.
        Post-Qualification takes value 1 during the 25 weeks following the qualification to ACN, and 0
        otherwise. Ethic conflict is coded using conflict data from the ACLED dataset.




4.5. Q UALIFICATIONS AND E THNIC C ONFLICT
In Table 11 we investigate the effect of qualification to the ACN tournament on conflict
events classified as ethnically related according to the procedure described in section 2.3.
When estimating our most comprehensive specification - with country × qualifier and week
fixed effects and lags of conflict - we find that national team’s qualification to the ACN finals
reduced the occurrence of inter-ethnic violence (column 1), as well as its intensity mea-
sured both by the number of conflict events and associated fatalities (columns 2-3). Though
smaller than for overall conflict, the effect is rather sizable, with the qualification reducing
the likelihood of ethnic violence by one third of the mean value of the dummy variable.33

4.6. A LTERNATIVE E XPLANATIONS
Finally, we analyze two alternative explanations for the negative effect of qualification on
conflict documented above. The first one is that the decline in conflict may be partly due
to the coincidence with the ACN tournament, which, in some cases, took place within six
months from qualification. Indeed, since the ACN finals are very popular and are broad-
33   As shown in Table A.13, the results are similar when using the number of conflict events and fatalities
     instead of their log +1 version.


                                                     34
cast around the continent, they may distract many individuals who may otherwise engage
in violence, particularly in countries that qualified. To test for this possibility, in Table 12
we re-estimate our baseline specification excluding from the sample the weeks during which
ACN finals were taking place. The results indicate that, regardless of which measure of con-
flict we use and whether we control for lagged conflict, the effect of qualification on conflict
remains virtually unchanged.34


                   TABLE 12: E FFECT OF Q UALIFICATION AND ACN F INALS

                                    Dummy for                     Number of                Number of
 Dependent variable:
                                 any conflict event         conflict events (log+1)     fatalities (log+1)
                                  (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)
                                -0.076**     -0.066**       -0.179**    -0.106***     -0.231**     -0.151**
 Post-Qualification
                                 (0.031)      (0.026)        (0.070)      (0.037)      (0.094)      (0.060)
 Country×Qualifier FE              Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
 Week FE                           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
 4 Lags of Conflict                No           Yes           No           Yes           No           Yes
 Excluding ACN Finals              Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
 Observations                     4,782        4,378         4,782        4,378         4,782        4,378
 R-squared                        0.010        0.023         0.015        0.112         0.013        0.071

 *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier
 level. Sample covers +/- 25 weeks around the end of qualification process, except for observations in weeks
 wherein the ACN finals took place, which are excluded (268 weekly observations). Conflict data comes
 from the ACLED dataset.




The second possibility relates to the news-based nature of the ACLED conflict data. A
conflict event is recorded by ACLED only if it is mentioned by at least one of a multiplicity
of local, national, or international media, (or if it is reported by local NGOs). It is in principle
possible that the qualification of the national team to the ACN tournament may lead to an
increase in the number of football-related news in local media that may crowd out news about
the conflict, potentially leading to a mechanical reduction in the number of conflict events
recorded by ACLED.35 To the extent that football-related news are likely more extensive
34   As an additional test in appendix Table A.21 we look at the entire sample but include a dummy for the
     weeks during which the ACN’s finals are taking place only for teams that qualified. The results are largely
     consistent with those in Table 12.
35   Evidence that news coverage of important sporting events on TV can crowd out news about other issues,
     such as natural disasters or conflict, is available from Eisensee and Stromberg (2007) and Durante and
     Zhuravskaya (forthcoming).


                                                       35
during the finals of the ACN, the results in Table A.21 are reassuring that this aspect is
not driving our results. Yet, it could be that football-news increase in the months prior to
the ACN finals, as the discussion about players’ selection and teams’ prospects intensifies.
One way to test for the crowding-out hypothesis is to verify that the effect is not driven by
less severe conflict events which should be more likely to go unreported due to competition
from football news than events involving a higher number of fatalities. We implement this
approach in Table 13 where we estimate our baseline specification for the occurrence of
conflict events of increasing severity, i.e. involving 10 or more fatalities, 25 or more fatalities,
and 50 or more fatalities. The fact that the results are similar for the different samples, both
in terms of magnitude and significance, suggest that reporting bias is not driving our results.


             TABLE 13: C ONFLICT O CCURRENCE BY N UMBER OF FATALITIES

 Dependent Variable:                      Dummy for at least one conflict event in a week
                                   Events with                 Events with               Events with
                               10 or more fatalities       25 or more fatalities     50 or more fatalities
                                  (1)        (2)              (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)
                               -0.042** -0.035**           -0.034**     -0.027*      -0.030**      -0.022*
 Post-Qualification
                                (0.021)  (0.016)            (0.016)     (0.014)       (0.013)      (0.012)
 Mean dep. variable              0.089        0.089         0.043        0.042         0.024        0.023
 Country×Qualifier FE             Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
 Week FE                          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
 4 Lags of Conflict               No            Yes          No            Yes          No           Yes
 Observations                    5,050        4,646         5,050        4,646         5,050        4,646
 R-squared                       0.010        0.026         0.011        0.045         0.012        0.053

 *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier
 level. Sample covers +/- 25 weeks around the end of qualification process. Conflict data comes from the
 ACLED dataset.




5. C ONCLUSIONS
We have shown that collectively shared experiences of the type induced by sports – and in-
ternational football in particular – can shape identities in ways that can help build national
sentiment at the expense of ethnic identification. In the context of Sub-Saharan Africa, we
find that individuals interviewed in the days immediately after a victory of their national
football team are less likely to report a strong sense of ethnic (as opposed to national) iden-

                                                      36
tity than those interviewed just before. The estimated effect is sizable – accounting for a
20% decrease in the average probability of ethnic self-identification – and robust to different
specifications and controls.
Exposure to national teams’ victories is also associated with a higher level of trust in others,
in general, and in individuals of other ethnicities, in particular. These effects appear to be
driven by a genuine increase in national pride rather than generic post-victory euphoria;
indeed national team’s victories have no significant impact on other attitudes such as support
for the government or optimism about present and future economic conditions.
Importantly, we show that the impact translates into tangible outcome, by looking at the evo-
lution of civil conflict around the time of important national teams’ achievements. Specifi-
cally, we find that countries whose national teams (barely) qualified to the finals of the Africa
Cup of Nations, experience significantly less conflict in the six months after the qualifica-
tion than countries whose teams (barely) did not qualify. This effect is not only sizable and
statistically significant, but also persists for several months after the successful event.
Our findings suggest a number of policy-relevant implications that go well beyond the realm
of sports. First, policies that favor emotional participation – which could be triggered, say, by
religious or civic events – may be most effective at forging a shared sentiment of unity and set
the foundations for more long-lasting cultural and political changes. They also highlight that
nation-building strategies are available even in contexts of low state capacity, and might work
as a substitute for other more demanding nation-building tools, especially by illustrating how
different groups can successfully cooperate.
Needless to say, the power of these shared collective experiences need not be used for good.
Even in our specific context, it is certainly possible that the reduction in friction and violence
within countries could coexist with increased conflictuality with other countries, especially
to the extent that the strengthening of national identity is taking place in a context of con-
trast with foreign adversaries. More broadly, the passions arisen by sports can certainly be
channeled to violence in other contexts as well. These remain interesting topics for future
research.




                                               37
R EFERENCES
Adida, Claire L., Karen E. Ferree, Daniel N. Posner, and Amanda Lea Robinson, “Who’s Ask-
  ing? Interviewer Coethnicity Effects in African Survey Data,” Comparative Political Studies, 2016,
  49 (12), 1630–1660.

Afrobarometer, Round 4 Survey Manual, Afrobarometer, 2007.

Alesina, Alberto and Bryony Reich, “Nation Building,” Working Paper 18839, National Bureau of
  Economic Research February 2015.

  and Eliana La Ferrara, “Preferences for redistribution in the land of opportunities,” Journal of
  Public Economics, 2005, 89 (5), 897–931.

  , Bryony Reich, and Alessandro Riboni, “Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars,” Working
  Paper 23435, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

  , Reza Baqir, and William Easterly, “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions*,” The Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics, 1999, 114 (4), 1243–1284.

Allison, L, “Sport and Nationalism,” in J Coakley an E. Dunning, ed., Handbook of Sports Studies,
  London: SAGE Publications Ltd, 2000, chapter 22, pp. 345–356.

Alvarez, Javier and Manuel Arellano, “The Time Series and Cross-Section Asymptotics of Dy-
  namic Panel Data Estimators,” Econometrica, 2003, 71 (4), 1121–1159.

Anderson, Benedict, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism,
  Verso, 1983.

Anderson, Michael L., “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early Interven-
  tion: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects,” Journal
  of the American Statistical Association, 2008, 103 (484), 1481–1495.

Armstrong, Gary, “Talking up the game: Football and the reconstruction of Liberia, West Africa,”
  Identities: Global Studies in Culture and Power, 2002, 9 (4), 471–494.

Bandiera, Oriana, Myra Mohnen, Imran Rasul, and Martina Viarengo, “Nation-Building
  through Compulsory Schooling during the Age of Mass Migration,” The Economic Journal, 2018.

Bandyopadhyay, Sanghamitra and Elliott Green, “Nation-building and conflict in modern Africa,”
  World Development, 2013, 45, 108–118.

Bazzi, Samuel, Arya Gaduh, Alexander Rothenberg, and Maisy Wong, “Unity in Diversity? How
  Intergroup Contact Can Foster Nation Building,” Working Paper, 2018.

Bel, Germà, “Infrastructure and nation building: The regulation and financing of network transporta-
  tion infrastructures in Spain (1720–2010),” Business History, 2011, 53 (5), 688–705.

Billig, Michael, “Banal Nationalism,” 1995.

Buggle, Johannes C, “Law and social capital: Evidence from the Code Napoleon in Germany,”
  European Economic Review, 2016, 87, 148–175.



                                                38
Card, David and Gordon B Dahl, “Family violence and football: The effect of unexpected emo-
  tional cues on violent behavior,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, pp. 103–143.

Carlin, John, Playing the Enemy: Nelson Mandela and the Game that Made a Nation, Penguin
  Books, 2008.

Cederman, Lars-Erik, Kristian Skrede Gleditsch, Idean Salehyan, and Julian Wucherpfennig,
  “Transborder ethnic kin and civil war,” International Organization, 2013, 67 (02), 389–410.

Cialdini, Robert B and Kenneth D Richardson, “Two indirect tactics of image management: Bask-
  ing and blasting.,” Journal of personality and social psychology, 1980, 39 (3), 406.

   and Maralou E De Nicholas, “Self-presentation by association.,” Journal of personality and
  social psychology, 1989, 57 (4), 626.

  , Richard J Borden, Avril Thorne, Marcus Randall Walker, Stephen Freeman, and
  Lloyd Reynolds Sloan, “Basking in reflected glory: Three (football) field studies.,” Journal of
  personality and social psychology, 1976, 34 (3), 366.

Conversi, Daniele, “‘We are all equals!’ Militarism, homogenization and ‘egalitarianism’ in nation-
  alist state-building (1789-1945),” Ethnic and racial studies, 2008, 31 (7), 1286–1314.

Darby, Paul, Africa, football, and FIFA: Politics, colonialism, and resistance, Vol. 23, Psychology
  Press, 2002.

  , “’Let Us Rally Around the Flag’: Football, National-Building, and Pan-Africanism in Kwame
  Nkrumah’s Ghana,” The Journal of African History, 2013, 54 (02), 221–246.

  , “Moving players, traversing perspectives: Global value chains, production networks and Ghana-
  ian football labour migration,” Geoforum, 2013, 50, 43–53.

Durante, Ruben, “Risk, Cooperation and the Economic Origins of Social Trust: an Empirical Inves-
  tigation,” 2011.

   and Ekaterian Zhuravskaya, “Attack when the World is not Watching? U.S. Media and the
  Israeli-Palestinian Conflict,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Easterly, William and Ross Levine, “Africa’s growth tragedy: policies and ethnic divisions,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, pp. 1203–1250.

Eifert, Benn, Edward Miguel, and Daniel N Posner, “Political competition and ethnic identification
  in Africa,” American Journal of Political Science, 2010, 54 (2), 494–510.

Eisensee, Thomas and David Stromberg, “News droughts, news floods, and US disaster relief,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122, 693–728.

Fearon, James D. and David D. Laitin, “Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War,” American Political
  Science Review, 2003, 97, 75–90.

Finer, Samuel E, “State-and nation-building in Europe: the role of the military,” in Charles Tilly, ed.,
  The formation of national states in Western Europe, Princeton University Press Princeton, 1975,
  pp. 84–163.


                                                  39
Francois, Patrick, Ilia Rainer, and Francesco Trebbi, “How is power shared in Africa?,” Econo-
  metrica, 2015, 83 (2), 465–503.

Green, Elliot D., “Ethnicity, national identity and the state: evidence from sub-Saharan Africa.,”
  British Journal of Political Science, 2017.

Hargreaves, John, “Olympism and Nationalism: Some Preliminary Consideration,” International
  Review for the Sociology of Sport, 1992, 27 (2), 119–135.

Healy, Andrew J, Neil Malhotra, and Cecilia Hyunjung Mo, “Irrelevant events affect voters’ eval-
  uations of government performance,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2010, 107
  (29), 12804–12809.

Heinila, Kalevi, “Sport and International UnderstandingâĂŤA Contradiction in Terms?,” Sociology
  of Sport Journal, 1985, 2 (3), 240–248.

Herbst, Jeffrey, States and power in Africa: Comparative lessons in authority and control, Princeton
  University Press, 2014.

Hilton, Christopher, How Hitler Hijacked World Sport: The World Cup, the Olympics, the Heavy-
  weight Championship and the Grand Prix, The History Press, 2011.

Hobsbawm, E. J., Nations and nationalism since 1870: Programme, myth, reality, Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press, 1990.

Horner, Elka Peterson, “Rally Around the Flag and Support the Black Stars: Multi-Relational Anal-
  ysis of Nationalism and Contemporary Football in Ghana,” 2010.

Jacob, Marcus and Marcel Tyrell, “The Legacy of Surveillance: an Explanation for Social Capital
  Erosion and the Persistent Economic Disparity between East and West Germany,” Available at
  SSRN 1554604, 2010.

Judson, Ruth A and Ann L Owen, “Estimating dynamic panel data models: a guide for macroe-
  conomists,” Economics letters, 1999, 65 (1), 9–15.

Kaplan, Ethan and Sharun Mukand, “The Persistence of Political Partisanship: Evidence from
  9/11,” Working Paper, IIES 2014.

Kelso, N.V. and T. Patterson, “World Urban Areas, LandScan, 1:10 million,” Technical Report,
  Made with Natural Earth 2012.

Kurzban, Robert, John Tooby, and Leda Cosmides, “Can race be erased? Coalitional computa-
  tion and social categorization,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2001, 98 (26),
  15387–15392.

Lowe, Matt, “Types of Contact: A Field Experiment on Collaborative and Adversarial Caste Integra-
  tion,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2018.

Madestam, Andreas and David Yanagizawa-Drott, “Shaping the Nation: The Effect of Fourth of
 July on Political Preferences and Behavior in the United States,” Working Paper 12034, Harvard
 Kennedy School 2012.



                                                40
Mamdani, Mahmood, When victims become killers: Colonialism, nativism, and the genocide in
 Rwanda, Princeton University Press, 2014.

Mehler, Andreas, “Political discourse in football coverage–the cases of Cote d’Ivoire and Ghana,”
 Soccer & Society, 2008, 9 (1), 96–110.

Michalopoulos, Stilyanos and Elias Papaioannou, “The Long-Run Effects of the Scramble for
 Africa,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Miguel, Edward, “Tribe or nation? Nation building and public goods in Kenya versus Tanzania,”
 World Politics, 2004, 56 (03), 328–362.

  and Mary Kay Gugerty, “Ethnic diversity, social sanctions, and public goods in Kenya,” Journal
  of Public Economics, 2005, 89 (11), 2325–2368.

Munyo, Ignacio and Martín A Rossi, “Frustration, euphoria, and violent crime,” Journal of Eco-
 nomic Behavior & Organization, 2013, 89, 136–142.

Nickell, Stephen, “Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects,” Econometrica: Journal of the
  Econometric Society, 1981, pp. 1417–1426.

Nunn, Nathan and Leonard Wantchekon, “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa,”
  American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 3212–3252.

Platow, Michael, Maria Durante, Naeidra Williams, Matthew Garrett, Jarrod Walshe, Steven
  Cincotta, George Lianos, and Ayla Barutchu, “The Contribution of Sport Fan Social Identity
  to the Production of Prosocial Behavior,” Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 06
  1999, 3, 161–169.

Ramirez, Francisco O and John Boli, “The political construction of mass schooling: European
  origins and worldwide institutionalization,” Sociology of education, 1987, pp. 2–17.

Robinson, Amanda Lea, “National versus ethnic identification in Africa: Modernization, colonial
  legacy, and the origins of territorial nationalism,” World Politics, 2014, 66 (04), 709–746.

  , “Nationalism and Inter-Ethnic Trust: Experimental Evidence from an African Border Region,”
  Comparative Political Studies, forthcoming.

Salehyan, Idean, Cullen S Hendrix, Jesse Hamner, Christina Case, Christopher Linebarger,
  Emily Stull, and Jennifer Williams, “Social conflict in Africa: A new database,” International
  Interactions, 2012, 38 (4), 503–511.

Stormer, Neil, “More than a game,” Common Ground News Service, 2006, 20 June 2006.

Tilly, Charles, “Reflections on the History of European State-Making,” in Charles Tilly, ed., The
   formation of national states in Western Europe, Princeton University Press Princeton, 1975, pp. 3–
   83.

Vidacs, Bea, “Through the prism of sports: why should Africanists study sports?,” Africa Spectrum,
  2006, pp. 331–349.

  , “Banal nationalism, football, and discourse community in Africa,” Studies in Ethnicity and Na-
  tionalism, 2011, 11 (1), 25–41.

                                                 41
Vigdor, Jacob L, “Interpreting ethnic fragmentation effects,” Economics Letters, 2002, 75 (2), 271–
  276.

Weber, Eugen, Peasants into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural France, 1870-1914, Stanford
 University Press, 1976.

West, Brady T. and Annelies G. Blom, “Explaining Interviewer Effects: A Research Synthesis,”
 Journal of Survey Statistics and Methodology, 2017, 5 (2), 175–211.

Yanagizawa-Drott, David, “Propaganda and conflict: Evidence from the Rwandan genocide,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (4), 1947–1994.




                                                42
O NLINE A PPENDIX - N OT FOR P UBLICATION
A DDITIONAL F IGURES AND TABLES




F IGURE A.1: E THNIC I DENTITY B EFORE AND A FTER NATIONAL T EAM ’ S V ICTORIES
                  I NCLUDING C OUNTRY-M ATCH F IXED E FFECT




  The figure plots the coefficients and the 95% confidence intervals for nine dummies indicating 3-day
  blocks from 15 days before to 15 days after a victory of the national football team. The coefficient for
  the period between 3 to 1 days before the match is normalized to zero. Confidence intervals are based
  on heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by language group×year. The coefficients are
  estimated from a unique regression in which we control for individual characteristics, country×match
  and language group×year fixed effects, and for the proximity to draws or defeats.




                                                    43
                         TABLE A.1: S UMMARY STATISTICS

                  Variable                      Mean    Std. Dev.   Min.   Max.    N
Ethnic over National Identity                   0.149    0.356       0      1     28758
Post-Play                                       0.505     0.5        0      1     28758
Post-Victory                                    0.181    0.385       0      1     28758
Post-Defeat                                     0.225    0.418       0      1     28758
Post-Draw                                       0.099    0.299       0      1     28758
Generalized Trust                               1.946    0.826       0      3     25475
Inter-Ethnic Trust                              1.414    1.057       0      3      7992
Intra-Ethnic Trust                              1.734    1.054       0      3      8078
Trust in Ruling Party                           1.544    1.128       0      3     27270
President’s Approval                            2.759    0.963       1      4     27330
Country’s Economic Conditions Today (1=Good)    0.268    0.443       0      1     28752
Country’s Economic Conditions Future (1=Good)   0.526    0.499       0      1     28746
Own Economic Conditions Today (1=Good)          0.291    0.454       0      1     28725
Own Economic Conditions Future (1=Good)         0.561    0.496       0      1     28733
Male                                            0.505     0.5        0      1     28758
Age                                              36.4    14.537      18    130    28758
Unemployed                                      0.294    0.456       0      1     28758
Rural Status                                    0.628    0.483       0      1     28758
Education                                       3.023    2.078       0      9     28758
Major Ethnicity                                 0.383    0.486       0      1     28758
Public Goods Provided                            0.47    0.305        0     1     28758




                                         44
              TABLE A.2: L ANGUAGE G ROUP VS E THNICITY FE

  Dependent Variable: Ethnic over National Identity (0-1 dummy)
                          (1)          (2)              (3)
  Post-Victory                   -0.038**          -0.039**              -0.036***
                                  (0.015)           (0.015)                (0.014)
  Individual Controls             Yes                Yes                   Yes
  Country-Match FE                Yes                Yes                   Yes
  Identity × Year FE              Yes                Yes                   Yes
  Identity                      Language           Language              Ethnicity
  Sample                           Main          Overlapping           Overlapping
  Observations                    28,758           24,809                24,809
  R-squared                        0.117            0.112                 0.115
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors clustered at the identity group ×
year level in parentheses. Victory takes value 1 if the respondent was interviewed within 15
days after a victory, 0 otherwise.




                                            45
                TABLE A.3: O RDERED D EPENDENT VARIABLE

                              Dependent Variable: Ethnic Identity (0rdered, 0-4)
                                    OLS                  Ordered Probit
                                (1)       (2)        (3)             (4)
  Post-Victory                -0.081** -0.050          -0.088**            -0.057
                               (0.038) (0.041)          (0.038)            (0.040)
  Country×Year FE                Yes          No          Yes                No
  Individual Controls            Yes          Yes         Yes                Yes
  Language × Year FE             Yes          Yes         Yes                Yes
  Country-Match FE               No           Yes         No                 Yes
  Observations                 25,293       25,293      25,293             25,293

*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors clustered at the language group ×
year level in parentheses. Victory takes value 1 if the respondent was interviewed within 15
days after a victory, 0 otherwise.




                                            46
                        TABLE A.4: A LTERNATIVE T IME -W INDOWS

                               Dependent Variable: Ethnic over National Identity (0-1 dummy)
                             (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
                         +/-15 Days    +/-5 days    +/-10 days    +/-20 days   +/-25 days    +/-30 days

                          -0.037**     -0.040***     -0.035**      -0.037**     -0.036**      -0.037**
Post-Victory
                           (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.015)       (0.015)
                            [0.02]        [0.01]       [0.03]        [0.03]       [0.03]        [0.03]
Country × Match FE          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes
Individual Controls         Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes
Language × Year FE          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes
Observations               28,758        10,901         19,438      32,785       38,459        43,600
R-squared                   0.110         0.153          0.130       0.110        0.108         0.110

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Robust standard errors clustered by language group × year in parentheses.
False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted p-values are reported in square brackets (Anderson, 2008). Post-
Victory takes value 1 if the respondent was interviewed in the x days following a victory of the national
team, with the value of x indicated at the top of each column, and 0 otherwise.




                                                   47
                                           TABLE A.5: M ULTIPLE G AMES

                                                            Panel A: Share of Victories
                             Ethnic         Generalized     Inter-Ethnic   Inter-Ethnic          Trust in       President’s
                          Identification      Trust             Trust    Trust Premium         Ruling Party      Approval
                               (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)                (5)              (6)
                            -0.040***          0.055          0.234**           0.056*             0.008           0.044
 Share of Victories
                              (0.013)         (0.042)         (0.102)           (0.028)           (0.032)         (0.033)
 Observations                 35,069           33,910          8,202             8,188            37,735          37,556
 R-squared                     0.110            0.239          0.190             0.056             0.174           0.231
                                                        Panel B: Share of Points Won
                             Ethnic         Generalized Inter-Ethnic    Inter-Ethnic             Trust in       President’s
                          Identification      Trust         Trust      Trust Premium           Ruling Party      Approval
                               (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)                   (5)              (6)
                            -0.040***         0.063*          0.234**           0.056*             0.006           0.045
 Share of Points Won
                              (0.013)         (0.036)         (0.102)           (0.028)           (0.032)         (0.033)
 Observations                 35,069           33,910          8,202             8,188            37,735          37,556
 R-squared                     0.110            0.240          0.190             0.056             0.167           0.231
 Multiple Games                 Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes
 Country×Year FE                Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes
 Individual Controls            Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes
 Language×Year FE               Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes

*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors clustered at the language group × year level in parentheses. Share
of Victories accounts for the fraction of total games won. Share of points Won accounts for the fraction of total possible
points obtained (a win, draw, and lose awards 3, 1, and 0 points, respectively).




                                                             48
 TABLE A.6: V ICTORIES AND E THNIC I DENTIFICATION : H ETEROGENOUS E FFECTS

                              Dependent Variable: Ethnic over National Identity (0-1 dummy)
                                    (1)                    (2)                 (3)                  (4)
                               -0.046***             -0.045***            -0.045***             -0.046***
Post-Victory
                                 (0.014)               (0.014)              (0.014)               (0.014)
                                  [0.01]                [0.01]               [0.01]                [0.01]
                                  0.012                 0.001                0.000                 0.011
Interaction
                                 (0.012)               (0.004)              (0.000)               (0.028)
                               -0.024***             -0.017***            -0.003***               -0.008
Uninteracted Term
                                 (0.007)               (0.002)              (0.001)               (0.033)
Interaction Term                  Male               Education                Age                Ethnic
                                                                                                 Majority
Country×Match FE                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Individual Controls                Yes                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Language×Year FE                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Observations                     28,758                28,758               28,758                28,758
R-squared                         0.116                 0.116                0.116                 0.116

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Robust standard errors clustered at the language group r×year level in
parentheses. False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted p-values are reported in square brackets (Anderson,
2008). Post-Victory takes value 1 if the respondent was interviewed in the 15 days after a victory, 0 otherwise.
To ease the comparison with previous tables, variables in the interaction terms were demeaned.




                                                      49
         TABLE A.7: T EAM D IVERSITY

 Country                   Year      Team Diversity
 BOTSWANA                  2003          0.885
 BOTSWANA                  2008          0.854
 CAMEROON                  2013          0.817
 GHANA                     2002          0.617
 GHANA                     2005          0.634
 GHANA                     2012          0.640
 KENYA                     2005          0.760
 KENYA                     2011          0.654
 NIGERIA                   2005          0.816
 NIGERIA                   2013          0.761
 SENEGAL                   2005          0.832
 SENEGAL                   2008          0.834
 SIERRA LEONE              2012          0.727
 TANZANIA                  2003          0.920
 TANZANIA                  2008          0.866
 TANZANIA                  2012          0.898
 UGANDA                    2002          0.334
 UGANDA                    2008          0.450
 UGANDA                    2012          0.112
 ZAMBIA                    2003          0.621
 ZAMBIA                    2009          0.758
 ZAMBIA                    2012          0.687
 ZAMBIA                    2013          0.740
 ZIMBABWE                  2005          0.840

Team diversity is computed as the ethnolinguistic frac-
tionalization index based in the ethnic composition of the
national team in the same year of the Afrobarometer’s
wave used in the main analysis.




                           50
              TABLE A.8: S UMMARY S TATISTICS C ONFLICT M EASURES

                     Variable                         Mean    Std. Dev.   Min.   Max.
Conflict Dummy                                        0.406    0.491       0        1
Number of Events (log + 1)                            0.618    0.907       0     4.263
Number of Fatalities (log +1)                         0.544    1.251       0     10.131
Ethnic Conflict Dummy                                 0.062    0.242       0        1
Number of Ethnic Events (log + 1)                     0.065    0.277       0      2.773
Number of Ethnic Fatalities (log +1)                  0.115    0.604       0     6.909
Riot Dummy                                            0.188     0.39       0        1
Attack on Civilians Dummy                             0.234    0.423       0        1
Government Event Dummy                                0.268    0.443       0        1
Battle Event Dummy                                    0.188    0.391       0        1
Number of Riot Events (log + 1)                       0.194    0.458       0      3.807
Number of Attack on Civ. (log + 1)                    0.286    0.598       0      3.892
Number of Gov. Events (log + 1)                       0.346    0.666       0      3.871
Number of Battles (log + 1)                           0.252     0.59       0      3.466
Number of Fatalities in Riots (log +1)                0.029     0.23       0      4.836
Number of Fatalities due to Attack on Civ. (log +1)   0.294    0.874       0     10.127
Number of Fatalities in Government Events (log +1)    0.308     0.93       0     6.987
Number of Fatalities in Battles (log +1)              0.334    1.002       0      6.987
Sample Size                                           5,050 weeks




                                          51
              TABLE A.9: T REATMENT AND C ONTROL G ROUPS BY Q UALIFYING P ROCESS

          Tournament Year        Treatment Group                                Control Group
                 1998            Angola, Namibia, DRC, and                      Zimbabwe, Mali, Senegal, Gabon,
                                 Mozambique                                     Liberia, and Malawi
                 2000            Togo, Ivory Coast, and Congo                   Guinea, Mali, Liberia, and Uganda
                 2002            Zambia, Burkina Faso, and DRC                  Angola, Zimbabwe, Madagascar
                                                                                Lesotho, and Gabon
                 2004            Benin, Kenya, Rwanda, Mali, DRC,               Zambia, Togo, Sierra Leone, Ivory
                                 South Africa, and Zimbabwe                     Coast, Madagascar, and Uganda
                 2006            DRC and South Africa                           Burkina Faso
                 2008            Ivory Coast, Sudan, Senegal,                   Gabon, Gambia, Uganda, Eritrea
                                 Guinea, Namibia, Benin, and                    Equatorial Guinea, Mozambique,
                                 South Africa                                   and DRC
                 2010            Zambia and Malawi                              Rwanda and Guinea
                 2012            Mali, Guinea, Niger, Angola,                   Zimbabwe, Sierra Leone, Nigeria,
                                 and Sudan                                      Malawi, South Africa, Cameroon,
                                                                                Cape Verde, Uganda, Kenya, CAR,
                                                                                and Gambia
                 2013            Ivory Coast,Ethiopia, Cape                     Malawi, Botswana, Uganda, Sierra
                                 Verde, Niger, Angola, Togo,                    Leone, Senegal, Liberia, Cameroon,
                                 DRC, Burkina Faso, Ghana,                      Equatorial Guinea, Sudan, Guinea,
                                 Mali, Nigeria, and Zambia                      Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Gabon,
                                                                                and CAR

NOTE: Italic is used to denote that an overdue qualification was at stake (defined as at least 3 years without
qualifying to the ACN finals). Italic bold is used to denote that a first-time qualification to the ACN finals
was at stake. Due to the lack of conflict data, Mauritius is not included in the analysis despite of the fact that
it did not qualified to the 2000 ACN the last match-day.




                                                                52
                                  TABLE A.10: BALANCE C HECK

Variable                         Qualified      Not Qualified P-Value of             Within Qualification
                                                              Difference                 Difference
                                     (1)             (2)          (3)                        (4)
GDP per Capita                    1689.92          2252.11             0.396                -515.812
                                                                                            (568.896)
Poverty Rate                        0.49              0.44             0.246                  0.048*
                                                                                              (0.025)
Gini Index                         44.18             44.49             0.826                  -0.119
                                                                                              (2.282)
Life Expectancy                    53.82             54.17             0.785                  -0.447
                                                                                              (0.930)
Population Density                 45.10             65.66             0.131                 -21.190
                                                                                             (18.468)
Urban Population Rate              37.88             38.25             0.909                  -0.175
                                                                                              (2.775)
Autocracy                           1.64              2.31             0.081                 -0.674*
                                                                                              (0.313)
Political Corruption                0.66              0.72             0.084                 -0.065*
                                                                                              (0.029)
Fraction Civil War 90’s             0.29              0.33             0.603                  -0.037
                                                                                              (0.059)
Number of Conflicts                 0.30              0.26             0.696                   0.039
                                                                                              (0.083)

For a set of covariates (listed on the left) in the year before the end of each qualification process to the
ACN, columns (1) and (2) report the unconditional means for (barely) qualified countries (46 observations)
and (barely) not qualified countries (55 observations). Column (3) reports the p-value associated with the
mean difference test between (1) and (2). A second test is presented in column (4) which presents the OLS
coefficients from separate regressions of each covariate on a treatment status (i.e, qualified) conditional on 9
qualification process dummies to ensure that comparison in the covariates is made between countries in the
same year. *** p < 0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses (in column 4). Each
test includes 101 observations, except in poverty rate and Gini index with 100 observations.




                                                      53
TABLE A.11: I MPACT OF ACN Q UALIFICATION ON C ONFLICT P REVALENCE (P ROBIT )

      Dependent Variable: Conflict Prevalence (1 if at least one conflict in week, 0 otherwise)
                                     (1)                (2)                (3)             (4)
 Post-Qualification                  -0.336**           -0.301***         -0.200**          -0.308**
                                      (0.133)             (0.117)          (0.079)           (0.128)
 Country×Qualifier FE                   Yes               Yes                No                No
 Random Effect Model                    No                No                 No                Yes
 Qualifying Country Indicator           No                No                 Yes               No
 4 lags of Conflict                     No                Yes                No                No
 Week FE                                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
 Observations                          4,650              4,278             5,050             5,050

Estimates from Probit regression models. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors
in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier level. Sample covers +/- 25 weeks around the end of
qualification process. Post-Qualification takes value 1 during the 25 weeks following the qualification to
ACN, 0 otherwise. Conflict data comes from the ACLED dataset.




                                                   54
             TABLE A.12: I MPACT OF ACN Q UALIFICATION ON C ONFLICT I NTENSITY
                       (M AXIMUM -L IKELIHOOD N EGATIVE B INOMIAL )

                  Dependent Variable:                Num. Events                Num. Fatalities
                                                    (1)      (2)                (3)        (4)
                  Post-Qualification             -0.440**       -0.332**     -0.803**      -0.797**
                                                  (0.194)        (0.146)      (0.327)       (0.335)
                  4 lags of Conflict                No            Yes           No            Yes
                  Country×Qualifier FE              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
                  Week FE                           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
                  Observations                     5,050         4,646         5,050         4,646

                Estimates from negative binomial regression models. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1
                Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier level. Sample
                covers +/- 25 weeks around the end of qualification process. Post-Qualification takes
                value 1 during the 25 weeks following the qualification to ACN, 0 otherwise. Conflict
                data comes from the ACLED dataset.




                     TABLE A.13: C ONFLICT I NTENSITY (IHS                 TRANSFORMATION )


                           Dependent Variable: Inverse Hyperbolic Sine Transformation of
Type of Conflict:                                All                                             Ethnic
                               Num. Events              Num. Fatalities         Num. Events           Num. Fatalities
                              (1)      (2)              (3)        (4)          (5)     (6)            (7)      (8)
                          -0.225**     -0.136***    -0.265**     -0.174*** -0.041       -0.028*     -0.088*   -0.068**
Post-Qualification
                           (0.090)       (0.048)     (0.106)       (0.066) (0.026)      (0.015)     (0.046)    (0.031)

4 lags of Conflict           No           Yes          No           Yes         No         Yes        No         Yes
Country×Qualifier FE         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Week FE                      Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Observations                5,050        4,646         5,050       4,646       5,050      4,646      5,050      4,646
R-squared                   0.013        0.111         0.012       0.068       0.010      0.080      0.011      0.061

*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier level.
Sample covers +/- 25 weeks around the end of qualification process. Post-Qualification takes value 1 during the 25 weeks
following the qualification to ACN, 0 otherwise. Conflict data comes from the ACLED dataset.




                                                           55
                         TABLE A.14: C LOSE Q UALIFICATIONS TO W ORLD C UP

                        Country         Year of Qualification   Qualification Status   Never Qualified Before
                        ANGOLA                  1997                     0                      1
                        CONGO                   1997                     0                      1
                        CAMEROON                1997                     1                      0
                        SOUTH AFRICA            1997                     1                      1
                        IVORY COAST             2001                     0                      1
                        LIBERIA                 2001                     0                      1
                        NIGERIA                 2001                     1                      0
                        SENEGAL                 2001                     1                      1
                        CAMEROON                2005                     0                      0
                        NIGERIA                 2005                     0                      0
                        SENEGAL                 2005                     0                      0
                        ANGOLA                  2005                     1                      1
                        IVORY COAST             2005                     1                      1
                        TOGO                    2005                     1                      1
                        GABON                   2009                     0                      1
                        CAMEROON                2009                     1                      0
                        NIGERIA                 2009                     1                      0


                        Qualification Status takes the value of 1 if the national team qualified
                        to the World Cup, 0 otherwise. Never Qualified Before takes the value
                        of 1 the if the national team reached the last match-day with chances of
                        qualifying to the World Cup for the very first time, 0 otherwise.




           TABLE A.15: P OOLING C LOSE Q UALIFICATIONS TO ACN                                    AND    W ORLD C UP

Dependent Variable                    Conflict Prevalence             Num. Events (log+1)               Num. Fatalities (log+1)
                                        (1)         (2)                (3)         (4)                   (5)           (6)
Post-Qualification                    -0.065**       -0.050**         -0.125*           -0.065*         -0.153*      -0.088
                                       (0.029)        (0.025)         (0.067)           (0.037)         (0.087)     (0.056)

4 lags of Conflict                       No              Yes             No                Yes             No         Yes
Country×Qualifier FE                     Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes        Yes
Week FE                                  Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes        Yes
Observations                            5,900          5,428            5,900            5,428           5,900        5,428
R-squared                               0.009          0.023            0.010            0.113           0.007        0.060
Number of Country-Qualifiers             118            118              118              118             118          118
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier level.
Sample covers +/- 25 weeks around the end of qualification process. Post-Qualification takes value 1 during the 25 weeks
following the qualification to ACN and WC, 0 otherwise. Conflict data comes from the ACLED dataset.




                                                                56
                    TABLE A.16: C LOSE Q UALIFICATIONS TO F IRST W ORLD C UP

Dependent Variable                     Conflict Prevalence Num. Events (log+1) Num. Fatalities (log+1)
                                          (1)         (2)    (3)        (4)       (5)          (6)
Post-Qualification                     0.150** 0.142** 0.494*       0.358**     0.711*       0.591*
                                        (0.068)    (0.052) (0.243)   (0.157)    (0.337)     (0.295)
First-Time x Post-Qualification       -0.208*** -0.137* -0.489*      -0.278*   -0.757**      -0.482
                                        (0.062)    (0.067) (0.233)   (0.159)    (0.343)     (0.300)

4 lags of Conflict                        No           Yes         No            Yes           No             Yes
Country×Qualifier FE                      Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Week FE                                   Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Observations                              850          782         850           782           850            782
R-squared                                0.073        0.090       0.080         0.150         0.063          0.102
Number of Country-Qualifiers              17           17          17            17            17             17
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier level.
Sample covers +/- 25 weeks around the end of qualification process. Post-Qualification takes value 1 during the 25 weeks
following the qualification to the World Cup, 0 otherwise. First-Time is a dummy indicating that the team reached the
last match-day with chances of qualifying to the World Cup for the very first time. Conflict data comes from the ACLED
dataset.




                                                          57
                                    TABLE A.17: U RBAN          VS   RURAL C ONFLICT

  Dependent Variable               Conflict Prevalence          Num. Events (log+1)          Num. Fatalities (log+1)
                                     (1)         (2)              (3)         (4)             (5)           (6)
  Post-Qualification             -0.068**         -0.065**      -0.103***      -0.065** -0.059               -0.124**
                                  (0.028)          (0.025)        (0.030)       (0.031) (0.039)               (0.057)

  Conflict Sample                   Urban          Rural            Urban        Rural        Urban            Rural
  Mean Dep. Var.                     0.26          0.30              0.31        0.44          0.16            0.46
  Std Dev. Dep Var                   0.43          0.46              0.58        0.80          0.63            1.16
  4 lags of Conflict                  No            Yes               No          Yes           No              Yes
  Country×Qualifier FE               Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes              Yes
  Week FE                            Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes              Yes
  Observations                      4,646          4,646            4,646        4,646        4,646            4,646
  R-squared                         0.024          0.036            0.070        0.123        0.020            0.062

 *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier level.
 Sample covers +/- 25 weeks around the end of qualification process. Post-Qualification takes value 1 during the 25 weeks
 following the qualification to ACN, 0 otherwise. Conflict data comes from the ACLED dataset. Urban areas in ? are used
 to code urban and rural events.




                      TABLE A.18: C ONFLICT P REVALENCE BY T YPE OF C ONFLICT

                                 Dependent Variable: Conflict Prevalence (if at least one conflict in week, 0 otherwise)
                                   Riots            Attacks on Civilians            Government                  Battles
                              (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)

                          -0.089***    -0.083***     -0.063**       -0.052**     -0.045     -0.043*       -0.014        -0.005
 Post-Qualification
                            (0.030)      (0.027)      (0.029)        (0.024)    (0.032)     (0.026)      (0.024)       (0.020)

 4 lags of Conflict          No             Yes         No            Yes        No           Yes          No           Yes
 Country×Qualifier FE        Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
 Week FE                     Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
 Observations               5,050        4,646         5,050         4,646      5,050        4,646        5,050        4,646
 R-squared                  0.017        0.037         0.014         0.032      0.008        0.024        0.010        0.022

*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier level. Sample
covers +/- 25 weeks around the end of qualification process. Post-Qualification takes value 1 during the 25 weeks after the
qualification to ACN, 0 otherwise. Conflict data comes from the ACLED dataset.




                                                               58
            TABLE A.19: C ONFLICT I NTENSITY BY T YPE OF C ONFLICT (N UM . E VENTS )

                            Dependent Variable: Number of Conflict Events by Type (Log + 1)
                                   Riots           Attacks on Civilians     Government                       Battles
                               (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)                  (7)       (8)
 Post-Qualification         -0.124***    -0.100***     -0.084       -0.055*      -0.086      -0.051      -0.019     -0.000
                              (0.039)      (0.027)     (0.051)      (0.029)     (0.058)     (0.033)     (0.043)    (0.026)

 4 lags of Conflict            No            Yes         No           Yes         No         Yes         No          Yes
 Country×Qualifier FE          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
 Week FE                       Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
 Observations                 5,050         4,646       5,050        4,646       5,050       4,646      5,050       4,646
 R-squared                    0.018         0.085       0.012        0.070       0.008       0.096      0.011       0.093

*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier level. Sample
covers +/- 25 weeks around the end of qualification process. Post-Qualification takes value 1 during the 25 weeks following
the qualification to ACN, 0 otherwise. Conflict data comes from the ACLED dataset.




          TABLE A.20: C ONFLICT I NTENSITY BY T YPE OF C ONFLICT (N UM . FATALITIES )

                                         Dependent Variable: Number of Fatalities by Type (Log+1)
 Conflict Type:                    Riots       Attacks on Civilians    Government               Battles
                               (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)      (5)        (6)       (7)         (8)
                             -0.004      -0.011 -0.132**          -0.112**     -0.112     -0.066 -0.152**         -0.106**
 Post-Qualification
                             (0.017)    (0.015) (0.062)            (0.054)    (0.073)    (0.048) (0.074)           (0.053)

 4 lags of Conflict            No         Yes         No            Yes        No         Yes         No            Yes
 Country×Qualifier FE          Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes
 Week FE                       Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes
 Observations                 5,050      4,646       5,050         4,646      5,050       4,646       5,050        4,646
 R-squared                    0.011      0.020       0.011         0.022      0.009       0.035       0.011        0.047

*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier level. Sample
covers +/- 25 weeks around the end of qualification process. Post-Qualification takes value 1 during the 25 weeks following
the qualification to ACN, 0 otherwise. Conflict data comes from the ACLED dataset.




                                                             59
                  TABLE A.21: I NCAPACITATION E FFECT DUE TO ACN FI NALS ?

Dependent Variable:           Conflict Prevalence         Num. Events (log+1)          Num. Fatalities (log+1)
                                (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)              (5)           (6)
Post-Qualification            -0.075**     -0.065**      -0.190***      -0.111***      -0.240**       -0.157***
                               (0.031)      (0.027)        (0.072)        (0.037)       (0.094)         (0.060)
During ACN Finals              -0.024       -0.027          0.100          0.050         0.134           0.101
                               (0.043)      (0.039)        (0.092)        (0.067)       (0.152)         (0.122)
Country×Qualifier FE             Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
Week FE                          Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
4 Lags of Conflict               No           Yes            No             Yes           No              Yes
Observations                    5,050        4,646           5,050         4,646         5,050          4,646
R-squared                       0.010        0.024           0.014         0.119         0.012          0.070

*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country×qualifier level.
Sample covers +/- 25 weeks around the end of qualification process. Post-Qualification takes value 1 during the 25
weeks following the qualification to ACN, 0 otherwise. The During ACN Finals takes value 1 for the qualified teams
during the weeks in which the ACN finals are taking place, 0 otherwise. Conflict data comes from the ACLED dataset.




                                                        60
