NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RECLASSIFICATION RISK IN THE SMALL GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE MARKET
Sebastián Fleitas
Gautam Gowrisankaran
Anthony Lo Sasso
Working Paper 24663
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24663

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018, Revised February 2020

We thank Steve Berry, John Bertko, Simon Board, Allan Collard-Wexler, Jan De Loecker, Tim
Dunne, Liran Einav, Antonio Galvao, Josh Gottlieb, Matt Grennan, Jon Gruber, Ben Handel, Igal
Hendel, Dan Herbst, Hide Ichimura, Neale Mahoney, Tom McGuire, Mark Pauly, Daniel Prinz,
Jim Rebitzer, Bob Town, Erin Trish, and numerous seminar and conference participants for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24663.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Sebastián Fleitas, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Anthony Lo Sasso. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Reclassification Risk in the Small Group Health Insurance Market
Sebastián Fleitas, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Anthony Lo Sasso
NBER Working Paper No. 24663
May 2018, Revised February 2020
JEL No. D25,I13,L13
ABSTRACT
We evaluate reclassification risk in the small group health insurance market from a period before
ACA community rating regulations. Reclassification risk in this setting is of key policy relevance
and also a matter of debate. We use detailed claims and premiums data from a large insurance
company and control non-parametrically for selection. We find a pass through of 16% from
changes in health risk to changes in premiums, with a stronger equilibrium relationship between
premiums and risk. This pattern is consistent with the insurer implicitly offering “guaranteed
renewability” contracts with one-sided pricing commitment. We further find that groups whose
health risk decreases have premiums that are more responsive to risk, which the guaranteed
renewability model attributes to ex post renegotiation. The observed pricing policy adds 60% of
the consumer welfare gain from community rating relative to experience rating. The welfare
gains are limited because employers and employees switch coverage frequently.

Sebastián Fleitas
Department of Economics
University of Leuven
3000 Leuven
Belgium
sebastian.fleitas@kuleuven.be
Gautam Gowrisankaran
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
P.O. Box 210108
Tucson, AZ 85721-0108
and HEC Montreal
and also NBER
gowrisankaran@eller.arizona.edu

Anthony Lo Sasso
Economics Department
DePaul University
1 East Jackson
Chicago, IL 60604
USA
alosasso@depaul.edu

1

Introduction

One of the most important concerns in designing health insurance markets is reclassification risk, which occurs when an adverse and persistent health shock leads to higher
future premiums or worse coverage. Reclassification risk has the potential to lead to market failure by limiting the long-run risk protection from insurance. A main goal of the
2010 Affordable Care Act (ACA) was to reduce reclassification risk—in the individual
and small group markets—through community rating provisions.
This paper considers reclassification risk in the context of the small group health insurance market. This market provides insurance to individuals at employers with 2 to
50 employees.1 In 2013, this market covered 18 million people in the U.S. (Kaiser Family
Foundation, 2013), representing about $100 billion in revenues.2 Our study brings novel
data to bear on this understudied market. Reclassification risk is particularly salient for
this market because of the small sizes of the employers. To illustrate, consider an individual who works for an employer with 5 employees with an annual health insurance contract.3 Suppose that the individual or her co-worker is diagnosed with a serious illness,
perhaps diabetes, with an expected cost of $25,000 per year going forward. A market that
fully passes through risk to the employer—such as a competitive insurance market without long run contracts—will increase premiums to this employer by $25,000, which raises
per-employee costs by $5,000.
The extent of reclassification risk in the small group market prior to the ACA is unclear.
On the one hand, a number of influential studies have documented substantial variation
in premiums across employers in this market (Cutler, 1994; Cebul et al., 2011; Bundorf
et al., 2012). A plausible cause of this premium variation is reclassification risk, i.e., from
employers with higher health risks facing higher premiums (Gruber, 2000). On the other
hand, using survey data, Pauly and Herring (1999) find that premiums did not corre1

Prior to the ACA, the small group market included groups with 1 to 50 members. The ACA originally
mandated a change in the market definition to include groups with up to 100 members. This change was
eliminated in the 2015 Protecting Affordable Coverage for Employees (PACE) Act, so that the federal definition remains 1-50 members. However, four states use the 100 members maximum in their definition (Jost,
2015).
2
Authors’ calculation using premium information from Blavin et al. (2014).
3
Annual insurance contracts are typical in this market.

2

late much with health risk in either the individual and small group insurance markets.
Herring and Pauly (2006) attribute this to the market providing protection from reclassification risk in the pre-ACA era in the form of “guaranteed renewability” contracts that
do not increase rates in response to health risk increases. Given these mixed findings and
the relevance to the ACA, we believe that understanding how much reclassification risk
existed in this market, and why it existed, is important to understanding the value of what
is one of the largest reforms to healthcare policy in the history of the U.S.
This paper has three main goals related to health insurance in the small group market.
The first goal is to examine the extent of reclassification risk in this market. The second
goal is to evaluate the mechanisms underlying our findings on reclassification risk. The
third goal is to understand the welfare consequences of alternative pricing policies, such
as community rating and full experience rating, relative to the current environment.
Our study uses data on the small group insurance market from a large health insurance
company, which we refer to as the United States Insurance Company, or USIC. These data
include a panel of claims and premiums for USIC’s small group market products in 10
states over the period 2012-15, containing information on over 300,000 USIC enrollees at
more than 12,000 employers.4 Crucially, this database allows us to observe healthcare
costs and premiums for each employer, which we use to directly evaluate reclassification
risk. Our study is unique in having access to a large database on the small group market
with this information.5
To motivate our empirical specifications, we first develop a simple two-period model
of insurance in the small group market. Our model specifies that USIC offers health insurance to a small employer, charging premiums that are potentially based on the health
risk (or equivalently, the expected claims cost) of the employer. Potential enrollees decide
whether or not to enroll in insurance if offered, given their health risk and the premium
4
This time period was immediately before most of the ACA regulations for the small group market were
effective. For the time period and states in our sample, insurers could experience rate small employers
without significant regulatory restrictions.
5
Related to our study, Buchmueller and DiNardo (2002) investigated whether the implementation of
community rating in New York led to adverse selection, while Cutler and Reber (1998); Bundorf et al. (2012);
Einav et al. (2010), and Kowalski (2015) study reclassification risk for employees who could choose from a
menu of plans offered by their employer, and Atal et al. (2019) study guaranteed renewability contracts in
Germany.

3

charged. The welfare loss from reclassification risk is increasing in the pass through from
changes in mean health risk at an employer to changes in premiums. We highlight three
benchmark cases: full experience rating—where an increase in health risk at an employer
is fully passed through in the form of higher premiums; community rating—where pass
through is zero; and USIC’s actual pass-through rate.
We evaluate the extent of reclassification risk by estimating the pass-through from
changes in health risk at an employer in a year to changes in its per-enrollee premiums.
We compute health risk for each individual as the ACG score, using the previous year’s
claims data.6 Because there is frequent movement in and out of small group insurance,
our estimation controls for selection with a non-parametric correction (Newey, 2009). Our
fixed effects estimates are identified by the extent to which changes in health risk at an
employer translate into changes in premiums, conditioning non-parametrically for the
probability of being in the sample. Individual risk and industrial sector provide useful
exclusion restrictions in the premium setting (treatment) equation that help identify the
probability of being in the sample.
Overview of findings. We find that a unit increase in mean ACG score for an employer
increases its mean annual claims cost by $4003.7 Our base estimates—with enrollee fixed
effects and controls for selection—show that this unit increase causes premiums to rise by
$624. Thus, our estimated pass through from expected claims to premiums is 16%. Our
results that do not control for fixed effects, but still control for selection, show a much
higher relation between health risk and premiums, of $2811, or 70% of health risk. The
difference between the fixed effects and non-fixed effects estimates suggests that USIC
prices new accounts based on their health risk and then updates premiums for existing
accounts with much less regard to health risk.
Given the Herring and Pauly (2006) view that insurers typically offered guaranteed
renewability contracts in the individual insurance market prior to the ACA, we seek to
understand whether these contracts can explain our fixed effects findings. Under these
6

The ACG score, which was developed by Johns Hopkins University, is widely used in this context (see,
for instance Gowrisankaran et al., 2013; Handel, 2013; Ghili et al., 2019), and similar to USIC’s proprietary
risk score.
7
An ACG score of 1 is the population mean score, so a unit increase would occur from an employer
having double the expected health cost of the population mean.

4

contracts, insurers commit to a long-run premium schedule that is invariant to updates in
health risk, but enrollees can let their insurance lapse and potentially buy a new policy.
Handel et al. (2019) and Ghili et al. (2019) consider the optimal guaranteed renewability
contract accounting for enrollee liquidity constraints. Under such contracts, insurers will
partly front load premiums to avoid lapsation but will balance the front loading against
consumption smoothing. In equilibrium, groups with decreases in risk score will renegotiate their contracts and obtain lower premiums.
The guaranteed renewability model with liquidity constraints has main three testable
implications relevant to our setting. First, it implies positive, but incomplete, pass through
from health risk to premiums. Second, it implies that the marginal impact of health risk
on premiums will be greater for groups whose risk scores decrease than for groups whose
risk scores increase. Finally, it implies that groups with initially higher risk scores will face
greater pass through from health risk to premiums than other groups, since there is more
scope for their premiums to decrease.
We simulated data from Handel et al. and show that these three implications hold
for their optimal contracts. We test these three implications in the USIC data and find
that they hold in our setting, though the exact numbers differ from Handel et al. due to
institutional differences. Focusing on the USIC data, our above finding of a pass through
of 16% is consistent with the first implication. Regarding the second implication, a unit
increase in the ACG score caused only a $44 increase in premiums, while a unit decrease
caused a $795 reduction in premiums, relative to a group with unchanged risk scores.
Regarding the third implication, groups with above average initial risk scores faced a
point estimate of an average increase of $413 from a unit increase in risk score while the
figure is $378 for groups with below average initial risk scores. These results suggest
that USIC may implicitly provide reclassification risk protection similar to guaranteed
renewability contracts.
We then simulate counterfactuals to evaluate the extent to which the insurance provided by USIC provides value in the form of protection from reclassification risk in the
small group market. We non-parametrically simulate the evolution of health risk over a
ten-year horizon to evaluate how this would translate into financial risk for individuals.
5

Given that our specifications with enrollee fixed effects uncover USIC’s pass through for
existing employers, we assume that when individuals remain in USIC insurance with a
given employer, they receive a new premium based on the new employer risk and the
estimated coefficient from the model with enrollee fixed effects and the selection correction. Given that our non-fixed-effects specifications may reflect risk-based pricing for new
accounts, we further assume that when individuals leave USIC insurance with the same
employer, they work at an employer of a similar size and risk and receive a premium
based on the coefficient estimated without enrollee fixed effects. We calculate the certainty equivalent loss in income from financial risk, using a CARA functional form and
estimated risk preferences from the literature (Handel, 2013).
We find that USIC’s current policies result in a mean annual certainty equivalent loss
from financial risk of $3,050 over the ten years after the initial period. Even though our
estimates with enrollee fixed effects show low pass through similar to community rating,
the reclassification risk protection of these contracts is limited by employees in this market frequently switching insurance coverage and by substantial out-of-pocket costs. With
community rating, we find a mean certainty equivalent loss of $1,950, all of which is due to
the financial risk from out-of-pocket costs. The certainty equivalent income loss is $4,500
under full experience rating, implying that USIC’s current pricing policy generates about
60% of the certainty equivalent gains in risk protection of community rating regulations
relative to full experience rating.
Finally, we evaluate the extent to which pooling in the small group market adds value
relative to an individual market with identical guaranteed renewability contracts and selection. We find that individuals in such a market would have a certainty equivalent loss
of $3,650 over the ten year horizon, implying that pooling across beneficiaries within a
small employer adds an average of $600 in risk protection annually.
The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our model of
enrollee choice, risk, and selection. Section 3 describes our data sources and estimation
sample. Section 4 describes our empirical approach. Section 5 describes our estimation
results, Section 6 presents our counterfactuals, and Section 7 concludes.

6

2

Model

2.1

Enrollee utility and choice

We develop a simple and stylized model of reclassification risk and selection in the health
insurance industry. The model has two time periods, periods 1 and 2. Period 2 payoffs
are discounted at the rate δ. A period is meant to represent a year, the typical length of a
health insurance contract.8 We consider potential enrollees who can obtain health insurance through a small group employer.9 Denote the potential enrollee by i, the employer
by j, the time period by t, and the number of potential enrollees at employer j by Ij .
Each potential enrollee starts each period with risk score rijt . The risk score is based
on her previous year’s healthcare claims, is proportional to her total expected costs of
healthcare at period t, is normalized to 1 for the mean individual in the population, and
is observable to both the potential enrollee and the insurer. Let H ∼ dFH (rijt ) denote the
period t health shock as a function of risk score and c(H) denote the claims cost given
health shock H. We separate costs into the portion that the insurer pays, cins (H), and the
portion that the enrollee pays out of pocket, coop (H). Insurer-paid claims satisfy
E[cins (H)] = γrijt

(1)

where γ is a constant of proportionality.10 The individual risk scores imply that the emPIj
ployer mean risk score over its population of potential enrollees is Rjt ≡ I1j i=1
rijt .
The timing in our model is as follows. In period 1, employer j forms with some exogenous set of employees. In both periods, the insurer first observes Rjt and then decides on
the per-person premium, pjt (Rjt ), which is the total premium for employer j divided by
the number of enrollees at employer j. This premium is potentially based on both Rjt and
the employer’s history with the insurer. Following this, the employer decides whether
to offer insurance. Potential enrollees then decide whether to take up the insurance if
8

We make this assumption for ease of notation. Our empirical work allows for more than two periods.
Our theoretical analysis does not distinguish between potential enrollees who are employees and dependents.
10
While risk scores typically concern overall costs, we assume here that the proportional relationship
holds for the costs borne by the insurer.
9

7

offered. Finally, the health shocks H are realized.
We now exposit the utility at each period. We assume that utility is additively separable across the time periods. We denote the per-period utility from obtaining insurance
when offered as UijA (rijt , pjt (Rjt )). This utility is a function of the potential enrollee’s income Yijt , her employer’s premium, and her out-of-pocket health costs:
UijA (rijt , pjt (Rjt ))

Z
=

uij [Yijt − pjt (Rjt ) − coop (H)] dFH (rijt ),

(2)

where uij (·) is her money utility function. We assume that, through adjustments to premium or wage, the potential enrollee pays her employer the full cost of her health premium,11 and that enrollees are risk averse.
We denote the per-period utility from not having insurance as UijN (rijt ). Without insurance, the individual bears the full cost of her health expenditures:
UijN (rijt )

Z
=

u [Yijt − c(H)] dFH (rijt ).

(3)

Combining the utility from both choices, the potential enrollee’s per-period utility is then:
Uij (rijt , pjt (Rjt )) = max{UijA (rijt , pjt (Rjt )), UijN (rijt )}.

(4)

Finally, the discounted value of the potential enrollee over the two periods is:
Z
Vij (~rj1 ) = Uij (rij1 , pj1 (Rj1 )) + δ

Uij (rij2 , pj2 (Rj2 ))dFR,r (Rj2 , rij2 |~rj1 ),

(5)

where ~r1j1 is the vector of period 1 risk scores and dFR,r (Rj2 , rij2 |~rj1 ) is the joint conditional
risk score distributions at period 2, for the potential enrollee and her employer.
11

The literature has shown positive but sometimes incomplete pass through from higher premiums to
lower wages (Baicker and Chandra, 2006; Bhattacharya and Bundorf, 2009). We model complete pass
through for simplicity but our empirical findings are robust to incomplete pass through.

8

2.2

Risk rating and reclassification risk

Reclassification risk can enter in our model because a bad and persistent health shock at
period 1 for the individual or her coworker will raise Rj2 . With experience rating, this
will in turn raise per-person premiums at employer j. The extent of reclassification risk
depends on the distribution of FR and on pj2 (·). If the individual were in a large risk pool,
then reclassification risk would not be a substantial issue because the distribution of FR
would be very concentrated and degenerate to a point in the limit. Even if the individual
were in a small risk pool, if pjt (Rjt ) did not vary much in response to Rjt , then she would
not face much reclassification risk. Thus, individuals employed by large employers or in
settings without much experience rating do not face much reclassification risk. In contrast,
individuals in small risk pools without significant restrictions on experience rating—i.e.,
individuals in our sample—may be faced with significant reclassification risk.
We now consider the impact of different risk rating policies, focusing on the case where
potential enrollees take up insurance. For ease of notation, we assume that the insured
have no out-of-pocket costs.12 This implies that E[c(H(rijt ))] = E[cins (H(rijt ))] = γRjt .
First, we examine full experience rating. In this case, the insurer sets premiums exactly
equal to expected equilibrium insured risk, so that pjt (R) = γR. Suppressing dependencies on variables that no longer enter, equation (5) specializes to:
Vij (~rj1 ) =

UijA (γRj1 )

Z
+δ

UijA (γRj2 )dFR (Rj2 |~rj1 ).

(6)

Individuals here are faced with reclassification risk: an increase in the expected equilibrium mean risk score among the insured in period 2, Rj2 , is passed through into an increase in expected insurance costs at the employer in period 2. This occurs even though
contracts are actuarially fair.
Next, we consider long-run contracts with a binding commitment to future premiums.
Consider such a contract with a period 1 premium of pj1 = γRj1 and a period 2 premium
of pj2 = γE[Rj2 |~rj1 ]. This contract would have premium equal to expected marginal cost
and would eliminate reclassification risk. Given our assumption that consumers are risk
12

Our empirical work accounts for out-of-pocket costs.

9

averse,
Z

UijA (Yij2 − γRj2 )dFR (Rj2 |~rj1 ) < UijA (Yij2 − γE[Rj2 |~rj1 ),

implying that such a contract would improve enrollee welfare for individuals who takeup insurance over state-contingent one-period contracts of the same actuarial value. Consider further the case where income and mean risk are the same across periods, so that
Yij1 = Yij2 , ∀i, and E[Rj2 |~rj1 ] = Rj1 . In this case, the above contract would maximize U A
among long-run break-even contracts. This implies that a competitive insurance industry
with full take-up would result in employers signing these two-period contracts.
Note further that this two-period contract is approximately equivalent to a community rating provision (provided the rating pool includes a large number of people) in that
there is no pass through from health risk to premiums. However, it is likely different from
community rating in that the initial premiums might vary based on employer characteristics. In particular, with binding contracts and competition, new employers would get risk
rated while continuing accounts would not. This would result in the initial premiums, pj1 ,
being larger with a higher Rj1 , which would not occur under community rating.
Finally, we consider the general case with different levels of pass through. A simple
functional form for premiums here is:
pjt = cjt + βRjt ,

(7)

for some constant cjt , which reflects baseline prices at period t, and might vary due to
changes in healthcare provider prices or general expected increases in health risk over
time. If β = γ, then this is the full experience rating case. Under community rating or
binding two-period contracts, we would have β = 0. For 0 < β < γ, there will be positive
but incomplete pass through from changes in risk to changes in premiums. Given that
preferences are risk averse, for β 0 < β̃,
Z
Z
<

UijA (Yij2 − pj1 − c − β̃(Rj2 − E[Rj2 |~rj1 ])dFR (Rj2 |~rj1 ))
(8)
UijA (Yij2

0

− pj1 − c − β (Rj2 − E[Rj2 |~rj1 ])dFR (Rj2 |~rj1 )),

10

implying that actuarially equivalent contracts with a lower β increases utility.
In a regression based on (7) with employer and year fixed effects to proxy for cjt , β
would indicate the pass through from changes in health risk to changes in premiums.
In a similar regression without employer fixed effects, the analogous coefficient would
indicate this pass through plus the risk-based portion of the initial premium in cj1 .
Since utility is decreasing in β, β is a sufficient statistic to evaluate the reclassification risk from a contract, conditional on preferences and the distribution of health shocks
scaled in dollars using γ. In the tradition of Chetty (2009) and Einav et al. (2010), our empirical analysis will estimate β and use it to characterize reclassification risk in this market.
This does not require us to specify or estimate all preferences parameters. To understand
welfare under the observed and counterfactual environments, we then combine our estimates of β with risk preference parameters from the literature, the estimated distribution
of health shocks scaled in dollars, and models of selection into insurance.
An important empirical question regards the β we would expect to occur in our data.
Since insurers can create value for risk averse individuals by offering a high c and a low
β relative to other actuarially equivalent policies, the market may evolve to have such
features. Nonetheless, this is not certain to occur, since a market without multi-period
contracts will have full experience rating, i.e. β = γ, and it is very difficult to enforce
enrollee commitment to binding multi-period contracts. However, one-sided commitment
by insurers may have existed in the individual and even small group insurance markets
during our sample period (Pauly and Lieberthal, 2008). When one-sided commitment is
allowed and there are liquidity constraints, a competitive insurance market will result in
these contracts occurring (Harris and Holmstrom, 1982).
Under the optimal one-sided commitment contracts with a competitive market, we
would expect positive but limited pass through from changes in health risk to changes in
premiums (Ghili et al., 2019).13 This would result in a relatively low β in regressions of premiums on health risk with employer and year fixed effects based on (7). Since one-sided
13

The small group insurance market, which has few insurance companies active in most states, is best
characterized as an oligopoly rather than a competitive market (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2013). For this
reason, the real world impact of one-sided commitment contracts in this market may be somewhat different
from the theory. However, we would still expect the general patterns from the theoretical literature to hold.

11

commitment contracts do not solve the problem of risk-based pricing for new accounts,
we would expect a stronger relationship between health risk and premiums in analogous
regressions without employer fixed effects. We will return to the difference between our
results with and without employee/employer fixed effects in Section 5.3.

2.3

Selection of enrollees

Our above results deal with the case where enrollees choose USIC insurance in both periods. In the real world, take-up of insurance is limited and employers and enrollees start
and stop coverage frequently. We now discuss selection of potential enrollees into insurance. We model the combined offer and take-up decision for the employer and enrollee
as:
Dijt = 1{f (Rjt , rijt , xijt ) + εsijt > 0}

(9)

where Dijt = 1 indicates offer and take-up of insurance, f (·) is a flexible mean utility
function to be estimated, and εsijt is an unobservable. Starting with (7) we then model
premiums as:
pijt = cjt + βRjt + εpijt ,

(10)

where we are now indexing p by ‘i’, cjt is the mean average pass through given characteristics of employer j and period t, and εpijt is also an unobservable, capturing idiosyncratic
premium risk unexplained by other factors and uncorrelated with risk, for instance due
to variation in employer or insurance broker bargaining ability.
Our data contain premiums only for individuals who take up insurance and hence for
whom Dijt = 1. Hence, (9) is our selection equation while (10) is our treatment equation.
As is typical in selection models, we allow for correlations between εsijt and εpijt for a given
i. We generally expect that there would be a negative correlation between the two unobservables since individuals who received a higher premium than expected given observables would also be less likely to select into insurance than expected given observables.
Note also that εpijt will be highly correlated for individuals at the same employer and year
since individuals at a given employer and year pay the same premium.
Our estimation seeks to recover consistent treatment effects for β in (10) in the presence
12

of selection. Specifically, we non-parametrically control for selection in (10) using the
methods of Newey (2009).

3

Data and Estimation Sample

3.1

Data

Our principal data are from employers who purchase health insurance for employee and
dependent coverage from “United States Insurance Company” (USIC) in the small group
market during the years 2012 to 2015. USIC provided us with data from 10 different states:
AR, DE, IL, PA, OK, MO, TN, TX, WI, and WY. USIC further classified the data into 19
different geographic markets, e.g., Texas is divided into Central Texas, Dallas, Houston,
North Texas, and South Texas. Employers in our sample purchased fully-insured insurance products from USIC, not third-party administrative services. Figure A.1 in On-Line
Appendix A provides a map of the states in our estimation sample.
While all states regulate small group insurance, they vary in the degree of their regulation. The states that we use were all lightly regulated prior to the ACA. For instance,
none of the states had community rating regulations during this period. One measure of
state regulation is the extent to which premiums are allowed to vary across groups for all
reasons apart from plan generosity, which are known as ratings bands. Prior to the start of
ACA regulations on this market, DE, PA, TX, IL, WI, and WY allowed premiums to range
across groups by a ratio of 25-to-1 or greater (a total of 12 states had bands this large);
MO and OK had rating bands between 19- and 25-to-1; and AR and TN had rating bands
between 13- and 19-to-1.14 During this period, all states had provisions that essentially
implied that USIC would not be able to cancel a group’s policy even if the mean health
risk for the group rose substantially.
The ACA implemented community rating regulations for the small group market—
specifically a ban on health status underwriting and a requirement that plans in the market
have a common small group risk pool—that were originally supposed to start in January,
14

See http://www.naic.org/documents/topics_health_insurance_rate_regulation_brief.pdf.

13

2014. However, almost all small group plans were exempt from the ACA market reforms
during our sample period, for two reasons. First, some of these plans were “grandfathered,” meaning that the ACA included a clause that allowed consumers to keep their
existing health plans, conditional on the plan not significantly changing its benefits.15 Second, a transitional rule let states allow “grandmothered” plans in the small group market,
meaning that they could permit insurers to continue offering non-ACA compliant plans
to small employers. The great majority of states opted to allow the sale of grandmothered
plans past our sample period, and indeed through 2018.16 Importantly for our analysis,
both grandmothered and grandfathered plans are exempt from the ACA’s community
rating regulations noted above.
Our data include information at both the enrollee-year (employee or dependent) and
employer-year levels. At the employer-year level, for all the employers that contract with
USIC, we observe the total number of employees that are eligible for health coverage, the
number of health insurance plans available to their enrollees in each year, the characteristics of each plan, and the total premium paid by the employer to the insurer for each plan
in each month of each year.
We observe data for each enrollee that takes up insurance in each year. Specifically,
we observe age, gender, the health plan chosen, the relationship of the enrollee to the
employee (e.g., self, spouse, child), and information to link enrollees to the employer and
to the employee with employer-sponsored coverage. We also observe claim-level data—
for both medical and pharmaceutical claims—for every healthcare encounter. These data
provide diagnosis, procedure, date of service, and premium information and are linked to
the enrollee identifier.
We calculate a per-enrollee premium by dividing the total premium paid by the employer to USIC in a year for a plan by the number of enrollees (employees and dependents)
at that employer and plan during that year. We use the January premium and enrollee information for this calculation and multiply the monthly premium by twelve to annualize
15

The concept of grandfathering of health plans was popularized by President Obama’s statement that “if
you like your health plan, you can keep your health plan.”
16
See Jost (2017) and CMS (2017) for further details on this discussion.

14

it.17
To measure the predicted health expenditure risk for each enrollee, we use the ACG
risk prediction software developed at Johns Hopkins Medical School. The software outputs an “ACG score” for each enrollee in each year, which corresponds to rijt in our model.
The ACG score indicates the predicted relative healthcare cost for the individual over the
year, and has a mean of 1 in a reference group chosen by ACG. The ACG score is based on
past diagnostic codes, expense, prescription drug consumption (code and length of consumption), age, and gender for each individual. In our case, we use the twelve months of
data from the previous year to generate the ACG score for a given year. Similarly to the
ACG score, USIC also uses a proprietary system to derive a risk score for each enrollee.
While we do not have access to the USIC scores, the ACG and USIC scores are very similar
(as we further show in On-Line Appendix B using a subsample of enrollees for whom we
have both scores).
For new groups, USIC did not generally use their proprietary risk scores, because this
would have required obtaining and processing claims information from the previous insurer for each enrollee. Instead, USIC typically obtained information on health risk from a
health questionnaire. This questionnaire requested information regarding 15 conditions,
including cancer, diabetes, and heart disease, and asked potential enrollees to list any
claims in excess of $5,000.
Since our risk score measures are calculated using the previous year claims data, we
need to observe an employer or individual for two consecutive years in order to have
a complete observation where we can observe the risk score and the premium. Thus, for
instance if we observed an employer in 2012 and 2013, this would allow us to compute the
2013 premium and mean risk score for the employer, where the risk score was computed
from 2012 data.
Most of our regressions use employer or enrollee fixed effects. Since we obtain the risk
score calculation from the previous year, we need three continuous years of data (which
17

Because individuals typically make enrollment decisions annually with contracts starting in January,
the total premiums paid by the employer to USIC in January is a good representation of annual per-person
premiums charged by USIC. We also computed per-enrollee premiums using the mean and mode of the
monthly premiums paid by the employer over different months, and obtained similar results with these
alternative measures.

15

generates two years with complete observations) to compute an employer/enrollee fixed
effect. For comparability across estimates, we drop employers/enrollees for which we
observe fewer than three continuous years of data for all our specifications, even those
without employer/enrollee fixed effects.18
As an additional source to evaluate selection, we use data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), which is a nationally representative survey regarding individual insurance decisions and health care expenditures. The MEPS data allow us to understand selection into the small group market since it has information about individuals that
did not take up insurance. We construct the sample by using panel 18 from the consolidated database for years 2013 and 2014. To select individuals who could participate in the
small group market, we select individuals that were (a) working but not self-employed at
the beginning of the period, (b) who worked at an establishment size less than or equal
to 50 individuals, and (c) were offered insurance via their employer. We use age, gender, and health conditions of individuals and establishment size and industrial sector as
characteristics to predict the probability of taking up insurance.

3.2

Summary statistics on estimation sample

Table 1 provides summary statistics on the enrollees in our estimation sample. Our full sample
includes approximately 330,000 unique individuals and 650,000 observations.
We first analyze enrollee turnover. To do this, we characterize enrollees based on whether
they have joined or quit available USIC coverage during our sample. A “joiner” is an enrollee for
whom we did not have a complete observation in the first year but for whom we had a complete
observation in a later year and whose employer was in the sample prior to her being there. A
“quitter” is the opposite: an enrollee for whom we did not have a complete observation in the
last year but for whom we had a complete observation in an earlier year and whose employer
remained in the sample after she was no longer there. A “stayer” is an enrollee for whom we have
three complete observations. Note that an individual can be both a joiner and a quitter, which
would occur if she were in our data in the middle two years only. Also, note that enrollees whom
we do not observe for two consecutive years would not fit any of these three categories.
18

We also drop employers with missing information for premiums, plan characteristics, or enrollment.

16

Table 1: Descriptive statistics on estimation sample at the enrollee-year level

Unique individuals
Observations
Relation (%)
Employees
Spouses
Children
Others
Age
Female (%)
In dollars:
Lagged paid total claims
Lagged out-of-pocket claims
Annual premiums
Health risk, rijt
rijt − rij,t−1
Conditions (%)
Cancer
Acute myocardial infarction
Transplant
Diabetes
Hypertension
Heart disease
Chronic kidney disease
Asthma

Full Sample
336,755
646,904

Stayers
80,031
240,093

Joiners
87,107
176,163

Quitters
113,124
186,012

56.57
15.50
27.56
0.37
38 (18)
47

56.25
16.18
27.35
0.22
40 (18)
46

56.19
15.28
28.12
0.41
36 (18)
47

56.46
15.49
27.78
0.28
38 (18)
48

3,388 (17,468)
902 (1,854)
5,219 (1,955)
1.00 (1.46)
0.05 (1.07)

3,778 (16,251)
1,009 (1,881)
5,493 (2,028)
1.01 (1.41)
0.05 (1.03)

3,287 (18,250)
894 (1,844)
4,977 (1,698)
0.92 (1.40)
0.06 (1.04)

3,272 (17,839)
845 (1,918)
5,105 (2,106)
1.05 (1.58)
0.06 (1.19)

2.47
0.16
0.14
5.57
14.12
0.39
0.48
3.38

2.57
0.16
0.15
5.66
14.64
0.38
0.49
3.27

2.03
0.16
0.12
4.90
12.26
0.34
0.43
3.35

2.60
0.17
0.16
5.90
14.55
0.43
0.51
3.59

Note: each observation in table is one enrollee during one year, 2013-15. Table reports mean values with standard deviations in
parentheses. “Stayers” are enrollees always in sample; “joiners” are enrollees with one or more full observation but without a full
observation in 2013; and “quitters” are enrollees with one or more full observation but without a full observation in 2015.

We find a lot of enrollee turnover. Only 37% of observations in our sample are for stayers.
Approximately 27% of observations are for joiners while 29% of observations are for quitters.
Overall, there is a clear though moderate pattern of differences between the groups, where
joiners have lower health risk than stayers who have lower health risk than quitters. Specifically,
joiners have a mean ACG score—or expected claims cost—of 0.92, compared to 1.01 for stayers,
and 1.05 for quitters. Consistent with this, joiners are on average two years younger than quitters,
though stayers are older than either group, suggesting that age affects insurance lapsation for
reasons other than health risk.
On average, people paid $5,219 in annual premiums, had $3,388 in total claims, and $902 in
out-of-pocket claims. We measure a number of chronic conditions from the claims data. The most
prevalent is hypertension, occurring in 14% of observations. The next most common is diabetes,

17

which occurs in 6% of enrollees.
Table 2: Descriptive statistics at the employer-year level

Employers
Observations
Subscribers
Take up rate (%)
Relation (%)
Employees
Spouses
Children
Others
Age
Female (%)
In dollars:
Lagged paid total claims
Lagged out-of-pocket claims
Annual premiums
2013
2014
2015
Health risk for enrolled, Rjt
Rjt − Rj,t−1
Conditions (%)
Cancer
Acute myocardial infarction
Transplant
Diabetes
Hypertension
Heart disease
Chronic kidney disease
Asthma

Full Sample
12,242
31,044
21 (27)
54 (22)

Stayers
6,560
19,680
21 (26)
54 (22)

Joiners
2,281
4,562
23 (27)
57 (21)

Quitters
3,401
6,802
20 (28)
53 (23)

64.80
12.82
22.17
0.21
41 (9)
46

64.45
13.01
22.32
0.21
41 (9)
46

63.90
13.08
22.85
0.18
39 (8)
46

66.40
12.12
21.28
0.21
41 (10)
47

4,076 (8,456)
1,092 (889)
6,162 (2,837)
5,954 (2,839)
6,276 (3,103)
6,238 (2,402)
1.07 (0.72)
0.02 (0.51)

4,003 (8,272)
1,051 (812)
6,248 (2,689)
5,881 (2,711)
6,394 (2,808)
6,469 (2,499)
1.05 (0.70)
0.01 (0.49)

3,775 (6,951)
1,061 (835)
5,385 (2,067)

4,490 (9,783)
1,232 (1,098)
6,433 (3,529)
6,095 (3,066)
6,772 (3,908)

3.02
0.18
0.19
6.15
15.67
0.46
0.57
3.34

3.04
0.17
0.21
5.95
15.43
0.45
0.55
3.28

2.40
0.17
0.10
5.29
14.15
0.40
0.54
3.18

5,196 (2,157)
5,574 (1,955)
0.97 (0.59)
0.04 (0.45)

1.17 (0.82)
0.05 (0.62)
3.38
0.21
0.19
7.33
17.39
0.52
0.66
3.61

Note: each observation in table is one small group employer during one year, 2013-15. Table reports mean values with standard
deviations in parentheses. “Stayers” are employers always in sample; “joiners” are employers with one or more full observation but
without a full observation in 2013; and “quitters” are employers with one or more full observation but without a full observation in
2015.

Table 2 provides summary statistics on the employers in our estimation sample. Our sample
includes 12,242 employers. Similarly to Table 1, we report the employers which are stayers, joiners,
or quitters. We define an employer to be a stayer if it had at least one enrollee with complete data in
each year; a joiner if it had no enrollee with complete data in 2013 but enrollee with complete data
in 2014 and 2015 and a quitter if it had no enrollee with complete data in 2015 but enrollees with
complete data in 2013 and 2014. Roughly half the employers in our sample, 54%, were stayers and
hence present throughout the sample period, with complete observations from 2013-15. Similarly
18

to at the individual level, more employers quit than joined coverage.
On average, employers in our sample have 21 subscribers. Eligible potential enrollees include
employees, spouses, children, and other family members. Employees constitute 65% of covered
lives. The mean take-up rate among eligible employees was 54%.
We observe a similar pattern of selection at the employer level to at the enrollee level. The
mean of the employer mean risk scores, R, is 0.97 for joiners, 1.05 for stayers, and 1.17 for quitters.
We also observe a substantial standard deviation in the change in R over time. This variation
will provide us with power to identify the USIC’s pass through, in our models with employer or
enrollee fixed effects.
Table 2 also presents the same statistics on enrollees that we reported in Table 1, but at the
employer-year level. We find similar values of the statistics regarding age, gender, premiums,
claims, and out-of-pocket costs using this measure. Premiums in this market rose a moderate 5%
over our two-year sample period.
Finally, Table 2 presents the mean incidence of eight chronic conditions at an employer—cancer,
transplants, acute myocardial infarctions (heart attacks), diabetes, hypertension, heart disease,
chronic kidney disease, and asthma—defined as the percentage of enrollees with a diagnosis of
the condition during the year. In On-Line Appendix B, we use the presence of these chronic conditions at the employer as a robustness check. While the incidence of transplants and AMI is less
than 1%, the mean incidence of cancer is 3% and diabetes is 6%.
Overall, the previous tables show lots of movement in and out of USIC insurance. The small
businesses that are in this market frequently start and stop coverage with USIC. Potential enrollees
at these businesses also frequently start and stop insurance take-up. This movement is driven by
at least three different factors. First, businesses may open or close for reasons orthogonal to health
insurance premiums. Second, individuals can also change jobs for reasons that are orthogonal to
premiums. Both of these factors are likely to be true given that small businesses enter and exit
frequently and also change employees frequently. Third, there can be selection of health insurance
based on premiums. Our results show moderate evidence of selection based on health risk, e.g.,
quitter employers have 9% higher expected costs than stayer employers, while quitter enrollees
have 4% higher expected costs than stayer enrollees. This selection based on risk suggests that
there may be selection based on premiums, which would bias our estimates of the pass-through
coefficient β. In order to address this potential selection, our estimates control for the effect of selection and our counterfactuals model a different impact of health risk on premiums for individuals

19

who leave the sample.
Table 3: Persistence in health risk over time
(1)
(2)
Panel A: dependent variable individual risk (rijt )
Enrollee ACG score, rij,t−1
0.733*** 0.718***
(0.005)
(0.007)
Lagged enrollee ACG score, rij,t−2

(3)

Sample
Market FE
Observations

0.561***
(0.010)
0.241***
(0.010)
2014-15
Yes
264,153

Sample
Employer FE
Observations

0.506***
(0.006)
0.193***
(0.007)
2014-15
Yes
18,802

2013-15 2014-15
Yes
Yes
523,679 264,153
Panel B: dependent variable employer risk (Rjt )
Health risk for enrolled, Rj,t−1
0.667*** 0.630***
(0.003)
(0.004)
Lagged health risk for enrolled, Rj,t−2
2013-15
Yes
31,044

2014-15
Yes
18,802

Note: for panel A (B), each observation is one enrollee (employer) during one year. We cluster standard errors at
the employer level. Markets are defined by USIC and roughly represent an MSA or state. ∗∗∗ indicates significance
at the 1% level, ∗∗ indicates significance at the 5% level, and ∗ indicates significance at the 10% level.

We next present the patterns of persistence over time for the ACG risk, in Table 3. Panel A
presents the results at the individual level for an AR(1) process in columns 1 and 2 and an AR(2)
process in column 3. Column 1 reports the AR(1) process for the full sample while column 2
reports the AR(1) process for the same sample as in column 3. Mean health risk exhibits substantial
persistence but at the same time a reversion to the mean. For instance, in the specification with
only one lag, the autocorrelation coefficient is 0.733. In the specification with two lags, reported
in column 3, the autocorrelation coefficients sum to 0.802. Thus, all the autocorrelated models are
stationary. Moreover, the sum of the coefficients when we include two lags is similar to the results
when we include only one lag, although these two processes imply different risk effects over time.
Panel B presents the autocorrelation results at the employer level. The results show that the
AR(1) and AR(2) processes are stable but also relatively persistent. The fact that persistence at the
employer level is smaller than at the individual level implies that the shocks for different enrollees
are not completely correlated, so they partially cancel each other out over time.
Finally, Table 4 reports descriptive statistics on the MEPS sample. From the full sample of
people offered insurance, 72% of individuals choose insurance through the employer. The average
age of these individuals is 42 years old and 52% of them are females. The average employer size is
20

Table 4: Descriptive statistics for MEPS sample

Mean
Standard deviation
Observations

Choose
insurance
0.72
0.45
1,355

Age
41.77
12.91
1,355

Employer
size
21.47
14.66
1,355

Female
0.52
0.50
1,355

Note: each observation in table is one individual in the consolidated Panel 18 for years 2013
and 2014 in MEPS. We selected working individuals not self-employed, who worked in establishments with less than 50 individuals and were offered health insurance via the employer.

21 which is similar but somewhat larger than the average employer size in our USIC sample. Not
reported in the table, the incidence of health conditions in the MEPS data are similar to in the USIC
sample.

4

Empirical Approach

The primary goal of our estimation is to recover γ, the impact of risk score on expected insurer
costs (dE[cins ]/dR), and β, the impact of employer mean insured risk on premiums (dp/dR). We
use these parameters together to understand the pass through from insurer costs to premiums,
dp/dE[cins ]:
dp
=
dE[cins ]

dp
dR
dE[cins ]
dR

=

dp
dR
dE[cins ]
dr

=

β
.
γ

(11)

We also use these parameters separately in our counterfactual analysis. Note that these parameters
regard insurer behavior; we do not estimate any utility parameters and our estimation algorithm
does not impose utility maximization.
We now discuss our estimation of γ, which is the parameter that scales risk scores into dollar
costs. Following (1), we estimate regressions that take the form:
r
cins
ijt = γrijt + γ2 xjt + εijt ,

(12)

where cins
ijt measures the total dollar value of claims for the individual over the year. Equation (12)
considers the impact of the individual’s current risk score—estimated using the previous year’s
claims—on current claims to the insurer. Comparing equations (12) and (1), the empirical specification uses the actual insurer costs while the theoretical model is based on the expectation of costs.
Thus, εrijt in equation (12) will capture the difference between actual claims and expected claims

21

for an individual in a year.19
The empirical specification also includes controls xjt . We include market fixed effects here
(using USIC’s market definition) to control for different provider prices across markets. Unless
individuals at different employers systematically use different-cost providers for the same conditions in a way that correlates with the risk at that employer, we do not need to include employer or
enrollee fixed effects. We estimate γ using only data from 2014, to not have to worry about changes
in provider prices over time.20
We now discuss our estimation of β, the impact of employer mean risk score on premiums.
Following Newey (2009), we estimate a two-step semi-parametric selection model. Specifically,
we first estimate the following selection equation:
Dijt = 1{f (Rjt , rijt , xijt ) + εsijt > 0}

(13)

where Rjt and rijt are the risk scores for the employer and the individual respectively, xijt are
time-varying individual characteristics, and εsijt is an unobservable component to the utility from
selection into the sample. We estimate (13) using a probit specification and a flexible functional
form for f (·).
We estimate two different specifications for the selection equation f (·). The first specification
uses USIC data. Since our USIC data only tracks individuals insured by USIC, observations at
period t include both individuals who left USIC after period t − 1 and those who were with USIC
at period t − 1 and remained at period t. These observations cannot include people who joined
USIC at period t and hence this estimation controls for dropped coverage but not new take-up of
insurance. In this specification, we include industry fixed effects, employer size, age, and gender
in xijt . The main advantage of this specification is that the inclusion of Rjt increases the accuracy
of the selection equation. The main disadvantage is that it only controls for individuals who left
USIC.
Our second specification for our selection equation uses the MEPS data. In this specification,
we include in f (·) proxies to approximate rijt , industry fixed effects, employer size, age, and gender. The proxies for risk are indicators for hypertension, heart disease, AMI, ischemic stroke,
respiratory failure, cancer, diabetes, and asthma, and are observable in both the MEPS data and
in the USIC data. In this specification we include fewer regressors but we are able to control for
19
20

We also estimate empirical specifications with coop (H(rijt )) as the dependent variable.
We also investigated estimating γ using other years in our sample and obtained similar results.

22

everyone who is offered insurance. Using the estimated parameters of (13), we define
Sijt ≡ P r(f (Rjt , rijt , xijt ) + εsijt > 0).

(14)

We compute Sijt using the predictions from our estimates of (13).
We use Sijt as a control in the second stage treatment effects equation. The treatment effects
equation is:
pijt = βRjt + αxjt + F E i + F Et + g(Sijt ) + εijt

(15)

where pijt is the premium charged to enrollee i working at employer j at period t and Rjt is the employer mean ACG risk score among enrollees who take up insurance at period t. In equation (15),
F E i are enrollee fixed effects, F Et are year dummies, and xjt are time-varying enrollee attributes,
and εijt is the econometric unobservable. The non-parametric selection correction g(Sijt ) (using
power series approximation) approximates the inverse Mills ratio from Heckman (1979). Comparing (10) to (15), εpijt = g(Sijt ) + εijt . While equation (15) specifies premium as the dependent
variable, we also report specifications where plan characteristics are the dependent variables.
We adjust our standard errors of β in (15) for the fact that we estimated β with a two-step
estimator, by modifying the formula proposed by Newey (2009). Newey accounts for the standard
errors of the selection parameters on the second stage variance formula; we modify his formula to
two-way cluster the standard errors, by employer and year.
Finally, we discuss identification. To obtain consistent estimates for the parameters of interest,
identification of both the selection equation (13) and the treatment equation (15) is required. It
is well understand that selection models are most credibly identified with exclusion restrictions
in the treatment equation. In our case, enrollee risk and industry fixed effects provide useful
exclusion restrictions. In particular, we assume that individual risk and variation across industries
in employment turnover rates affect the probability of leaving the sample, but do not affect the
pass through given the set of controls in the second stage. We also use multiple data sources to
evaluate the robustness of our selection equation to specification.
Note further that our treatment equations include employer or enrollee fixed effects in most
specifications. In this case, our identification of β is based on changes in pjt following changes
in Rjt . The selection correction further non-parametrically corrects β to estimate its value if everyone selected into USIC insurance. Because we control for the baseline health status with fixed
effects and also control for selection, we believe that it is reasonable to consider changes in the
23

risk score—which reflect changes in expected health expenditure for the population of potential
enrollees conditional on the base level—to be exogenous.

5

Estimation Results

We now present our estimation results, starting with our results on the impact of health risk on
claims costs and on the determinants of sample selection. We then discuss our main results, which
are the impact of health risk on premiums and evidence regarding the mechanism of guaranteed
renewability contracts.

5.1

Impact of health risk on claims costs
Table 5: Impact of expected risk on claims

Regressor:
Enrollee ACG score, rijt
Market FE
Observations

Paid amount ($)
(1)
4,003∗∗∗
(129)
Yes
204,913

Dependent variable:
Allowed amount ($)
OOP amount ($)
(2)
(3)
∗∗∗
4,483
480∗∗∗
(131)
(9)
Yes
Yes
204,913
204,913

Note: each observation is one enrollee during one year. The dependent variables indicate three measures of the total claims
amount for that enrollee. The sample is covered individuals with an ACG score in 2014 only. Markets are defined by USIC and
roughly represent an MSA or state. We cluster standard errors at the employer level. ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the 1% level,
∗∗ indicates significance at the 5% level, and ∗ indicates significance at the 10% level.

Table 5 presents the estimated relationship between health risk and claims, which is γ. From
column 1, we find that an increase in ACG score of 1—which would mean doubling the score relative to the population mean—would lead to an expected increase in USIC-paid claims of γ =$4,003.
From column 2, an increase in ACG score increases the allowed amount of the claims by $4,483.
This latter figure includes the portion for which payment is the responsibility of the enrollee as
well as the amount that USIC expects to pay for the claim. Not surprisingly, the coefficient on the
out-of-pocket amount—which is reported in column 3—at $480, is the difference between these
two coefficients.
Robustness. On-Line Appendix A provides robustness on the evidence presented in Table 5
by using splines. These results are very similar to our base results, though with some non-linearity.
Our takeaway is that our base coefficient of $4,003 is a reasonable approximation of the impact of
24

risk score on expected claims.

5.2

Selection equation estimates

Table 6 presents the results of the sample selection equations that we then use to estimate β.
Columns 1 and 2 present the average marginal effects and the standard errors, respectively, of
the selection equation estimated using the USIC sample. Consistent with the findings that quitters
had a higher R in Table 2, R here also positively predicts leaving the USIC sample. Enrollee age,
employer size, and the industry fixed effects are also statistically significant.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 6 present the average marginal effects and the standard errors, respectively, of the selection equation with the MEPS sample. Enrollee age and the industry fixed
effects are the only variables that are statistically significant here. The lack of significance may be
due to the MEPS sample size being much smaller.21

5.3

Impact of health risk on premiums

We now investigate our main parameter of interest, the pass through from health risk to premiums,
which is β. Table 7, Panel A provides results with employer or enrollee fixed effects, indicating
how changes in the employer mean ACG score among the insured, R, result in changes in the mean
per-enrollee premium for the employer, p. We expect that we will obtain similar results when we
include either employer or enrollee fixed effects. Both specifications will identify β from the impact
of a change in health risk at the employer on a change in premiums. However, enrollee fixed
effects allow for us to more appropriately implement our selection correction, given that we model
selection at the enrollee level. For this reason, we use enrollee fixed effects in our specifications
that control for selection.
Panel A, column 1 regresses p on R at the employer/year level, including employer fixed effects, without controls for selection. In this specification, a unit increase in employer mean ACG
risk score for an employer results in a $188 increase in premiums. Column 2 presents a similar specification without selection correction but at the enrollee/year level and including enrollee
fixed effects. As we expected, this specification with enrollee year fixed effects reports similar results: a unit increase in enrollee mean ACG risk score for an employer results in a $195 increase in
21

The health conditions that we observe in the MEPS data are similar to those that USIC included in its
questionnaires for new enrollees.

25

Table 6: Selection equation estimates using USIC and MEPS samples

Dependent variable:

Health risk for enrolled, Rjt
Individuals ACG score, rij,t
Ageijt
Femaleijt
Employer sizejt
Hypertensionj,t−1
Heart diseasej,t−1
AMIj,t−1
Ischemic strokej,t−1
Respiratory failurej,t−1
Cancerj,t−1
Diabetesj,t−1
Asthmaj,t−1
Industry fixed effects
Observations

Sample USIC
Drop coverageijt
(1)
(2)
Average
Standard
marginal effect
error
0.067***
(0.009)
0.008
(0.008)
−0.001***
(0.0001)
0.003
(0.003)
0.001***
(0.0002)

Yes

Yes
204,913

Sample MEPS
Decline insuranceijt
(3)
(4)
Average
Standard
marginal effect
error

0.005***
−0.039
0.001
−0.001
0.089
−0.177
-0.116
0.064
−0.054
0.019
0.027
Yes

(0.001)
(0.261)
(0.001)
(0.030)
(0.092)
(0.121)
(0.124)
(0.063)
(0.061)
(0.051)
(0.041)
Yes
1,355

Note: in the USIC sample each observation is one enrollee during one year. “Drop coverageijt ” indicates that individual was in
sample in period t but not t + 1. In the MEPS sample each observation is one individual in the consolidated panel 18 for 2013-14.
“Decline insuranceijt ” indicates that the individual was offered insurance through the employer and declined this insurance
coverage. We calculate Rjt based on individuals that worked in the employer in the previous year and had an ACG score. We
cluster standard errors at the employer level. ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the 1% level, ∗∗ indicates significance at the 5% level
and ∗ indicates significance at the 10% level.

26

premiums.
Panel A, columns 3 and 4 present results similar to column 2 but where we control for sample
selection by specifying first- and sixth-order polynomials for g(Sijt ), respectively. The estimates
of β are $663 for the first-order polynomial and $624 for the sixth-order polynomial, higher than
the uncorrected estimate. This implies that enrollees disproportionately quit USIC insurance if
they receive a high pass through from claims to premiums, which fits with our priors. It is also
consistent with our finding that higher risk people disproportionately quit USIC insurance. While
the sample selection controls increase the estimate of β, the coefficients are between 16% and 17%
of γ, still indicating that pass through from expected claims to premiums is very far from full
experience rating.
Table 7: Impact of risk on premiums with USIC sample correction
Observation level:
Employer/year Enrollee/year Enrollee/year Enrollee/year
No selection correction
With selection correction
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: specifications with employer/enrollee fixed effects
Health risk for enrolled, Rjt
188**
195***
663***
624***
(87)
(82)
(132)
(121)
Panel B: specifications without employer/enrollee fixed effects
Health risk for enrolled, Rjt
1,749***
2,263***
2,594***
2,811***
(174)
(116)
(120)
(88)
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Polynomial Order
No
No
1st
6th
Observations
31,044
448,259
448,259
448,259
Note: each observation is either one employer or enrollee during one year. The dependent variable is the premium charged the
employer by USIC divided by the number of covered lives. We calculate Rjt based on individuals that worked in the employer in
the previous year and had an ACG score. Column (1) in Panel A includes employer fixed effects. Columns (2) to (4) in Panel A
include enrollee fixed effects. Panel B includes market fixed effects. Columns (3) and (4) control non-parametrically for selection with
polynomial of the selection probability. Markets are defined by USIC and roughly represent an MSA or state. We two-way cluster
standard errors at the enrollee and year levels. ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the 1% level, ∗∗ indicates significance at the 5% level, and
∗ indicates significance at the 10% level.

Table 7, Panel B presents analogous results to panel A but without employer/enrollee fixed
effects (though with market fixed effects, using USIC’s market definitions). Given that we do not
include employer/enrollee fixed effects, the results from this panel indicate the equilibrium relation between health risk and premiums rather than the pass through from changes in health risk to
changes in premiums. As we discussed in Section 2.2, this specification captures the equilibrium
relationship between health risk and premiums, which includes the pass-through plus the risk

27

rated part of the initial premium.

22

Analogously to Panel A, column 1 is at the employer/year

level, all the other columns are at the enrollee/year level, and columns 3 and 4 include sample
selection corrections.
The estimates show a substantially larger relationship between health risk and premiums than
does Panel A. The enrollee/year level coefficient in column 2 is $2,263 and increases to $2,594 or
$2,811 with controls for sample selection. Thus, the selection correction changes the estimate of β
in the same direction as in the enrollee fixed effects specification. The coefficients here show that
equilibrium premiums reflect between 44% and 70% of expected claims. This indicates that the
equilibrium does not reflect full experience rating, though it does reflect a much stronger relation
between expected claims and premiums than the pass through coefficients in Panel A.
While our Panel B results show the equilibrium relationship between health risk and premiums, we interpret them as being similar to the amount of risk rating that USIC would impose on
new enrollees. To verify this, we estimated a specification analogous to Panel B, column 4 on the
sample of 2014 joiners (who started coverage in 2013) for the year 2014. We estimate a coefficient on
Rjt of $2,566, which is very similar to our Panel B value of $2,811. Together, our results show that
USIC passes through very little risk for existing customers into premiums, while new customers
receive premiums that are more based on their risk.
Robustness. We also analyze the robustness of our estimates of the impact of health risk on
premiums to several factors. We use MEPS as an alternative source of data for selection correction;
we verify the robustness of our health risk to measurement error; we include indicators for specific
chronic conditions; and we examine changes in plan characteristics following changes in health
risk. In all cases, we find very similar results to the baseline. We also show that the low passthrough cannot be explained by the planned roll-out of community rating regulations under the
ACA and that the pass-through is similar across employer size. On-Line Appendix B provides the
details.

5.4

Evidence of guaranteed renewability contracts

We find much less reclassification risk in the small group market than in the simple model with full
experience rating, particularly among groups continuously enrolled with USIC. This is different
22

For comparability, we use the same sample for Panel A and Panel B of Table 7. We find similar results
for Panel B when we include all observations.

28

from what many observers thought was likely occurring in this market (Gruber, 2000).23 However,
it is broadly consistent with the Herring and Pauly (2006) view that the individual insurance market mostly operated with “guaranteed renewability” dynamic insurance contracts in the pre-ACA
era.
We further investigate the possibility that our results are driven by USIC implicitly offering
guaranteed renewability contracts. Under these contracts, insurers operating in a competitive market commit to a long-run premium schedule (Pauly et al., 1995).24 The commitment is one-sided:
while insurers promise to offer insurance at set rates in future periods, enrollees do not commit to
renew their contracts. Although the contracts underlying our data do not explicitly include guaranteed renewability provisions, our conversations with USIC suggest that their actual practices
resembled guaranteed renewability during our sample period.25
Guaranteed renewability contracts add value relative to full experience rating by providing
protection against reclassification risk. In many models with guaranteed renewability contracts,
the equilibrium risk protection is only partial (Harris and Holmstrom, 1982; Ghili et al., 2019).26
In these models, enrollees with relative drops in risk scores would be able to obtain a new insurance plan from the market at a rate that is lower than with their existing contract. Insurers then
offer to renegotiate insurance contracts for these enrollees at cheaper rates, to avoid lapsation and
recontracting.
The only way to avoid this equilibrium renegotiation would be to substantially front load premiums but, in the presence of liquidity constraints, this would lower welfare by reducing consumption for the young. Thus, the equilibrium with a competitive market of insurers when onesided commitment is allowed has guaranteed renewability contracts with ex post renegotiation,
where the level of front loading optimally balances risk protection against consumption smoothing (Harris and Holmstrom, 1982; Ghili et al., 2019).
We test three principal empirical implications of the guaranteed renewability model with ex
post renegotiation. First, the model implies an incomplete pass through from health risk to premi23

Low pass through from costs to prices are observed in a variety of contexts, including energy costs
(Ganapati et al., 2016), tariffs (De Loecker et al., 2016), and beverage taxes (Cawley et al., 2018).
24
Relatedly, Cochrane (1995) proposed a scheme where enrollees would be compensated based on
changes in their risk score.
25
For instance, they indicated to us that they typically did not re-underwrite existing accounts. Pauly and
Lieberthal (2008) notes that the individual insurance typically operated in this manner in the pre-ACA era.
26
Harris and Holmstrom (1982) model labor markets with symmetric learning. Insurance models with
one-sided commitment build on their framework. Hendel and Lizzeri (2003) also model one-sided commitment contracts for life insurance.

29

ums, i.e. 0 < β < γ. This property is exactly why guaranteed renewability contracts add value:
they lower equilibrium reclassification risk. Second, the marginal impact of an increase in health
risk on premiums is lower for groups with relative increases in health risk than for groups with
relative decreases. The reason for this is that groups whose health risk increase sufficiently will
simply obtain the guaranteed premium after the first period. The other groups will obtain reductions in their premiums through the threat of renegotiation, with higher reductions the greater is
their decrease in risk. Third, groups with high ex ante risk will face more reclassification risk, because they have a higher probability of having their health risk drop, and health risk drops lead
to renegotiation, which leads to reclassification risk. Note that these implications are specific to a
model with ex post renegotiation of contracts, such as Ghili et al. (2019).
We demonstrate that these implications hold in calibrated guaranteed renewability contracts
and then test them by evaluating whether they hold in the USIC data. Specifically, we simulate data
using Handel et al. (2019)’s reported figures on risk score transitions and equilibrium premiums
from guaranteed renewability contracts.27 These figures report actual risk score transitions and
calibrated guaranteed renewability contracts for a variety of counterfactual scenarios. We created
our simulated data using the reported initial health status distribution and health status transitions
for ages 30-35. The Handel et al. equilibrium long-term contracts depend on the year relative to
the contract start, age of the individual, and income profile. We use contracts for individuals with
“flat net income” and aged 25 (as Handel et al. do not report contracts for ages 30-35).
To demonstrate the first implication in the calibrated contracts, we consider pass through from
risk to premiums by performing regressions analogous to Table 7, Panel A from the Handel et al.
simulated data. We find that β = $1,821 with a standard error of $410, indicating positive but
incomplete pass through. In particular, the pass through in this simulation is larger than with
our fixed effects estimator but much smaller than under full experience rating. Moreover, the
figures reported in this part of Handel et al. do not incorporate switching costs (though they do
consider switching costs in other parts of the paper). Switching costs would lower pass through
by decreasing the ability of healthy enrollees to renegotiate and have been found to exist in similar
settings (Handel, 2013).
To examine the second implication, Table 8, Panel A presents results from regressions of pass
through of a spline of the change in risk, for both the Handel et al. simulated data and the USIC
27

Handel et al. (2019) is an older version of Ghili et al. (2019) with calculations from a different database;
Handel et al. (2019) report the data necessary for this calculation but Ghili et al. (2019) do not.

30

Table 8: Impact of risk on premiums using splines, with simulated guaranteed renewability data
and USIC data
Panel A: specifications with enrollee fixed effects
Dependent variable: change in annual employer mean premium, pjt
Sample:
HHW
USIC
(1)
(2)
(3)
Spline, ∆ Rjt ≤ 0
3,612***
465***
752***
(82)
(99)
(88)
Spline, ∆ Rjt > 0
172***
-275***
12
(26)
(71)
(85)
Enrollee FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year FE
Yes
Polynomial Order
No
1st
90,826
90,826
Observations
Panel B: specifications without enrollee fixed effects
Dependent variable: annual employer mean premium, pjt
Spline, Rjt ≤ 1
2,973*** 3,203*** 3,669***
(742)
(136)
(126)
Spline, Rjt > 1
1,638*** 1,887*** 2,212***
(478)
(181)
(187)
Enrollee FE
No
No
No
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Polynomial Order
No
1st
Observations
181,652 181,652

(4)
795***
(30)
44
(29)
Yes
Yes
6th
90,826

3,532***
(123)
2,480***
(223)
No
Yes
6th
181,652

Note: each observation is one enrollee for which we have a complete observation for years 2014 and 2015. Column (1) uses
simulated data from Handel et al. (2019). In Columns (2) to (4), the dependent variable is the premium charged the employer
by USIC divided by the number of covered lives. We calculate Rjt based on individuals that worked in the employer in the
previous year and had an ACG score. Columns (3) and (4) control non-parametrically for selection with polynomial of the
selection probability. Markets are defined by USIC and roughly represent an MSA or state. We two-way cluster standard
errors at the enrollee and year levels. ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the 1% level, ∗∗ indicates significance at the 5% level, and
∗ indicates significance at the 10% level.

data. For the USIC data, we use the last two years of our sample, 2014 and 2015—and individuals
with complete observations during these years—in order to have a uniquely defined measure of
the change in risk.
The Handel et al. results verify that their simulated guaranteed renewability contracts imply
substantial equilibrium pass through for individuals whose risk score decreases, and positive, but
much lower, pass through at the margin for individuals whose risk scores increase. We find the
same qualitative pattern with the USIC data. For instance, column (4), which corrects for selection,
reports a pass through of $795 on the spline for decreases in risk score, with a coefficient of $44 on
the spline for increases in risk score. While the overall levels of pass through are different across
the two samples, this again may reflect the presence of switching costs in the real world, as well as

31

other institutional differences.28
Panel B shows specifications without enrollee fixed effects where we again examine the relation between premiums and risk scores using splines. For this panel, we now base the spline on
risk, not change in risk, and use a cut point of R = 1 (the overall population mean risk score).29
These specifications capture the equilibrium effect of risk score on premiums, rather than the pass
through from a change in risk score on a change in premiums. Once again, both the Handel et al.
simulated data and the USIC data show a similar pattern: the equilibrium relation between risk
and premiums at the margin is larger for low risk and smaller for high risk groups.
To examine the third implication, Table 9, Panel A presents results from regressions of pass
through from expected health risk to premiums, stratifying by the period 1 health risk. We again
choose the population mean of R = 1 as the cut point. For the Handel et al. simulated data, we find
that the large β, and hence the bulk of the reclassification risk, is largely occurring for individuals
with R > 1, who were less healthy than average in the initial period. The USIC data shows a
consistent, though weaker, pattern. For instance, in the selection corrected results in column 4, the
pass through coefficient β for groups with initially below average risk is $378, while it is $413 for
groups with initially above average risk.30
Panel B presents analogous results without enrollee fixed effects, stratifying based on the period 1 risk score. The results are again broadly consistent between the Handel et al. simulated data
and the USIC data. They show a stronger equilibrium relation between expected health risk and
premiums for groups with a higher period 1 risk score.
In sum, our tests show that the main implications of the guaranteed renewability model hold
in our data.31 In particular, we find that there is partial pass through from changes in health risk
to changes in premiums. Groups with decreases in risk score faced a larger marginal impact of expected health risk on premiums, while groups with increases in risk score were not very exposed
to reclassification risk at the margin. Similarly, groups with higher risk scores, which had a greater
28

Three features of our setting differ from Handel et al.. First, the small group insurance market is best
characterized as an oligopoly while they model competition. Second, individuals frequently select out of
USIC insurance for reasons such as switching employers, while they do not allow for this behavior. Finally,
we model the small group market while they consider individual insurance.
29
For comparability, we use the same sample as in Panel A, but the results using all complete observations
during our sample period are similar.
30
This is also consistent with our finding of higher initial risk scores for quitters in Tables 1 and 2, as some
of these groups may be obtaining insurance from a different insurer instead of renegotiating with USIC.
31
On-Line Appendix C verifies that these results also hold when we use the sample of 2013 joiners. We
do not use this sample as our base sample because it has fewer observations. However, it is more similar to
our Handel et al. simulations, which consider the first year of guaranteed renewability contracts.

32

Table 9: Impact of risk on premiums heterogeneity stratifying on initial risk, with simulated guaranteed renewability data and USIC data
Panel A: specifications with enrollee fixed effects
Dependent variable: change in annual employer mean premium, pjt
Sample:
HHW
USIC
(1)
(2)
(3)
1{Rj1 ≤ 1} × ∆Rjt
279***
39
337***
(91)
(63)
(87)
1{Rj1 > 1} × ∆Rjt
2,798***
65
346***
(64)
(87)
(491)
Enrollee FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Polynomial Order
No
1st
90,826
90,826
Observations
Panel B: specifications without enrollee fixed effects
Dependent variable: annual employer mean premium, pjt
1{Rj1 ≤ 1} × Rjt
615***
1,313*** 1,692***
(205)
(106)
(119)
1{Rj1 > 1} × Rjt
3,181*** 2,002*** 2,337***
(209)
(70)
(81)
Enrollee FE
No
No
No
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Polynomial Order
No
1st
Observations
181,652 181,652

(4)
378***
(33)
413***
(27)
Yes
Yes
6th
90,826

1,978***
(18)
2,554***
(12)
No
Yes
6th
181,652

Note: each observation is one enrollee for which we have a complete observation for years 2014 and 2015. Column (1) uses
simulated data from Handel et al. (2019). In Columns (2) to (4), the dependent variable is the premium charged the employer
by USIC divided by the number of covered lives. We calculate Rjt based on individuals that worked in the employer in the
previous year and had an ACG score. Columns (3) and (4) control non-parametrically for selection with polynomial of the
selection probability. Markets are defined by USIC and roughly represent an MSA or state. We two-way cluster standard errors
at the enrollee and year levels. ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the 1% level, ∗∗ indicates significance at the 5% level, and ∗ indicates
significance at the 10% level.

possibility of a decrease in risk score, were also more exposed to equilibrium reclassification risk.
This suggests that USIC may be offering contracts with an implicit promise of guaranteed renewability for existing accounts, with ex post renegotiation for groups with drops in risk score.
Robustness. We also consider three other different explanations for our findings: (1) oligopoly
power by USIC; (2) USIC potentially passing on expected health risk to premiums slowly over
time; and (3) consumer search. We find little support for any of these explanations. See On-Line
Appendix D for details.

33

6

Counterfactuals and Welfare

6.1

Simulation of counterfactuals

Using our estimates, we now examine the extent of reclassification risk and the resulting welfare
loss under the current pricing environment and counterfactual environments, over a 10-year horizon after the initial insurance enrollment. We base our counterfactuals on the idea that enrollees
obtain the fixed-effects pass through coefficient when they stay with USIC insurance, as this coefficient indicates the impact of changes in health risk on changes in premiums. When they leave USIC
insurance, they work at another small employer with similar employees and obtain premiums that
are determined by the non-fixed-effects coefficient in this case.
We calculate our counterfactuals with three steps. First, we iteratively construct the future
distribution of enrollee health risk and mean employer health risk to which an enrollee is exposed,
over a 10-year renewal period following the initial insurance enrollment. Following Table 3, which
shows that two lags of risk scores are predictive of the current score, we predict the health risk
using two lags of the score. Rather than using the coefficients from Table 3, we simulate future
risk scores and out-of-pocket expenditures non-parametrically for each individual, using enrollees
with similar ACG scores for the two previous periods, for each enrollee.32
Second, we evaluate how changes in risk translate into changes in future premiums and outof-pocket costs. This reclassification risk occurs through two mechanisms. First, health shocks (for
the enrollee or others in her group) result in enrollees facing higher premiums; second, enrollees
may drop health coverage due to the higher premiums caused by these health shocks. Since both
of these sources of risk are potentially important, our counterfactuals capture both sources. Specifically, to evaluate reclassification risk under the observed environment, after simulating the new
risk scores Rijt and rijt each period, we simulate a joint draw from the estimated εs and εp distributions. We then use εs to simulate whether the individual selects into insurance. If so, she
receives new premiums based on the estimated β from our specification with enrollee fixed effects
and selection correction in Table 7, panel A, column 4 (and using the draws of εs and εp ).33 If she
selects out of her current insurance, we assume that she receives new premiums based on β estimated without employer/enrollee fixed effects or selection corrections (Table 7, panel B, column
32

We use a uniform kernel and choose the bandwidth based on Silverman’s rule (Hansen, 2018).
Although Section 5.4 shows evidence of heterogeneity of pass through based on the changes in risk
score, given the small pass through overall, we use the mean pass through coefficient here for simplicity.
33

34

2) and a draw from the unconditional estimated distribution of εp .
Third, we examine how this distribution of premiums and out-of-pocket costs translates into a
certainty equivalent income level. We use a CARA functional form for our money utility function
uij (·). We do not estimate the CARA risk aversion parameter, but instead use 0.000428, the value
from Handel (2013), who estimates risk in a similar context of health insurance choice.34

6.2

Counterfactual results

We consider four different pricing environments. First, as the baseline, we examine the observed
pricing environment, using our simulation methods described above. Second, we examine the
baseline but without idiosyncratic premium risk. In this case, we follow the same procedure as in
the baseline, but we set εp = 0. Third, we examine community rating, where β = 0. Finally, we
examine full experience rating, under which β = γ.
Figure 1 reports the mean across individuals in the certainty equivalent loss from risk across
these pricing environments. The baseline estimates show a mean annual certainty equivalent loss
from risk of $3,050 in the ten years after the initial enrollment. Some of this is caused by idiosyncratic premium risk. Without idiosyncratic risk, the mean certainty equivalent loss from risk drops
to $2,750. Under community rating, the mean annual certainty equivalent income loss is $1,950,
while it is $4,500 under full experience rating. Thus, USIC’s observed pricing policy provides approximately 60% of the consumer welfare protection from reclassification risk as does community
rating, relative to full experience rating. Even though USIC’s pricing policy for existing customers
exhibits very little experience rating, turnover in this market is large, which limits this protection.
In addition, even under community rating, the possibility of large out-of-pocket expenditures generates a substantial certainty equivalent loss from risk, particularly later in the sample.
Figures 2 and 3 report the mean standard deviation in premiums and total health spending,
respectively. The numbers here follow Figure 1 pretty close here, with the baseline policy without
idiosyncratic risk having about half of the standard deviation in premiums of the full experience
rating case relative to the community rating case. Consistent with the welfare loss from out-ofpocket costs in Figure 1, the standard deviation on total healthcare expenditures is $1,300 in the
initial year, stemming exclusively from out-of-pocket expenditures. This rises gradually over time
34

With the CARA utility function, the certainty equivalent income loss of a lottery does not depend on the
base income level, and hence we do not specify the income for each enrollee. We also examine robustness
using the CARA parameter of 0.00008, which is also used by Ghili et al. (2019).

35

0

2000

Dollars per year
4000
6000

8000

Figure 1: Simulated mean certainty equivalent loss from risk across pricing policies

0

2

4
6
Years after enrollment

Baseline estimates
Community rating, β=0

8

10

Baseline without idiosyncratic risk
Full experience rating, β=γ

Note: Figure based on authors’ calculations as described in paper.

under all of the four scenarios.
One difference here is that the baseline policy has a greater standard deviation in the early
years than other policies. But, because this risk is i.i.d., this standard deviation does not generate
as big a welfare impact over time as the premium risk from experience rating.
Finally, Figure 4 examines the extent to which pooling in the small group market adds value.
Specifically, it performs a simulation similar to our baseline estimate but where each individual’s
premiums are based on her risk scores, rijt , rather than on her employer’s mean risk scores, Rjt .
We find that the value generated by pooling in the small group market is moderate. Specifically,
we find that the mean difference in the certainty equivalent income loss from being exposed to
USIC’s current pricing policies and being in a small group versus being exposed to the same pricing policies but purchasing individual insurance is $600 per year over the 10-year horizon.
In sum, our results show that USIC offer insurance contracts with characteristics similar to
guaranteed renewability. However, employees switching jobs and employers starting and stop-

36

0

500

Dollars per year
1000
1500

2000

2500

Figure 2: Simulated mean standard deviation in premiums across pricing policies

0

2

4
6
Years after enrollment

Baseline estimates
Community rating, β=0

8

10

Baseline without idiosyncratic risk
Full experience rating, β=γ

Note: Figure based on authors’ calculations as described in paper.

ping coverage likely due to shutting down limits the consumer welfare gains from these contracts
well below the first best level.
Robustness. On-Line Appendix E provides robustness results with a different risk aversion
coefficient. Although the magnitude of the welfare losses differs with different risk aversion parameters, the pattern of the results is similar to the baseline.

7

Conclusion

In this paper, we seek to understand the extent and causes of reclassification risk in the small
group insurance market from a period before ACA community rating regulations were effective.
The ACA was designed, in part, to reduce reclassification risk in the individual and small group
markets. Studies from the pre-ACA era assessed very different priors on the extent of reclassification risk in this market (Cutler, 1994; Pauly and Herring, 1999; Gruber, 2000; Herring and Pauly,

37

0

1000

Dollars per year
2000
3000

4000

Figure 3: Simulated mean standard deviation in healthcare expenditures across pricing policies

0

2

4
6
Years after enrollment

Baseline estimates
Community rating, β=0

8

10

Baseline without idiosyncratic risk
Full experience rating, β=γ

Note: Figure based on authors’ calculations as described in paper.

2006). Our study makes use of a unique database from a large U.S. health insurer, “United States
Insurance Company” (USIC), with premium information on over 12,000 employers, and claims
data from more than 300,000 enrollees at these employers. Our data allow us to obtain direct
evidence on the relationship between health risk and claims in this market.
We

first

develop

a

simple

two-period

model

of

insurer

pricing

and

employer/employee offer/take-up. Our model allows for the premiums to each employer to be
based on the expected claims cost of the employer and for enrollees to select insurance based on
their premiums and risk scores. We show that the pass through from changes in health risk to
changes in premiums, which we denote β, is a sufficient statistic to understand reclassification risk
in this market, under some conditions. In the tradition of Chetty (2009) and Einav et al. (2010),
we estimate β and use it to characterize reclassification risk in this market, but do not estimate
preference parameters.
We find that the pass through from changes in expected claims to changes in premiums is 16%

38

0

Dollars per year
2000
4000

6000

Figure 4: Simulated mean certainty equivalent loss with no pooling within group

0

2

4
6
Years after enrollment

Baseline estimates

8

10

Baseline if individual market

Note: Figure based on authors’ calculations as described in paper.

with enrollee fixed effects and non-parametric selection controls, which is much closer to binding
long-run contracts or community rating than experience rating. Without enrollee fixed effects or
selection controls, the relation is larger, with a dollar in higher expected claims associated with 44
cents higher premiums. Together, these results suggest that USIC prices new accounts based on
health risk but then does not adjust premiums for existing accounts much in response to changes
in health risk.
This limited reclassification risk for existing accounts is consistent with USIC offering “guaranteed renewability” one-sided commitment contracts where the insurer imposes little risk rating on
existing customers. We further test two additional implications of the optimal guaranteed renewability contracts with liquidity constraints and find that they hold in our setting. First, we find that
health risk reductions lead to relatively large drops in premiums compared to health risk increases,
which the guaranteed renewability model attributes to ex post renegotiation by groups with drops
in health risk. Second, we find higher reclassification risk for groups with ex ante higher risk,

39

which follows because they are more likely to revert to lower risks and renegotiate ex post. Additionally, we show that the limited reclassification risk that we observe cannot be explained by
alternative hypotheses such as slow pass through over time, market power, or search frictions.
Finally, we simulate counterfactuals to evaluate the extent to which USIC insurance provided
value in the form of protection from reclassification risk in the small group market. To compute
this, we non-parametrically simulate the evolution of health risk for an employer over a ten-year
horizon and evaluate how this would translate into selection into and out of insurance and a welfare loss from financial risk. We use a CARA risk aversion parameter taken from the literature and
our estimated pass-through, extent of selection, and health risk transitions. We find that the observed USIC policy adds about 60% of the difference in consumer welfare between full experience
rating and community rating. The high turnover of enrollees limits the value from the guaranteed
renewability feature of USIC’s contracts. Substantial out-of-pocket costs in this market also generate significant welfare loss. The value from pooling within a small group is relatively small, at
$600 per year under the baseline policy.
Overall, our findings are consistent with the existence of optimal guaranteed renewability contracts in the sense of Ghili et al. (2019) in the small group market before the ACA regulations. This
finding is different from what many observers thought was likely occurring in this market before
the ACA (Gruber, 2000), although broadly consistent with the analysis of Herring and Pauly (2006).
Finally, and although these contracts improve consumer welfare substantially, there are limitations
to their value. These occur because of significant out-of-pocket costs from the small group insurance products that we observe and because employees and employers switch insurance companies
frequently, likely due to business creation and destruction and job switching.

References
Atal, J. P., Fang, H., Karlsson, M., and Ziebarth, N. R. (2019). Long-term health insurance: Theory
meets evidence. In 2019 World Congress on Health Economics. iHEA.
Baicker, K. and Chandra, A. (2006). The labor market effects of rising health insurance premiums.
Journal of Labor Economics, 24(3):609–634.
Bhattacharya, J. and Bundorf, M. K. (2009). The incidence of the healthcare costs of obesity. Journal
of Health Economics, 28(3):649–658.

40

Blavin,
ing

F.,
the

Garrett,
impact

B.,
of

05.19.2018.

Blumberg,
the

L.,

affordable

and
care

Buettgens,
act

on

M.

(2014).

employers,

2014;

Monitoraccessed:

https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/33696/

413273-Monitoring-the-Impact-of-the-Affordable-Care-Act-on-Employers.PDF.
Buchmueller, T. and DiNardo, J. (2002). Did community rating induce an adverse selection death
spiral? evidence from New York, Pennsylvania, and Connecticut. American Economic Review,
92(1):280–294.
Bundorf, M. K., Levin, J., and Mahoney, N. (2012). Pricing and welfare in health plan choice.
American Economic Review, 102(7):3214–48.
Cawley, J., Willage, B., and Frisvold, D. (2018). Pass-through of a tax on sugar-sweetened beverages
at the Philadelphia International Airport. JAMA, 319(3):305–306.
Cebul, R. D., Rebitzer, J. B., Taylor, L. J., and Votruba, M. E. (2011). Unhealthy insurance markets: Search frictions and the cost and quality of health insurance. American Economic Review,
101(5):1842–71.
Chetty, R. (2009).

Sufficient statistics for welfare analysis: A bridge between structural and

reduced-form methods. Annual Review of Economics, 1(1):451–488.
CMS (2017).

Insurance standards bulletin series. extension of transitional policy through

calendar year 2018;

accessed:

08.15.2016.

https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/

Regulations-and-Guidance/Downloads/Extension-Transitional-Policy-CY2018.pdf.
Cochrane, J. H. (1995). Time-consistent health insurance. Journal of Political Economy, 103(3):445–
473.
Cutler, D. (1994). Market failure in small group health insurance. Technical report. NBER Working
Paper 4879.
Cutler, D. M. and Reber, S. J. (1998). Paying for health insurance: the trade-off between competition
and adverse selection. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2):433–466.
De Loecker, J., Goldberg, P. K., Khandelwal, A. K., and Pavcnik, N. (2016). Prices, markups, and
trade reform. Econometrica, 84(2):445–510.

41

Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., and Cullen, M. R. (2010). Estimating welfare in insurance markets using
variation in prices. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3):877–921.
Ganapati, S., Shapiro, J. S., and Walker, R. (2016). The incidence of carbon taxes in us manufacturing: Lessons from energy cost pass-through. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Ghili, S., Handel, B., Hendel, I., and Whinston, M. D. (2019). The welfare effects of long-term health
insurance contracts.
Gowrisankaran, G., Norberg, K., Kymes, S., Chernew, M. E., Stwalley, D., Kemper, L., and Peck,
W. (2013). A hospital system’s wellness program linked to health plan enrollment cut hospitalizations but not overall costs. Health Affairs, 32(3):477–485.
Gruber, J. (2000). Health insurance and the labor market. In Handbook of health economics, volume 1,
pages 645–706. Elsevier.
Handel, B., Hendel, I., and Whinston, M. D. (2019). Welfare effects of dynamic health insurance
contracts. Working Paper.
Handel, B. R. (2013). Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets: When nudging
hurts. The American Economic Review, 103(7):2643–2682.
Hansen, B. E. (2018). Econometrics. https://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~bhansen/econometrics/.
Harris, M. and Holmstrom, B. (1982). A theory of wage dynamics. The Review of Economic Studies,
49(3):315–333.
Heckman, J. J. (1979). Sample selection bias as a specification error. Econometrica, 47(1):153–161.
Hendel, I. and Lizzeri, A. (2003). The role of commitment in dynamic contracts: Evidence from life
insurance. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1):299–328.
Herring, B. and Pauly, M. V. (2006). Incentive-compatible guaranteed renewable health insurance
premiums. Journal of Health Economics, 25(3):395–417.
Jost, T. (2015). PACE and EACH Acts pass House; CMS addresses consumers enrolled in multiple
plans (updated); accessed: 08.15.2016. http://goo.gl/JFYUFT.

42

Jost, T. (2017).

Administration allows states to extend transitional policies again; accessed:

05.21.2018. https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hblog20170223.058912/full/.
Kaiser Family Foundation (2013). Market share and enrollment of largest three insurers- small
group market, 2013; accessed: 08.15.2016. http://goo.gl/qk8mKg.
Kowalski, A. E. (2015). Estimating the tradeoff between risk protection and moral hazard with a
nonlinear budget set model of health insurance. International Journal of Industrial Organization,
43:122–135.
Newey, W. K. (2009). Two-step series estimation of sample selection models. The Econometrics
Journal, 12:S217–S229.
Pauly, M. V. and Herring, B. (1999). Pooling health insurance risks. American Enterprise Institute.
Pauly, M. V., Kunreuther, H., and Hirth, R. (1995). Guaranteed renewability in insurance. Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty, 10(2):143–156.
Pauly, M. V. and Lieberthal, R. D. (2008). How risky is individual health insurance? Health Affairs,
27(3):w242–w249.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT press.

43

On-Line Appendices
A

On-Line Appendix A: Extra exhibits on data

Figure A.1: States in our estimation sample

In Sample
Not in Sample

44

Table A.1: Impact of expected risk on claims using splines

Regressor:
Spline enrollee ACG score, rijt ∈ [0, 1)
Spline enrollee ACG score, rijt ∈ [1, 2.5)
Spline enrollee ACG score, rijt ∈ [2.5, 5)
Spline enrollee ACG score, rijt ∈ [5, ∞)
Spline enrollee ACG score, rijt ∈ [0, .32)
Spline enrollee ACG score, rijt ∈ [.32, .57)
Spline enrollee ACG score, rijt ∈ [.57, 1.13)
Spline enrollee ACG score, rijt ∈ [1.13, ∞)
Market FE
Splines
Observations

Dependent Variable: Paid amount ($)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
2,746∗∗∗
2,836∗∗∗
(94)
(96)
3,174∗∗∗
3,190∗∗∗
(151)
(151)
4,284∗∗∗
4,282∗∗∗
(361)
(361)
∗∗∗
4,692
4,689∗∗∗
(398)
(398)
2,503∗∗∗
2,633∗∗∗
(559)
(563)
3,756∗∗∗
3,814∗∗∗
(411)
(411)
1,189∗∗∗
1,289∗∗∗
(421)
(420)
∗∗∗
4,345
4,344∗∗∗
(185)
(185)
No
Yes
No
Yes
Fixed cut Fixed cut Quartiles
Quartiles
points
points
204,913
204,913
204,913
204,913

Note: each observation is one enrollee during one year. The dependent variable indicates the total claims amount paid by
USIC for that enrollee. The sample is covered individuals with an ACG score in 2014 only. Markets are defined by USIC and
roughly represent an MSA or state. We cluster standard errors at the employer level. ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the 1% level,
∗∗ indicates significance at the 5% level and ∗ indicates significance at the 10% level.

45

B

On-Line Appendix B: Robustness to results of impact of health risk
on premiums

We consider a number of robustness checks of our results on the impact of health risk on premiums.
First, we examine robustness to our selection correction. Table B.1 presents the results of our main
estimates when we control for selection using the MEPS sample instead of the USIC sample, with
analogous specifications to Table 7. The estimates of the pass through are smaller than in Table 7
for both the fixed-effects and the non-fixed-effects specifications. Overall, the estimates using the
MEPS sample correction show a very similar pattern to the main estimates.
Table B.1: Impact of risk on premiums using MEPS sample correction
Observation level:
Employer/year Enrollee/year Enrollee/year Enrollee/year
No selection correction
With selection correction
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: specifications with employer/enrollee fixed effects
Health risk for enrolled, Rjt
188**
195***
195
196
(84)
(102)
(87)
(82)
Panel B: Estimations with market fixed effects
Health risk for enrolled, Rjt
1,749***
2,263***
2,210**
2,175***
(120)
(88)
(94)
(272)
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Polynomial Order
No
No
1st
6th
Observations
31,044
448,259
448,259
448,259
Note: each observation is either one employer or enrollee during one year. The dependent variable is the premium charged the
employer by USIC divided by the number of covered lives. We calculate Rjt based on individuals that worked in the employer in
the previous year and had an ACG score. Column (1) in Panel A includes employer fixed effects. Columns (2) to (4) in Panel A
include enrollee fixed effects. Panel B includes market fixed effects. Columns (3) and (4) control non-parametrically for selection with
polynomial of the selection probability. Markets are defined by USIC and roughly represent an MSA or state. We two-way cluster
standard errors at the enrollee and year levels. ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the 1% level, ∗∗ indicates significance at the 5% level, and
∗ indicates significance at the 10% level.

Second, we consider the bias from measurement error from the fact that we use the ACG risk
score instead of USIC’s risk score. For a subset of 3,759 enrollees in 2013, we have USIC’s own
risk score.35 We found a high correlation between the USIC score and the ACG score for this
subsample. In particular, the linear (Pearson) correlation between the ACG risk score and the
USIC risk score is 0.835 and the rank Spearman correlation is 0.881.36 We then computed the size
of the true pass-through coefficient assuming that the measurement error is uncorrelated with the
35

USIC develops this score in-house for use in its risk rating decisions. USIC was unable to recover their
risk score for the rest of the sample.
36
We also estimated β for this subsample using USIC’s risk score instead of the ACG score and we found
a result that is not statistically different from our main result.

46

regressors,37 using β estimate = β true σRRσRR
+σωω (Wooldridge, 2010, p. 75), where σωω is the variance
of the measurement error and σRR is the variance of the (USIC) true risk score. We calculated
σRR = 1.92 for our estimation sample and estimated σωω as the standard deviation of the residual
from a regression of the ACG score on the USIC score, obtaining 0.74, which yields β true = $863.
Thus, the measurement error here can only explain a very small part of the pricing relative to full
experience rating. We also constructed our own risk score (ORS) measure using a random forest
algorithm, and instrumented for the USIC risk score with ORS. We find a pass through that is
smaller than the estimated using the ACG score that is not statistically different from zero.
Third, Table B.2 presents similar specifications to our main results in Table 7, panel A, column
4 but with the addition of the percent of enrollees with specific chronic diseases. We chose cancer,
transplants, AMIs (heart attacks) and diabetes (in Panel A), and hypertension, heart failure, kidney
chronic disease and asthma (in Panel B), as these diseases result in persistent increases in the costs
of healthcare, and they may serve as markers that insurers use to price risk. The pass through from
the risk score to premiums is very similar, ranging from $625 to $648, which are not very different
from our main estimate of $624. While increases in the percent of enrollees with cancer and heart
failure increase premiums, we do not find significantly significant and positive effects for the other
conditions. Our takeaway from this is that the pass through from expected claims to premiums is
very stable to the inclusion of these chronic diseases.

37

The measurement error here is likely uncorrelated, since the point estimate of β does not change in
different specifications when we add different controls.

47

Table B.2: Impact of expected risk on premiums, with chronic conditions
Dependent Variable: Annual employer mean premium, pjt
Panel A: Effect controlling for chronic conditions
Regressor:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
Health risk for enrolled, Rjt
624
648
626
625∗∗
(116)
(117)
(135)
(124)
Lag % cancer at employer
2∗∗
(4)
Lag % transplant at employer
2
(2)
Lag % AMI at employer
1
(0.5)
Lag % diabetes at employer
Year FE
Enrollee FE
Polynomial Order
Observations

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6th
6th
6th
6th
448,259 448,259 448,259 448,259
Panel B: Effect controlling for chronic conditions
Health risk for enrolled, Rjt
624∗∗
627∗∗
633∗∗
627∗∗
(116)
(120)
(119)
(116)
Lag % hypertension at employer
0.2
(0.1)
Lag % heart failure at employer
2∗∗
(0.4)
Lag % kidney disease at employer
0.7
(0.3)
Lag % asthma at employer
Year FE
Enrollee FE
Polynomial Order
Observations

Yes
Yes
6th
448,259

Yes
Yes
6th
448,259

Yes
Yes
6th
448,259

Yes
Yes
6th
448,259

(5)
628∗∗
(116)

1
(0.3)
Yes
Yes
6th
448,259
625∗∗
(119)

0.2
(0.1)
Yes
Yes
6th
448,259

Note: each observation is either one employer or enrollee during one year. The dependent variable is the premium charged the
employer by USIC divided by the number of covered lives. We calculate Rjt based on individuals that worked in the employer
in the previous year and had an ACG score. Column (1) in Panel A includes employer fixed effects. Columns (2) to (4) in Panel A
include enrollee fixed effects. Panel B includes market fixed effects. Columns (3) and (4) control non-parametrically for selection
with polynomial of the selection probability. Chronic disease regressors indicate the mean percent of enrollees with a claim for the
disease in the previous year. Markets are defined by USIC and roughly represent an MSA or state. We two-way cluster standard
errors at the enrollee and year levels. ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the 1% level, ∗∗ indicates significance at the 5% level, and ∗
indicates significance at the 10% level.

Fourth, in Table B.3 we examine whether changes in health risk lead to changes in the plan
benefits that the employer chooses, again using similar specifications to our main results. We consider three measures of plan benefits: the out-of-pocket maximum, the coinsurance rate, and the
in-network deductible. For each of our benefit measures, the estimated coefficient on health risk is

48

small and not statistically significant, suggesting that employers do not systematically substitute
to plans with different benefit structures following health risk shocks.
Table B.3: Impact of expected risk on benefits

Regressor:
Health risk for enrolled, Rjt
Year FE
Enrollee-plan FE
Polynomial Order
Observations

In-network
maximum OOP ($)
(1)
303
(113)
Yes
Yes
6th
448,259

Dependent variable
Coinsurance
In-network
rate (%)
deductible ($)
(2)
(3)
−0.43
159
(0.57)
(58)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
th
6
6th
448,259
448,259

Note: each observation is one enrollee during one year. Each dependent variable is a measure of plan benefits. We calculate Rjt based
on individuals that worked in the employer in the previous year and had an ACG score. Column (1) in Panel A includes employer
fixed effects. Columns (2) to (4) in Panel A include enrollee fixed effects. Panel B includes market fixed effects. Columns (3) and
(4) control non-parametrically for selection with polynomial of the selection probability. Markets are defined by USIC and roughly
represent an MSA or state. We two-way cluster standard errors at the enrollee and year levels. ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the 1%
level, ∗∗ indicates significance at the 5% level, and ∗ indicates significance at the 10% level.

Fifth, we consider whether the low pass through may be due to the planned roll-out of community rating regulations, that may have affected insurers’ pass through. We checked whether
there was a change in the pass-through coefficient between 2013-2014 and 2014-2015, because of
the gradual phase-in of ACA regulations. We present the results from our base specification but
with the two different samples in Table B.4. The estimated coefficient of pass through for the first
period is somewhat smaller than in our main specification but not statistically significant from our
main estimate. The point estimate for the 2014-2015 sample is lower, and not statistically different
from the estimate for the first period. Overall, the evidence does not suggest that our estimated
passthrough is affected by changes in regulations after 2014.
Finally, our analysis suggest that there are not large differences in the pass-through results
by employer size. To analyze this, we split the sample based on deciles of the distribution of
employers size. Figure B.1 presents the results for our base specification but where we split the
pass-through coefficient by deciles. The pass through remains stable across the size distribution.

49

Table B.4: Impact of risk on premiums with heterogeneity by different periods
Dependent variable: annual employer mean premium, pjt
(1)
(2)
(3)
Health risk for enrolled, Rjt
568*
2,903**
440*
(85)
(74)
(68)
Sample Years
2013-14 2013-14 2014-15
Enrollee FE
Yes
No
Yes
Market FE
No
Yes
No
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Polynomial Order
6th
6th
6th
Observations
281,932 325,080 246,358

(4)
2,766***
(189)
2014-15
No
Yes
Yes
6th
307,293

Note: each observation is one enrollee during one year. The dependent variable is the premium charged the employer by
USIC divided by the number of covered lives. We calculate Rjt based on individuals that worked in the employer in the
previous year and had an ACG score. Markets are defined by USIC and roughly represent an MSA or state. All estimates
control non-parametrically for selection with a 6th order polynomial of the selection probability. SWe two-way cluster
standard errors at the enrollee and year levels. ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the 1% level, ∗∗ indicates significance at the
5% level, and ∗ indicates significance at the 10% level.

Figure B.1: Effect of risk on premium by employer size

Note: Coefficients from our preferred specifications allowing different effects by size.

50

C

On-Line Appendix C: Robustness evidence on guaranteed renewability contracts using joiners sample

Table C.1: Impact of risk on premiums using splines, with simulated guaranteed renewability data
and USIC data
Panel A: specifications with enrollee fixed effects
Dependent variable: change in annual employer mean premium, pjt
Sample:
HHW
USIC
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Spline, ∆ Rjt ≤ 0
3,612*** 374*** 733***
749***
(88)
(129)
(159)
(78)
Spline, ∆ Rjt > 0
172*** -164*** 211
212
(26)
(142)
(162)
(79)
Enrollee FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
1st
6th
Polynomial Order
Observations
10,795 10,795
10,795
Panel B: specifications without enrollee fixed effects
Dependent variable: annual employer mean premium, pjt
Spline, Rjt ≤ 1
2,973*** 3,265*** 3,512***
3,489***
(742)
(239)
(194)
(185)
Spline, Rjt > 1
1,638*** 2,240*** 2,370***
2,508***
(478)
(160)
(166)
(199)
Enrollee FE
No
No
No
No
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Polynomial Order
No
1st
6th
Observations
21,590 21,590
21,590
Note: each observation is a joiner in 2013 for which we have a complete observation for years 2014
and 2015. Column (1) uses simulated data from Handel et al. (2019). In Columns (2) to (4), the
dependent variable is the premium charged the employer by USIC divided by the number of covered
lives. We calculate Rjt based on individuals that worked in the employer in the previous year and
had an ACG score. Columns (3) and (4) control non-parametrically for selection with polynomial of
the selection probability. Markets are defined by USIC and roughly represent an MSA or state. We
two-way cluster standard errors at the enrollee and year levels. ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the 1%
level, ∗∗ indicates significance at the 5% level, and ∗ indicates significance at the 10% level.

51

Table C.2: Impact of risk on premiums heterogeneity stratifying on initial risk, with simulated
guaranteed renewability data and USIC data
Panel A: specifications with enrollee fixed effects
Dependent variable: change in annual employer mean premium, pjt
Sample:
HHW
USIC
(1)
(2)
(3)
1{Rj1 ≤ 1} × ∆Rjt
279***
-20
364***
(91)
(129)
(148)
532***
1{Rj1 > 1} × ∆Rjt
2,798*** 170
(491)
(110)
(143)
Enrollee FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Polynomial Order
No
1st
Observations
10,795 10,795
Panel B: specifications without enrollee fixed effects
Dependent variable: annual employer mean premium, pjt
1{Rj1 ≤ 1} × Rjt
615*** 1,448*** 1,603***
(205)
(166)
(201)
1{Rj1 > 1} × Rjt
3,181*** 2,254*** 2,395***
(209)
(124)
(138)
Enrollee FE
No
No
No
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
1st
Polynomial Order
Observations
21,590 21,590

(4)
357***
(83)
537***
(70)
Yes
Yes
6th
10,795

1,721***
(51)
2,490***
(35)
No
Yes
6th
21,590

Note: each observation is a joiner in 2013 for which we have a complete observation for years 2014 and 2015. Column (1) uses
simulated data from Handel et al. (2019). In Columns (2) to (4), the dependent variable is the premium charged the employer
by USIC divided by the number of covered lives. We calculate Rjt based on individuals that worked in the employer in the
previous year and had an ACG score. Columns (3) and (4) control non-parametrically for selection with polynomial of the
selection probability. Markets are defined by USIC and roughly represent an MSA or state. We two-way cluster standard errors
at the enrollee and year levels. ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the 1% level, ∗∗ indicates significance at the 5% level, and ∗ indicates
significance at the 10% level.

52

D

On-Line Appendix D: Alternative explanations for findings

We consider three explanations for our findings beside USIC offering guaranteed renewability
contracts: (1) oligopoly power by USIC; (2) USIC potentially passing on expected health risk to
premiums slowly over time; and (3) consumer search.
First, our results may be driven by USIC having pricing power and choosing pass through
to maximize revenues based on this pricing power. Suppose that the insurer set premiums as a
single firm maximizing static profits. In this case, we would expect that its price in each market
would vary with its residual demand in that market. While it would be difficult to estimate USIC’s
residual demand across markets, we believe that residual demand would likely vary based on the
market concentration in a particular area. Thus, we test whether our results may be generated
by static pricing power by evaluating whether USIC’s pricing policies vary across markets based
on measures of concentration. Table D.1 interacts the pass-through coefficient with three different
measures of market concentration, specifically the Herfindahl Index (HHI), the market share of the
leader insurer, and the number of insurers with more than 5% of market share, in panels A, B and
C, respectively.38
In all cases, the interaction measures are not statically significant. Thus, we do not find evidence that the low levels of pass through that we estimate are driven by insurer pricing power.
Additionally, Figure D.1 present the variation across different states. We find no significant pattern
in the variation of pass through across states.

Second, it is possible that when an employer has an increase in R, its average risk score, USIC
passes through the expected costs to premiums slowly over time, rather than immediately. In
order to test this proposition, Table D.2 reports the pass through using the current and lagged
ACG scores, with specifications analogous to our main specifications with and without fixed effects
(which are repeated in columns 1 and 3, respectively). Our fixed-effects specification with a lagged
risk score in column 2 shows no evidence that employers raise their premiums based on the lagged
risk score. In contrast, our specification in column 4 without fixed effects shows a positive and
significant estimate on lagged risk score, with the sum of the coefficients adding up roughly to the
unique risk score coefficient in column 3. Our interpretation is again that employers that are new
to USIC face a premium that is relatively risk based while employers with existing USIC accounts
do not see much variation in premiums as their risk changes.
38

We define these indices at the state level using Kaiser Family Foundation data for 2013-15.

53

Table D.1: Impact of expected risk on premiums by market concentration
Dependent variable: annual employer mean premium, pjt
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: market HHI
Health risk for enrolled, Rjt
624∗∗ (121)
617∗∗ (146)
700∗∗ (116)
∗∗∗
HHI
0.035 (0.008)
0.057 (0.032)
Rjt × HHI
−0.023 (0.057)
Enrollee FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
448,259
448,259
448,259
Panel B: share of largest insurer
Health risk for enrolled, Rjt
624∗∗ (121)
617∗∗ (87)
711∗∗ (101)
∗∗
Share of leader insurer
280 (58)
447∗∗ (245)
Rjt × Share of leader insurer
−174 (228)
Enrollee FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
th
th
Polynomial Order
6
6
6th
Observations
448,259
448,259
448,259
Panel C: number of insurers with 5% or larger market share
Health risk for enrolled, Rjt
624∗∗ (121)
615∗∗ (116)
605 (231)
Number of insurers with 5%+ share
−58 (19)
− 60 (73)
p
Rjt
× Number of insurers with 5%+ share
2.5 (61)
Enrollee FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Polynomial Order
6th
6th
6th
Observations
448,259
448,259
448,259
Note: each observation is one enrollee during one year. Markets are defined by USIC and roughly represent an MSA or state.
We define HHI, share of leader insurer, and number of insurers with 5%+ market share using the Kaiser Family Foundation
State Health Facts database. All estimates control non-parametrically for selection with a 6th order polynomial of the selection
probability. We two-way cluster standard errors at the enrollee and year levels. ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the 1% level, ∗∗
indicates significance at the 5% level, and ∗ indicates significance at the 10% level.

Third, our results may be driven by consumer search. To understand the size of the effect of
consumer search on pass through, we calculate a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the potential
pass through from search frictions using Cebul et al. (2011)’s estimated model of search frictions
γ
for health insurance. In equation (13), Cebul et al. define average premiums as p̄ = c + 1+γ
(pR − c),

where c is marginal cost, pR is the maximum willingness to pay for insurance, and γ is the “market
friction parameter.” Using this equation and their estimated γ = 0.153 from Panel A of Table
12, the pass through can be expressed as:

∆p̄
∆c

=

1
1+γ =86.7%.

Therefore, their estimated search

model implies that about 87% of a cost increase would be passed through to the mean small group
employer. Given our pass-through estimate of 16% in the fixed effects specification, our results are
also unlikely to be mostly explained by search frictions.

54

Figure D.1: Effect of risk on premium by state

Note: Coefficients from our preferred specifications allowing different effects by state.

Table D.2: Impact of risk on premiums with lagged risk score
Dependent variable: annual employer mean premium, pjt
Regressor:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Health risk for enrolled, Rjt
624**
450
2,811***
1,822**
(121)
(92)
(127)
(112)
Lagged health risk for enrolled,
218
1,311**
Rj,t−1
(54)
(98)
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Enrollee FE
Yes
Yes
No
No
Market FE
No
No
Yes
Yes
Polynomial Order
6th
6th
6th
6th
Observations
448,259 160,062 448,259
264,145
Note: each observation is one enrollee during one year. The dependent variable is the premium charged the
employer by USIC divided by the number of covered lives. We calculate Rjt based on individuals that worked in
the employer in the previous year and had an ACG score. Markets are defined by USIC and roughly represent an
MSA or state. All estimates control non-parametrically for selection with a 6th order polynomial of the selection
probability. We two-way cluster standard errors at the enrollee and year levels. ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the
1% level, ∗∗ indicates significance at the 5% level, and ∗ indicates significance at the 10% level.

55

E

On-Line Appendix E: Additional counterfactual simulations

Figure E.1 replicates Figure 1, considering the certainty equivalent income loss with the lower
CARA risk aversion coefficient of 0.00008 used by Ghili et al. (2019). The same relative pattern of
certain equivalent losses hold as in Figure 1. However, the dollar values of the certainty equivalent
income losses are much smaller. For instance, there is a $200 mean annual loss under the baseline
instead of $3,050 with the base risk aversion parameter.

0

200

Dollars per year
400
600

800

1000

Figure E.1: Simulated mean certainty equivalent loss from risk, with lower risk aversion

0

2

4
6
Years after enrollment

Community rating, β=0
Observed β without FEs

8

10

Observed β with FEs
Full experience rating, β=γ

Note: Figure based on authors’ calculations as described in paper. The CARA risk aversion parameter is
0.00008.

56

