NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN LESS IS MORE:
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON INFORMATION DELIVERY DURING INDIA'S DEMONETIZATION
Abhijit Banerjee
Emily Breza
Arun G. Chandrasekhar
Benjamin Golub
Working Paper 24679
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24679

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018

We thank Mohammad Akbarpour, George Beknazar-Yuzbashev, Chris Blattman, Pascaline
Dupas, Matt Jackson, Rachel Kranton, Michael Kremer, Ted Miguel, Ben Olken, Evan Sadler
and many seminar participants for helpful comments and conversations. We are grateful to Ruben
Enikolopov for a very helpful discussion. We thank Pooja Suri, Arnesh Chowdhury, Piyush Tank,
Tithee Mukhopadhyay, Anushka Chawla, Devika Lakhote, Alokik Mishra, and Shambhavi
Priyam for exceptional research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Abhijit Banerjee, Emily Breza, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, and Benjamin Golub. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

When Less is More: Experimental Evidence on Information Delivery During India's Demonetization
Abhijit Banerjee, Emily Breza, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, and Benjamin Golub
NBER Working Paper No. 24679
June 2018
JEL No. D8,G41,O33
ABSTRACT
How should policymakers disseminate information: by broadcasting it widely (e.g., via mass
media), or letting word spread from a small number of initially informed “seed” individuals?
While conventional wisdom suggests delivering information more widely is better, we show
theoretically and experimentally that this may not hold when people need to ask questions to fully
comprehend the information they were given. In a field experiment during the chaotic 2016
Indian demonetization, we varied how information about demonetization’s official rules was
delivered to villages on two dimensions: how many were initially informed (broadcasting versus
seeding) and whether the identity of the initially informed was publicly disclosed (common
knowledge). The quality of information aggregation is measured in three ways: the volume of
conversations about demonetization, the level of knowledge about demonetization rules, and
choice quality in a strongly incentivized decision dependent on understanding the rules. Our
results are consistent with four predictions of a model in which people need others’ help to make
the best use of announced information, but worry about signaling inability or unwillingness to
correctly process the information they have access to. First, if who is informed is not publicized,
broadcasting improves all three outcomes relative to seeding. Second, under seeding, publicizing
who is informed improves all three outcomes. Third, when broadcasting, publicizing who is
informed hurts along all three dimensions. Finally, when who is informed is made public, telling
more individuals (broadcasting relative to seeding) is worse along all three dimensions.
Abhijit Banerjee
Department of Economics, E52-540
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
banerjee@mit.edu

Arun G. Chandrasekhar
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
arungc@stanford.edu

Emily Breza
Harvard University
Littauer Center, M28
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ebreza@fas.harvard.edu

Benjamin Golub
Harvard University
Littauer Center, 308
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
ben.golub@gmail.com

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2881

WHEN LESS IS MORE

2

1. Introduction
How should a policymaker deliver information to a community? In practice, there
are two commonly used strategies that are very different from each other: (1) broadcasting information widely to all (e.g., radio, television, newspaper, or a Twitter feed)
and (2) delivering information to a select few “seed” individuals and relying on subsequent diffusion (which we see in viral marketing, agricultural extension services, or
the introduction of microcredit).1 Finding an effective way to provide information can
be very important in getting people to make the right choices, and in extremis—for
instance, during an epidemic or a natural disaster—can lead to lives being saved.
This paper is about the choice of a dissemination strategy. There are, of course,
many factors that inform this choice: broadcasting may be infeasible in some contexts,
say because there are no local TV channels, or seeding may be too expensive because
there is not enough information about who the right seeds should be. Here we focus
on one key factor, which is how the dissemination strategy affects engagement in
social learning, and in particular people’s willingness to ask questions—an issue that
has received little attention in the social learning literature.
The point of departure of this paper is that people often need to ask questions
in order to process the information they were given. At the same time, they may
be hesitant to ask because of worries about what asking may imply about them—for
example, that they are unable or unwilling to use information they already have access
to. A recent survey by Chandrasekhar, Golub, and Yang (2017) asked 122 villagers
in India about their willingness to ask questions of other community members about
farming, health or finance: 88% of respondents felt constrained in terms of how many
times they could seek advice from someone else in their community. In 64% of the
cases where they felt limited in their capacity to ask for advice, the respondents said
they refrained from seeking out information because they did not want to appear weak
or uninformed. Chandrasekhar et al. (2017) goes on to develop a signaling model that
captures this idea and finds support for its predictions in a lab experiment.2
The idea that people’s signaling and reputational concerns affect their decisions to
ask questions has important consequences for the design of public communication.
In particular, both how many people are informed and what they are told about
1

See, e.g., Leskovec et al. (2007); Ryan and Gross (1943); Conley and Udry (2010); Miller and
Mobarak (2014); Banerjee et al. (2013); Beaman et al. (2016); Cai et al. (2015).
2
Bursztyn, Egorov, and Jensen (2016) provides evidence that signaling concerns strongly influence
the choices of high school students, potentially to the serious detriment of their educational careers.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

3

what others know (meta-knowledge) will influence whether questions get asked and
therefore how many people learn information accurately. For example, if a decisionmaker knows that others believe he has access to certain information—say, because it
was widely broadcast—he may be less willing to question others about it to avoid the
suspicion that his comprehension is deficient. In contrast, if he is unlikely to have been
informed and everyone knows it, no negative signal would be associated with asking
questions.3 Thus, while broadcasting has an obvious advantage over seeding in that
information immediately reaches more people, it also has a potential disadvantage:
it may activate reluctance to seek information and thus harm the social aspect of
learning.
Motivated by this tension, we study, in theory and in an experiment, an environment in which we can vary both (i) how many people are given information (seeding a
few versus broadcasting to everyone) and (ii) meta-knowledge about who is informed
(making the set of informed people common knowledge or not). A simple theory
of how the two dimensions affect incentives to seek leads to four predictions. (1) If
it is not common knowledge who was informed, then broadcasting should increase
engagement in social learning relative to seeding. In the broadcast case, people learn
about at least the existence of important information, while the absence of common
knowledge (as we show) limits signaling concerns. (2) With seeding, making it common knowledge who is informed should lead to more engagement in social learning:
it helps people find those who are informed and ask them questions, again without
exposing the seekers to signaling concerns. On the other hand, (3) broadcasting
with common knowledge should generate less participation in social learning than
broadcasting without common knowledge, because with common knowledge, it is understood that someone seeking information had access to it already. By the same
token, (4) if it is common knowledge who is informed, then going from seeding to
broadcasting should reduce engagement in social learning, because it is deterred by
signaling concerns.
The implications of these results for the quality of information aggregation are
less obvious. The fact that broadcast generates fewer conversations than seeding
under common knowledge need not imply that people learn less—because the direct
3

The potential negative signal does not necessarily have to be about lack of comprehension. The
signal could concern one’s trade-off between one’s own and others’ effort: “Why didn’t you pay
attention then instead of wasting my time now?” The implications for communication design are
likely to be similar. Of course, in some contexts asking questions may be a positive signal. The
direction of the effect in any specific case is an empirical matter.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

4

effect of broadcasting is to inform more people.4 Nevertheless, the theory opens up the
possibility of reversing the ordering one would expect from the “infection-type” models
often used to study information transmission (Bass, 1969; Bailey, 1975; Jackson, 2008;
Jackson and Yariv, 2011; Aral and Walker, 2012; Akbarpour et al., 2017). In those
models, people pass on the information with some probability without being asked,
or ask questions without any strategic motive if they don’t have the information
(again with some probability).5 In such a world, more information is always better:
broadcasting is better than seeding whether or not there is common knowledge.6
Under the theory proposed here, these conclusions may not hold—seeding can be
better than broadcast if there is common knowledge, and common knowledge can be
strictly worse than no common knowledge when the information is broadcast.
Motivated by the possibilities opened up by our theory,7 we conducted a field
experiment in India approximately six weeks after Prime Minister Narendra Modi
announced the demonetization of all Rs. 500 and Rs. 1000 notes. The policy was
unexpected and far-reaching, affecting 86% of India’s currency. While there was
near-universal awareness of the broad outlines of the policy in India, its chaotic implementation, with over 50 rule changes in a seven week period, led to widespread
confusion and misinformation (see Appendix A). For example, in our sample, 25%
did not understand that demonetized currency could only be deposited into a bank
account, not be exchanged for new bills over the counter; 15% thought that the Rs.
10 coin was also being demonetized. As a result, the period following the policy announcement offered ample scope for trying out different strategies for informing the
populace about the actual rules.
In over 200 villages, in the ten days (starting on December 21, 2016) leading up to
the date when the old Rs. 500 and Rs. 1000 bills stopped being accepted for deposit
into bank accounts, we randomly varied how we provided information to villages.
The experiment varied at the village level (1) whether information was provided to
all households or to just five seed households; (2) whether who was informed within
the village was made common knowledge; (3) the number of facts provided, which
4

Thus, further conditions are needed to predict less learning, and we discuss these when we present
our theory.
5
We are assuming, of course, that not everyone gets the message even when the information is
broadcast.
6
In general, these models do not discuss meta-knowledge, but more information about where signals
are delivered cannot hurt. In a simple discussion of a theoretical benchmark, we formalize the
prediction that without incentive frictions, more information cannot be worth less to the community.
7
It is worth emphasizing that the theory in Chandrasekhar, Golub, and Yang (2017) existed in the
public domain prior to the experiment.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

5

could be either 2 or 24. The information we provided always consisted of a list of
facts in a short pamphlet; the same pamphlet was provided to all households who
received information in that village. The facts came directly from the Reserve Bank
of India’s circulars (released as of December 19th, 2016), and thus represent the
information that the policymakers themselves chose to communicate to the public.
We then returned to the villages to collect our outcome data, approximately three days
after the intervention. Importantly for our experiment, the information contained in
the pamphlets was unlikely to cover everything villagers needed to know about the
policy. First, of course, in half the villages we only provided two facts; even 24 facts
was short of a full description of all relevant aspects of the policies. Second, the facts
conveyed in the RBI circulars involved terms that were not necessarily familiar to
the recipients, and it would not have been clear to everyone how the facts applied to
their decisions. As a result, communication was probably beneficial even for those
who received the pamphlets; indeed, our hope was in part that the pamphlets would
make the villagers realize that there was hard information to be had, and encourage
the sharing of information, including information about topics that were not in the
pamphlets.
The outcomes we measure are: engagement in social learning, policy knowledge,
and choice in an incentivized decision. For engagement in social learning, we asked
how many conversations villagers had had about demonetization over the prior three
days. For knowledge, we asked questions about the demonetization rules. For incentivized choice, we asked the subjects to select one of the following three options:
(a) same-day receipt of a Rs. 500 note (worth 2.5 days’ wage) in the old currency,
which was still legal for depositing in the bank; (b) an IOU for Rs. 200 in Rs. 100
notes (unaffected by demonetization) redeemable 3-5 days later; and (c) an IOU for
dal (pigeon peas) worth Rs. 200, again redeemable 3-5 days later. At the time of the
choice, subjects still had time to deposit the Rs. 500 note at the bank, no questions
asked, for the cost of going to the bank.
As suggested above, in an infection model with mechanical transmission (i.e., no
endogenous decision of engagement), providing information to all households in a
village (a 10-fold increase), providing more meta-information (common knowledge),
and providing more information in the each pamphlet (a 12-fold increase) should all
lead to more knowledge being aggregated, and better decision-making on the part of
our subjects. The reasons are simple: more information leads to a diffusion process
with the same local dynamics but more starting points. Common knowledge should

WHEN LESS IS MORE

6

always increase the number of conversations, because it makes it easier to find those
who know. Finally, more information in the pamphlets increases the number of
facts that are mechanically being transmitted. Under the alternative theory sketched
above, these simple intuitions can be reversed.
In addition our theory has the interesting prediction that the ranking of broadcast
and seeding in terms of generating conversations, may be reversed by adding common
knowledge. Without common knowledge, broadcast will tend to generate more conversations because it makes it easier to find someone to ask, but if there is common
knowledge the fact people shy away from asking questions under broadcast but not
under seeding, can lead to a reversal. The infection model has no clear prediction
about whether seeding or broadcast generates more conversations: broadcast makes
it easier to find someone to ask but it also makes it likelier that they already have
enough information to make it unnecessary to talk.8 However there is no reason why
there would be reversal when we bring in common knowledge into the infection model.
We find strong evidence for all of these kinds of reversals. Our core results are as
follows. First we look at endogenous participation in social learning.9. Adding common knowledge to a seeding strategy makes for more conversations: going from (Seed,
No CK) to (Seed, CK) increases the number of conversations by 103% (p = 0.04) but
among broadcast strategies we find the reverse: (Broadcast, CK) generates 63% fewer
conversations (p = 0.02) than (Broadcast, No CK). Furthermore, (Broadcast, CK)
leads to 61% less conversations (p = 0.029) than (Seed, CK) but going from (Seed,
No CK) to (Broadcast, No CK) increases the number of conversations by 113% (p
= 0.048).The fact that common knowledge has opposite effects across seeding and
broadcast strategies and reverses the ranking of seeding and broadcast in terms of
the number of conversations generated, are all consistent with the endogenous participation model sketched above and unlikely to obtain in models where there is no
strategic motive behind participation in social learning.
Second, we turn to whether the changes in endogenous participation in learning
correspond to changes in knowledge. Going from (Seed, No CK) to (Seed, CK) reduces
the error rate on our knowledge survey by 7.3% (p = 0.0142). On the other hand
going from (Seed, CK) to (Broadcast, CK) leads to a 5.6% increase in the error rate
on our knowledge survey (p = 0.062). This shows that even though all households are
8

Here we have in mind a version of the infection model where conversations are started by the
uninformed non-strategically asking questions of their network neighbors
9
Niehaus (2011) emphasizes a different aspect of endogenous participation. In his model the informed
party decides whether or not to reveal what they have learnt

WHEN LESS IS MORE

7

given signals instead of merely five, the amount of knowledge for a random household
is less, not more, suggesting an important role for social learning. The exact opposite
happens when going from (Seeding, No CK) to (Broadcast, No CK), corresponding
to a 6.22% decline in the error rate (p = 0.053). Within broadcast, (Broadcast,
CK) has a 4.6% higher error rate than (Broadcast, No CK), though the effect is not
statistically significant (p = 0.17).
Third, when we look at whether subjects choose the Rs. 500 note, which at that
time was still accepted for deposit by banks, or an IOU worth Rs. 200 in cash or
in kind to be paid in 3-5 days, we again see a similar pattern. Going from (Seed,
No CK) to (Seed, CK) leads to a 81% increase in the probability of choosing the Rs.
500 note (p = 0.037). Going from (Seed, CK) to (Broadcast, CK) leads to a 38.5%
decline in the probability of choosing the Rs. 500 note (p = 0.104). I contrast, there
is a 114% increase in the probability of choosing the note when going from (Seed,
No CK) to (Broadcast, No CK) (p = 0.014) and going from (Broadcast, No CK) to
(Broadcast, CK) leads to a 48% decline in the probability of choosing the Rs. 500
note (p = 0.041).
The results from the choice exercise, reassuringly, mirror what we find with the
knowledge measures and conversations. Taken together, they provide clear evidence
of the various ways in which more can be less, and more generally, make a strong case
for taking strategic participation seriously when designing information campaigns.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the setting
and experimental design. Section 3 presents our theoretical framework where agents
endogenously choose to participate in social learning. There we study the equilibria
of our model and show how social learning varies as we change the environment along
the main dimensions. We also compare the predictions to those of models in which
signaling-based seeking frictions are not present. We present our empirical results in
Section 4. Section 5 provides a discussion.

2. Experiment
2.1. Demonetization. On November 8, 2016, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi
announced a large-scale demonetization. At midnight after the announcement, all
outstanding Rs. 500 and Rs. 1000 notes (the “specified bank notes” or SBNs) ceased
to be legal tender. Demonetization affected 86% of circulating currency in terms of
value, and individuals holding SBNs had until December 30, 2016 to deposit them in

WHEN LESS IS MORE

8

a bank or post office account. Modi intended for the surprise policy to curb “black
money” and more broadly to accelerate the digitization of the Indian economy. The
policy affected almost every household in the country, either because they held the
SBNs, or through the cash shortages that resulted from problems in printing and
distributing enough new bills fast enough.
The implementation of the policy was chaotic. The initial rollout revealed a number of ambiguities, loopholes, and unintended outcomes. As a result, the government
changed the rules concerning demonetization over 50 times in the seven weeks following the announcement. The rule changes concerned issues such as the time frame
for over-the-counter exchange of SBNs, the cash withdrawal limit, the SBN deposit
limit, and various exemptions—e.g., for weddings, which tend to be paid for in cash.
See Appendix A for a timeline of these rule changes.
2.2. Setting. Our study took place in 225 villages across 9 sub-districts in the state
of Odisha, India. The baseline was conducted starting December 21, 2016, the intervention on December 23, 2016, and the endline ran from December 26 to 30, 2016. It
is important to note that the last day to legally deposit SBNs at bank branches was
December 30, 2016.
All of our study villages have two or more hamlets, each dominated by a different caste group. Typically one hamlet consists of scheduled caste and/or scheduled
tribe individuals (SCST), commonly referred to as lower caste, and the other hamlet
consists of general or otherwise-backwards caste (GMOBC) individuals, commonly
referred to as upper caste. The two hamlets are typically 1/2 to 1 km apart. While
the primary occupation differs by caste, the majority of the people across the villages
in our sample are involved in agriculture and agriculture-related activities. Given
the hamlet structure of the study area, all of our treatments and and outcomes were
focused in only one randomly-chosen hamlet in each village. Basic sample statistics
are provided in Tables 1 and 2. 89% of individual respondents in the sample had some
kind of formal bank account, 80% of respondents were literate, and major occupations
included being a casual laborer (21%), domestic worker (16%), landed farmer (16%)
and share-cropper (9%).
2.3. Baseline knowledge of demonetization rules. Using responses from our
baseline survey, we first explore the beliefs of villagers about the rules prior to our
intervention. While villagers almost universally understood that the Rs. 500 and Rs.
1000 notes were being taken out of circulation, we document in Table 3 that many

WHEN LESS IS MORE

9

households had inaccurate beliefs about other aspects of the policy. For example,
approximately 15% of the population thought (inaccurately) that the Rs. 10 coin
was also being taken out of circulation with the policy;10 25% of villagers believed
(falsely) that, at the time of our baseline survey, they could still exchange notes at
the bank without first depositing them into an account. Moreover, only a handful
of respondents could accurately tell us the deadline for being able to exchange the
demonetized notes and only 50% of respondents could tell us that the notes could be
deposited at post offices/RBI offices/village government offices. Our subjects were
particularly uninformed about some of the economically important details, such as
the weekly withdrawal limits from banks. 33% of respondents reported that they did
not know the limit, and in total, only 22% of respondents could tell us the correct
answer (Rs. 24,000). Respondents also had very poor knowledge about limits on
ATM withdrawals (10% accuracy) and withdrawal limits on the low documentation
Jan Dhan accounts used by the poor (13% accuracy). It is also important to note
that the low levels of knowledge are not due to limits to financial inclusion in the
study setting. As noted before, in our sample, 89% of respondents’ households had
bank accounts (Table 2).
One might ask if it is important for poor rural farmers with limited formal savings
to understand minute details of the policy. However, one important implementation
problem associated with demonetization was that there simply were not enough notes
to meet demand, which ended up affecting the lives of most people. For example,
employers were not able to pay cash wages on time, microfinance borrowers were not
able to service their loans, and demand for cash purchases at small shops fell. Even for
individuals without bank accounts, understanding the rules would have been useful
for deciding whether to accept an IOU from an employer or customer, for example,
or how much new supplies to order. Measuring these types of effects is beyond the
scope of our study.
2.4. Experimental design.
Sample. We enumerated an initial list of 276 villages which were assigned to treatments. We conducted our experiment in one hamlet in each village in that sample;
half of the villages were randomly assigned to have their GMOBC hamlet in our
10This

specific rumor spread across much of the country and was reported in
the
Indian
press
(e.g.,
http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/tamil-nadu/Rs.
10-coins-pile-up-as-rumours-take-toll/article16966261.ece).

WHEN LESS IS MORE

10

experiment and the other half to have their SCST hamlet in our experiment. We randomized villages to treatments before we verified that each village met our criteria.
Any hamlet that had fewer than 20 households was dropped from the sample, yielding
a set of 221 villages. Sixteen villages were then added in a new subdistrict to increase
the sample to 237.11 A baseline survey was administered only in the chosen hamlets
described above. Given the rush of implementing 200+ interventions in a matter of
days, some field errors were made. Endline data was not collected in 6 villages and
the intervention did not happen in 5 villages (we also did not collect endline data
there). In two villages, the elders refused entry to our surveyors. Ultimately, we have
a sample of 225 villages that were treated and received endline surveys.12
Before we describe the treatments, it is important to note that the baseline survey
also contained a module based on Banerjee et al. (2016) (“the gossip survey”) to
identify the individuals in each treatment hamlet that were assessed by others to be
good at spreading information.13,14
Treatments. All of our experimental treatment arms involved distributing pamphlets
with information about demonetization to the study villages. Our goal was to spread
the official policy rules, and thus all information came from the RBI circulars released
up until December 19th, 2016. We took this official information, published by the
central bank, and subdivided it into 30 distinct policy rules. As we implemented
our experiment over the last week before the December 30 deadline, the rules that
we provided did not change over the course of our experiment. Through informal
conversations in pilot villages, we also identified the 10 most useful rules for a typical
11

Online Appendix K repeats our main analysis dropping these new villages and shows that our
conclusions remain the same.
12
Unfortunately, also due to the intense time pressure, in 16 of the villages our field team administered
the intervention and endline to the wrong hamlet. While this should be idiosyncratic and orthogonal
to treatment, we collected outcome data in the right hamlet and we redo our estimation using
treatment assignment as instruments for treatment in Online Appendix J. All our results look nearly
identical.
13
We asked each individual “If we want to spread information about the money change policy put
in place by the government recently, whom do you suggest we talk to? This person should be quick
to understand and follow, spread the information widely, and explain it well to other people in the
village. Who do you think are the best people to do this for your hamlet?” and we allowed them to
nominate anywhere from 0 to 4 individuals. The results reported in Banerjee et al. (2016) show that
this methodology identified the best people in the village to spread information—informing gossips
led to three times as many people being reached as informing random people or informing prominent
people.
1413 villages were dropped before information was even delivered because they were inaccessible to
the survey staff. We show in Online Appendix M that this was not differential by treatment status.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

11

villager in the study area.15 Our experimental protocol involved giving a randomlyselected set of facts to each village—below we describe exactly how the selection is
done. All individuals receiving lists of facts in a village received the same list.
Our core design is a 2 × 2 that varies how many people got information as well
as whether there was common knowledge. Because another important dimension for
information policies is the volume of information given to each individual, we added
an arm varying whether individuals received long or short lists of facts. Prior work
has shown that more information can overwhelm individuals and harm learning and
choice quality (Carvalho and Silverman (2017), Beshears, Choi, Laibson, and Madrian
(2013), Abaluck and Gruber (2011)), so we wanted to examine whether similar effects
would be present in our social learning setting.
Thus, the treatments are:16
(1) Information dissemination:
• Broadcast: information was provided to all households in the hamlet.17
• Seed: information was provided to 5 seed households in the hamlet, chosen
via the gossip survey.18
(2) Common knowledge:
• No common knowledge: we did not tell any subject that we were providing
information to anyone else in the community.
• Common knowledge: we provided common knowledge of the information dissemination protocol. In “Broadcast” treatments in arm (1), every
pamphlet contained a note that all other households received the same
pamphlet. (Thus, if subjects understood and believed us, they had common knowledge of the pamphlet’s distribution.) In the “Seed” treatments,
every household received a notification that five individuals in their community (who were identified) were provided information about demonetization by us, and that the seeds were informed that we would inform
everyone. Figure 1 summarizes the design.
15For

example, one rule explained how foreigners could exchange their SBNs. This was not one of
the “useful” facts on our list.
16We also attempted to get data from 30 villages where we did not intervene whatsoever and instead
only collected endline data. We call these “status quo” villages. Unfortunately, these villages are
not entirely comparable to our core set due to implementation failures that led to violations of
randomization. We detail this in Online Appendix L.
17Pamphlets were dropped off at every household.
18Pamphlets were dropped off at each of these households. Households were not told that they were
chosen for any particular reason.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

12

(3) Information volume:
• Long: 24 facts were provided.
• Short: 2 facts were provided.
The Short lists of facts contained one of the 10 “useful” facts, drawn
uniformly at random, and a second fact drawn uniformly at random from
the remaining 20, while the Long lists of facts were drawn uniformly.19
Appendix B provides the total list of facts from which we selected the list for each
pamphlet, and Appendix C provides examples of the pamphlets we handed out.20
2.5. Outcomes. We have three main outcomes of interest at endline: engagement in
social learning; general knowledge about facts surrounding the demonetization; and
whether the respondent selected the demonetized Rs. 500 note as opposed to an IOU
payable in 3-5 days for either Rs. 200 in non-demonetized notes or Rs. 200 in dal, a
staple commodity.
First, we collected data on the volume of conversations about demonetization. This
allows us to see whether engagement in social learning increased or decreased based
on the signal distribution and knowledge structure provided in the treatment arm.
Second, we assess knowledge of facts surrounding demonetization. We survey the
respondent on 34 facts and create a simple metric of knowledge.
Third, we offered subjects a choice between: (a) a Rs. 500 note; (b) an IOU to
be filled in 3-5 days for Rs. 200 in two Rs. 100 notes; (c) an IOU to be filled in
3-5 days for Rs. 200 worth of dal. With a 1/6 probability, subjects actually received
the item they chose. To implement the payment, we returned to each household in
the sample before exiting the village, rolled the die, and provided either the Rs. 500
or the IOU notice.21 The reason for using the IOU, which obviously relied on the
villagers trusting us, was to make sure that the villagers did not go for the lower
amount because they could get it right away, rather than after going to the bank. We
nevertheless worried about the cost of going to the bank and depositing the 500 rupee
note into an account. As noted already, 89% of respondents had bank accounts. We
also collected data about the actual cost of going to the bank (see Table 2): based
19Thus,

on average, in the Long treatment, 8 facts were useful. In the Short treatment, at least one
fact was always useful, and the additional fact was useful with probability 1/3.
20
Appendix G contains a version of our main analysis, looking separately at the endline knowledge
of useful facts, facts that were reported in that particular village, and facts that were omitted from
that village’s pamphlets.
21
In practice, we surprised the respondents by paying the cost of going to the bank for them by
giving them the value in non-demonetized notes (Rs. 100 notes). Note that this was our last action
before we exited the village; it occurred after each subject had already locked in their responses.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

13

on the data we collected, the median wait times at banks was 10 minutes in the area
and the median village in our sample was at about 20 minutes of a bank by foot.22
At the time of our experiment, depositing the bill required no documentation of the
source of the cash. Thus, selecting Rs. 200 or the equivalent was giving up more
than one day’s wages, even accounting for the travel to and time at the bank. We
argue that this is evidence of confusion and measures a willingness to pay to avoid
holding on to the demonetized note in a period where it was both legal and easy to
convert. Further, we asked respondents who did not choose the Rs. 500 to provide
an open-ended justification for their choice at the end of the survey module. Figure 3
shows that most individuals who did not choose the Rs. 500 note believed, mistakenly,
that the deposit deadline had already passed. The choice between 200 rupees and
the equivalent in dal was intended to capture general trust in paper currency and
confusion about whether the 100 rupee bills had also become demonetized. Taking
the money offered more flexibility, since dal was easy to buy in village stores.23
3. Endogenous Participation in Social Learning
Our focus is mainly on the the demand for information: the decisions people make
about whether or not to engage in conversations about a topic of interest. As discussed in the introduction, this focus is motivated by our pilot surveys, in which
many villagers reported that they were reluctant to seek information from others.
The model we develop here is related to recent work by Bursztyn et al. (2016) and
especially Chandrasekhar et al. (2017) on how reputational or signaling incentives
affect information-seeking. Indeed, the formal framework we use is based on the latter paper. The idea of the model is very simple: high-ability people are better at
interpreting any informational signals they get than low-ability people. As a result,
conditional on already having a signal, they value additional conversation and clarification on that topic less than the low-ability people. Suppose now that it is common
knowledge that most people received a signal. Then seeking information increases the
likelihood in the public eye that a seeker has low ability, and that makes it costly for
some people to ask questions. As a result, in that situation, fewer people will seek out
information, which, ceteris paribus, reduces the quality of information aggregation.
22

At this time, there were still news reports of very long queues at banks and ATMs in other,
more urban parts of the country. In our study area, the waits had become much more manageable
compared to the weeks following the policy announcement. Nevertheless, we were concerned that
the villagers’ perceived wait time could be very large. Our survey data showed that this was not
the case—the median perceived wait time was 15 minutes, which was consistent with the reality.
23
We explore this further in Online Appendix G.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

14

Conversely, when most people are not expected to have a signal, seeking information
is not informative about the seeker’s ability, and therefore there will be more seeking.
After presenting the basic theory, we interpret our experimental treatments through
the lens of this model and derive predictions about how the treatments affect engagement and learning. For the simplest analysis of the incentives to seek, we focus
on one agent’s decision of whether or not to seek information. In this two-person
model, many important considerations—such as information aggregation across multiple individuals—are not modeled explicitly. In Section 3.6, we consider some alternative models to show why the phenomena we highlight are difficult to explain
without endogenous seeking decisions, even when we do allow for the complexities
that an explicit model of network structure entails.
In addition to the demand for information, it is natural also to consider the supply
side: how much effort the initially informed invest in communicating. We discuss
such considerations—which can be analyzed using standard public goods or free-rider
models—in Appendix E.1. There, the associated predictions are briefly presented and
compared with those of this section.
3.1. The environment. Consider a set N of agents (the village). The model focuses
on the choice of a single decision-maker, D ∈ N of whether to seek or not.
3.1.1. Timing. The timing of the interaction is as follows:
(1) (a) The policymaker privately chooses a breadth of dissemination
b ∈ {Broadcast, Seed, None}.
The prior probability of breadth b is βb ∈ (0, 1). Conditional on b =
Broadcast, all members of the village N receive facts. Conditional on
b = Seed, a nonempty, proper subset S of individuals is randomly drawn
to be informed.
(b) The policymaker sends a public signal (which reaches all members of N )
p ∈ {CK:Broadcast, CK:Seed, No CK}.
When a “CK:b” announcement is made, it is always the case that the
breadth is in fact b. If no “CK:b” signal is sent, that is necessarily
common knowledge; we call that outcome the No CK signal, which, practically, is an absence of such a public announcement. Under breadth b,
the probability of a CK:b announcement is χb ∈ (0, 1).

WHEN LESS IS MORE

15

(2) If b ∈ {Broadcast, Seed}, then with certainty the facts mechanically reach the
Town Square.
(3) The decision-maker, D ∈ N , privately learns his incremental value of getting
additional information beyond the facts he received. He then decides whether
to go to the Town Square to seek information about the facts delivered. D’s
decision is denoted by
d ∈ {NS (Not Seeking), S (Seeking)}.
(4) An Observer in the Town Square sees whether D has come to seek information,
and updates his belief about D’s type.24
A treatment in our experiment may be summarized by a pair t = (b, p), the breadth
of dissemination and the public signal.
The interpretation of the Town Square is that there are locations in the village (a
store, tea shop, etc.) where exchange of information takes place and where the local
news of the day can be accessed. There, individuals interested in learning about an
issue can participate in conversations about it.
This model abstracts from important forces, such as social learning outside the
Town Square and the dependence of learning and signaling on others’ seeking decisions. To some extent such forces can be captured in parameters of this simple model;
for instance, the extent of social learning may affect the probability that information
is in the Town Square. In Section 3.6, we consider some models with richer social
learning.
3.1.2. Types and payoffs. The payoff that D experiences from seeking depends on
(i) what information there is to gain by going to the Town Square, compared to
the information D already has; (ii) non-learning costs and benefits of going to the
Town Square, such as the cost of time or the possibility of running into a friend;
(iii) reputational payoffs depending on what people may infer about D based on his
decision to go to the Town Square. This subsection introduces the primitives we use
to model these considerations.
We posit that D has a privately known ability type a ∈ {H, L}, with prior probabilities αH , αL ∈ (0, 1), respectively.25 We will assume these are generic.26 Let ID ∈ {0, 1}
24We

will discuss beliefs about D’s type more below.
ability random variable is independent of all others in the model except those defined below
that explicitly condition on it.
26That is, drawn from a measure absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure.
25The

WHEN LESS IS MORE

16

denote whether D has received facts from the policymaker. This occurs if b = Broadcast or if b = Seed and D ∈ S. Let IT ∈ {0, 1} denote whether there is information in
the Town Square. The information is present (IT = 1) when b = Broadcast or Seed,
and absent otherwise.
With this notation in hand, we introduce quantities capturing (i) and (ii) above:
the direct (i.e., non-reputational) payoffs of Seeking and Not Seeking. The random
variable V (ID ,IT ) (S) is the direct payoff of Seeking when the informational states are
(ID , IT ), while V (ID ) (NS) is the direct payoff (which can be positive or negative) of not
seeking when the seeker’s information is ID . The realizations of these V quantities for
all their arguments—{V (ID ,IT ) (S)}ID ,IT and {V (ID ) (NS)}ID —are known to D at stage
(4), the time he makes his decision.
The following random variable, whose prior distribution we call Fa(ID ,IT ) , represents
the incremental direct payoff gain to seeking:
(3.1)

∆(ID ,IT ) := V (ID ,IT ) (S) − V (ID ) (NS) ∼ Fa(ID ,IT ) .

Crucially, the V random variables, and hence the random variable ∆(ID ,IT ) , have
distributions that depend on D’s ability type. Because of this, if seeking decisions
provide information about ∆(ID ,IT ) , they can signal D’s ability.
Perception payoffs. In addition to the direct payoff, D receives a reputational, or
perception, payoff. If D chooses to seek and goes to the Town Square, this choice will
be observed by some other villagers, who may make inferences about D’s ability.
For a simple model of how D values others’ assessment of him, we posit that, in
the Town Square, there is an agent called the Observer (O), drawn uniformly at
random from the village. This Observer sees D’s decision of whether to seek or not.
Because this person is also in the village, she has her own information, a realization
IO . (Thus, for example, when a broadcast has disseminated information to everyone,
the Observer has received the information, too.) We assume D does not know in
advance who may observe his decision to seek, and therefore does not condition the
seeking decision on the realized identity of the Observer. The perception payoff enters
D’s utility function additively, as a term
λP(a = H | d, p, IO ),
where λ is a positive number. Note that the Observer is conditioning on everything
she knows: the decision he observes D taking, the public signal, and the Observer’s
own information about the state. The idea behind the perception payoff is that D is

WHEN LESS IS MORE

17

better off when other villagers assess D’s ability to be high—for example, because in
that case those villagers are more likely to collaborate with D later.27
D’s total payoff given seeking decision d is, therefore,
(3.2)

u(ID ,IT ) (d) = V (ID ,IT ) (d) + λP(a = H | d, p, IO ).

It will be useful to write the difference
(3.3)

u(ID ,IT ) (S) − u(ID ,IT ) (NS) = ∆(ID ,IT ) − λΠ

where ∆(ID ,IT ) is defined in (3.1) and
(3.4)

Π = P(a = H | d = NS, p, IO ) − P(a = H | d = S, p, IO ).

D will take expectations over the perception payoffs in making his decision. In turn,
the posterior belief that other villagers have about ability is endogenous: it depends
on the seeking behaviors for both types, which depend on their payoffs. This leads
us to an examination of the equilibria of the game.
3.2. Equilibrium: Definition and basic observations. We study a Bayesian
equilibrium of this game. A strategy of D determines beliefs of the Observer—i.e.
P(a = H | d, p, IO )—for both values d = S, NS.28 That, in turn, determines D’s
incentives, since he cares about perceptions.
A strategy for D is a map that gives a decision d as a function of the tuple of
all realizations D knows at the time of his decision—ability a, public signal p, own
information state ID , and the values V (ID ,IT ) (d) across decisions d and pairs (ID , IT ).
However, the decision can actually be simplified: in any rational strategy, D will seek
if and only if his expectation of his direct gain ∆(ID ,IT ) exceeds his expectation of the
perception benefit of not seeking, Π, which in equilibrium is a known number.29
An equilibrium strategy is characterized by these conditions: (i) D seeks if and only
if his expectation of ∆(ID ,IT ) is at least his expectation of λΠ; (ii) the beliefs about
ability a in (3.4) are consistent with (i) and Bayes’ rule.
If each Fa(ID ,IT ) has no atoms—an assumption we will maintain—then an equilibrium can be described essentially completely by specifying a cutoff for D to seek:
27Foundations

for this assumption are discussed in Chandrasekhar et al. (2017).
usual, the equilibrium can be given a population interpretation: there is a population of D’s,
who have different draws of private information, and the Observer is inferring the attributes of a
particular D in view of the population’s behavior.
29D’s decision does not depend on his private ability type a. The reason is as follows: Given ∆(ID ,IT ) ,
D’s ex post direct gain to seeking, (3.3), does not depend on his private ability type. Because his
ability type is unobservable, the reputational payoff cannot depend on it, either.
28As

WHEN LESS IS MORE

18

how high D’s expected value of ∆(ID ,IT ) has to be in order to choose d = S. The
cutoff, which we call v(p, ID ) only depends on the public signal p and on ID and, as
a function of these, it is commonly known in equilibrium.30
3.3. Assumptions.
3.3.1. Payoffs. We now discuss assumptions on the distribution of ∆(·, ·). First, for
technical convenience, we will maintain the assumption that the support of Fa (ID , IT )
includes the positive reals, for all values of a and (ID , IT ).
Next, we make assumptions on how different abilities value information.
(I ,I )

P1 (a) For any (ID , IT ), the distribution FL D T first-order stochastically domi(I ,I )
nates FH D T .
A low-ability D always has at least as much to gain from seeking as a
high-ability one, all else equal.
1−F

(ID ,IT )

(v)

L
(b) For all values of IT , the ratio
is strictly increasing in ID for
(I ,I )
1−FH D T (v)
any v.
For any cutoff, having a value of information above that cutoff signals low
ability more when D is informed (ID = 1) than when D is not informed
(ID = 0).

Assumption P1(a) reflects that a low-ability D needs more help to figure out the
content of information. It ensures that seeking is (weakly) a signal of low ability,
because for any cutoff D uses, the low-ability type is (weakly) more likely to exceed
it. Assumption P1(b) imposes some structure on that signal, as described above.
Our next assumption imposes structure on how the informational states of D and
of the Town Square affect the payoffs of seeking.
P2 (a) Fa(ID ,1) (v) < Fa(ID ,0) (v) for all v ≥ 0 and all values of a and ID .
Regardless of ability and own signal, seeking is (in the stochastic sense)
strictly more beneficial when there is information in the Town Square.
(b) Fa(0,1) first-order stochastically dominates Fa(1,1) for both values of a.
The direct benefit of seeking is weakly greater when one is uninformed,
assuming there is information in the Town Square.
Our final assumption is for technical convenience.
P3 For any (ID , IT ), the ratio
30We

(I ,IT )
(v)

1−FH D

(I ,I )
1−FL D T (v)

is strictly decreasing in v for all v ≥ 0.

make the innocuous tie-breaking assumption that the seeker seeks if and only if ∆(ID ,IT ) ≥
v(p, ID ).

WHEN LESS IS MORE

19

This is a regularity condition on the distribution of values of seeking which is
satisfied if, for example, FL and FH are stochastically ordered normal distributions
centered to the left of zero. Economically, this means that the higher is the cutoff for
seeking, the worse is the inference about D’s ability if D chooses to seek. This condition is useful because it enables us to use the techniques of monotone comparative
statics to study how v(p), the cutoff for seeking, varies across treatments.
3.3.2. Beliefs. In our description of the timing of the game, we did not make any
assumptions about how S, the set of seeded individuals, is drawn. We now make two
assumptions on individuals’ beliefs that restrict this distribution, which we will need
in some, but not all, of our results.
B1 For any i ∈ N , the probability P(i ∈ S) is between 1/n and k/n for some
constant k.
B2 For any two individuals i and j, there is a constant C so that the conditional
probability P(i ∈ S | j ∈ S, b = Seed) is at most CP(i ∈ S | b = Seed).
These assumptions say that there are not too few or too many seeds, and from the
perspective of any j, individual i’s membership in the seed set S is not too correlated
with j’s own.
3.4. Dependence of seeking rates on treatment. In general the model may
have multiple equilibria.31 However, under our assumptions (the key one being P3)
the game has some nice structure. In particular, as the cutoffs32 v(p, ID ) increase,
incentives to seek decrease monotonically for all realizations of private information.
(This occurs because, loosely speaking, seeking becomes a worse signal.) Because
the resulting game of incomplete information then has a supermodular structure, we
can identify an equilibrium that has maximum seeking in a strong sense: for every
realization of D’s private information, there is more seeking in that equilibrium than
in any other. This equilibrium will always be stable under best-response dynamics,
and call this the maximum equilibrium.33
Let s(t) be the probability, in the maximum equilibrium, that D chooses d = S
(Seeking) in treatment t = (b, p)—for example t = (Seed, CK:Seed). This is an ex
ante probability: we integrate over all ability types, information realizations, etc. We
31For

more on this multiplicity, see Chandrasekhar et al. (2017).
in Section 3.2 above.
33Making another selection, such as the minimum equilibrium, which also exists, would not change
the analysis or the results. Of course, this selection point is moot if equilibrium is unique; conditions
for uniqueness are available upon request.
32Introduced

WHEN LESS IS MORE

20

focus on this statistic because it is one that is observed in our experiments. Now we
can state the two main propositions yielding our predictions.
Proposition 1. Under the assumptions of Section 3.3.1:
(a) s(Broadcast, No CK) > s(Broadcast, CK);
(b) s(Seed, CK) > s(Broadcast, CK).
The proof of this and all other propositions appears in Section D.1 of the Appendix.
We give the key ideas of the argument in the next subsection.
The second proposition relies on assumptions about beliefs, ranking the amount of
communication in the Seed treatments.
Proposition 2. Under the assumptions of Sections 3.3.1 and 3.3.2, and assuming
k/n is small enough, it holds that s(Seed, CK) > s(Seed, No CK).
Finally, the prediction that requires the most structure is:
Proposition 3. Take the assumptions of Sections 3.3.1 and 3.3.2 and, fixing all
other parameters, suppose the following three quantities are small enough: (i) k/n;
Broadcast
. Then s(Broadcast, No CK) > s(Seed, No CK).
(ii) βSeed ; and (iii) 1−χ(k/n)
2
3.4.1. Intuition behind the Propositions. We now explain the key forces behind each
of the main predictions entailed in the propositions above.
Proposition 1
(a) (Broadcast, No CK) has more seeking than (Broadcast, CK). In both cases,
D’s assessment of direct payoffs is the same: since ID = 1, D knows that
IT = 1. In the (Broadcast, CK) treatment, O is certain that D is informed,
and D knows this. It is in that case that signaling concerns are the strongest
they could be, by Assumption P1(b). In (Broadcast, No CK) the signaling
effect is weaker, because some probability is placed on D not being informed.
Thus, there is more seeking under (Broadcast, No CK).
(b) (Seed, CK) has more seeking than (Broadcast, CK):
Considering the signaling contribution to payoffs: for any given cutoffs, we
can write the beliefs of the Observer conditional on d = S (given either value
of p) as a convex combination over values of ID . The term corresponding to
ID = 1 is the same across the two treatments. This is the only term with a
positive weight in the (Broadcast, CK) treatment. The term corresponding
to ID = 0 involves a weakly greater posterior that a = H by Assumption P1.
Thus, signaling concerns are smaller in (Seed, CK).

WHEN LESS IS MORE

21

Turning now to the direct payoffs, IT = 1 is known in both cases. By
Assumption P2(b), the value of seeking is greater for the uninformed, who are
at least as prevalent in the Seed treatment. Thus, direct payoffs are greater
there.
Proposition 2
First, under (Seed, CK), D is certain that information is in the Town Square, which
by P2 shifts up the expected direct value of seeking relative to (Seed, No CK) by at
least some positive amount. Now we turn to signaling concerns. Condition on ID = 0
(which is the case with high probability under Seed, since k/n is small by assumption).
In this case, D is nearly certain that O is uninformed. Conditioning on IO = 0, by
the same token, O is nearly certain that D is uninformed. Thus, signaling concerns
are very similar to the case in which it is common knowledge that D is uninformed.
Proposition 3
For the argument behind Proposition 3, we need a lemma, which we state somewhat
informally. It follows immediately from Bayes’ rule.34
Lemma 1. Under the assumptions of Section 3.3.2, suppose that (1 − χBroadcast ) is
small enough relative to (k/n)2 . Then conditional on p = No CK and any realizations
of ID and IO , the probability that b = Broadcast is negligibly small.
Now we can establish the proposition. Concerning the direct benefit: in (Seed, No
CK), when D receives no information (ID = 0), the fact that βSeed is small means that
his expectations approximate those when IT = 0. In contrast, in (Broadcast, No CK),
given that ID = 1, the breadth b is in {Broadcast, Seed} (i.e., not equal to “None”)
and information is certain to be in the Town Square (IT = 1). By Assumption P2,
seeking is more valuable in this case.
Turning now to signaling concerns, the key step is to rule out the possibility that
the observer under (Broadcast, No CK) assumes that since he has a signal, so does
everyone else (i.e. the state is Broadcast). This is where we make use of the face
that because there is no public announcement, by Lemma 1, O will be nearly certain
that b 6= Broadcast. Because k/n is small, he will also be nearly certain that D is
not a seed. To sum up, O will believe ID holds with high probability. Thus, signaling
concerns are therefore almost the same in the two cases.
34Consider

an observer who knows that ID = IO = 1 and that p = No CK. His posterior likelihood
ratio that b = Broadcast has occurred versus b = Seed is of order (1 − χBroadcast )/(k/n)2 . Thus if
this is small, then even this observer will consider Broadcast unlikely.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

22

The proof formalizes these ideas using monotone comparative statics.
Comments on modeling choices. We close this subsection with some brief comments
on our modeling choices. One choice we make is to assume that the Observer is not the
source of the information that is available in the Town square. An alternative would
have been to have the person asked for information to also be the Observer, thus
merging the roles of the source T and O. However, this raises a variety of challenging
modeling decisions: do we explicitly model the aggregation of information by this
person? What if she herself is unable to process the signal she received? How are
signaling concerns affected by the fact that she may be able to infer, based on the
number of people coming to her, what the (b, p) realization is? Another direction
would be to more realistically model a Town Square where there are many different
people, and now the information D gets is obtained by talking to a member of this
population, drawn according to some distribution. Aggregation of information in the
Town Square would now have to be modeled explicitly, which presents considerable
complications; there will also be potential for bilateral signaling, both by Seekers and
Advisers. Our modeling abstracts from these complications to get at what we believe
are the essential phenomena, though models addressing these richer concerns may be
interesting in their own right.
3.5. Knowledge and choice quality in equilibrium. Propositions 1 and 2 focus
on the rates of seeking—which, in the experiment, we measure by the amount of
conversation. But our experiments also consider other outcomes: knowledge about
demonetization and choice quality. To study these using our theory, we analyze the
expected direct payoff
p(t) = E[V (ID ,IT ) (d) | t]
in a given treatment t. This is the value of information gross of signaling concerns.
Again, it is pooled over ability types and information realizations. Consider the
comparisons of Propositions 1 and 2. When ID is held fixed, the rankings are just as
in that proposition:
Corollary 1. Under the conditions of Proposition 2,
(a) p(Broadcast, No CK) > p(Broadcast, CK)
(b) p(Seed, CK) > p(Seed, No CK)
Note that in both (a) and (b), D’s information endowment is the same. In (a), the
proof of Proposition 1 shows that the direct value is the same on both sides of the

WHEN LESS IS MORE

23

inequality, while the signaling concerns are smaller on the left-hand side, furnishing
the conclusion. In (b) the proof of Proposition 2 shows that the signaling concerns
are no greater while the incremental value of information is appreciably higher.
When the comparison of two given treatments also involves changes in ID , the
comparisons are not as immediate. However, we will now discuss, somewhat informally, what is needed for the remaining rankings of knowledge and decision quality
to parallel those that were derived for s above:
• p(Seed, CK) > p(Broadcast, CK)
• p(Broadcast, No CK) > p(Seed, No CK) under the assumptions of Proposition 3.
For the first item, let us consider how the inequality could possibly be reversed relative
to the corresponding item in Proposition 1. For a reversal, it would have to be that
the base level of knowledge possessed by agents in (Broadcast, CK) is enough to
make them better off even if signaling concerns deter seeking. The reversal would
therefore not happen if we assume: (a) low-ability types who don’t seek make decisions
approximately as if they were uninformed, and (b) there are enough low-ability types.
In that case, seeking rates become pivotal to the welfare of enough of the population;
knowledge and choice quality then move in tandem with seeking rates.
The condition needed for the second ranking is similar. If we assume that βSeed is
small, then, as we argued in Proposition 3, the expected incremental direct benefit
of seeking (∆(ID ,IT ) ) is very close to its expectation under ID = IT = 0. Under
(Broadcast, No CK), it is much higher, while signaling concerns are very similar
across the two cases. Thus equilibrium welfare must also be higher for those types
who need to seek in order to do better than their uninformed welfare.
3.6. Benchmarks from models without seeking frictions. We close this section
by arguing that the predictions coming out of our endogenous social learning model
above are not consistent with some benchmark network communication models that
do not feature endogenous seeking frictions.
3.6.1. Tagged information transmission. The first network learning model we look
adapts those of Acemoglu et al. (2014), Möbius et al. (2015), and others. We present
it informally here and defer the details to Appendix E.2. In brief, there is a network of
communication opportunities. Initially, agents are endowed with some information—
their understanding of the facts we give them, and any information about demonetization they may have otherwise. Each time period, they have opportunities to talk

WHEN LESS IS MORE

24

to others, realized randomly. When they talk, they convey a message and its original
source: this is the essence of the tagging model, where the deck is stacked in terms
of aggregating information correctly. This extreme assumption abstracts away from
the complex issues of how players might make inferences from reports that did not
track source information. (We reconsider this simplification below when we discuss
another class of models.)
Importantly, in the tagging models, information aggregation at any given moment
needn’t be complete. Because of randomness in communication opportunities and
dropped messages, a given individual may not have access to all signals received in
the community, or even in his neighborhood. However, the following is a general
result. Suppose initial endowments of information improve, in the sense that they
become Blackwell more informative about the state of interest. Then, after the aggregation process, each individual has better information. In particular, each individuals’
decisions about anything determined by the state will be better in expectation after
the change.
In terms of interpretation, this means that making more agents informed, or increasing the amount of information given to each individual, can only improve aggregate
outcomes. Common knowledge had no role to play in the story above. To look at the
case where it can have such a role, take the model of Acemoglu et al. (2014), which is
essentially the tagged model along with endogenous decisions of whether to drop out
of the social learning process or stay engaged in hopes of learning more. There, social
learning is improved by making it public that many agents are informed, because
it increases the amount of information that any one of them can expect to receive
by a given time. The essential reason is the strategic complementarity between the
engagement of different agents.
To summarize, a standard class of models without aggregation frictions predicts
that endowing the community with more information will be reflected in better individual decisions, and that common knowledge should also help.
Evidence. We document in Table 4 that, contrary to the predictions of the benchmark model sketched above, there is no detectable beneficial effect of informing more
people, or giving them more information. Panel A shows that more information per
pamphlet does not lead to more conversations or better outcomes. Providing a 12-fold
increase in the number of facts leads to a 26% decline in the number of conversations,
no change in knowledge, and no change in the probability of picking Rs. 500. Panel
B shows that broadcasting information to 100% of households instead of 10% leads

WHEN LESS IS MORE

25

to no change in either the number of conversations, knowledge, or in the probability
of picking Rs. 500.
Thus providing a greater amount of information to each person does not lead to
greater knowledge in the population.35 More strikingly, when we provide information
to ten times the number of people, we do not see the expected in knowledge and or
an improvement in quality of decisions made. This is despite the fact that there are
low levels of knowledge on average, even among seeds, which suggests that there is
considerable scope for improvement in learning in these communities.
3.6.2. Herding models. An extreme assumption in the types of models discussed in
the previous section is that agents transmit the original sources of all the pieces of
information they convey (or at least a sufficient statistic). Relaxing this assumption
raises the issue of how agents make inferences from coarsened observations that do
not track their sources of the information. A tractable way to study these difficulties
is to use a sequential social learning model, which seems reasonable in our setting as
agents are not likely to engage in information exchange on too many distinct occasions
(as we verify in our survey data).
In general, characterizing learning quality exactly in herding models can be very
difficult. However, an approach of Lobel and Sadler (2015), which applies to sequential
learning in arbitrary conversation networks, can be used to argue why phenomena
such as those our main model produces are unlikely to be explained by standard
sequential models. We flesh out the details of the argument here in E.3.
Consider a binary decision (such as the one we gave our agents) about whether
or not to accept certain denomination of currency. Individuals form opinions about
this. Differences in private information lead to heterogeneity in the strengths of their
beliefs. In particular, the messages an individual has received affect the strength of
his posterior belief about the right action to take.
Lobel and Sadler (2015) show that in equilibrium, most agents’ decisions are at
least as good as those decisions taken by those who are “experts”—very sure of the
right answer based on private information (i.e. their own understanding) alone. The
intuition can be most easily seen in a model where all predecessors are observed:
if decisions were substantially worse than the expert benchmark for arbitrarily late
movers, then the well-informed would speak against the prevailing view, revealing
35This

is consistent with Carvalho and Silverman (2017), who argue that complexity can lead to
worse decision-making and can lead to individuals taking dominated options. They study this issue
in the context of portfolio choice.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

26

their superior information and persuading others. Remarkably, the same remains
true even when agents observe only a few predecessors, under some conditions. The
main substantive one is that the network is connected enough, with everyone having
indirect access to many others.
It can be deduced from this that improving information endowments can only hurt
learning if it was already quite good. In other words, the known forces from herding
or information cascades will have difficulty explaining how adding information can
lead to outcomes in which most people do worse than the individual decisions of the
“well-informed” individuals.
4. Results
4.1. Endogenous participation in social learning.
4.1.1. Volume of Conversations. We begin by looking at which delivery mechanisms
led to more or less endogenous participation in social learning, measured by the number of conversations the subject had over the prior three days about demonetization.
Table 5 presents regressions of the number of conversations on the various treatments.36 In each regression, (Seed, No CK) is the omitted treatment arm. The coefficients are additive, so to compare (Broadcast, Common Knowledge) to the omitted
category, it is necessary to add the coefficients: CK, Broadcast, and Broadcast × CK.
In each regression specification, we present the p-values throughout, with standard
errors clustered at the village level, and for two additional key comparisons. The
test (CK + Broadcast × CK = 0) allows us to compare (Broadcast, CK) to (Broadcast, No CK). The test (Broadcast + Broadcast × CK = 0) allows us to compare
(Broadcast, CK) with (Seed, CK).
The outcome variable in column 1 is the number conversations about the demonetization that the respondent was a part of over the last three days. Going from (Seed,
No CK) to (Seed, CK) increases the number of conversations by 103% (0.65 more
conversations, p = 0.04). This is consistent with the model described above: a typical villager now knows that there is no expectation that they have the information
because it is common knowledge that they did not receive signals and because the
seeds are known, which emboldens them to seek information.
36For

all of our main results, we focus on our core 2 × 2 treatment design, pooling across the Long
and Short lists of facts. Appendix F provides the analysis separately for Long and Short information
and also discuss how one might interpret the length of the fact list through the lens of the model.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

27

At face value, it is also consistent with a simpler model where there is no strategic
seeking and the effect is driven by the fact that the villagers know whom to ask, as well
as the possibility that seeds have more of a motivation to spread information. However
we do not think this is the case for two reasons. First, in Online Appendix H, we show
the same results split by whether the household was a seed or not and demonstrate
that our results are primarily driven by an increase in conversation volume among
non-seed households, rather than by non-seed households seeking out seeds or vice
versa.37 As Table H.1 shows there is a (noisily estimated) increase of 1.3 in the
conversation count for a Seed in CK relative to No CK (p = 0.39). If every seeded
household gained 1.3 conversations, then this explains 6.5 more conversations, which
is only 28 percent of the 23 extra conversations we find a village of 50 households.
(Even if we assume that the true number of seed conversations is double the number
implied by the coefficient—13 conversations—this at best would only explain 56%
of the increase in conversations.) Second, we collected data about the nature of
the conversations—whether they were the result of a directed question or statement
about demonetization (purposeful) or merely something that came up in a broader
conversation (incidental). These are reported in Subsubsection 4.1.2, below. They
make it clear that most of the increase came from incidental conversations–in other
words not from people going out to ask questions from seeds or seeds coming to deliver
a message.
Next we look at what happens when we compare strategies that employ common
knowledge. Going from (Seed, CK) to (Broadcast, CK), which corresponds to a 10fold increase in the number of households informed (from 5 households to 100% of
households), leads to a 61% decline in the volume of conversations (0.78 fewer conversations, p = 0.029). Again this is consistent with the model, though it could also
be that because everyone is informed, there is less need for conversations. However,
given how little people know (even in (Broadcast, CK) villages (see below), this seems
unlikely.
When we look at (Broadcast, No CK) versus (Seed, No CK), we are comparing
a situation where we provided signals to all versus just a few, but in either case no
agent knows whether or not any other agent has necessarily received a signal. In sharp
contrast, we find that a 10-fold increase in the number of households informed leads
to an increase in the volume of conversations by 113% (0.708 more conversations,
37We

remind the reader that every village had “seed” households selected by the same process ex
ante, but in Broadcast treatments all households were treated. In Online Appendix H, Table H.1,
shows that all our main results hold for the households that are not seeds.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

28

p = 0.048). This makes intuitive sense: essentially with (Seed, No CK) a typical
household doesn’t even know that there is something to converse about, whereas that
is not true with (Broadcast, No CK). Note however that this also goes against the
idea that the reason why there is less seeking with (Broadcast, CK) than with (Seed,
CK) is that people already have enough information. They seem to act as if they
need information as long as they can hide that fact from others.
The sharpest test of our model is when we go from (Broadcast, No CK) to (Broadcast, CK). This leads to a 63% decline in the volume of conversations (0.84 fewer
conversations, p = 0.02). Making broadcast common knowledge should not reduce
conversations unless signaling concerns are very powerful: in that world, the fact
that it is not common knowledge that one received a signal allows the agent to ask
questions about demonetization more freely.
In sum, our results show that common knowledge affects considerably endogenous participation in social learning. When only a few individuals are seeded, it
greatly increases aggregate conversations. We have also shown evidence for two
non-monotonicities consistent with our model: first, adding common knowledge to
a broadcast delivery mechanism can discourage conversations; and, second, if there is
common knowledge, going from only 10% to 100% of the population being informed
actually discourages conversations. As one may have expected, if there is no common
knowledge, increasing the number informed increases conversations, in contrast.

4.1.2. Types of Conversations: Purposeful and Incidental. As mentioned above, we
collected information both on the number of conversations and then the number
of conversation by type: purposeful and incidental. Purposeful conversations were
initiated with the sole purpose of talking about demonetization, while incidental conversations were initiated for some other purpose but then touched on the topic of
demonetization. Columns 2 and 3 of Table 5 break up the number of conversations
that the subject participated in by whether they were incidental (column 2) or purposeful (column 3). Incidental conversations comprise the vast majority, 78%, of
reported conversations. As columns 2 and 3 make clear, our core results broadly go
through for each type of conversation, but significantly more of the impact of the
interventions comes from the incidental conversations. Consistent with that, column
3 of Appendix Table H.1 shows that the increase in conversations where seeds are CK
do not appear to be driven by the seed actively going out to explain the information

WHEN LESS IS MORE

29

to others, nor others actively seeking out the seeds. The primary driver of information aggregation here is conversations among non-seeds, and we see no evidence of an
effort by seeds to coordinate conversations about the topic.
The fact that individuals largely discuss demonetization via incidental conversations is consistent with the metaphor used in our theory–that information aggregation
occurs in the Town Square. Engaging in conversations about demonetization in public
places while going about one’s business can be viewed as tapping into the information
aggregated there.
4.2. Information aggregation and choice. We present regressions in Table 6
which show how knowledge of the demonetization rules and incentivized choice behavior depend on treatment cell. Recall that the quality of the choice depended on
the respondent’s understanding of the demonetization rules.
In column 1, we turn to whether the changes in endogenous participation in learning
correspond to changes in knowledge. This is primarily an empirical question, though
we provide sufficient conditions for it to happen in section 3.5. To see why an increase
in conversations may not lead to an increase in learning, note, for example that even
though there are fewer conversations happening in (Broadcast, CK) as compared to
(Seed, CK), 10-times the number of households received information under broadcast
treatments, so it is entirely possible that they still learned more. Therefore the finding
that (Broadcast, CK) generates less learning than (Seed, CK) is a more powerful test
of our theory than the fact that there are more conversations in (Seed, CK). If the
reason why there were fewer conversations in (Broadcast, CK) is that people got
enough information from their signals so that they did not need to ask questions
(rather than they chose not to ask questions for fear of revealing their type, as in our
theory), we would expect (Broadcast, CK) to out-perform (Seed), CK) in terms of
knowledge, even if there are fewer conversations. It is only when there are important
strategic reasons for not asking questions and social learning is an important part
of gathering information, that we would expect a reversal of the ”natural” ordering,
where broadcasting does better than seeding.
We find evidence for the strong reversals that our model predicts. The outcome
variable is the error rate on our knowledge metric. In our metric, the (Seed, no CK)
mean is 0.434. Going from seeding to broadcast leads to a 5.6% increase in the error
rate on our knowledge survey (p = 0.062). This is striking and shows that though
100% of households receive information instead of 10%, the amount of aggregated
information that a random household has at the end of the day is actually less, not

WHEN LESS IS MORE

30

more. Also, turning to broadcast strategies, adding common knowledge leads to a
4.6% increase in the error rate, though the effect is not quite statistically significant
(p = 0.174). In addition, going from (Seed, No CK) to (Seed, CK) decreases the
error rate on our knowledge survey by 7.3% (p = 0.0142) and going from (Seed, No
CK) to (Broadcast, No CK) actually makes people better informed and reduces the
error rate by 6.4% (p = 0.05). It is worth noting that we see reductions in knowledge
exactly where we see conversations declining which strongly suggests that people do
learn from each other and the reduction in conversations results in a reduction in
knowledge.
In column 2, we turn to the impact of our experimental treatments on incentivized
choice. We look at whether subjects choose the Rs. 500 note on the spot, which
they could still deposit in their accounts, or an IOU worth Rs. 200 to be paid in
3-5 days, taking a loss of about 1.5 days wages. The probability of selecting the Rs.
500 note in the omitted category (Seed, No CK) is only 5.92%.Going from seeding
to broadcast, conditional on common knowledge, leads to a 38.5% or 4.13pp decline
in the probability of choosing the Rs. 500 note (p = 0.104). Looking at broadcast
strategies, adding common knowledge leads to a 48% decline in the probability of
choosing the Rs. 500 note (p = 0.041). In addition, going from (Seed, No CK) to
(Seed, CK) leads to a 4.8pp or an 81% increase in the probability of choosing the
Rs. 500 note (p = 0.037) but going from (Seed, No CK) to (Broadcast, No CK)
corresponds to a 6.77pp or 114% increase in the probability of choosing the Rs. 500
note (p = 0.014).
Taken together, our results clearly demonstrate that broadcasting information is
better than seeding in a world without common knowledge. However, increasing the
number of informed households has opposite effects, depending whether there is common knowledge or not. In a world without common knowledge, the conventional
wisdom holds: increasing the number informed encourages more conversations and
better decision making. However, under common knowledge, broadcasting information actually backfires, leading to worse outcomes across the board. These results
are consistent with our framework of endogenous communication. One bottom line
result is that seeding just five households combined with common knowledge makes
the outcomes indistinguishable from (Broadcast, No CK), where ten times as many
people were seeded. And finally, and perhaps more strikingly, either holding common
knowledge fixed and moving from seed to broadcast or holding broadcast fixed and

WHEN LESS IS MORE

31

moving from no common knowledge to common knowledge actually reduces conversation volume, knowledge, and quality of choice
5. Conclusion
Social learning happens in part through choices by the participants about whether
to ask questions. We show that, consistent with prior lab-in-field research by a subset
of us, Chandrasekhar et al. (2017), the number of signals and the structure of common knowledge matter considerably for the extent of participation in social learning.
In particular we find evidence for a set of clear reversals that are consistent with
our model and prima facie inconsistent with a model where there is no endogenous
participation. When looking at targeted seeding, going from no common knowledge to common knowledge increases conversations but the exact opposite is true for
broadcast strategies. Moreover conversations actually decline when, holding common
knowledge fixed, more people are provided information. Furthermore in our setting,
this increase or decline in conversation volume is met with a corresponding increase
or decline in knowledge about the rules as well as quality of choice. Thus, the success
of an information intervention depends crucially on the details of the design and how
it affects endogenous communication.
Of the full set of experimental interventions, two consistently perform well along all
the dimensions—conversations, knowledge, and choice—and have comparable benefits to one another: seed with common knowledge and broadcast without common
knowledge. Note, however, that broadcast, no common knowledge is not easy to
implement in a non-experimental setting. Most, if not all, broadcast technologies
such as radio, television, newspaper, or the village crier intrinsically contain a common knowledge component. Moreover, it would be difficult to repeat a non-common
knowledge broadcast strategy without it eventually becoming common knowledge.
The results have implications for how researchers and policymakers should think
about the use of broadcast media versus extension to educate individuals, and how
extension should be structured. The results indicate that the benefits of extension
strategies can be magnified with common knowledge.
References
Abaluck, J. and J. Gruber (2011): “Choice inconsistencies among the elderly:
evidence from plan choice in the Medicare Part D program,” American Economic
Review, 101, 1180–1210. 2.4

WHEN LESS IS MORE

32

Acemoglu, D., K. Bimpikis, and A. Ozdaglar (2014): “Dynamics of information exchange in endogenous social networks,” Theoretical Economics, 9, 41–97.
3.6.1
Akbarpour, M., S. Malladi, and A. Saberi (2017):
“Diffusion,
Seeding, and the Value of Network Information,” Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3062830. 1
Aral, S. and D. Walker (2012): “Identifying Influential and Susceptible Members
of Social Networks,” Science, 337, 337–341. 1
Bailey, N. (1975): The Mathematical Theory of Infectious Diseases and Its Applications., Griffin: London. 1
Banerjee, A., A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. O. Jackson (2013):
“The diffusion of microfinance,” Science, 341, 1236498. 1
——— (2016): “Gossip: Identifying Central Individuals in a Social Network,” Working Paper. 2.4, 13
Banerjee, A., L. Iyer, and R. Somanathan (2007): “Public action for public
goods,” Handbook of Development Economics, 4, 3117–3154. E.1
Banerjee, A. V. and E. S. Maskin (1996): “A Walrasian theory of money and
barter,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 955–1005. G
Bass, F. M. (1969): “A new product growth for model consumer durables,” Management science, 15, 215–227. 1
Beaman, L., A. BenYishay, J. Magruder, and A. M. Mobarak (2016): “Can
Network Theory based Targeting Increase Technology Adoption?” Working Paper.
1
Beshears, J., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2013): “Simplification and saving,” Journal of economic behavior & organization, 95, 130–145.
2.4
Bursztyn, L., G. Egorov, and R. Jensen (2016): “Cool to Be Smart or Smart
to Be Cool? Understanding Peer Pressure in Education,” . 2, 3
Cai, J., A. De Janvry, and E. Sadoulet (2015): “Social networks and the
decision to insure,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 81–108. 1
Carvalho, L. and D. Silverman (2017): “Complexity and Sophistication,” . 2.4,
35
Chandrasekhar, A. G., B. Golub, and H. Yang (2017): “Signaling, Shame,
and Silence in Social Learning,” Working paper, Stanford University. 1, 7, 3, 27,
31, 5, E.1

WHEN LESS IS MORE

33

Conley, T. G. and C. R. Udry (2010): “Learning about a New Technology:
Pineapple in Ghana,” The American Economic Review, 35–69. 1
Galeotti, A. and S. Goyal (2010): “The Law of the Few,” American Economic
Review, 100, 1468–1492. E.1
Jackson, M. and L. Yariv (2011): “Diffusion, strategic interaction, and social
structure,” Handbook of Social Economics, San Diego: North Holland, edited by
Benhabib, J. and Bisin, A. and Jackson, M.O. 1
Jackson, M. O. (2008): Social and Economic Networks., Princeton University
Press. 1
Kiyotaki, N. and R. Wright (1989): “On money as a medium of exchange,”
Journal of Political Economy, 97, 927–954. G
Leskovec, J., L. A. Adamic, and B. A. Huberman (2007): “The dynamics of
viral marketing,” ACM Transactions on the Web (TWEB), 1, 5. 1
Lobel, I. and E. Sadler (2015): “Information diffusion in networks through social
learning,” Theoretical Economics, 10, 807–851. 3.6.2, E.3
Miller, G. and A. M. Mobarak (2014): “Learning about new technologies through social networks: experimental evidence on nontraditional stoves in
Bangladesh,” Marketing Science, 34, 480–499. 1
Möbius, M., T. Phan, and A. Szeidl (2015): “Treasure hunt: Social learning int
he field,” NBER Working Paper No. 21014. 3.6.1
Niehaus, P. (2011): “Filtered Social Learning,” Journal of Political Economy, 119,
686–720. 9
Ryan, B. and N. C. Gross (1943): “The diffusion of hybrid seed corn in two Iowa
communities.” Rural sociology, 8, 15. 1
Samuelson, P. A. (1958): “An exact consumption-loan model of interest with or
without the social contrivance of money,” Journal of Political Economy, 66, 467–
482. G
Wallace, N. (1980): “The Overlapping Generations Model of Fiat Money, in Models
of Monetary Economies (J. Kareken and N. Wallace, eds.), 49(82),” Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis. G

WHEN LESS IS MORE

34

Figures
NO

YES

Quantity of Info per HH

Quantity of Info per HH

Seed, Short
NCK

Seed, Long
NCK

Broadcast, Short
NCK

Broadcast, Long
NCK

Number of HHs Informed

Number of HHs Informed

Common Knowledge:

Seed, Short
CK

Seed, Long
CK

Broadcast, Short
CK

Broadcast, Long
CK

Figure 1. Experimental Design

Nov. 24
Exchange facility
closed

Nov. 8
Demon. announced

Dec. 23-27
Information
delivery

Dec. 21-24
Baseline

Dec. 30
Last day to
deposit SBNs

Dec. 26-30
Endline
+ choice

Figure 2. Intervention Timeline

0

.2

fraction of respondents
.4
.6
.8

1

WHEN LESS IS MORE

Bank is too Far

Lines are too Long

Illegal to hold Rs.500

Cannot deposit/use anymore

Figure 3. Why did you not choose 500?

35

36

0

Standardized error rate

-.2

-.1

1
0
Seed, No CK

Seed, CK

Broadcast, No CK

Broadcast, CK

Seed, CK

.1

frac. chose 500

Seed, No CK

Broadcast, No CK

(b) Knowledge error

.2

(a) Volume of conversations

Seed, No CK

0

volume of conversations

.1

.2

2

WHEN LESS IS MORE

Seed, CK

Broadcast, No CK

Broadcast, CK

(c) Chose old 500

Figure 4. Raw Data: Core Experiment Outcomes

Broadcast, CK

WHEN LESS IS MORE

37

Tables
Table 1. Summary Statistics
mean
sd
obs
Female
0.32 (0.47) 1082
SC/ST
0.50 (0.50) 1082
Age
39.18 (11.88) 1079
Casual laborer
0.21 (0.41) 1082
Farmer: landed
0.16 (0.37) 1082
Domestic work
0.16 (0.37) 1082
Farmer: sharecropper 0.09 (0.29) 1082
Unemployed
0.02 (0.14) 1082
Bank account holder 0.89 (0.31) 1078
Literate
0.80 (0.40) 1047
Notes: This table gives summary statistics
on the endline sample used for analysis.

Table 2. Bank Summary Statistics

Actual wait time at banks (mins)
Perceived wait time at banks (mins)
Nearest Bank (mins)

median
10.00
15.00
20.00

mean
sd
obs
11.86 (7.87) 51
17.06 (22.13) 32
19.84 (9.88) 63

Notes: This table gives actual wait time at banks near our sample
villages. We surveyed bank employees at 51 banks. It also gives
perceived wait time and perceived time taken to reach the nearest
bank by a sub-sample of the endline respondents.
Table 3. Baseline Error Statistics
mean
10 rupees coin
0.15
General currency
0.17
Withdrawal limits on Jan Dhan accounts
0.87
Over-the-counter exchange
0.25
Weekly withdrawal limits from bank accounts 0.78
Daily withdrawal limits on ATMs
0.90
Exchange locations other than banks
0.50

sd
(0.36)
(0.38)
(0.33)
(0.44)
(0.41)
(0.30)
(0.50)

obs
965
965
965
965
965
965
966

Notes: This tables gives error rates on knowledge about demonetization in the baseline sample.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

38

Table 4. Frictionless benchmark
Panel A: Short vs. Long
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
OLS
OLS
VARIABLES Volume Knowledge error Chose 500
Long

Observations
Short Mean

-0.296
(0.250)
[0.238]

0.00692
(0.00946)
[0.465]

-0.0183
(0.0180)
[0.309]

1,078
1.136

1,082
0.417

1,067
0.0954

Panel B: Seed vs. Broadcast
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
OLS
OLS
VARIABLES Volume Knowledge error Chose 500
Broadcast

Observations
Seed Mean

-0.0399
(0.253)
[0.875]

-0.00236
(0.00936)
[0.802]

0.0129
(0.0186)
[0.490]

1,078
0.998

1,082
0.418

1,067
0.0755

Notes: All columns control for randomization strata
(subdistrict) fixed effects. They also control for date
and time of entry into the village, caste category of the
treatment hamlet and distance from the village to an
urban center. Respondent-level controls include age,
gender, literacy and potential seed status. Standard
errors (clustered at the village-level) are reported in
parentheses and p-values are reported in brackets.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

39

Table 5. Engagement in social learning

VARIABLES
CK

Broadcast

Broadcast × CK

Observations
Seed, No CK Mean
CK + BC × CK = 0 p-val
BC + BC × CK = 0 p-val

(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
OLS
OLS
Volume of
# incidental # purposeful
conversations conversations conversations
0.651
(0.318)
[0.0420]
0.708
(0.356)
[0.0477]
-1.491
(0.529)
[0.00535]

0.447
(0.262)
[0.0901]
0.520
(0.320)
[0.106]
-1.113
(0.442)
[0.0125]

0.204
(0.105)
[0.0527]
0.188
(0.127)
[0.142]
-0.378
(0.190)
[0.0482]

1,078
0.627
0.0211
0.0292

1,078
0.490
0.0314
0.0399

1,078
0.137
0.247
0.119

Notes: All columns control for randomization strata (subdistrict) fixed effects. They also control for date and time of entry into the village, caste
category of the treatment hamlet and distance from the village to an urban center. Respondent-level controls include age, gender, literacy and
potential seed status. Standard errors (clustered at the village-level) are
reported in parentheses and p-values are reported in brackets.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

40

Table 6. Knowledge and decision-making

VARIABLES
CK

Broadcast

Broadcast × CK

Observations
Seed, No CK Mean
CK + BC × CK = 0 p-val
BC + BC × CK = 0 p-val

(1)
(2)
OLS
OLS
Knowledge Error Chose 500
-0.0318
(0.0129)
[0.0142]
-0.0279
(0.0143)
[0.0525]
0.0506
(0.0193)
[0.00958]

0.0480
(0.0228)
[0.0368]
0.0677
(0.0272)
[0.0135]
-0.109
(0.0392)
[0.00583]

1,082
0.434
0.174
0.0621

1,067
0.0592
0.0409
0.104

Notes: All columns control for randomization strata (subdistrict) fixed effects. They also control for date and time
of entry into the village, caste category of the treatment
hamlet and distance from the village to an urban center.
Respondent-level controls include age, gender, literacy and
potential seed status. Standard errors (clustered at the
village-level) are reported in parentheses and p-values are
reported in brackets.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

Appendix A. Timeline of Rule Changes

Nov-08 •
•
•
•
Nov-09 •
•
•
Nov-10 •
•
•
Nov-13 •
•
•
•
•
Nov-14 •
•
Nov-17 •
•
Nov-20 •
Nov-21 •
•
•
•
Nov-22 •
•
Nov-23 •
Nov-24 •
•
Nov-25 •
•

Rs. 500 and Rs. 1000 notes shall have their legal tender
withdrawn wef midnight Nov 8
Closure of ATMs from Nov 9th to Nov 11th
All ATM free of cost of dispensation
ATM machine withdrawal limit:
Rs. 2000 per day per card (till Nov. 18th); Rs. 4000 thereafter
Re-Calibration of ATMs to dispense Rs. 50 and Rs. 100 notes
Withdrawal of Rs. 2000 limit per day per card
Cash withdrawals could be made from Banking Correspondents
and Aadhar Enabled Payment Systems
Rs. 4000 or below could be exchanged for any denomination at banks
Max deposit for an account without KYC: Rs. 40000
Cash withdrawal per day: Rs. 10,000; with a limit of Rs. 20,000
in one week
Limit for over the counter withdrawal: Rs. 4500
Daily withdrawal on debit cards: Rs. 2500
Weekly withdrawal limit: Rs. 24,000
Daily limit of Rs. 10,000: withdrawn
Separate queues for senior citizens and disabled
Waivers of ATM customer charge
Current account holders: Withdrawal limits Rs. 50,000
with notes of mostly Rs. 2000
Over the counter exchange of notes limited to Rs. 2000
PAN card is mandatory for deposits over Rs. 50,000, or
opening a bank account
Withdrawal of ATM: limit unchanged at Rs. 2500
Cash withdrawal for wedding: Rs. 2,50,000 for each party
for wedding before Dec. 30th, for customers with full KYC
60 day extra for small borrowers to repay loan dues
Limit of Rs. 50,000 withdrawal also extended to overdraft,
cash credit account (in addition of current account - Nov-14)
Farmers can purchase seeds with the old Rs. 500 notes
Prepaid payment instruments: limit extended from Rs. 10,000
to Rs. 20,000 in order to push electronic payment systems
For wedding payments: a list must be provided with details
of payments for anyone to whom a payment of more that 10,000
is to be made for wedding purposes
SBNs not allowed to deposit money in Small Saving Schemes
No over the counter exchange of SBNs wef midnight Nov-24
Only the old Rs. 500 notes will be accepted till Dec. 15th
in the following places: government school or college fees,
pre-paid mobiles, consumer co-op stores, tolls for highways
Weekly withdrawal limit: Rs. 24,000 (unchanged)
Foreign citizens allowed to exchange Rs. 5000 per week till Dec 15th

41

WHEN LESS IS MORE

Nov-28 •
Nov-29 •
Dec-02 •
Dec-06 •
Dec-07 •
Dec-08 •
Dec-16 •
•
•
•
Dec-19 •
•
•
•
•
•
•
Dec-31 •
Jan-03 •
•
Jan-16 •
•
Dec-21
Dec-26
Dec-29
Dec-30

42

Relaxation in norms of withdrawal from deposit accounts of deposits made in
legal tender note wef Nov-29
For account holders of Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana:
limit of Rs. 10,000 withdrawal per month for full KYC
customers; Rs. 5000 with customers with partial KYC
Aadhaar-based Authentication for Card Present Transactions
Relaxation in Additional Factor of Authentication for payments upto Rs. 2000
for card network provided authentication solutions
Old Rs. 500 notes can only be used for purchase of railway tickets till Dec. 10th
OTP based e-KYC allowed
Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Deposit Scheme Issued wef Dec 17
Foreign citizens allowed to exchange Rs. 5000 per week till Dec 31st
Merchant discount rate for debit card transactions revised
No customer charges to be levied for IIMPS, UPI, USSD
SBNs of more than Rs. 5000 to be accepted only once till Dec 30th
to full KYC customers
The limit of Rs. 5000 deposit not applicable to full KYC customers
60 day extra for short term crop loans
Additional working capital for MSEs
Closure of the scheme of exchange of Specified Bank Notes
PPI guideline (issued Nov 22) extended
ATM machine withdrawal limit: Rs. 4500 per day per card
Grace period for non-present Indians for SBN exchange at RBI
Allocation changes to cash in rural areas
Foreign citizens allowed to exchange Rs. 5000 per week till Jan 31
ATM limit extended to Rs. 10,000 per day per card
Current account withdrawal limits extended to 1,00,000

WHEN LESS IS MORE

Appendix B. List of Facts

Chapter 1:
DEPOSITING OR
TENDERING SPECIFIED
BANK NOTES

Chapter 2:
EXCHANGING
SPECIFIED BANK
NOTES

Chapter 3:
CASH WITHDRAWAL
AT BANK BRANCHES

Chapter 4:
ATM WITHDRAWALS

Chapter 5:
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
FOR FARMERS

1. The old Rs. 500 and Rs.1000 notes will be accepted at bank branches until
30/12/2016. If you deposit more than Rs. 5,000 then you will have to
provide a rationale for why you didnt deposit the notes earlier.
2. You will get value for the entire volume of notes tendered at the
bank branches / RBI offices.
3. If you are not able to personally visit the branch, you may send a representative
with a written authority letter and his/her identity proof with tendering the notes.
4. Banks will not be accepting the old Rs.500 and Rs. 1000 notes for deposits in
Small Saving Schemes. The deposits canbe made in Post Office Savings accounts.
5. Quoting of PAN is mandatory in the following transactions: Deposit with a bank
in cash exceeding Rs. 50,000 in a single day; Purchase of bank drafts or pay orders
or bankers cheques from a bank in cash for an amount exceeding Rs. 50,000 in a
single day; A time deposit with a Bank or a Post Office; Total cash deposit
of more than Rs. 2,50,000 during November 09 to December 30th, 2016
1. The over the counter exchange facility has been discontinued from the midnight
of 24th November, 2016 at all banks. This means that the bank wont exchange
the notes for you anymore. You must first deposit them into an account.
2. All of the old Rs.500 and Rs. 1,000 notes can be exchanged at RBI Offices only,
up to Rs.2000 per person.
3. Until December 15th, 2016, foreign citizens will be allowed to exchange up to
Rs. 5000 per week. It is mandatory for them to have this transaction entered
in their passports.
4. Separate queues will be arrangedfor Senior Citizens and Divyang persons,
customers with accounts in the Bankand for customers for exchange of notes
(when applicable).
1. The weekly limit of Rs. 20,000 for withdrawal from Bank accounts has
been increased to Rs. 24,000. The limit of Rs. 10,000 per day has been removed.
2. RBI has issued a notification to allow withdrawals of deposits made in the valid
notes (including the new notes) on or after November 29, 2016 beyond the current
limits. The notification states that available higher denominations bank notes
of Rs. 2000 and Rs. 500 are to be issued for such withdrawals as far as possible.
3. Business entities having Current Accounts which are operational for last three
months or more will be allowed to draw Rs. 50,000 per week. This can be done
in a single transaction or multiple transactions.
4. To protect innocent farmers and rural account holders of PMJDY from money
launders, temporarily banks will: (1) allow account holders with full KYC to
withdraw Rs. 10,000 in a month;(2) allow account holders with limited KYC to
withdraw Rs.5,000 per month, withthe maximum of Rs.10,000 from the amount
deposited through SBN after Nov 09,2016
5. District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCBs) will also facilitate withdrawals with
the same limits as normal banks.
1. Withdrawal limit increased to Rs. 2,500 per day for ATMs that have been
recalibrated to fit the new bills. This will enable dispensing of lower denomination
currency notes for about Rs.500 per withdrawal. The new Rs. 500 notes
can be withdrawn
2. Micro ATMs will be deployed to dispense cash against Debit/Credit cards up to
the cash limits applicable for ATMs.
3. ATMs which are yet to berecalibrated, will continue to dispense Rs. 2000 till
they are recalibrated.
1. Farmers would be permitted to withdraw up to Rs. 25,000 per week in cash
from their KYC compliant accounts for loans. These cash withdrawals would be
subject to the normal loan limits and conditions. This facility will also apply
to the Kisan Credit Cards (KCC).
2. Farmers receiving payments into their bank accounts through cheque or other
electronic means for selling their produce, will be permitted to withdraw up to
Rs.25,000 per week in cash. But these accounts will have to be KYC compliant.
3. Farmers can purchase seeds with the old bank notes of 500 from the State or
Central Govenment Outlets, Public Sector Undertakings, National or State Seeds
Corporations, Central or State Agricultural Universities and the Indian Council of
Agricultural Research (ICAR), with ID proof.

1

43

WHEN LESS IS MORE

4. Traders registered with APMC markets/mandis will be permitted to withdraw
up to Rs. 50,000 per week in cashfrom their KYC compliant accounts as in the
case of business entities.
5. The last date for payment of crop insurance premium has been extended by
15 days to 31st December,2016.

Chapter 6:
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
FOR WEDDINGS

Chapter 7:
OTHER DETAILS

1. In the case of a wedding, one individual from the family (parent or the person themselves) will be able to withdraw Rs. 2,50,000 from a KYC compliant bank account.
PAN details and self-declaration will have to be submitted stating only one person is
withdrawing the amount. The girls and the boys family can withdraw this
amount separately.
2. The application for withdrawal for a wedding has to be accompanied by the following
documents: An application form; Evidence of the wedding, including the invitation card,
copies of receipts for advance payments already made, such as Marriage hall booking,
advance payments to caterers, etc.; A declaration from the person who has to be paid more
than Rs. 10,000 stating that they do not have a bank account, anda complete list of people
who have to be paid in cash and the purpose for the payment.
1. In Odisha, Panchayat offices can be used for banking services in areas where banks
are too far or banking facilities are not available.
2. You can use NEFT/RTGS/IMPS/InternetBanking/Mobile Banking or any other
electronic/ non-cash mode of payment.
3. Valid Identity proof is any of the following: Aadhaar Card, Driving License, Voter
ID Card, Pass Port, NREGA Card, PAN Card, Identity Card Issued by Government
Department, Public Sector Unit to its Staff.
4. You may approach the control roomof RBI on Telephone Nos 022-22602201 22602944
5. The date for submission of annual life certificate has been extended to January 15, 2017
from November for all government pensioners
6. As of December 15, 2016, specified bank notes of only Rs. 500 can no longer be used for
the following: Government hospitals and pharmacies, railway and government bus tickets,
consumer cooperative stores, government and court fees, government School fees, mobile
top-ups, milk booths, crematoria and burial grounds, LPG gas cylinders, Archaelogical
Survey of India monuments, utilities, toll payments

1

44

WHEN LESS IS MORE

Appendix C. Example Pamphlet Excerpts

(a) Front

(b) Back

Figure C.1. Short pamphlet (2 facts)

45

WHEN LESS IS MORE

(a) Front

(b) Page 1/8

(c) Page 2/8

Figure C.2. Long pamphlet (24 facts)

46

WHEN LESS IS MORE

47

Appendix D. Technical details and proofs for Section 3
D.1. Signaling model.
D.1.1. Preliminaries for Proof of Main Proposition. Introduce an index ω ∈ (0, 1)
for the type of the decision-maker D. This index is drawn uniformly from [0,1]. By
the assumption of no atoms, we can view ∆(ID ,IT ) as a continuous increasing function
(0, 1) → R. Moreover, by P2, we may assume that, pointwise, ∆(ID ,1) (ω) > ∆(ID ,0) (ω)
and ∆(0,1) (ω) ≥ ∆(1,1) (ω). This uses the standard coupling for random variables
ordered by stochastic dominance.
Recall the payoff difference formula (3.3)
u(ID ,IT ) (S) − u(ID ,IT ) (NS) = ∆(ID ,IT ) − λΠ,
where Π is the signaling penalty. For any p, a strategy profile in which D is bestresponding can be summarized by a vector of interior cutoffs c = (c(p, ID ))ID such
that D seeks given ID if his index ω is above c(p, ID ), and does not seek if his index
is below c(p, ID ). (Interiority is guaranteed by the assumption that the distributions
of ∆ in each case have full support.)
We may now write the right-hand side of (3.3) as
W (ID ,IT ) (ω; c) = ∆(ID ,IT ) (ω) − λΠ(c).
Here ∆(ID ,IT ) (ω) is increasing in ω and Π(c) is increasing in c by P3.
Define W (ID ,p) (ω) to be the expectation of W (ω) given public signal p and a realization of ID . Define the analogous notation for ∆.
Because λ is a finite constant, cutoffs given both values of ID are guaranteed to
be in some compact subset C ⊆ (0, 1) irrespective of strategies; so we will restrict
attention to this subset from now on in studying equilibria.38
For each p and each ω, the payoff advantage W (ID ,p) (ω) of seeking is monotone
decreasing in the cutoff vector c, so this is a supermodular game. In particular, a
minimum equilibrium cutoff profile (which corresponds to maximum seeking) exists.
We now state two results which follow from the supermodular structure of the game:
Fact 1. The following hold:
SM1 If W (ID ,p) (ω; c) strictly increases for each ω, c ∈ C and ID then the minimum
cutoff c strictly decreases in each component.
38To

show the cutoff does not get arbitrarily close to 0 in ω space, we can simply note that each
function ∆(ID ,p) (ω) is negative below some ω > 0. Because Π ≥ 0, cutoffs cannot occur in the region
where W is negative.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

48

SM2 Let ιp be the ex ante probability of ID = 1 given p. Then, for each p, the
maximum equilibrium cutoff c(p, 0) is continuous in ιp at ιp = 0 for generic
priors (αH , αL ).
The first part, SM1, is a standard monotone comparative statics fact. The second,
SM2, is argued as follows. Define a reaction function rιp : C 2 → C 2 mapping any cutoffs c to the best-response cutoffs when the Observer updates assuming the cutoffs
c. Because the distribution of ∆(ID ,IT ) has full support, inferences of the Observer
depend arbitrarily little on the behavior of ID = 1 types as ιp ↓ 0. Thus, the reaction functions rιp may be bounded within an arbitrarily narrow band of the reaction
functions r0 . Thus, for generic parameters (guaranteeing that r is transversal to the
hyperplane (x, y) 7→ (x, y) at the equilibrium), the equilibrium will be continuous in
ιp .
D.1.2. Proof of Proposition 1.
(a) (Broadcast, No CK) has more seeking than (Broadcast, CK). In both cases,
W (ID ,p) (ω): since ID = 1, D knows that IT = 1.
Now we turn to signaling concerns. Denote by ID all the information D has
when making his decision. Write
(D.1)
ED [Π(c) | ID ] = ξPc (a = H | d = 1, p, ID = 1) + (1 − ξ)Pc (a = H | d = 1, p, ID = 0).
This says that D’s interim expectation of perception payoffs can be written as
a convex combination (involving a weight ξ that depends on ID ) of conditional
probabilities of a = H given the value of ID . The probabilities assessed by O
depend on the cutoffs used, hence the subscripts c. Note that under (Broadcast, CK), ξ = 1, while under (Broadcast, No CK), ξ is not 1 because the
probability of Seeding is positive and the seed set S is a proper (strict) subset
of N . Now, by P1(b), the first probability (the one being multiplied by ξ) is
smaller than the second probability (the one being multiplied by 1 − ξ), by
P1(b). This formalizes the claim that signaling concerns could not be greater
than they are in the (Broadcast, CK) case. Applying SM1 finishes the proof.
(b) (Seed, CK) has more seeking than (Broadcast, CK).
Considering the signaling contribution to payoffs: for any given cutoffs, just
as in (a), we can write the update of the Observer (given either value of p) as
a convex combination conditioning on values of ID . The term corresponding
to ID = 1 is the same across the two treatments, and the term corresponding

WHEN LESS IS MORE

49

to ID = 0 involves a strictly lower posterior that a = H. Only the first term
is nonzero in the (Broadcast, CK) treatment, while both contribute in the
(Seed, CK) treatment. Turning now to the direct payoffs, IT = 1 is known in
both cases. By Assumption P2(b), ∆(0,1) (ω) ≤ ∆(1,1) (ω) for every ω.
Applying SM1 to the two W functions gives the result.
D.1.3. Proof of Proposition 2. First, under (Seed, CK), D is certain that information
is in the Town Square, while under (Seed, No CK) this probability is strictly less
than 1 assuming ID = 0. Thus ∆(0,CK:Seed) (ω) is pointwise strictly greater than
∆(0,No CK) (ω). By compactness of C, it is strictly greater for all ω ∈ C, by at least a
positive quantity ν > 0.
Now we turn to signaling concerns. Condition first on ID = 0. By the argument
given in the main text, once k/n is small enough, in the decomposition of (D.1) the
weight on the ID = 1 term under either value of p is arbitrarily small. Thus, the
difference between signaling payoffs under p = No CK and under p = CK:Seed is less
than ν. Thus we see W (0,p) strictly increases pointwise for each ω, c ∈ C when we
move from p = No CK to p = CK:Seed.
Because the realizations with ID = 1 become very unlikely (by smallness of k/n),
we can apply SM2 to finish the proof.
D.1.4. Proof of Proposition 3. We now state a formal version of Lemma 1, whose
proof follows by Bayes’ rule.
Lemma 1. Fix any  > 0. Then there is a δ (depending on this ) so that if (1 −
χBroadcast ) < δ(k/n)2 , then conditional on p = No CK and any realizations of ID and
IO , the probability that b = Broadcast is at most .
Now, to prove the proposition in several steps. First, we will show that (Seed, No
CK) has a level of seeking arbitrarily close to the one when it is common knowledge
that IT = 0 and ID = 0.
Consider (Seed, No CK). Condition on ID = 0. When D receives no information
(ID = 0), the fact that βSeed is small means that his expectations approximate those
when IT = 0. Thus, his direct benefits as a function of ω are arbitrarily close to ∆(0,0)
on the compact set C. Moreover, in (Seed, No CK), conditioning on ID = 0, D is
certain that b 6= Broadcast, and thus (because the probability of seeding is small) he
believes that IO = 0 with high probability, and thus signaling concerns are uniformly
bounded by an arbitrarily small number on C. By the full support assumption on
∆(0,0) , it follows that for any cutoffs, there is an arbitrarily small measure of ω for

WHEN LESS IS MORE

50

which the decision differs from the case where Π is exactly zero. Finally, applying
SM2 shows that the conclusion extends even when we take into account the ID = 1
realizations.
Now consider (Broadcast, No CK), every realized D is certain that IT = 1 and
thus assesses the direct benefits to be greater than his ID = 0 counterpart, by an
amount bounded away from 0, as in Proposition 2. Fourth, under (Broadcast, No
CK), signaling concerns are negligible, as follows. By the lemma, conditional ID , D
is nearly certain that b 6= Broadcast. The probability of b = Seed is small. Putting
these facts together, D is also nearly certain that IO = 0. Thus, in the decomposition
of (D.1) the weight on the ID = 1 term under either value of p is arbitrarily small.
Continuing from that point just as in the proof of Proposition 2, we conclude that
signaling concerns are negligible. Thus, seeking rates are as if it is common knowledge
that IT = 1 and ID = 0.
By P2, there is more seeking when it is common knowledge that IT = 1 and ID = 0
than when it is common knowledge that IT = 0 and ID = 0 (this follows by a simple
comparison of direct payoffs without any signaling concerns).

WHEN LESS IS MORE

51

Appendix E. Alternative Models
E.1. Supply Effects: Information as a Public Good. The core model of Chandrasekhar, Golub, and Yang (2017) and its application to our setting focuses on
seeking effort or endogenous participation in learning. A different kind of explanation focuses on the effort of those informed to understand, filter, and communicate
the information in a useful way to others. The simplest framework to capture this is a
model of public goods provision and free-riding. This class of model has been studied
extensively in a development context, and we rely on arguments from Banerjee, Iyer,
and Somanathan (2007) to explain why supply-side effects are unlikely to explain our
results.
A robust point within such public goods models is that enlarging the set of people
who are able to provide a public good should not, in equilibrium, reduce its aggregate
provision. Indeed, if anything provision should slightly increase, which is contrary to
our empirical results.
For a simple model, consider a situation where those initially given information
have the opportunity to provide the public good of processing and disseminating it to
others. There are n agents, and each of those informed believes that k in total are able
to contribute. Every i who has information invests an effort zi ≥ 0 in transmitting.
Their payoffs are given by
!
X

Ui (z1 , . . . , zn ) = V

zi − czi .

i

Here V is an increasing, smooth function with V 0 (z) tending to 0 at large arguments
z, and c > 0 is a cost parameter. Those who are unable to contribute are constrained to zi = 0 and are passive. The key fact, which is formalized for instance by
Banerjee, Iyer, and Somanathan (2007), is that at any equilibrium with some people
contribution, for those contributing we have
!

(E.1)

V

0

X

zi = c,

i

so the aggregate level of contribution cannot depend on n or k. The intuition is simple:
the free-riding problem is self-limiting, at least in the sense of aggregate (though not
per-person) provision. If more agents try to free-ride, then others have more reason
to provide the good. A similar force is present in the network model of Galeotti and
Goyal (2010): there, endogenously, networks form so that only a few people provide

WHEN LESS IS MORE

52

the public good but everyone can access it, and a larger number of potential providers
does not make for less provision.
If agents have a private benefit term in their utility function, vi (zi ), where v is
increasing and v 0 (zi ) > c for zi ∈ [0, δ), then as long as there are sufficiently many
agents who can provide the public good, the amount provided will be at least kδ—a
lower bound which is increasing in k. A similar argument applies if only some agents
have such a v term.
Thus, natural public goods theories do not predict a decrease in the amount of overall provision, and thus in overall learning, as k (the number of potential providers)
increases. One can, of course, elaborate these models with stochastic k and idiosyncratic ci , but the basic intuition described above is quite robust.
One further supply-side effect to consider is one of social obligation. If the seeds
are publicly “deputized,” as they are in the CK treatment, each may face stronger
incentives to provide information relative to a situation in which provision opportunities are diffuse. Though this is outside a basic public goods model, our evidence on
seed effort does not support this hypothesis.
E.1.1. Application to Experiment. The number of people, k, who can contribute is
either k = 5 or k = n. Under common knowledge, this matches up with the beliefs
agents hold, so in this sense the simple model is faithful to the experiment. Thus, the
basic public goods theory predicts (contrary to the demand-side theory) that holding
CK fixed and moving from Seed to Broadcast should not hurt aggregate provision.
When common knowledge is not present, agents will have beliefs about k. But
as long as their beliefs about k are reasonably consistent (e.g., agents have common
priors about it), the essence of the above argument goes through: a stochastic version
of (E.1) still holds, and changes in beliefs about k alone should not lead to large swings
in provision.
This model is inconsistent with our empirical findings for several reasons. First,
aggregate provision of effort cannot decline, as established above. If the number of
people a typical subject in our random sample conversed with measures conversational
effort, this means that the number of conversations for the average person must not
decline. Column 1 of Table 5 shows that, conditional on common knowledge, going
from k = 5 to k = n corresponds to a 61% decline in the number of conversations (p =
0.029), which means that aggregate contribution to conversations must be decreasing.
Second, the model suggests that the amount of value being generated cannot decline, since after all otherwise a given individual would have an incentive to put

WHEN LESS IS MORE

53

in some more effort to gain more marginal benefit. Here, we can measure this either through knowledge or choice quality. Turning to Table 6, recall that columns 1
(for knowledge) and 2 (for choice) show robust declines in aggregate social learning
and quality of choice when we go from k = 5 to k = n under common knowledge
(p = 0.0621 and p = 0.104).
E.2. Tagged Information Aggregation. There is an undirected graph G = (N, E)
of potential communication opportunities, corresponding to the social network with
nodes N and edges E. At time 0, agents are endowed with certain information, the
realization of a random variable Si . (In our application, this represents one’s degree of
understanding of the information delivered in the intervention.) At each discrete time
t = 1, 2, . . . a subset Et ⊆ E of agents who can communicate is realized randomly.39
We make no assumptions on this process: it may involve arbitrary correlations, etc.
If agents i and j are able to communicate at time t, they send each other messages,
with the i → j message mij,t reaching its destination with probability pij,t . Again,
we make no assumptions on these numbers. Critically, information is “tagged.” This
means that at time t, agent i’s information, Ii,t , consists of a set of signals labeled
by their origin (formally, a set of pairs (k, Sk )). When agent i sends a message to j,
the message reveals his whole information set It , which then is incorporated into j’s
information. Consider any improvement in initial information—making the profile
of initial signal random variables (Si )i∈N more informative in the Blackwell sense to
obtain a new profile (Sei )i∈N . Then, holding fixed the parameters of the model, at any
time t and for any agent i, the information Iei,t dominates Iei,t .40
E.3. Herding model. We briefly review the notation of the Lobel and Sadler (2015)
model, paraphrasing their Section 2. Agents, indexed by natural numbers n which
correspond to the time they move, sequentially make choices xn ∈ {0, 1}, which can
be thought of making the correct choice or statement about the new currency. Agents
receive a positive payoff from matching the state θ ∈ {0, 1}, and zero otherwise. In
contrast to the tagging model, this is a maximally coarsened mode of communication.
Each individual, when acting, observes two things: a private signal sn ∈ S, and the
actions of a set of predecessors B(n), which may be drawn with randomness. This
allows us to encode network structure into the model. Private signals are conditionally
independent given the true state θ.
39We

omit formal notation for the probability space in the background.
if we order information sets by containment, then under this order Iei,t first-order stochastically dominates Ii,t .
40Formally,

WHEN LESS IS MORE

54

Lobel and Sadler (2015) show that in equilibrium, the decisions of all sufficiently
late-moving agents (those with high n) are at least as good as those decisions that
would be made based on sn alone, for the most informative possible realizations of
sn . To state this more formally, they define the private belief pn as the belief about
θ induced by n’s signal, and define the strongest possible private beliefs to be the
extreme points of the support of pn , which they denote by β and β. So, more formally,
Lobel and Sadler (2015) show that the decisions of all sufficiently late-moving agents
achieve essentially the utility that would be achieved by getting one of the strongest
possible private signals. This requires some conditions on the network structure.
The simplest of these (in their Theorem 1) is that individuals’ neighborhoods are
independent, and each late-moving agent has paths of observation leading back to
arbitrarily many prior movers’ choices.
Though in the sequential social learning model, equilibrium outcomes may be nonmontonic in signal endowments, the Lobel-Sadler lower bound described above is
monotonic in signal endowments: when we make everyone’s initial information better, the β and β become more extreme (corresponding to stronger signals and better
decisions) and the lower bound is strengthened.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

55

Appendix F. Heterogeneity by length of information
We now look at the interaction of our core treatment cells with the amount of
information in the pamphlet. Whether this should accelerate or dampen the effect of
going to common knowledge in a given information delivery system depends on the
details of the model and therefore becomes an empirical question.
To see why, consider the case of (Broadcast, CK) and now imagine comparing a
world in which only two facts are given as compared to a world where a lengthy
pamphlet of 24 facts is given. What matters is how the type-specific marginal value
of information distributions, FH and FL , move when we go from a short set of facts
to a long set of facts. Assume for the moment that the cost of figuring out which
of the 24 facts are useful, or coordinating on the same topic of conversation out
of the now 24 possibilities, is very high no matter if the individual is a high or
low ability type. In this case, the scope for signaling reduces, and therefore going
from (Broadcast, No CK, Long) to (Broadcast, CK, Long) should generate less of a
reduction in endogenous participation in social learning than going from (Broadcast,
No CK, Short) to (Broadcast, CK, Short). Now on the other hand, if it was very
easy for high ability types to figure out what is useful, but the task was arduous for
low ability types, then scope for signaling could actually increase.
Turning to seeding, observe that in seeding with or without common knowledge,
the length of the information is not commonly known either way. So, long sets of
facts should likely have no effect on endogenous participation.
We now turn to the data in Table F.1 to look at how going from two to 24 facts
differentially impacts the effects of interest. For the most part the effect is noisy, and
there is no differential effect. The one plausible finding is that going from (Broadcast,
No CK) to (Broadcast, CK) is less of a deterrent to purposeful conversations (p =
0.15) when the facts are long. If this is to be taken seriously, minding the caveat that
for overall conversations this effect is not distinguishable from zero (p = 0.251), it
is evidence in favor of the idea that sorting through the 24 facts or deciding which
topic to coordinate on and converse about is costly enough for both ability types
that the signaling motive is dampened by the longer list. Said differently, it is, if
anything, consistent with the story that it is much less likely for someone to go ask
about information when it is known that they have received two facts, than when it
is known that they received a lengthy booklet of facts.
Table F.2 repeats the same exercise now turning to knowledge and choice. Of note
is that a similar pattern is true here. There is mostly no detectable effect. But if we

WHEN LESS IS MORE

56

Table F.1. Conversations: Length interactions

VARIABLES
CK

Broadcast

Long

Broadcast × CK

CK × Long

Broadcast × Long

Broadcast × CK × Long

Observations
Seed, No CK, Short Mean
CK + BC × CK = 0 p-val
BC + BC × CK = 0 p-val
Long + CK × Long + BC × Long + BC × CK × Long = 0

(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
OLS
OLS
Volume of
# incidental # purposeful
conversations conversations conversations
0.825
(0.496)
[0.0982]
0.963
(0.545)
[0.0787]
-0.0939
(0.372)
[0.801]
-2.212
(0.735)
[0.00296]
-0.372
(0.562)
[0.508]
-0.563
(0.680)
[0.408]
1.448
(0.809)
[0.0752]

0.693
(0.412)
[0.0937]
0.665
(0.481)
[0.168]
-0.00127
(0.330)
[0.997]
-1.614
(0.626)
[0.0107]
-0.485
(0.480)
[0.313]
-0.319
(0.616)
[0.605]
1.006
(0.733)
[0.172]

0.132
(0.163)
[0.421]
0.297
(0.219)
[0.175]
-0.0926
(0.130)
[0.478]
-0.599
(0.264)
[0.0244]
0.113
(0.194)
[0.560]
-0.244
(0.233)
[0.295]
0.442
(0.281)
[0.118]

1,078
0.523
0.00573
0.0170
0.251

1,078
0.385
0.0275
0.0259
0.520

1,078
0.138
0.0365
0.0602
0.155

Notes: All columns control for randomization strata (subdistrict) fixed effects. They also control for date
and time of entry into the village, caste category of the treatment hamlet and distance from the village to
an urban center. Respondent-level controls include age, gender, literacy and potential seed status. Standard
errors (clustered at the village-level) are reported in parentheses and p-values are reported in brackets.

had to guess, at p = 0.5 for both outcomes, it suggests that perhaps introducing CK
to the broadcast cell has less of a detrimental effect on both knowledge and choice
quality. This is extremely noisy, speculative evidence that suggests if anything, a
stigma-like effect operates more when there are only two facts.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

57

Table F.2. Knowledge and choice: Length interactions

VARIABLES
CK

Broadcast

Long

Broadcast × CK

CK × Long

Broadcast × Long

Broadcast × CK × Long

Observations
Seed, No CK, Short Mean
CK + BC × CK = 0 p-val
BC + BC × CK = 0 p-val
Long + CK × Long + BC × Long + BC × CK × Long = 0

(1)
(2)
OLS
OLS
Knowledge Error Chose 500
-0.0215
(0.0162)
[0.185]
-0.0264
(0.0169)
[0.121]
0.0131
(0.0174)
[0.451]
0.0537
(0.0247)
[0.0312]
-0.0167
(0.0255)
[0.513]
0.000655
(0.0262)
[0.980]
-0.00862
(0.0383)
[0.822]

0.0542
(0.0404)
[0.181]
0.0804
(0.0361)
[0.0269]
-0.00591
(0.0300)
[0.844]
-0.144
(0.0556)
[0.0104]
-0.0144
(0.0508)
[0.777]
-0.0284
(0.0548)
[0.605]
0.0696
(0.0785)
[0.376]

1,082
0.436
0.0919
0.120
0.532

1,067
0.0374
0.0141
0.133
0.550

Notes: All columns control for randomization strata (subdistrict) fixed effects. They also
control for date and time of entry into the village, caste category of the treatment hamlet
and distance from the village to an urban center. Respondent-level controls include age, gender, literacy and potential seed status. Standard errors (clustered at the village-level) are
reported in parentheses and p-values are reported in brackets.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

58

ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Appendix G. Other choice and knowledge error metrics
Recall that because we randomized content, we have variation in whether the questions we ask about in the endline were actually provided to the villagers and also how
relevant the information was. Table G.1 looks at whether facts are more likely to be
known if (a) they were actually the ones provided in the information pamphlet to
the village and (b) whether they were ex-ante deemed to be more useful to villagers.
This would tell us whether there were complementarities and filtering occuring in the
social learning process. The analysis is conducted on a person-fact level. Thus, it is
a panel of the respondent’s answers to each of the 34 facts asked to them.
In columns 1 and 2, for facts that were not provided and not useful respectively,
we see that neither (Seed, CK) nor (Broadcast, No CK) are indistinguishable from
(Seed, No CK). However, when we look at the effect on knowledge of facts that
were provided during information delivery, adding Common Knowledge to the Seed
treatment decreases error in knowledge by 17.1% (column 1, p = 0.014). Under no
Common Knowledge, Broadcast decreases error in knowledge by 15% (column (1),
p = 0.0345) relative to Seed. Similarly, in column 2 we see that holding useful facts
fixed, (Seed, CK) decreases error in knowledge by 6.6% (p = 0.008) and (Broadcast,
No CK) decreases error in knowledge by 6% (p = 0.0345), compared to (Seed, No
CK). We can conclude that the core effects on aggregation are being driven by facts
that were provided during information delivery and facts that were deemend useful.
Next we turn to the fact that even if the subject rejected the Rs. 500 in favor
of a 3-5 day IOU for either Rs. 200 in non-demonetized notes or Rs. 200 worth
of dal, we know which they picked. Table G.2 explores this. Column 1 looks at a
regression where the outcome variable is a dummy for picking the dal option. We can
see that relative to (Seed, No CK), adding common knowledge considerably reduces
the probability of selecting dal which corresopnds to a 15.6% decline (p = 0.135). We
also see a 14% decrease in the probability of selecting dal when going from (Seed, No
CK) to (Broadcast, No CK) (p = 0.138). The interaction of broadcast with common
knowledge has a large point estimate but is extremely noisy, however.
Note that the above says nothing about where the mass that moves away from dal
ends up going. In columns 2 and 3, we present the results of a multinomial logit,
where the omitted category is dal and the first column is Rs. 200 relative to dal

WHEN LESS IS MORE

59

Table G.1. Heterogeneity in knowledge error

VARIABLES
CK

Broadcast

Told/Useful

Broadcast × CK

CK × Told/Useful Facts

BC × Told/Useful Facts

BC × CK × Told/Useful Facts

Observations
Seed, No CK, Untold/Not useful Mean
CK + CK × Told/Useful = 0 p-val
BC + BC × Told/Useful = 0 p-val

(1)
(2)
OLS
OLS
Knowledge error Knowledge error
(Told)
(Useful)
0.0239
(0.0282)
[0.396]
0.0189
(0.0270)
[0.486]
0.0840
(0.0410)
[0.0419]
-0.0160
(0.0390)
[0.682]
-0.112
(0.0596)
[0.0614]
-0.0962
(0.0575)
[0.0962]
0.125
(0.0852)
[0.145]

0.0352
(0.0669)
[0.599]
0.0325
(0.0658)
[0.622]
-0.0750
(0.0488)
[0.126]
-0.117
(0.0941)
[0.216]
-0.0661
(0.0686)
[0.336]
-0.0606
(0.0676)
[0.371]
0.163
(0.0975)
[0.0957]

36,788
0.431
0.0140
0.0345

36,788
0.543
0.00829
0.0345

Notes: All columns control for randomization strata (subdistrict) fixed effects. They also control for date and time of entry into the village, caste
category of the treatment hamlet and distance from the village to an urban
center. Respondent-level controls include age, gender, literacy and potential
seed status. Column (1) displays effects on error rate of if the fact being
asked about was told during information delivery. Column (2) displays effects on error rate of if the fact being asked about is a useful fact or not.
Standard errors (clustered at the village-level) are reported in parentheses
and p-values are reported in brackets.

and the second is Rs. 500 relative to dal. We see that going to (Seed, CK) from
(Seed, No CK) leads to a 3.4pp increase in the probability of selecting the IOU for
Rs. 200 in cash instead of dal, relative to a mean rate of selection of Rs. 200 of 40.8%
(p = 0.285). However we cannot detect any broadcast or broadcast interacted with
common knowledge effects. When we compare the choice of Rs. 500 relative to dal,
the resulting marginal changes in the probability of picking Rs. 500 look much like
our main results: a 4.7pp increase when we move to (Seed, CK), a 6.9pp increase

WHEN LESS IS MORE

60

when we move to (Broadcast, No CK), and a relative decline of 4.1pp when going
from (Broadcast, No CK) to (Broadcast, CK), all on a base rate of picking Rs. 500
at 5.9%.
Recall that we had two successful information dissemination strategies: (Seed, CK)
and (Broadcast, No CK). We find that in the former, but not the latter, we also see
movement away from dal in favor of Rs. 200 in cash. This suggests that at least some
part of the misinformation involved decreased confidence in Rs. 100 notes as well,
because otherwise Rs. 200 in cash should dominate dal.
Finally, because the dal, equivalent cash, and Rs. 500 are welfare-ordered, in that
order, we have in column 4 an ordinal logit which shows again that (Seed, CK) and
(Broadcast, No CK), relative to (Seed, No CK) improve outcomes in choice quality.
Table G.2. Other choice outcomes

VARIABLES
CK

Broadcast

Broadcast × CK

Observations
Seed, No CK Mean
CK + BC × CK = 0 p-val
BC + BC × CK = 0 p-val

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
OLS
Multinomial Logit Multinomial Logit Ordinal Logit
Chose dal
Chose 200
Chose 500
Choice
-0.0832
(0.0554)
[0.135]
-0.0756
(0.0507)
[0.138]
0.0887
(0.0782)
[0.258]

0.257
(0.241)
[0.285]
0.124
(0.223)
[0.578]
-0.117
(0.332)
[0.724]

0.700
(0.357)
[0.0496]
0.932
(0.340)
[0.00611]
-1.170
(0.464)
[0.0116]

0.377
(0.208)
[0.0699]
0.398
(0.193)
[0.0396]
-0.523
(0.297)
[0.0780]

1,067
0.533
0.914
0.826

1,067
0.408
0.539
0.978

1,067
0.059
0.126
0.467

1,067
0.451
0.567

Notes: All columns control for randomization strata (subdistrict) fixed effects. They also control for date and time of entry into the village, caste category of the treatment hamlet and
distance from the village to an urban center. Respondent-level controls include age, gender, literacy and potential seed status. Standard errors (clustered at the village-level) are reported in
parentheses and p-values are reported in brackets.

Our study was certainly not designed to quantify the costs and benefits of demonitization in India. However, by studying misinformation and its remedies during the
SBN deposit window, a few, more modest lessons emerge. First, we show that in the
context of rural Orissa, while basic policy knowledge was near-universal, individuals
still had a poor grasp on some of the most basic policy rules at baseline. This suggests
that there was substantial room for improvement in the quality of outreach between
the policy makers and villagers. Second, in our experiment, we show that decisions

WHEN LESS IS MORE

61

are impacted by the provision of information. Individuals in treatments that lead to
better community wide knowledge of the policy do change their incentivized choices
and are more likely to recognize that an old Rs. 500 note is more valuable than
Rs. 200 in the days before the deadline. Moreover in the some treatment conditions
associated with improved knowledge, namely (Seed, CK), individuals are more likely
to choose currency over commodities of equivalent face value. This result suggests
that a portion of the individuals preferring lentils over cash in our benchmark, nonintervention villages were likely doing so out of a loss of confidence in paper money.
This observation relates back to the foundational macroeconomic literature on fiat
money (Samuelson, 1958; Kiyotaki and Wright, 1989; Banerjee and Maskin, 1996;
Wallace, 1980) and suggests that sowing confusion about the government’s intervention in the currency undermines trust.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

62

Appendix H. Heterogeneous Communication by Potential Seeds
Table H.1. How much more do potential seed households speak?

VARIABLES
Seed HH

CK

Broadcast

Broadcast × CK

Seed HH × CK

Seed HH × BC

Seed HH × BC × CK

Observations
Seed, No CK, Non-seed HH Mean
CK + BC × CK = 0 p-val
BC + BC × CK = 0 p-val

(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
OLS
OLS
Volume of
# incidental # purposeful
conversations conversations conversations
0.606
(0.857)
[0.481]
0.522
(0.303)
[0.0866]
0.723
(0.364)
[0.0480]
-1.364
(0.507)
[0.00778]
1.305
(1.499)
[0.385]
-0.505
(1.161)
[0.664]
-0.917
(1.874)
[0.625]

0.0724
(0.411)
[0.860]
0.325
(0.253)
[0.202]
0.542
(0.333)
[0.105]
-1.058
(0.429)
[0.0146]
1.251
(1.156)
[0.280]
-0.694
(0.616)
[0.261]
0.0699
(1.514)
[0.963]

0.533
(0.479)
[0.267]
0.197
(0.103)
[0.0560]
0.181
(0.106)
[0.0906]
-0.306
(0.175)
[0.0821]
0.0540
(0.619)
[0.931]
0.189
(0.816)
[0.817]
-0.986
(0.898)
[0.273]

1,078
0.627
0.0168
0.0435

1,078
0.490
0.0168
0.0419

1,078
0.137
0.397
0.311

Notes: All columns control for randomization strata (subdistrict) fixed effects.
They also control for date and time of entry into the village, caste category of the
treatment hamlet and distance from the village to an urban center. Respondentlevel controls include age, gender, literacy and potential seed status. Standard
errors (clustered at the village-level) are reported in parentheses and p-values are
reported in brackets.

Table H.1 looks at how the volume of conversations changed by treatment, and in
particular whether there was differential conversation participation by “seed households” relative to the others. Specifically, this allows us to ask if part of the positive
effect on communication in (Seed, CK) relative to (Seed, No CK) is coming from
the seed household itself putting in more effort and having more conversations. We
remind the reader that every village (even broadcast treamtents) has a set of “seed

WHEN LESS IS MORE

63

households.” This is because the seeds were chosen using responses to the gossip
survey that was conducted at baseline in each village.
In Table H.1, we see that our main results hold for the households that are not seeds:
(1) adding common knowledge to seeding increases conversations, (2) broadcasting
information to all households without common knowledge raises conversations relative to seeding, (3) broadcasting information to all households reduces conversations
if there is common knowledge, and (4) adding common knowledge to broadcasting
reduces conversations.
Turning to the seed households, there is a noisily estimated 1.3 increase in the
conversation count for a Seed in CK relative to No CK (p = 0.39). If anything,
this entirely comes from incidental conversations, and one cannot statistically reject
an effect size of 0. Note that there is a 0.5 increase in conversations per random
non-seeded households. This means that in a village of 50 households, there will be
23 extra conversations. If every seeded household gained 1.3 conversations, then this
explains 6.5 or 29% of the increase in conversations. (Even if we assume that there are
double the coefficient’s number, so 13 conversations, this at best would only explain
56% of the increase in conversations.) Finally, note that by column 3, because the
effect is not coming from purposeful seeking or advising behavior, any increase in
seed conversations does not appear to be driven by the seed actively going out to
explain the information to others, nor others actively seeking out the seeds. Taken
together, this suggests that a primary driver of information aggregation here comes
from decentralized conversations among non-seeds.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

64

Appendix I. Randomization Balance
Table I.1 presents a balance table, comparing (Seed, No CK), (Seed, CK), (Broadcast, No CK), and (Broadcast, CK) across whether the village is very rural, periurban, time of entry for endline survey, date of entry, whether the village was reassigned, gender of subject, literacy of subject, whether the subject has a bank account,
and age of subject.
Columns 1-4 present means by covariate in the four treatment cells aforementioned,
in that order. Columns 5-10 present p-values of pairwise comparisons of differences in
means across cells. Notably of the 54 pairwise comparions, only 11% have a p-value
below 0.1 and only 5.5% have a p-value below 0.05. We can therefore see that there
is reasonable balance.
Table I.1. Balance
Means

Beyond 40kms of urban center
Within 5kms of urban center
Standardized entry time
Survey date
New strata
Female
Literate
Bank account holder
Age

(1)
Seed,
No CK

(2)
Seed,
CK

.14
.31
-.12
3.55
.09
.32
.8
.91
40.01

.21
.4
.1
3.64
.07
.25
.8
.86
40.06

Pairwise Differences p-values

(3)
(4)
Broadcast,Broadcast,
No CK
CK
.1
.35
.02
3.7
.05
.33
.82
.85
38.27

.22
.31
-.21
3.76
0
.39
.78
.93
38.24

(5)
SNCK SCK

(6)
SNCK BCNK

(7)
SNCK BCK

(8)
SCK BNCK

(9)
SCK BCK

(10)
BNCK BCK

.39
.41
.23
.54
.83
.25
.89
.27
.97

.53
.73
.49
.26
.53
.91
.75
.1
.12

.35
1
.65
.12
.05
.29
.6
.56
.15

.13
.63
.71
.64
.67
.17
.66
.9
.14

.93
.39
.13
.36
.05
.02
.74
.16
.16

.11
.72
.3
.63
.09
.29
.41
.04
.98

WHEN LESS IS MORE

65

Appendix J. Instrumenting for treatment assignment
Typically a village has one SCST hamlet and one GOBC hamlet. In conducting our
intervention in a small sample of 16 villages, our field staff visited the wrong hamlet.
However, we did an endline in these “missed” hamlets, which were intended to receive
the treatment, as well though with a slightly smaller random sample. Here we present
our main results where we only look at the set of hamlets originally that should have
received treatments. We instrument for actual treatment assignment with intended
treatment assignment.
Table J.1 and J.2 present versions of our main results with this IV strategy. We
see that all our main results essentially go through.
Table J.1. Engagement in social learning

VARIABLES
CK

Broadcast

BC × CK

Observations
Seed, No CK Mean
CK + BC × CK = 0 p-val
BC + BC × CK = 0 p-val

(1)
(2)
(3)
IV
IV
IV
OLS
OLS
OLS
Volume of
# incidental # purposeful
conversations conversations conversations
0.681
(0.328)
[0.0380]
0.888
(0.377)
[0.0185]
-1.720
(0.546)
[0.00164]

0.464
(0.270)
[0.0862]
0.617
(0.338)
[0.0679]
-1.236
(0.456)
[0.00672]

0.217
(0.107)
[0.0430]
0.271
(0.141)
[0.0540]
-0.485
(0.199)
[0.0151]

1,068
0.651
0.00478
0.0191

1,068
0.514
0.0145
0.0305

1,068
0.137
0.0846
0.0759

Notes: All columns control for randomization strata (subdistrict) fixed effects. They also control for date and time of entry into the village, caste
category of the treatment hamlet and distance from the village to an urban center. Respondent-level controls include age, gender, literacy and
potential seed status. Only outcomes from intended treatment hamlets
are used. CK, Broadcast and BC×CK are instrumented with CK in intended hamlet, Broadcast in intended hamlet and BC×CK in intended
hamlet. Standard errors (clustered at the village-level) are reported in
parentheses and p-values are reported in brackets.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

66

Table J.2. Knowledge and decision-making

VARIABLES
CK

Broadcast

BC × CK

Observations
Seed, No CK Mean
CK + BC × CK = 0 p-val
BC + BC × CK = 0 p-val

(1)
(2)
IV
IV
OLS
OLS
Knowledge Error Chose 500
-0.0427
(0.0127)
[0.000804]
-0.0327
(0.0147)
[0.0261]
0.0639
(0.0195)
[0.00107]

0.0459
(0.0225)
[0.0409]
0.0653
(0.0277)
[0.0183]
-0.110
(0.0396)
[0.00560]

1,073
0.436
0.128
0.00887

1,057
0.0557
0.0361
0.0844

Notes: All columns control for randomization strata (subdistrict) fixed effects. They also control for date and time
of entry into the village, caste category of the treatment
hamlet and distance from the village to an urban center.
Respondent-level controls include age, gender, literacy and
potential seed status. CK, Broadcast and BC×CK are
instrumented with CK in intended hamlet, Broadcast in
intended hamlet and BC×CK in intended hamlet. Only
outcomes from intended treatment hamlets are used. CK,
Broadcast and BC×CK are instrumented with CK in intended hamlet, Broadcast in intended hamlet and BC×CK
in intended hamlet. Standard errors (clustered at the
village-level) are reported in parentheses and p-values are
reported in brackets.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

67

Appendix K. Dropping villages from new subdistrict
From our original sample we added 16 new villages from a new subdistrict. Unfortunately, the reassignment was not randomly done, which we discuss at length in
Online Appendix L. To deal with this, here we repeat our main results dropping the
set of 16 villages that were assigned a new subidstrict. Tables K.1 and K.2 show that
all of our main results go through.
Table K.1. Engagement in social learning

VARIABLES
CK

Broadcast

Broadcast × CK

Observations
Seed, No CK Mean
CK + BC × CK = 0 p-val
BC + BC × CK = 0 p-val

(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
OLS
OLS
Volume of
# incidental # purposeful
conversations conversations conversations
0.602
(0.333)
[0.0722]
0.689
(0.364)
[0.0601]
-1.445
(0.539)
[0.00807]

0.401
(0.275)
[0.147]
0.495
(0.327)
[0.131]
-1.065
(0.450)
[0.0191]

0.201
(0.111)
[0.0703]
0.193
(0.132)
[0.146]
-0.380
(0.193)
[0.0499]

1,020
0.685
0.0224
0.0387

1,020
0.536
0.0332
0.0535

1,020
0.150
0.248
0.128

Notes: All columns control for randomization strata (subdistrict) fixed
effects. They also control for date and time of entry into the village,
caste category of the treatment hamlet and distance from the village to
an urban center. Respondent-level controls include age, gender, literacy
and potential seed status. Villages from newly added strata are not included in this sample. Standard errors (clustered at the village-level) are
reported in parentheses and p-values are reported in brackets.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

68

Table K.2. Knowledge and decision-making

VARIABLES
CK

Broadcast

Broadcast × CK

Observations
Seed, No CK Mean
CK + BC × CK = 0 p-val
BC + BC × CK = 0 p-val

(1)
(2)
OLS
OLS
Knowledge Error Chose 500
-0.0372
(0.0130)
[0.00474]
-0.0273
(0.0145)
[0.0608]
0.0539
(0.0194)
[0.00589]

0.0529
(0.0235)
[0.0256]
0.0734
(0.0275)
[0.00839]
-0.116
(0.0395)
[0.00360]

1,024
0.438
0.228
0.0281

1,009
0.0534
0.0366
0.0947

Notes: All columns control for randomization strata (subdistrict) fixed effects. They also control for date and time
of entry into the village, caste category of the treatment
hamlet and distance from the village to an urban center.
Respondent-level controls include age, gender, literacy and
potential seed status. Villages from newly added strata are
not included in this sample. Standard errors (clustered at
the village-level) are reported in parentheses and p-values
are reported in brackets.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

69

Appendix L. Status Quo Appendix
We also attempted to get 30 villages of data where we did not intervene whatsoever
and instead only collected endline data. We call these the “status quo” villages.
Unfortunately, these villages are not entirely comparable to our core set. “Status quo”
villages are considerably more likely to be peri-urban/neighboring a city, larger in size,
more educated, and due to survey logistics were surveyed much closer to the deadline.
This was due to the following implementation failures: (1) mechanically, survey teams
were less familiar with the “status quo” villages because no treatment was delivered,
and unfortunately, they went to these villages after intervention villages. This both
pushed the visits closer to the deadline and later in any given day; (2) a share of
initially selected “status quo” villages were dropped and the replacements were not
randomly drawn from a list of a villages in a subdistrict, placing them city-adjacent;
(3) there was geographic imbalance in the initial randomization between “status quo”
and intervention villages. Therefore, we do not include these along with the analysis.
We can include “status quo” in a regression analysis to compare it to our other
treatments, but we need to keep in mind that this is observational, and relies on
controlling for the distribution of distance from cities, survey timing, etc. That means
when we compare to “status quo” we should interpret it with caution. When we do
this, we find suggestive evidence that the number of conversations between “status
quo” villages and (Seed, No CK) is similar, while (Seed, CK) exceeds “status quo”.
Our information and choice analysis have commensurate estimates, but results are
noisier.
Recall that the goal of the paper is to understand how changes to the seeding
structure affect endogenous participation and subsequent knowledge and choice. The
“status quo” treatment cell is unnecessary for accomplishing this.
We begin by looking at the distance distributions for the “status quo” and intervention villages. Figure L.1, Panels A, B, and C present coefficients from a quantile
regression of distance from urban center against “status quo”, conditional on caste
of the hamlet. Panel A conditions on caste, and Panels B and C consider only data
from GOBC and SC/ST, respectively. We see that “status quo” hamlets are much
more likely to be considerably closer to an urban center particularly in the tail of the
distribution.

70

25000
0
-25000
-50000

Distance to urban center (in metres)

50000

WHEN LESS IS MORE

0

20

40

60

80

100

Quantile

50000
25000
0
-50000

-25000

Distance to urban center (in metres)

25000
0
-25000
-50000

Distance to urban center (in metres)

50000

(a) Controlling for hamlet caste

0

20

40

60

80

Quantile

(b) Only General caste hamlets

100

0

20

40

60
Quantile

(c) Only SC/ST hamlets

Figure L.1. Distance to urban center: status quo vs. treated

80

100

Table L.1. Imbalance: status quo vs. treated

VARIABLES
Control

Observations
Treated Mean

(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
OLS
OLS
Beyond 40kms
Within 5kms Standardized
of urban center or urban center entry time
-0.106
(0.0508)
[0.0380]

0.137
(0.105)
[0.193]

0.312
(0.175)
[0.0764]

1,242
0.166

1,242
0.345

1,248
-0.0539

(4)
OLS
Survey
day

(5)
OLS
New
strata

(6)
OLS
Female

(7)
OLS

(8)
OLS
Has
Literate bank account

0.214
0.0488 -0.0223 -0.0349
(0.109) (0.0601) (0.0574) (0.0427)
[0.0511] [0.417]
[0.699]
[0.414]
1,241
3.660

1,248
0.0536

1,248
0.323

1,209
0.800

(9)
OLS
Age

(10)
(11)
OLS
OLS
Surveyed Surveyed
seed
seed

-0.0101
(0.0409)
[0.805]

0.937
(0.972)
[0.336]

0.0326
(0.0230)
[0.158]

0.0232
(0.0104)
[0.0266]

1,244
0.890

1,239
39.18

1,248
0.0518

1,248
0

Notes: Columns (1) and (2) are covariates describing distance from the village to an urban center. Column (10) is a dummy for if respondent was a potential seed. Column (11) is a dummy for if respondent was a potential controlling for if the household being surveyed was a potential seed household.
Standard errors (clustered at the village-level) are reported in parentheses and p-values are reported in brackets.

WHEN LESS IS MORE
71

WHEN LESS IS MORE

72

Table L.1 presents information analogous to our prior balance table, to show that
“status quo” is often imbalanced. Column 1 shows that these villages are much less
likely to be very rural, defined as beyond 40km from the nearest city: 6% instead of
16% (p = 0.038). Column 2 shows that these villages are 13.7pp likely to be periurban, within 5km of a city (p = 0.193). These distance imbalances come from several
issues. In the original randomization, we were unlucky and had some imbalance. This
was compounded by the “status quo” villages not being drawn randomly from a list of
villages in the replacement subdistrict (10% of the sample fall into this category and
were all within the 61th percentile of distance to an urban center in the treatment
distance distribution).
Column 3 and 4 look at time of entry. We see that they were much more likely
to be visited later in the day (0.312 standard deviations later, p = 0.076) and later
during the study period (0.2 days later, p = 0.05). The time of day matters because
it can affect the composition of which members of which households are home (for
instance whether they are working in the field or in town or are home). Furthermore,
status quo villages are much more likely to be done about half a day later than the
treatment villages.
Columns 5 - 9 show no detectable difference in terms of likelihood of being replaced,
a female subject being surveyed, a literate subject being surveyed, the subject having
a bank account, nor age. Columns 10 and 11 do show that the respondent is more
likely to be a seed, and conditional on interviewing a seed household, the seed himself
is more likely to be interviewed.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

73

Table L.2. Experiment Outcomes: status quo vs. treated

VARIABLES
Seed

Seed × CK

Broadcast

Broadcast × CK

Observations
Status Quo Mean
Seed + Seed × CK = 0 pval
BC + BC × CK = Seed + Seed × CK

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
Volume of
# incidental # purposeful
conversations conversations conversations Knowledge error Chose 500
0.00619
(0.455)
[0.989]
0.688
(0.345)
[0.0471]
0.519
(0.523)
[0.323]
-0.854
(0.442)
[0.0547]

0.0483
(0.409)
[0.906]
0.342
(0.276)
[0.216]
0.352
(0.479)
[0.464]
-0.621
(0.408)
[0.130]

-0.0421
(0.134)
[0.753]
0.346
(0.125)
[0.00600]
0.167
(0.157)
[0.289]
-0.233
(0.159)
[0.144]

0.0202
(0.0183)
[0.272]
-0.0303
(0.0146)
[0.0392]
-0.00244
(0.0160)
[0.879]
0.0144
(0.0155)
[0.354]

-0.0115
(0.0335)
[0.732]
0.0399
(0.0296)
[0.180]
0.0584
(0.0306)
[0.0577]
-0.0421
(0.0290)
[0.149]

1,190
1.116
0.128
0.00294

1,190
0.939
0.325
0.0167

1,190
0.177
0.0231
0.00576

1,194
0.412
0.478
0.119

1,179
0.0793
0.370
0.725

Notes: All columns control for randomization strata (subdistrict) fixed effects. They also control for date and time
of entry into the village, caste category of the treatment hamlet and distance from the village to an urban center.
Respondent-level controls include age, gender, literacy and potential seed status. Standard errors (clustered at the
village-level) are reported in parentheses and p-values are reported in brackets.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

74

Against this backdrop, Table L.2 presents the main regressions of our paper, bringing in the status quo villages as well, as the omitted category. We are controlling
for entry time, survey date, flexibly for distance, caste of hamlet, whether it was
replaced, and subdistrict fixed effects. We find similar results to our main results.
In column 1 we look at total volume of conversations. As one would have thought,
(Seed, No CK) is not appreciably different from status quo, since we only handed
out 5 pamphlets and there was no common knowledge of this. Meanwhile, (Seed,
CK) is statistically distinguishable from (Seed, No CK), and corresponds to a 0.688
increase in the number of people spoken to relative to status quo (p = 0.128). We
see that going from status quo to (Broadcast, No CK) leads to a large increase in the
number of people spoken to, though this is not statistically distinguishable from zero
(p = 0.323). However, we can precisely say that adding common knowledge to broadcast reduces the conversation rate relative to (Broadcast, No CK) (p = 0.055). And
we also see that conditional on common knowledge, going from seeding to broadcast
reduces conversations (p = 0.003). These same patterns largely hold in columns 2
and 3 across incidental and purposeful conversations, as well as in columns 4 and 5
across knowledge and choice.
Taken together, the evidence suggests that when controlling for sources of imbalance and failures in execution, status quo mostly behaves like (Seed, No CK), whereas
(Seed, CK) and (Broadcast, No CK) perform better on conversation and choice metrics.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

75

Appendix M. Attrition
Table M.1 presents p-values from a regression at the village level, among the 237
villages in our baseline, of whether a village dropped out of the study before endline
on treatment assignment. We conduct all pairwise comparisons among (Seed, No
CK), (Seed, CK), (Broadcast, No CK), (Broadcast, CK), and Status Quo. We find
there is no differential attrition of village by treatment assignment. The attrition
rates respectively are 7.4%, 5.66%, 5.77%, 2.1%, and 6.25%.
Table M.1. Attrition
SNCK - SCK SNCK - BNCK
.72

.74

SNCK - BCK

SCK - BNCK

SCK - BCK

BNCK - BCK

SNCK - SQ

SCK - SQ

BNCK - SQ

BCK - SQ

.2

.98

.35

.34

.91

.84

.93

.39

Notes: p-values listed from pairwise comparisons of attrition rates.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

76

Appendix N. Effect on Joint Distribution of Conversations and
Information Quality
Here we look at how the joint distribution of conversations and information quality
move. Table N.1 presents multinomial logistic regressions. In column 1, the outcome
variable takes on values of “Conversations and High Knowledge”, “Conversations and
Low Knowledge,” “No Conversations and High Knowledge,” and “No Conversations
and Low Knowledge”. Therefore we look at whether as we move across treatments,
for instance from (Seed, No CK) to (Seed, CK), whether the mass moves towards the
joint outcome of both conversations going up and quality of information going up.
This provides suggestive evidence consistent with social learning. Column 2 repeats
the exercise but where information quality in this case is measured by whether the
respondent chose the Rs. 500 note. Figure N.1 presents the same results with raw
data.
We find that going from (Seed, No CK) to (Seed, CK) leads to a large increase in the
mass of respondents who both have more conversations and have higher information
quality (measured by knowledge and choice). The same is the case when comparing
(Seed, No CK) to (Broadcast, No CK). However, we see that (Broadcast, No CK) is
differentially less likely to both increase knowledge and conversations together, and
more likely to push mass into the no conversations cells. This is consistent with a
story wherein (Seed, CK) and (Broadcast, No CK) both encourage engagement in
social learning whereas (Broadcast, No CK) discourages social learning.

WHEN LESS IS MORE

77

Table N.1. Joint distribution of conversations and information quality
(1)
Knowledge

(2)
Rs. 500

1.603
(0.330)
[1.18e-06]
1.648
(0.416)
[7.57e-05]
-2.351
(0.552)
[2.02e-05]

1.682
(0.799)
[0.0352]
1.963
(0.867)
[0.0236]
-2.858
(1.043)
[0.00614]

1.190
(0.422)
[0.00480]
1.114
(0.474)
[0.0188]
-2.281
(0.667)
[0.000622]

1.052
(0.261)
[5.71e-05]
1.011
(0.296)
[0.000640]
-1.661
(0.405)
[4.06e-05]

0.775
(0.279)
[0.00542]
0.889
(0.326)
[0.00634]
-1.292
(0.439)
[0.00324]

0.350
(0.362)
[0.333]
0.693
(0.358)
[0.0530]
-0.791
(0.532)
[0.137]

1,082
0.115
0.0564
0.0253
0.0113
0.130
0.138

1,067
0.0342
0.125
0.0503
0.0148
0.288
0.796

Convo Knowledge
CK

Broadcast

Broadcast × CK

Convo NoKnowledge
CK

Broadcast

Broadcast × CK

NoConvo Knowledge
CK

Broadcast

Broadcast × CK

Observations
Convo, Knowledge: CK + BC × CK = 0 p-val
Convo, Knowledge: BC + BC × CK = 0 p-val
Convo, No Knowledge: CK + BC × CK = 0 p-val
Convo, No Knowledge: BC + BC × CK = 0 p-val
No Convo, Knowledge: CK + BC × CK = 0 p-val
No Convo, Knowledge: BC + BC × CK = 0 p-val

Notes: The table presents marginal effects from a multinomial regression on
treatment. In each column the outcome variable consists of whether or not
the participant had conversations about demonetization with a measure of
information quality. In column 1 this measure is whether the participant has
above average knowledge on our test. In column 2 this is whether the participant selected the Rs. 50 note. Standard errors (clustered at the villagelevel) are reported in parentheses and p-values are reported in brackets.

78

0

0

.1

.2

.2

.4

.3

.6

.4

.5

.8

WHEN LESS IS MORE

Broadcast, CK

Broadcast, No CK

Seed, CK

More Conv, More Know.
No Conv., More Know.
(a) Knowledge

Seed, No CK

More Conv., Less Know.
No Conv., Less Know.

Broadcast, CK

Broadcast, No CK

More Conv, Choose Rs. 500
No Conv., Choose Rs. 500

Seed, CK

Seed, No CK

More Conv., Not Choose Rs. 500
No Conv., Not Choose Rs. 500

(b) Choice of Rs. 500

Figure N.1. Joint distribution of conversations and information quality

