                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               SELECTION VERSUS TALENT EFFECTS ON FIRM VALUE

                                        Briana Chang
                                        Harrison Hong

                                     Working Paper 24672
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24672


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2018




We thank Toni Whited (Editor) and an anonymous referee for many helpful comments. We are
also extremely grateful to Jeffrey Kubik for many helpful comments and to Jay Ritter for
providing the IPO underpricing data. We also thank Bernard Salanie, Pierre-André Chiappori, Raj
Iyer, Antoinette Schoar, Marcin Kacperczyk, Pengjie Gao, Bruno Biais, Doug Diamond, Eugene
Fama, Diego Garcia, Vish Vishwanathan, Sheridan Titman, Laura Starks and seminar participants
at Chicago Booth Business School, Imperial University, Gerzensee Corporate Finance
Conference, Nanyang Technological University, AFA 2017, Conference on Finance and
Accounting, University of Wisconsin, University of Texas at Austin and Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology for helpful suggestions. This paper subsumes our earlier work
circulated as "Assignment of Stock Market Coverage". The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Briana Chang and Harrison Hong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Selection versus Talent Effects on Firm Value
Briana Chang and Harrison Hong
NBER Working Paper No. 24672
May 2018
JEL No. G20,G24,G30,G34

                                         ABSTRACT

Measuring the value of labor-market hires for stock prices, be it underwriters when firms go
public (IPOs) or chief executive officers (CEOs), is difficult due to selection. Opaque firms with
higher costs of capital benefit more from prestigious underwriters, while productive firms benefit
more from talented CEOs. Using assignment models, we show that the importance of talent (or
agent heterogeneity) relative to selection (or firm heterogeneity) is measured by wage increases
across agents of different compensation ranks divided by changes in output across their firms.
The median of this ratio is 0.5% for underwriters and 2% for CEOs.


Briana Chang
Department of Finance, Investment and Banking
University of Wisconsin - Madison
bchang@bus.wisc.edu

Harrison Hong
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1022 International Affairs Building
Mail Code 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
hh2679@columbia.edu
1.       Introduction

Measuring the value of labor market hires for stock prices is a fundamental question in
financial economics. Two labor markets are particularly important and widely studied. The
first is the market for underwriters when firms issue equity. Firms compete and spend
significant resources to hire reputable underwriters (typically investment banks with track
records of successful placements) for their initial public offerings (IPOs) so as to alleviate
adverse selection (see, e.g., Allen and Faulhaber (1989), Carter and Manaster (1990), Welch
(1989)). Measuring the value of prestigious underwriters is a long-standing goal in the IPO
literature (for reviews, see, e.g., Ritter and Welch (2002)). The second is the market for
Chief Executive Officers (CEOs). There is a large literature on the value-added of a CEO
(see, e.g., Bertrand and Schoar (2003)). In particular, valuing different attributes of a CEO,
be it intelligence or other personality attributes, remains a widely researched topic (see, e.g.,
Kaplan et al. (2012), Graham et al. (2013)).1
      Regardless of the situation, quantifying these hires’ impact on stock prices is difficult
due to selection or sorting in competitive labor markets (Becker (1973) and Rosen (1974)).
Firms that hire better underwriters might have more opacity or information asymmetry
and higher costs of capital to begin with. So correlating a firm’s stock valuation with the
status of the underwriter it hired is potentially problematic due to this selection. Indeed,
recent empirical work suggests that such competitive selection effects between firms and
underwriters (Fernando et al. (2005), Akkus et al. (2013)) might inform the long-running
debate on IPO underpricing, the first-day return thought to compensate investors for adverse
selection. Prestigious underwriters were associated (correlated) with less underpricing before
the Internet period but became associated with more underpricing during and after the
Internet period. This change in the sign of this underpricing-prestige correlation remains
puzzling. Selection effects arising from assortative matching in a competitive labor market
  1
    Due to CEO wage inequality, this question continues to be important in the popular press and across
various disciplines such as strategy and management (see, e.g., "Do CEOs Matter?" by The Atlantic in the
June 2009 issue which surveyed a variety of contrasting views of whether CEOs add any value.).


                                                   1
for CEO talent are also problematic. Terviö (2008) and Gabaix and Landier (2008) point
to a positive assortative matching between managerial talent and firm productivity due to
complementarities in firm production functions.
   To understand the role of selection from the direct effect of agent talent, we develop
an assignment model where firms compete to hire a talented agent, be it an underwriter
or a CEO, to raise their stock valuations. Specifically, the value of the match depends
on the role of the agent in the asset market. In the labor market for underwriters when
firms go IPO, our asset market follows the classical IPO underpricing set-up (Rock (1986),
Benveniste and Wilhelm (1990), Habib and Ljungqvist (2001)), in which adverse selection
generates underpricing. More prestigious underwriters are assumed to be able to bring in
more uninformed investors and hence alleviate the need for underpricing. In the labor market
for CEOs, a talented CEO raises long-term fundamental value as in Terviö (2008) and Gabaix
and Landier (2008).
   We characterize the assignment equilibrium that maps (assigns) these multiple dimen-
sions of firms into agent talent and solve for the wage function and stock price. There are two
effects that shape the relationship between firm value, be it the underpricing or fundamental
value, and agent talent, be it a prestigious underwriter or a talented CEO. The first is the
"direct effect" of hiring a more talented agent: all else equal, a firm with a better agent
will have a lower cost of capital or higher value since the more prestigious underwriter will
bring more uninformed investors to the IPO or the more talented CEO will lead to a greater
increase in firm profitability. The second is the "selection effect". Firms with greater opacity
or more productivity benefit more and pay more for a better agent.
   The strength of the selection effect increases with heterogeneity across firms (be it opacity
or firm productivity) relative to the talent distribution of agents. For instance, if firm opacity
is tightly distributed in the population, the highly opaque firms still hire the most talented
agents and so the direct effect dominates and firms with better agents have lower costs of
capital. As dispersion of firm types increases this association flips signs from negative to


                                                2
positive; i.e. firms with better agents have higher costs of capital. This selection effect
can potentially explain the change in the underpricing-prestige relationship during Internet
period to the extent there is greater dispersion in firm opacity as young Internet firms with
little cashflows went IPO. In the labor market for CEOs, the selection effect driven by the
desire of firms with high fundamental value to hire talented CEOs gives rise to a positive
correlation between firm size and CEO talent.
       But dispersion in underlying opacity or productivity and heterogeneity in agent talent
are typically unobservable to the econometrician, which results in the challenge of separating
selection from talent effects. The key result of our paper is that we provide a decomposition
of these unobservable quantities using observable firm outcomes (underpricing or firm profit)
and agent wages.
       Since the most talented workers work for the firms with the most opacity or productivity
and make the most compensation, we can rank agents based on their wages. We show that
the relative strength of the talent effect (or agent heterogeneity) can then be measured by
the ratio of the change in wages across agents divided by the change in output (underpricing
or profit) of the firms that these agents work for. Intuitively, suppose that workers are
homogeneous in talent, then their wages will be similar and this ratio is close to zero. In the
other extreme, suppose firms are similar, then the change in wages and output move one for
one across agents of different percentiles, i.e. the ratio is close to 1. This ratio is invariant
to scale effects, that is if all firms become equally more opaque or productive, it would not
affect this ratio.
       Given that firm profits and wage distributions are often observable, empirical researchers
can use this decomposition to measure the relative strength of selection versus direct effects.2
We apply our decomposition to the IPO and CEO settings. The time variation in IPO un-
derpricing patterns has spawned competing explanations of selection effects versus structural
   2
    Adjusting for selection (see, e.g., Heckman (1977), Roberts and Whited (2012)) is empirically challeng-
ing since it generally requires instrumental variables for the selection equation. Moreover, important firm
characteristics that might drive the selection, such as investors’ information asymmetry or uncertainty, are
also unobservable to econometricians and at a minimum difficult to measure.


                                                     3
changes in underwriter technology or incentives (Loughran and Ritter (2002)). Using data
on IPO underpricing from 1990-2015, we find that the relative strength of talent or prestige
heterogeneity is for the median IPO in a typical year around 0.05% to 1%, a small fraction in
comparison to selection effects or firm heterogeneity. Moreover, we find a significant decline
in talent relative to selection effects from the early nineties into the dot-com period. That is,
the change in signs of underpricing and prestige is likely driven by the increasing importance
of selection effects due to time-variation in the heterogeneity of firm opacity.
       Scale effects have been argued to explain the rise of CEO wages since the 1980s. The
main test is to show that the increase in the average size of the firm in the stock market (i.e.
a scale effect) can explain the rise in CEO wages (Gabaix and Landier (2008)). But there is
debate on whether this coincident trend is causal as Frydman and Saks (2010) find that in
the pre-1980s period wages of CEOs did not rise even though the average size of the firm in
the stock market rose. One way to frame alternative explanations is the level of CEO wages
in assignment models increase with both firm and talent heterogeneity as well as the scale.
Since our decomposition is invariant to scale, we can use it to see if the rise of CEO wages
might also be due to changing heterogeneity.
       Using CEO wage data and firm value data from 1993-2014, we find that the relative
strength of talent effects is for the median firm in a typical year 2%. It peaks at 4% during
the Internet period, pointing to the importance of selection effects overall. We also find that
the relative strength of talent effects rose from the early nineties to the early 2000’s and has
declined subsequently. That is, the rise in CEO pay since the 1980s is not just simply due
to scale effects but also the changing composition of talent over the Internet period.3
       Finally, we show that this decomposition can be thought of as a diagnostic test of the
relative strength of talent versus selection effects in other labor markets such as venture
capitalists who can affect both fundamental value and underpricing, i.e. the cost of capital.
   3
    A simultaneous fall in the heterogeneity of talent effects along with an increase in scale effects during
the pre-1980s might then explain why the average firm size rose in this period but CEO wages did not as we
discuss in more detail below.



                                                     4
Notably Sørensen (2007) uses a structural model to point to the talent effects of venture
capitalists in improving firm fundamental value, while Megginson and Weiss (1991) point to
venture-capital backed IPOs having lower underpricing. A number of literatures in corporate
finance involving the effect of talent on firm value have evolved largely separately but they
are united, as we have hoped to show, in fundamental ways through the role of selection in
labor markets.
     Our paper proceeds as follows. We describe our assignment model in Section 2. We
provide the solution in Section 3. We derive the decomposition of talent versus selection
effects in the traditional multiplicative setting in Section 4. We provide some estimates of
this decomposition for IPO underpricing and CEO compensation in Section 5. We consider
more general settings in Section 6. We conclude in Section 7.



2.     Model

The model lasts for three dates. There is a unit measure of heterogeneous firms that issue
equity through the stock market. Firms can hire agents (e.g., underwriters or executives)
via a competitive labor market at date 0. These agents, who differ in their ability, affect the
share price of the firm at date 1. Finally, at date 2, the cash flow is realized, and all players
in the economy consume their realized gains.
     To proceed, we first introduce a general framework for the labor market. Firms, which
differ in multiple dimensions, choose the optimal agent to maximize the firm’s expected
payoff. They rationally anticipate how different agents affect their stock price at date 1. We
then specify the relationship between agents’ talents and share prices by considering two
classical models.
     Agents: There is a distribution of heterogeneous agents whose ability is indexed by
h ∈ H ≡ [hL , hU ]. Let GA (h) denote the talent distribution. This ability in the context of
underwriters is prestige bringing in more uninformed investors to an IPO. In the context of



                                               5
CEOs, this talent increases fundamental value.
   Firms: Each firm owns a risky project with capital stock k, which can be interpreted
as firm productivity or size. The payoff of the project for the firm with capital k, is given
by kθ, where θ is a firm-specific payoff with mean θ̂(h). The mean θ̂(h) aims to capture
firms’ long-term fundamental, which can potentially be affected by the type of agent a firm
hires. The riskiness of the project is indexed by σ. A firm originally owns (1 + ψ) measure of
shares and wants to raise capital by issuing one measure of its equity to investors at date 1.
In general, firms can differ in their size, volatility, or their proportion proportion of issued
shares. Let y ⊆ Rn denote the characteristics of a firm. The types of firms are distributed
according to a probability measure ν F on Y, which is assumed to be absolutely continuous
with respect to the Lebesgue measure.
   Labor Market: At date 0, each firm can hire at most one agent assuming it hires any at
all. The fee paid to the agent is denoted by ω(h), which will be determined competitively
in equilibrium, and is paid at the end-of-period. The end-of-period cash flows for firm y are
then the profit from its project minus the fee that it commits to pay: kθ − ω(h). All equity
holders are thus bearing the cost of fees.
   At date 0, given the fee required to hire agent ω(h), a firm of type y chooses the optimal
agent to maximize its expected payoff. Let p̃hy denote the realized share price at date 1 for
firm y if it hires agent h. Given that the firm is issuing one share, he receives the share price
                               
                              ψ
p̃hy at date 1, and retain 1+ψ    shares of the end-of-period profit, kθ − ω(h). The expected
profit of firm y who hires agent h is then given by

                                                              
                                                 ψ
                         U (y, h) = Eθ p̃hy +         (kθ − ω(h))                            (1)
                                                1+ψ

   The exact relationship between agents’ talents and share prices, p̃hy , depends on the
specified environment. Nevertheless, given the price function, the (unconditional) expected
                                                    h                 i
asset return for investors is given by R(y, h) ≡ Eθ kθ−ω(h)
                                                        1+ψ
                                                                − p̃ hy   . Thus, Equation (1)



                                               6
can be rewritten as
                                      n                        o
                            U (y, h) = k θ̂(h) − R(y, h) − ω(h) .                               (2)

   Thus, the agent can affect firms’ expected profit through two channels: The first term
reflects how talent affects the expected payoff (i.e., firms’ long-term fundamental). The
second term can be interpreted as the firm’s cost of capital, which depends on both the
firms’ characteristics and the talent effect. Hence, the firm’s expected profit when hiring
agent h can be conveniently rewritten as simply the value generated by the agent minus the
agent’s fee.
                                                                       ω(h)
   Note that, since the investors ultimately bear the hiring cost      1+ψ
                                                                              at the end-of-period,
such cost is reflected in the share price at period 1. This explains why, from a firm’s view
point, the total cost is simply the agent’s fee. To fix the ideas, we now consider two classical
applications to show how they can be nested in our setup:


Labor Market for Underwriters:             In the setting of Rock (1986), Benveniste and Wil-
helm (1990), and Habib and Ljungqvist (2001), the key friction is the asymmetric information
among investors, where informed investors know the quality of the firm, while uninformed
investors do not. As the winner’s curse increases in proportion to the fraction of informed
investors, so does the necessary amount of underpricing.
   The main value of the underwriters is to reduce the cost of capital by attracting unin-
formed investors. One can thus interpret agents as the underwriters in this setting, who
differ in terms of their ability to attract uninformed investors. Specifically, let β(h) denote
the fraction of uninformed investors that are attracted by underwriter h. We assume that
the higher is h, the more prestigious the underwriter, the higher fraction of investors will be
uninformed participating in the IPO: β 0 (h) > 0. We further set θ̂(h) = θ̄, which captures
the fact that underwriters do not affect the fundamental and thus only increase the value of
forms by reducing the cost of capital.
   Specifically, the payoff of the project is given by θ ∈ {θ̄ − σ, θ̄ + σ} with equal probability.


                                                7
Informed investors know the realized value of θ, but uninformed investors do not. For any
given fraction of uninformed investors, the price at which shares are sold to investors must
be such that uninformed investors expect to break even. The expression for the expected
                                                                                              4
return, which is interpreted as underpricing in the IPO literature, yields

                                                                          
                                                                      kσ       (1 − β(h))
                               U P (y, h) ≡ R(y, h) =                                     .                  (3)
                                                                     1+ψ       (1 + β(h))

                                        
             ∂U P (h,y)             kσ         2β 0 (h)
Note that       ∂h
                          =−       1+ψ       (1+β(h))2
                                                          < 0. Since a better (more prestigious) underwriter can
attract more uninformed investors, a better agent helps reduce the amount of underpricing
by more than a worse agent.


Labor Market for CEOs: In (Terviö (2008), Gabaix and Landier (2008)), the role of
CEO is to increase the firm’s fundamental. To capture this, it can be nested in our model by
assuming that (1) a better CEO increases the average payoff of the project, i.e., θ̂(h) = θ̄h,
and (2) a perfectly competitive and frictionless stock market. Thus, the share price is the
                                               h       i
expected fundamental value given by p̃hy = Eθ kθ−ω(h)
                                                  1+ψ
                                                         = kθ̄h−ω(h)
                                                              1+ψ
                                                                     .
      Given that the price is simply the fair value of the share, the expected return R(y, h) is
thus always zero. Hence, Equation (2) then collapses to the standard CEO setting, U (y, h) =
k θ̄h − ω(h), where a CEO only affects the firm’s fundamental.


Other Applications: Our uniform model can be further applied to other labor markets
as well, such as the labor market for venture capitalists. In particular, venture capitalists
may affect both the firm’s fundamental as well as the underpricing. In this case, one can
set U (y, h) = k θ̄h − U P (y, h) − ω(h). That is, both forces identified above will affect firms’
hiring decision.
      Equilibrium: Given any price function, the equilibrium in the labor market consists of
an assignment µ(y): Y → H ∪ {∅} and competitive fee for agents ω(h) : H → R+ such
  4
      See Appendix A.1 for detailed derivation.



                                                                8
that (1) the optimality conditions for both firms and agents are satisfied, i.e. given wage
ω(h), µ(y) is the type of agent that firm y optimally chooses to hire. That is, µ(y) ∈
arg maxh∈H∪{∅} U (y, h). And (2) the market-clearing condition holds for the labor market.



3.      Labor Market Hiring

Taking into account how the agent affects the price in the asset market, we now characterize
the assignment function and wage function. The surplus between firm y and agent h, which
is the sum of their payoff minus their outside option, yields


                          Ω(y, h) ≡ U (y, h) − U (y, ∅) + ω(h)
                                                  
                                  = k θ̂(h) − θ̂(∅) + R(y, ∅) − R(y, h),                      (4)


where ∅ denotes the case in which a firm hires no agent (i.e., the firm’s autarky value) and
the workers’ unemployed value is normalized to zero. The first two terms thus represent the
gain of firm y when it hires agent h relative to no hiring. The third term represents the
payoff of a worker, which is the fee. Thus, the surplus is simply the change in fundamental
plus the reduction in the cost of capital (relative to no hiring).
     Technically, given the multiple characteristics of a firm, our environment is a multidimensional-
to-one matching problem. As established in Chiappori et al. (2016), given our surplus func-
tion in (4) and that the measure of firms ν F is absolutely continuous with respect to the
Lebesgue measure, stable matching exists and the assignment function µ(y) is unique and
pure. That is, each firm hires a unique agent instead of using mixed strategies.


Sorting Proposition 1 first establishes the property of the assignment function in terms of
firms’ characteristics.

Proposition 1. In the IPO setting, all else equal, a firm with a riskier project (σ), greater
                                                                      1
productivity or size (k), and a higher proportion of issued shares ( 1+ψ ) hires a more talented

                                                9
agent. That is, µσ (k, ψ, σ) > 0, µk (k, ψ, σ) > 0 and µψ (k, ψ, σ) < 0. In the CEO market, a
more productive firm hires a more talented agent.

   These results can be seen from the firms’ optimization problem. Specifically, given that
all firms face the same cost function ω(h), a firm that has a higher marginal benefit for
talent must hire a better agent in equilibrium. For example, in the IPO setting, given the
underpricing expression in Equation (3), the added value of talent h for firm y yields

                                                        2β 0 (h)
                                                
                         ∂U (y, h)          kσ
                                   =                             − ωh (h).                (5)
                           ∂h              1+ψ       (1 + β(h))2

In other words, there is a complementarity between the prestige of an agent and firms’ scale
and riskiness. Thus, firms with a higher scale or more volatility benefit more from hiring
a prestigious underwriter. Similarly, as standard in the market for CEO (Terviö (2008),
Gabaix and Landier (2008)), there is complementarity between the size or productivity of
the firm and talent; hence, a more productive firm hires a better CEO.


Characterization Observe that, for the market for underwriters, Equation (5) suggests
that firms’ marginal value for hiring can be simply summarized by the one-dimensional index

                                                          
                                                      kσ
                                       a(y) =                  .                          (6)
                                                     1+ψ

Thus, two different firms will choose the same agent in equilibrium if they have same index
a(y). With this particular feature, the model can be solved similarly as in the standard
model with one-dimensional heterogeneity, where firms with a higher a is matched with a
more talented agent.
   In the market for CEO, the only firm heterogeneity is firm productivity or size. And,
a larger firm has a higher marginal value of hiring a more talent agent. That is, the one-
dimensional index for firm is given by a(y) = k.
   In both cases, the assignment function µ(y) must then satisfy the familiar market clearing

                                                 10
condition:
                                           GF (a(y)) = GA (µ(y)),                                         (7)

where GF (a) denotes the measure of firms with an index lower than a. Furthermore, as shown
in Terviö (2008), for any agent h, his marginal gain in equilibrium (represented by ωh (h)) is
his contribution to the surplus within the match, given his optimal assignment:


                                          ωh (h) = Ωh (µ−1 (h), h),                                       (8)

where µ−1 denotes the inverse of µ, representing the type of firm assigned to agent h. Note
that the continuity assumption is important for Equation (8). In a continuous model, all
agents and firms have arbitrarily close competitors. As a result, they do not earn rents over
their next best competitor.5
      More generally, the sorting can be multidimensional. For example, when venture capi-
talists affect both the firm’s fundamental as well as the cost of capital, the sorting can no
longer can be reduced to one-dimensional index. In Section 6, we provide an algorithm to
characterize the assignment function and wages when type spaces are multidimensional and
discuss its implications.



4.       Selection and Talent Effects in Multiplicative Setting

Given that firm value depends on both the characteristics of firms and talents, the existence
of sorting suggests that quantifying the impact of talent on firm value is fundamentally
difficult. Below, we consider an environment where the output of a firm is multiplicatively
separable in the characteristics of firms and agents, and establish how one can use both wage
and firm output information to disentangle these two effects.
  5
      In a discrete model, on the other hand, there would be a match-specific rent left for bargaining.




                                                      11
4.1.       Joint Effects on Firm Output

The output function for a firm (underpricing outcome for IPOs or fundamental value) de-
pends on the talent of the agent (underwriters or CEOs) can be written as V (a, b) = ab,
where a represents the aggregate index of a firm’s type and b represents the effective type of
agent. That is, b can be understood as a monotonically increasing function in agent’s ability
h (i.e., b = f (h), where f 0 (h) > 0).
       Let a[j] represent the jth percentile firm sorted based on the one-dimensional index a
and let b[i] represent the value generated by the ith percentile agent, where a0 [j] > 0 and
b0 [i] > 0.6 Due to sorting and labor market clearing in Equation (7), positive sorting implies
that an i-th percentile agent thus match with an i-th percentile firm: j ∗ (i) = i. Hence, the
output created by the ith percentile agent can be expressed as


                                     V [i] = a[j ∗ (i)]b[i] = a[i]b[i].                                (9)


       In our underpricing environment, for example, output is measured by underpricing V [i] =
−U P [i], where a[i] represents the i-th percentile firm sorted based on the one-dimensional
                                                                          
                                                                 1−β(h[i])
index of firm opaqueness given by Equation (6), and b[i] = − 1+β(h[i])       represents the value
generated by underwriter of prestige h[i]. In the standard CEO literature (e.g., Gabaix and
Landier (2008)), a[i] = k[i] represents the firm size and b[i] = θ̄h[i] represents the ability of
the ith percentile CEO.
       In either case, given that the output and wage depend on the characteristics of firms and
agents, it is thus difficult to tell whether the change in output/income is driven by either
talent or selection effects. Formally, V 0 [i] = a0 [i]b[i] + a[i]b0 [i], thus the percentage change of
   6
    As explained in Terviö (2008), a central feature of the assignment is that the characteristics a and b
are essentially ordinal. It is thus without loss of generality to consider a simple multiplicative function
V (a, b) = ab. Any separable function, for example, Aaγ b1−γ , can be nested in this expression.




                                                    12
output as function of the rank i yields

                                             V 0 [i]   a0 [i] b0 [i]
                                                     =       +       .                                   (10)
                                             V [i]     a[i]    b[i]

The first (second) term is the selection (talent) effect, which captures the characteristics of
firms (agents).7


4.2.       Decomposition

In either event, accurately assessing worker contribution to the surplus is challenging because
of selection effects. To separate selection from talent effects, we make use of the wage
distribution.
       Let ω(b) denote the wage schedule with respect to the effective type b. According to
Equation (8), the marginal wage increase for an agent with type b is given by his contribution
to the surplus within the match, given his optimal assignment. That is, ωb (b) = Ωb (µ−1 (b), b).
       The wage for the i-th percentile agent is thus given by ω[i] ≡ ω(b[i]). Given that the
optimal assignment for agent b[i] is the firm with index a[i] (i.e., µ−1 (b[i]) = a[i]), the slope
of the wage profile as a function of the i-th percentile agent can then be rewritten as


                           ω 0 [i] = ωb (b[i])b0 [i] = Ωb (a[i], b[i])b0 [i] = a[i]b0 [i].               (11)


       Recall that the surplus function defined in Equation (4) is given by the change in firm’s
output when the firm hire agent b relative to no hiring: Ω(a, b) = V (a, b) − V (a, ∅). Thus,
the last equality follows from the fact that Ωb (a, b) = Vb (a, b) = a.
       Observe that, unlike the change in the firm output V 0 [i] = a0 [i]b[i] + a[i]b0 [i], the wage
slope ω 0 [i] depends on the change in the characteristic of agent b0 [i] but not the change in
   7
     If agents and firms are matched randomly, then a[i], which represents the expected type of firm that
hires the ith agent, will be the same across all agents (i.e., a0 [i] = 0). In other words, the first term in
Equation (10) no longer exists. That is, the expected value generated by the ith agent is driven by the talent
effect only.



                                                        13
firm’s characteristic a0 [i]. The reason is that, in the competitive market, the slope of the
wage for worker i in equilibrium is pinned down to keep the firm a[i] from wanting to hire
the next best individual. This explains the economics behind Equation (11): the marginal
cost of hiring the ith agent is simply the marginal benefit of firm a[i].
   This observation thus implies that underlying heterogeneity of firms and talents will
affect these two variables in different ways. Specifically, the proportion driven by talent’s
heterogeneity can be measured by the ratio of the slope of the wage to the change in firms’
output:
                                                                              b0 [i]
                               ω 0 [i]       a[i]b0 [i]                       b[i]
                         φ[i] ≡ 0 = 0                         =      a0 [i]            b0 [i]
                                                                                                .   (12)
                               V [i]   a [i]b[i] + a[i]b0 [i]                  +
                                                                     a[i]              b[i]

   Since the talent (selection) effect is more important when talent’s (higher) heterogeneity
is higher, φ[i] thus measures the strength of the selection vs. talent effects, which can be seen
from Equation (12). One can see that φ[i] = 0 if and only if all workers are homogeneous
(i.e., b0 [i] = 0), and φ[i] = 1 if and only if all firms are homogeneous. The general relationship
is summarized by Proposition 2.

Proposition 2. The measurement φ[i] decreases with the strength of the selection effect
                                    a0 [i]
(i.e., the heterogeneity of firms   a[i]
                                           )   and increases with the talent effect ( i.e., heterogeneity
            b0 [i]
in agents   b[i]
                   )

This quantity is robust to how we specify the outside option of agents as long as it is constant
across agents. To the extent these outside options vary across agents, this would change the
slope of the wage function.
   It is this quantity that we will estimate in the data. Moreover, this ratio simply gives
us a sense of how important relatively are talent versus selection effects. Even if talent
heterogeneity is small, it can still give rise to large economic differences in output and wages
as we highlight below. Before we turn to implementing this decomposition, it is worth
highlighting what drives this quantity.



                                                       14
Determinants of the Relative Strength of Talent versus Selection Effects We now
formalize how the heterogeneity of the underlying distributions of firms and agents affect the
observable wages, output, and the strength of the selection effect. First of all, Proposition
2 immediately implies that the scaling effect of firms does not change the strength of the
selection.

Corollary 1. When all firms are scaled by some constant λ > 1, that is, ã[i] = λa[i], both
wage and output also change by the same multiple: ω̃[i] = λω[i] and Ṽ [i] = λV [i]. But the
strength of the selection effect (i.e., φ[i]) remains the same.

    Such an effect is considered in the CEO setting of Gabaix and Landier (2008), who
show that when all firms become bigger, the level of wage increases. Our result provides an
additional test for this hypothesis. If this were true, then the strength of the selection effect
(i.e., φ[i]) should stay constant.
    In the underpricing setting, on the other hand, this means that when all firms become
uniformly more opaque, underpricing is scaled up by the same constant. Intuitively, the
demand for prestige increases when all firms become more opaque. However, since the
increase is uniform across firms, it will not change the matching pattern. That is, all firms
match with exactly the same underwriter, but the matching surplus within each pair is
simply scaled up by the same constant λ.
    As a result, such a uniform change will not affect the strength of the selection effect.
Thus, our model predicts that the observable correlation between prestige and under-pricing
         U P 0 [i]
(i.e.,   U P [i]
                   )   must remain the same. In other words, the scaling effect cannot explain why
the sign of the underpricing-prestige correlation changed signs from negative pre-Internet to
positive during and after the Internet period.
    Hence, the change of the signs must be driven by the change of underlying distribution of
talents or firms, as it affects the strength of the selection effect. In particular, the strength
of the selection effect depends on a0 [i]. Intuitively, a steep a0 [i] means that an i-th quantile
firm has a higher a index relative to the competitor right below it. Similarly, the strength

                                                     15
of the direct effect depends on b0 [i]. As a result, which effect dominates crucially depends on
the ratio of these two, which can be mapped onto the ratio of the density function:


                                              a0 [i]   dGA (b[i])
                                                     =            .                                 (13)
                                              b0 [i]   dGF (a[i])

     A higher (lower) ratio means that firms are relatively dispersed (homogeneous) relative
to the talent distribution, resulting in a stronger (weaker) selection effect. For the sake of
illustration, consider a simple case where both firms and agents’ effective types (summarized
by a and b, respectively) follow a uniform distribution. This term is then a constant ratio
                                 a0 [i]       (aU −aL )
of the density function (i.e.,   b0 [i]
                                          =   (bU −bL )
                                                        ).   This shows transparently that the selection
effect is stronger whenever firms are dispersed relative to the talent. The same intuition
holds for more general distributions: for any given distribution of talent, the selection effect
is stronger when firms are more heterogeneous in the sense that there is a smaller mass for
a given a. The proposition below formalizes this effect.

Corollary 2. Consider two distributions, where the heterogeneity of firms is higher under
ã[i] in the sense that ã0 [i] ≥ a0 [i] for i and ã[1] = a[1]. For any a[i] ≥ 0 and b[i] ≥ 0, φ[i]
is lower (and thus selection effect is stronger) under ã[i]. On the other hand, an increase in
the heterogeneity of agents leads to a weaker selection effect and thus a higher φ[i].



5.     Estimates

The appealing part of this decomposition is that we do not need to measure underlying
firm and agent characteristics per se. By comparing the change in firm output and work
wages, we can deduce the relative strength of talent versus decomposition effects. This is
an alternative diagnostic test to the literature that tries to measure the sorting relationship
based on underlying firm and agent characteristics. In this section, we implement this
decomposition for IPO underpricing and CEO compensation. Since the data is better for
CEO compensation, we start with CEOs first and then consider IPO underpricing.

                                                        16
5.1.       Time Variation in CEO Wages

Implementing this decomposition for CEO compensation is relatively straightforward since
CEO wages are readily available. The data set with CEO compensation runs from 1993 to
2014. Data for CEO compensation typically covers firms in the S&P 1500, with less coverage
in the beginning of the sample and more at the end. Following the literature, we focus on
the top 1000 firms in terms of market capitalization (where capitalization includes market
equity plus book value of debt).
       The only key decision variable is what constitutes firm output, which can be measured
using net income, firm sales or even market capitalization. We focus on net income but results
are similar using other metrics. More specifically, for each firm/year observation, we average
a firm’s net income for the five previous years including the year of the observation.8 This
intertemporal smoothing reduces measurement errors as annual fluctuations in net income
might be due to idiosyncratic capital expensing or other accounting choices.
       In general it is hard to know exactly what is firm output in the context of assignment
models and hence any proxy we use is necessarily subject to measurement error. As a result
of this measurement error, one challenge of measuring φ for any given i-th percentile agent
is that the change in net income across agents might be close to zero or negative and hence
create ill-behaved estimates. With this caveat in mind, we propose a robust way of estimating
φt .
       We sort each year CEOs and the firms that hire them into decile bins based on compen-
sation ranks (n = 1 is the top compensation bin and n = 10 the bottom compensation bin).
We take the median compensation and median smoothed net income in each bin. We then
calculate ω 0 and V 0 across these decile bins and obtain

                                                ωt (n) − ωt (n + 1)
                                         φt =                       .
                                                Vt (n) − Vt (n + 1)
   8
     If the firm does not have five years of net income information, we use four years. If it does not have four
years, then we use three years.



                                                      17
In other words, we are shrinking compensation ω and V to the decile bins based on com-
pensation rank before calculating φt . It does not matter much whether we bin at deciles
or demi-deciles. An alternative which we have also tried is kernel smoothing of wage and
net income for each i-th percentile agent. This yields qualitatively similar results to this
decile-binning approach.
   There is debate on whether selection effects due to firm productivity and CEO talent
can explain the rise of CEO wages since the 1980s in the CEO literature. The main test
in the literature thus far is to show that the increase in the average size of the firm in the
stock market can explain the rise in CEO wages (Gabaix and Landier (2008)). But Frydman
and Saks (2010)) find that in the pre-1980s period wages of CEOs did not rise even though
the average size of the firm in the stock market rose. They point out concerns regarding
coincident trends. Alternative explanations such as managerial talent might also be part of
the story (see Frydman and Jenter (2010) for a review).
   Our decomposition offers an alternative test in Figure 1. In this figure, we plot the
median φ for each year along with bootstrap standard error bands for the 5-th and 95-th
percentiles. The standard error bands can be wide in some years but for most of the years,
we get a fairly sharp estimate of φ that is between 4% and 1%. The median estimate is 2%.
There does appear to be some trends. For instance, between 1997 and 2001, we see a near
doubling of our estimate of φ from 2% to nearly 4%. Whereas the 5-th percentile during
this sub-sample is around 1%, the 95-th rises to nearly 8%. That is, talent heterogeneity
or relative importance of talent effects seems to have nearly doubled during the Internet
boom of 1997-2001. But this is then followed by a steady drop in the importance of talent
effects post the Internet boom. In the recent period our estimates place talent effects at
around 1.5% with 5-th and 95-th confidence intervals of 1% and 3.5%, respectively. Our
decomposition suggests that part of the rise in CEO wages is due to time variation in talent
effects but clearly selection effects play a large role.
   Moreover, the coexistence of a scaling effect and a decrease in talent heterogeneity can


                                                18
result in an increase in firm value but the level of wage remains the same.9 To see this,
when all firms become larger, the level of all firm value increases. However, from the wage
Equation (8), a mean-preserving shrink in talent’s distribution decreases the wage slope. It
can then offset the scaling effect of firm size, leaving the wage function the same. Such a
scenario might then explain why the average firm size in the stock market rose pre-1980s
but CEO wages did not. We leave verifying this possibility for future research. We have
emphasized the time variation in φ but our analysis provides a first estimate of the levels of
φ. Our results show that the heterogeneity in firm is much higher than the one in talent.
However, a relative small change in talent can still have large effect on firm firm value, as
its impact will be amplified by firms’ characteristics as pointed out by Gabaix and Landier
(2008).


5.2.       Time Variation in IPO Underpricing-Prestige Relationship

We now implement our decomposition to understand time variation in the IPO underpricing-
prestige relationship. The stylized facts are well summarized in various review papers (see,
e.g. Ritter and Welch (2002), Loughran and Ritter (2002)). First, underpricing before the
Internet era of the late nineties averaged a few percent and firms that hired prestigious un-
derwriters had lower underpricing. Second, the underpricing became much larger after the
late nineties, averaging nearly 20% and coverage by a prestigious underwriter is associated
more underpricing. Explanations have typically centered on structural changes in firm ob-
jective functions, such as firms underpricing to benefit friends or family in the late nineties,
and changes in underwriter strategies, such as underpricing to pay buy-side clients.
       We use our model to examine the extent to which selection effects induced by competitive
sorting in the labor market for underwriters can account for these stylized facts. Given that
   9
      For example, consider that all firms are scaled up by λ > 1 (i.e., ã[i] = λa[i]).   Assume talents follow
uniform distribution U ∼ [h̄ − ∆    2 , h̄ +  ∆
                                              2 ] with    mean  h̄. Thus,  h[i] =  h̄ − ∆
                                                                                        2 + i∆. Suppose that the
dispersion of talent decreases ∆ ˜ = ∆ but the mean h̄ remains the same. This thus implies that the wage
                                    ´iλ             ´i
level remains the same as ω̃[i] = 0 ω̃ 0 [ĩ]dĩ = 0 λa[ĩ] ∆λ dĩ = ω[i]. However, the value of firm increases since
                    ∆
                         + i∆
                             
Ṽ [i] = λa[i] h̄ − 2λ      λ   = a[i](λ   − 1)h̄ + V [i] > V [i].


                                                         19
the Internet period produced a sizeable Internet (new technology) sector that had little
cashflows before going IPO, a plausible hypothesis is that the opacity (a) distribution most
likely has a higher mean, i.e. the average firm becomes more opaque, and also more dispersed
or heterogeneous. Indeed, as shown in Ritter and Welch (2002), the composition of firms
that go IPO changed during the Internet period. In particular, during this period, firms are
much younger and many of them have negative earnings, which thus leads to a higher level
of heterogeneity in opacity. While opacity is itself difficult to measure, we can evaluate the
importance of each of these changes to the firm distributions using our decomposition, i.e.
to estimate the φ.
   We follow Loughran and Ritter (2002) and IPO literature in using the IPO underpricing
from SDC Platinum from 1990 through 2015. There are several years during that period
when there are a very small number of IPOs, so we only include years when there are at least
100 IPOs. This gives us 18 years of IPOs. For each IPO in our sample, we can calculate the
underpricing for each IPO offering following the literature as:


    U nderpricing = (ClosingP riceof Of f ering − Of f erP rice) × N umberof Shares.


   In the IPO underpricing setting, to implement our decomposition, we ideally need the
underpricing data and the wages of security analysts working at the bank that the firm
hired for underwriting the IPO. While such detailed wage data are not readily available,
we can nonetheless gather financial analysts wages data for each year t using the American
Community Survey produced by the Census Bureau. We get information on the income of
analysts from the March supplements of the Current Population Survey. People sampled
in that supplement are asked to report their yearly income the previous calendar year. We
gather together the CPS data sets from 1991 to 2016. This gives us income information for
the years 1990 through 2015. The income variable we use is total personal wage and salary
income.



                                             20
   We limit our sample in three ways. First, we look at people classified as being in the
occupation "Securities and financial services sales occupations" using the 1990 Census oc-
cupation codes. Next, we look at only at men since we want to compare time trends over
time and do not want other trends in terms of men-women pay differentials influencing our
comparisons. Finally, we only look at observations that have income above the median for
the year. We think the analysts that deal in any way with IPOs would be at the upper half
of the income distribution, suggesting that we should not look below the median.
   With this sample, we collapse the data into quartiles each year. In contrast to the CEO
sample where we have more data in each cross-section, we have a smaller sample of wages
(around several hundred wages per year) and hence use quartiles to bin observations rather
than deciles. That is, we take the median total income of analysts by quartile for each year.
This gives us a data set with four observations each year. We can then use this data set to
calculate the ω 0 . That is, sorting on income quartile we calculate:


                     ω 0 = M edianIncome(n) − M edianIncome(n + 1),


where n corresponds to the income quartile. (Lower n is higher quartile.) We have also tried
smaller and larger binning groups. The primary difference is that bootstrap standard errors.
The median estimates are similar but the standard errors are the tightest when we bin by
quartiles.
   While we do not know the underwriters that they work for, we know from earlier work
that underwriters with high Carter and Manaster (1990) prestige rankings (i.e. bulge-bracket
banks like Goldman, JP Morgan, Morgan Stanley) pay higher wages that lower tiered firms
(Stickel (1992)). From data from Jay Ritter, we have a dataset that includes IPO underpric-
ing and the Carter-Manaster ranking of investment bank prestige. We then collapse the data
by Carter-Manaster rankings into quartiles by year. That is, for each year/Carter-Manaster
ranking quartile, we calculate the median U nderpricing of the IPOs in that bucket. With



                                              21
this data set, we can then calculate the change in the U nderpricing across Carter-Manaster
ranking quartiles. Then V 0 is:


                V 0 = M ediumU nderpricing(n) − M edianU nderpricing(n + 1),

where n corresponds to the Carter-Manaster quartile rank of the observation within the year
(lower n corresponds to higher Carter-Manaster quartile rank).
       We then calculate the median φ for each year along with the bootstrap standard error
bands. The graph of this ratio is presented below in Figure 2. The bootstrap standard
error bands at the 5-th and 95-th percentile can be quite wide in certain years. But they
are precise over the period of interest, during the 1997-2000 Internet period. Notice that
φ is around 0.5% before 1997. It then drops to close to zero in 2000. That is, during the
peak of the Internet period in 2000, φ is close to zero when underpricing is highest and
the correlation between underpricing and prestige becomes positive. So it is likely that the
flip in the sign of the IPO underpricing-prestige is associated with much lower talent effects
or equivalently, much larger selection effects.10 Right after the Internet boom, the relative
talent effect rises again. It then falls as we enter into the recent period of 2013-2015 when
there are again many new IPOs with social media.
       As in the CEO discussion, we have emphasized the time variation in φt . Our analysis
here, as in the CEO setting, gives a first estimate of the importance of selection effects.
While the proportion of talent effects is also small in this setting it does not mean that the
heterogeneity in talent cannot generate enormous differences in value as in the CEO context.
Moreover, our analysis focuses on just analyst wages but if wages for investment bankers were
  10
     To see why, according to Equation (10), by setting V [i] = −U P [i], the percentage change of underpricing
for the ith quantile underwriter yields:

                                      U P 0 [i]   a0 [i]    2β 0 (h[i])h0 [i]
                                                =        −                    .                           (14)
                                      U P [i]     a[i]     ((1 − β(h[i])2 )

Under competitive sorting, we have have a0 [i] > 0. And thus U P 0 [i] > 0 if the selection effect dominates
         0
(i.e., aa[i]
           [i]
               is large enough). On the other hand, without the sorting effect, underpricing is always negative
associated with prestige. To see this, under random matching a0 [i] = 0 and thus U P 0 [i] < 0.


                                                        22
available, this could also be used to re-estimate φ. Our qualitative conclusions are unlikely
to change since wages of bankers and analysts are both higher at higher Carter-Manaster
ranking firms.



6.      General Settings

More generally, the output function can be non-multiplicative and the sorting can be multi-
dimensional. Below, we highlight our prediction in a more general environment and discuss
how our measurements remain robust. For example, venture capitalists may affect both the
firm’s fundamental as well as the underpricing, so that we have

                                                      
                                                  kσ       (1 − β(h))
                        U (y, h) = k θ̄h −                            − ω(h).
                                                 1+ψ       (1 + β(h))

This is then an example where the output function is then non-multiplicative and the sorting
can no longer be reduced to one-dimensional index.


Characterization        In Appendix A.2, we thus provide an algorithm to characterize the
assignment function and wages when type spaces are multidimensional. Intuitively, similar
to one-dimensional assignment model, the equilibrium wage ω(h) must be such that it is
indeed optimal for firm y to hire agent µ(y). Thus, the wage schedule ω(h) together with the
assignment function µ(y) must be such that a firm’s first-order condition is satisfied: if firm
y chooses to match with agent µ(y) in equilibrium, then his marginal benefit of precision
must equal the marginal cost. As illustrated in Figure 3, each line represents the set of firms
such that, given the wage schedule, ωh (µ(y)) = Ωh (y, µ(y)).
     Furthermore, to make sure that the market-clearing condition is satisfied, ωh (h) must be
chosen so that the measure of firms below the line coincides with GA (h). That is, the wage
schedule must be constructed in a way so that the measure of firms that find a particular
talent type h too expensive coincides with the measure of agents below h. As long as this


                                                  23
condition is satisfied, Chiappori et al. (2016) establishes that the constructed algorithm
guarantees a stable matching equilibrium.11


Robustness           We now discuss how our measures change in the general setting. When firms’
types are multi-dimensional, there is no obvious ordering of the firms’ types. Thus, unlike
the one-dimensional case, firms can no longer be ranked by one index a. However, agents
can still be ranked by their skill index b[i]. So, the equilibrium solution still describes the
matching for any agent i. Specifically, when the characteristics of firms are m dimensional,
a[i] = (a1 [i], a2 [i], ..., am [i]) is now defined as the vector that describes the characteristics of
the firm that is matched with i-th percentile agent. The output of the firm associated with
i-th percentile agent is then given by V [i] = V (a[i], b[i]).
       Furthermore, analogous to Equation (11), in the multidimensional environment, the slope
of the wage schedule for the i-th percentile agent is his marginal contribution to the surplus
within the match: ω 0 [i] = Ωb (a[i], b[i])b0 [i], where the only difference is that a[i] is now a
vector. Given that Ωb (a, b) = Vb (a, b), φ[i] in the general setting thus becomes:



                                ω 0 [i]                 Vb (a[i], b[i])b0 [i]
                       φ[i] =           =                                                      .           (15)
                                V 0 [i]   Σm                     0                        0
                                           n=1 (Van (a[i], b[i])an [i]) + Vb (a[i], b[i])b [i]



       Similar to the one-dimensional sorting setting, this ratio captures the importance of talent
heterogeneity, as it increases with the marginal benefit of hiring the i-th agent relative to the
next best individual, captured by the term Vb (a[i], b[i])b0 [i]. On the other hand, the first term
in the denominator captures the effect of firms’ heterogeneity, which is now multidimensional.
Notice that the result for the separable one-dimensional case can be understood as a special
case of this general setting by setting m = 1 and Va1 (a[i], b[i]) = b[i] and Vb (a[i], b[i]) = a[i],
which gives the simpler expression in Equation (15). In other words, the φt measure even in
a general setting is a diagnostic of the relative strength of talent to selection effects.
  11
       Chiappori et al. (2016) refers this nested condition. See Appendix A.2 for a detailed discussion.


                                                          24
7.    Conclusion

Firms hire in labor markets, be it underwriters when going public or executives on an on-
going basis, to improve firm value. But assessing the value of these hires for stock prices
is challenging because of selection since more opaque firms with higher costs of capital and
lower valuations to begin with might hire better agents. By developing an assignment model,
where matching surpluses, firm valuation, and wages emerge from a stock-market equilib-
rium, we derive a decomposition of selection from the direct effect of agent talent. We find
that talent of underwriters and CEOs account for 0.5% and 2% of the heterogeneity in firm
values, respectively. We also use this decomposition to understand changes over time in
IPO underpricing and the surge in CEO wages since the 1980s. This decomposition is easy
to implement when there is wage and firm profit data and can potentially applied in many
other settings as a diagnostic test for selection versus talent effects.




                                               25
References
Akkus, O., J. A. Cookson, and A. Hortaçsu (2013). Assortative matching and reputation in
 the market for first issues. Ph. D. thesis, Working paper, Nathan Associates, Arlington,
 VA.

Allen, F. and G. R. Faulhaber (1989). Signalling by underpricing in the ipo market. Journal
  of Financial Economics 23 (2), 303–323.

Becker, G. S. (1973). A theory of marriage: Part i. Journal of Political Economy, 813–846.

Benveniste, L. M. and W. J. Wilhelm (1990). A comparative analysis of ipo proceeds under
  alternative regulatory environments. Journal of Financial Economics 28 (1-2), 173–207.

Bertrand, M. and A. Schoar (2003). Managing with style: The effect of managers on firm
  policies. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4), 1169–1208.

Carter, R. and S. Manaster (1990). Initial public offerings and underwriter reputation.
  Journal of Finance 45 (4), 1045–1067.

Chiappori, P.-A., R. J. McCann, and B. Pass (2016). Multidimensional matching. Technical
  report.

Fernando, C. S., V. A. Gatchev, and P. A. Spindt (2005). Wanna dance? how firms and
  underwriters choose each other. Journal of Finance 60 (5), 2437–2469.

Frydman, C. and D. Jenter (2010). Ceo compensation. Annual Review of Financial Eco-
  nomics 2 (1), 75–102.

Frydman, C. and R. E. Saks (2010). Executive compensation: A new view from a long-term
  perspective, 1936–2005. Review of Financial Studies 23 (5), 2099–2138.

Gabaix, X. and A. Landier (2008). Why has ceo pay increased so much? Quarterly Journal
 of Economics 123, 49–100.

Graham, J. R., C. R. Harvey, and M. Puri (2013). Managerial attitudes and corporate
  actions. Journal of Financial Economics 109 (1), 103–121.

Habib, M. A. and A. P. Ljungqvist (2001). Underpricing and entrepreneurial wealth losses
  in ipos: Theory and evidence. Review of Financial Studies 14 (2), 433–458.

Heckman, J. J. (1977). Sample selection bias as a specification error (with an application to
  the estimation of labor supply functions).


                                             26
Kaplan, S. N., M. M. Klebanov, and M. Sorensen (2012). Which ceo characteristics and
 abilities matter? Journal of Finance 67 (3), 973–1007.

Loughran, T. and J. R. Ritter (2002). Why has ipo underpricing changed over time?

Megginson, W. L. and K. A. Weiss (1991). Venture capitalist certification in initial public
 offerings. The Journal of Finance 46 (3), 879–903.

Milgrom, P. and I. Segal (2002). Envelope theorems for arbitrary choice sets. Economet-
 rica 70 (2), 583–601.

Ritter, J. R. and I. Welch (2002). A review of ipo activity, pricing, and allocations. ournal
  of Finance 57 (4), 1795–1828.

Roberts, M. R. and T. M. Whited (2012). Endogeneity in empirical corporate finance.

Rock, K. (1986). Why new issues are underpriced. Journal of Financial Economics 15 (1-2),
  187–212.

Rosen, S. (1974). Hedonic prices and implicit markets: product differentiation in pure
  competition. Journal of Political Economy 82 (1), 34–55.

Sørensen, M. (2007). How smart is smart money? a two-sided matching model of venture
  capital. Journal of Finance 62 (6), 2725–2762.

Stickel, S. E. (1992). Reputation and performance among security analysts. Journal of
  Finance 47 (5), 1811–1836.

Terviö, M. (2008). The difference that ceos make: An assignment model approach. American
  Economic Review , 642–668.

Welch, I. (1989). Seasoned offerings, imitation costs, and the underpricing of initial public
 offerings. Journal of Finance 44 (2), 421–449.




                                             27
A.      Appendix

A.1.     Detailed Derivation for Underpricing

For any given fraction of uninformed investors, the price at which shares are sold to investors
must be such that uninformed investors expect to break even on average. Thus p̃hy must
solve
                                                                                       
               1           k(θ̄ + σ) − ω(h)                1       k(θ̄ − σ) − ω(h)
            0 = β(h)                        − p̃hy       +                          − p̃hy .
               2                 1+ψ                       2             1+ψ

To interpret this break-even condition, if β(h) = 1, and all investors are uninformed, there is
no winner’s curse since the uninformed investor will with 50% chance get the asset when the
valuation is low and 50% chance get the asset when the valuation is high. But if β(h) < 1
and hence some fraction of the investors are informed, the informed investors will only buy
when the valuation is good. That is, from the viewpoint of an uninformed investors, when
the project has a high valuation, the probability that an order is filled is β(h) < 1. Hence,
the share price for firm y that hires an underwriter with ability h is then given by

                                                             
                                    k β(h)(θ̄ + σ) + (θ̄ − σ)    ω(h)
                           p̃hy   =                            −      .
                                       (1 + β(h))(1 + ψ)         1+ψ

This then gives us the expression in Equation (3).


A.2.     Characterization for Multidimensional Sorting

As discussed in Chiappori et al. (2016), when type spaces are multidimensional, it is generally
not possible to derive a closed-form solution for the assignment function. Nevertheless, one
can see that the characteristics of firms can be further reduced to aggregated indices in
our setting, thereby simplifying our characterization. Facing equilibrium fee ω(h), ωh (h)
represents the marginal cost of a particular precision from the view point of firms. From
the first-order condition, if firm y chooses to match with agent µ(y) in equilibrium, then his
marginal benefit of precision must equal the marginal cost. That is, Ωh (y, µ(y)) = ωh (µ(y)).

                                                 28
   In other words, once we have figured out the value of ωh (h), one can then find the set of
firms matched to agent h. Note that when firms differ in multiple dimensions, two different
types of firms may have the same marginal value of h. To facilitate the analysis, define the
set of firms y whose marginal benefit of h is given by a value of m :


                             Υ(h, m) ≡ {y ∈ Y | Ωh (y, h) = m} .


That is, if the marginal cost of hiring agent h is given by ωh (h), then Υ(h, ωh (h)) is the set
of firms matched to agent h.
   Clearly, ωh (h) is an equilibrium object that depends on the underlying distribution. We
now consider the following algorithm that allows us to construct an explicit solution for
this multi-dimensional environment. The basic idea of the equilibrium construction is the
following.
   First, for each h, we will need to choose some level m ∈ R that satisfies the following
condition:
                      Y (h, m) ≡ ν F ({y ∈ Y | Ωh (y, h) ≤ m}) = GA (h).                   (16)

By choosing m properly for each agent h, the measure of firms whose marginal benefit of
h is lower than m exactly coincides with the measure of agents below h. Intuitively, if m
were the price for ability h, all firms within (outside of) the set y ∈ Y (h, m) find this type
of agent to be too expensive (cheap).
   Choosing m for each h is thus as if we are choosing the price for any given ability.
Equation (16) requires that, in equilibrium, the price for any particular ability must be
chosen in a way so that the measure of firms that find this type of agent to be too expensive
exactly coincides the measure of agents below this agent.
   As established in Chiappori et al. (2016), this algorithm works only in the environment




                                              29
where the constructed ωh (h) in the above procedure satisfies the following nested condition:


                                Y (h, ωh (h)) ⊂ Y (h0 , ωh (h0 )) ∀h0 > h.                  (17)


The construction of the fee schedule is such that if a firm finds that hiring agent h is too
expensive, then it must find a better agent h0 > h to be too expensive as well.
   Observe that Condition (17) together with Condition (16) guarantee that (1) the set of
firms that found h to be too expensive are always matched to firms below agent h and (2) the
market clears in the sense that the measure that firms that hire agents below h coincides with
the measure of agents below h. As a result, the optimality condition of firms and market-
clearing condition are satisfied. The following Lemma summarizes the characterization.

Lemma 1. Let ωh (h) be the value that solves Y (h, ωh (h)) = GA (h). Under nested match-
ing (i.e., if condition (17) holds), the optimal assignment is characterized by µ−1 (h) =
Υ(h, ωh (h)).

Proof. By construction, Equations (16) and (17) guarantee that the market clearing condi-
tion is satisfied: the measure of agents below h is the same as the measure of firms that hire
agents whose precision is lower than h. We now examine firms’ optimality condition.
   Recall that Υ(h, ωh (h)) is the set of firms that are matched to agent h,


                          Υ(h, ωh (h)) ≡ {y ∈ Y | Ωh (y, h) = ωh (h)} .

Since U (y, h) = Ω(y, h)−ω(h), it thus shows that the FOC of firms is satisfied as Uh (y, µ(y)) =
Ωh (y, µ(y)) − ωh (µ(y)) = 0.
   We now show that µ(y) is indeed the maximum of U (y, h). Condition (17) suggests that,
for any h0 > µ(y), y ∈ Y (µ(y), ωh (µ(y)) ⊂ Y (h0 , ωh (h0 )). That is, the marginal cost of a
hiring a better agent h0 is too high:


                                    Ωh (y, h0 ) < ωh (h) ∀h0 > µ(y).

                                                   30
That is, U (y, h) decreases with h for h > µ(y). Similarly, hiring an agent with lower precision
is too cheap:
                                    Ωh (y, h0 ) > ωh (h) ∀h0 < µ(y).

Thus, U (y, h) increases with h for h < µ(y). Hence, the constructed µ(y) solves the firm’s
optimization problem.


A.3.     Omitted Proofs

A.3.1.   Proof for Proposition 1

                                                                                            1
Proof. From Equations (5), observe that Uh (k, ψ, σ, h) increases with k, σ, and           1+ψ
                                                                                               .   Ac-
cording to Milgrom and Segal (2002), µ(k, ψ, σ), the solution to maxh U (y, h), must increase
                  1
with k, σ, and   1+ψ
                     .   Since Uh (y, h) = Ωh (y, h) − ωh (h), this is equivalent to looking at the
complementarity of the surplus function, as is standard in matching models. Similarly, for
CEO case, Uh (k, h) increases with k. Thus, the firm with higher k will hire a more talented
CEO.


A.3.2.   Proof for Proposition 2

Proof. This follows immediately from Equation (12).


A.3.3.   Proof for Corollary 1
                                                                             ´
Proof. Given that ã[i] = λa[i], Ṽ [i] = ã[i]b[i] = λV [i] and ω̃[i] =         ã[j]b[j]dj = λω[i].
Furthermore, given that
                                        ã0 [i]   λa0 [i]   a0 [i]
                                                =         =        ,
                                        ã[i]     λa[i]     a[i]

according to Equation (12), φ̃[i] = φ[i] ∀i.




                                                    31
A.3.4.      Proof for Corollary 2

Proof. For a change in the distribution that implies a higher heterogeneity (i.e., a higher
a0 [i]) with the same maximum, it thus implies that ã[i] < a[i] ∀i < 1. And hence, for any
            ã0 [i]       ã0 [i]
a[i] ≥ 0,    ã[i]
                      >    ã[i]
                                  ,   and thus, by Proposition 2, a stronger selection effect (lower φ[i]).
                                                                              b0 [i]
Similarly, for any b[i] ≥ 0, an increase in b0 [i] leads to a higher          b[i]
                                                                                       and thus higher φ[i].




                                                            32
Figure 1: Proportion of Talent Effect (φ) for CEOs. Sample period: 1993-2014. Each year we place
CEOs and firms into decile bins based on CEO compensation. We take the median values for compensation
and net income within each decile bin. We then calculate φ defined as the change in wage divided by the
change in net income across bins. We report the median value of the φ’s for each year along with bootstrap
standard errors at the 5-th and 95-th percentiles.




                                                   33
                 .02
                 .01
                 0
                 −.01
                 −.02




                        1991   1993   1995     1997         1999   2004      2006    2013
                                                          Year

                                         Median                    95th Percentile
                                         5th Percentile




Figure 2: Proportion of Talent Effect (φ) for IPO Underpricing. Sample period: 1990-2015. Each
year we sort analysts into quartiles based on compensation. We take the median compensation of analysts
in each quartile and calculate the change in these medians across quartiles. Each year we sort IPOs into
quartiles based on Carter-Manaster rankings of the underwriters. We calculate the median IPO underpricing
for each quartile and the change in these medians across quartiles. We calculate φ by taking the ratio of
the changes in wages and changes in underpricing across quartiles. We report the median φ each year along
with bootstrap standard errors at the 5-th and 95-th percentiles.




                                                      34
Figure 3: Characterization for Multidimensional Sorting: Consider agents with ability hi , where
h3 > h2 > h1 and firms’ type are two-dimensional, summarized by two indices y = (a1 , a2 ). Assume that
Ω13 (a1 , a2 , h) > 0 and Ω23 (a1 , a2 , h) > 0, so firms with higher index a1 or a2 will hire a better agent. Each line
represents the set of firms y that hires agent hi . The construction of the wage schedule schedule ω(h) together
with the assignment function µ(y) must satisfy (1) firms’ optimality condition: Ωh (y, µ(y)) = ωh (µ(y)) for
any firm y, and (2) the market-clearing condition: the measure of firms below the indifferent set for agent
hi is equal to the measure of agents below hi .




                                                          35
