                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     FUNDING BREAKTHROUGH RESEARCH:
                PROMISES AND CHALLENGES OF THE “ARPA MODEL”

                                      Pierre Azoulay
                                        Erica Fuchs
                                      Anna Goldstein
                                      Michael Kearney

                                     Working Paper 24674
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24674


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2018




All four authors were involved in the National Academies review of ARPA-E, “An Assessment
of ARPA-E” (NRC 2017). Azoulay and Fuchs were Committee Members, and Goldstein and
Kearney were consultants to the Committee. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Pierre Azoulay, Erica Fuchs, Anna Goldstein, and Michael Kearney. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Funding Breakthrough Research: Promises and Challenges of the “ARPA Model”
Pierre Azoulay, Erica Fuchs, Anna Goldstein, and Michael Kearney
NBER Working Paper No. 24674
June 2018
JEL No. I23,O31,O32,Q55

                                         ABSTRACT

From its 1958 origin in defense, the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) model for
research funding has, in the last two decades, spread to other parts of the US federal government
with the goal of developing radically new technologies. In this paper, we propose that the key
elements of the ARPA model for research funding are: organizational flexibility on an
administrative level, and significant authority given to program directors to design programs,
select projects and actively manage projects. We identify the ARPA model’s domain as mission-
oriented research on nascent S-curves within an inefficient innovation system. Finally, we
describe some of the challenges to implementing the ARPA model, and we comment on the role
of ARPA in the landscape of research funding approaches.

Pierre Azoulay                                  Anna Goldstein
MIT Sloan School of Management                  Carnegie Institution for Science
100 Main Street, E62-487                        Department of Global Ecology
Cambridge, MA 02142                             apgoldst@gmail.com
and NBER
pazoulay@mit.edu

Erica Fuchs                                     Michael Kearney
Carnegie Mellon University                      MIT Sloan School of Management
Department of Engineering &                     100 Main Street, E62-463
Public Policy                                   Cambridge, MA 02142
Baker Hall 131E                                 mkearney@mit.edu
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
erhf@andrew.cmu.edu
   Introduction

   In October 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1 into low-Earth orbit, igniting both a

space race and an innovation race with the United States. The United States countered with the

Apollo Program and a focus on broader innovation efforts, particularly within the Department of

Defense (DOD). In 1958, the DOD launched the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) with

the goal of helping the United States avoid further technological surprises. Later renamed the

Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), the agency has grown to maintain an

annual budget of $3 billion for extramural research funding overseen by roughly 100 program

managers (Gallo 2018).

   DARPA is frequently heralded for its successes in funding high-risk, high-reward research. In

a commissioned report to celebrate its 50th anniversary, DARPA highlighted its impact on military

applications, such as missile defense and stealth technology, as well as on innovations that made

their way to consumer markets, including GPS, the Internet, and autonomous navigation (DARPA

2008). Historians have attributed to DARPA a role in a number of high-profile inventions, such as

the Internet (Newman 2002), the personal computer (Allan 2001), the laser (Bromberg 1991) and

Microsoft Windows (Fong 2001). Piggy-backing on these perceived successes, use of the ARPA

name has expanded to federal agencies outside of the DOD, to include HSARPA for Homeland

Security in 2002, IARPA for the intelligence agencies in 2006, and ARPA-E in the Department of

Energy (DOE) in 2009.

   Given DARPA’s high profile, in recent years, analysts have sought to codify the “ARPA model”

of innovation (Bonvillian 2006; Van Atta 2007), but empirical evaluation of the successes and

failures of the ARPA model remains elusive. One challenge for evaluating the ARPA model is the

incompatibility between traditional innovation metrics and the lofty goals of ARPA organizations,

e.g. “to make pivotal investments in breakthrough technologies” for DARPA,1 or “accelerating

transformational technological advances” for ARPA-E (110th Congress 2007). The returns to


   1
       https://www.darpa.mil/about-us/mission

                                                1
innovation are notoriously skew-distributed (Scherer and Harhoff 2000). For a program that

makes long-term and high-risk investments, many failures can be justified by a single success. The

rare nature of transformational outcomes handicaps formal program evaluation, which is geared

toward measuring short-term outputs like patents and publications, or even medium-term outputs

like commercialization activity. It is impossible to accurately measure the incidence of one-in-a-

thousand ideas, much less one-in-a-million ideas, on a timescale relevant to political decision-

making around program authorization. While DARPA has been lauded for significant

technological successes ex post (e.g. the internet, GPS, etc.), ARPA-E, a relatively young agency,

has yet to be associated with similar outsized wins, making the challenge of intermediate evaluation

more difficult.

   Nevertheless, the prospect of being able to orchestrate transformational innovation holds great

appeal in the US and across the world. The question for policymakers thus remains: should the

ARPA model be replicated, and if so, under what conditions? To investigate this question, we

provide a summary of how the ARPA model has been implemented and what factors may be

important for its success. Building on the National Academies’ recent assessment of ARPA-E

(NRC 2017), we focus on four defining characteristics of the ARPA model: (a) the flexible nature

of its organization, (b) the identification of “technological white space” and design of programs to

fill that void, (c) the discretion in selection of projects by program managers, and (d) the active

management of each project using specific technical milestones and time commitments.

   This paper proceeds as follows: Section 1 provides a history of (D)ARPA and its younger

siblings. Section 2 outlines the elements of the ARPA model in detail. Section 3 discusses what is

“ARPA-ble,” to help identify technological areas where the model might bear fruit. Section 4 draws

attention to several challenges for the model, and Section 5 concludes by placing ARPA-like

agencies in context of the larger research-funding ecosystem.




                                                 2
   1. History of (D)ARPA and Its Younger Siblings

   Since its inception in 1958 as ARPA, DARPA has had an amoeba-like ability to evolve with

new Directors in ever-changing political environments (Fuchs 2010). Defense analyst Richard Van

Atta writes, “There is not and should not be a singular answer on ‘what is DARPA’—and

if someone tells you that [there is], they don’t understand DARPA” (Fuchs 2010: Van Atta 2007).

At various times in DARPA’s history, the agency has had many overlapping areas of focus,

including broadly-defined basic research, defense applications with short-term milestones and

goals, economic competitiveness and local manufacturing capabilities. Here, we provide a brief

overview of this history, drawing primarily from work by Fuchs (2010), which offers a more

detailed narrative.

   ARPA was initially formed in response to the Soviet Union’s launch of Sputnik, a major step

forward for the United States’ Cold War adversary in the space race. As such, the core mission of

ARPA at inception was the prevention of technological surprises (NRC 1999). ARPA was initially

tasked with overseeing America’s burgeoning space program while the National Aeronautics and

Space Administration (NASA) was launched (Fuchs 2010). In 1960, with NASA up and running,

ARPA shifted its focus from space to high-risk military technology that was not garnering support

in the private sector, with the goal of transitioning the technologies from the lab to proof of concept

(Roland 2002; Fuchs 2010). As an independent entity within the Department of Defense, the

agency had to be mindful of the distribution of research and development efforts across the

military services. Focusing on earlier stage research enabled ARPA to avoid overlap with more

applied research and systems development.

   Over the course of the 1960s, ARPA developed a flat organizational architecture, staffed with

top-notch engineers and scientists from industry and academia (NRC 1999). Under Director Jack

Ruina, office directors and program managers operated with significant autonomy and were

encouraged to make use of available tools like “no-year money,” where the agency can reallocate

unobligated funds to a subsequent year, and unsolicited proposals (NRC 1999; Fuchs 2010). Staff


                                                  3
were empowered to build programs independently, and the agency’s direction was associated with

the personalities of these staffers and the vision set forth by the Director. During the Vietnam War,

however, research was redirected from high-risk, long-term research toward military applications

(Flamm 1987), and ARPA rebranded as Defense ARPA (DARPA) in 1972. Under President Nixon,

Congress required that all military funding have a “direct and apparent relationship to a specific

military function” (NRC 1999). With these shifts, the research portfolio at DARPA took on a

stricter mission orientation, which continued through the Directorship of George Heilmeier

(Roland 2002).

   In the decades after the Vietnam War, industrial competitiveness and dual-use technologies

were prominent in DARPA’s focus (Fuchs 2010). In 1987, with U.S. semiconductor manufacturers

planning to purchase the majority of their equipment from Japanese suppliers, 14 U.S.

semiconductor companies came together to create a not-for-profit venture, SEMATECH, to

improve domestic semiconductor manufacturing (Fuchs 2010). With semiconductor

manufacturing seen as vital to defense technology, the federal government appropriated $100M

annually for five years to match the industrial funding. The funding was channeled through

DARPA (NRC 1999). Between 1992 and 2000, (D)ARPA returned to having a greater focus on

early-stage research. From 1993 to 1996, the agency even briefly returned to the ARPA name,

before becoming DARPA once again (Fuchs 2010).

   During the George W. Bush Administration, the agency’s focus moved away from industrial

competitiveness and dual use technologies to center on mission-driven applied research. Tony

Tether took over as Director in 2001 and repositioned the agency to “bridge the gap” between

fundamental discovery and military use (Fuchs 2010). During this period, the proportion of

DARPA funding allocated toward academic researchers declined by 50 percent, though funding

levels for DARPA as a whole remained constant (Fuchs 2010; Lazowska and Patterson 2005;

Markoff 2005). In contrast to the discretion given to researchers in the 1990s, Tether increased

usage of timelines for project go-no-go milestones that, if unmet, resulted in the termination of

projects (Fuchs 2010).
                                                 4
   It was in this context that the ARPA model first appeared in other Departments of the federal

government. In 1998, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) launched the Advanced Research and

Development Activity (ARDA), which became the Disruptive Technologies Office (DTO) in 2006.

DTO was then combined with the newly created IARPA in 2007, with the goal of exploring

transformative technical breakthroughs for intelligence activities, including data collection,

analysis and computing. Similarly, the Department of Homeland Security launched HSARPA in

2002 to identify operational gaps that could be filled with technological advance within the

agencies of Homeland Security: U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Secret Service, and the Coast

Guard.

   In its 2007 report Rising Above the Gathering Storm, a committee of the National Academies

called for the creation of a DARPA-like agency within the Department of Energy (NRC 2007). In

the same year, the America COMPETES Act authorized the creation of ARPA-E, which was tasked

with “identifying and promoting revolutionary advances in fundamental science; translating

scientific discoveries and cutting-edge inventions into technological innovations; and accelerating

transformational technological advances in areas that industry itself is not likely to undertake

because of technical and financial uncertainty” (110th Congress 2007). ARPA-E received initial

funding in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, and has been in operation since.

   There have been four agencies to use the ARPA name (DARPA, IARPA, HSARPA and ARPA-

E). Others, such as the Advanced Technology Program (ATP) in the National Institute of

Standards and Technology (NIST), and Biomedical Advanced Research and Development

Authority (BARDA) in the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), have been inspired

by DARPA (Sen 2017). Of the ARPA agencies, DARPA has received by far the most attention, with

appearances in popular media such as Playboy Magazine and the television show “The West Wing”

(Fuchs 2010), Congressional testimony (Mowery 2006, Van Atta 2007), and recent books in the

popular press (Belfiore 2010, Jacobsen 2015, Weinberger 2017). More recently, ARPA-E has been

subject to scrutiny and empirical review by the National Academies (National Research Council

2017). In the next section, we focus on DARPA and ARPA-E as the two best-known
                                                5
implementations of the ARPA model. We identify common elements across the two that, together,

comprise the core of the “ARPA model.”



   2. Elements of the ARPA model

   Despite a great deal of commentary on DARPA, lack of access to internal archival data has

hampered efforts to study it empirically. One notable exception is the work of Roland and Shiman

(2002),2 who offer an industrial history of DARPA’s effort to develop machine intelligence under

the “Strategic Computing Initiative.” They emphasize both the agency’s positioning in the research

ecosystem—carrying military ideas to proof of concept that would be otherwise neglected—as well

as the program managers’ role as “connectors” in that ecosystem. Roland and Shiman are to our

knowledge the only academic researchers ever to receive internal access to DARPA’s archives.

Recent work by Goldstein and Kearney (2018a) on ARPA-E is to-date the only quantitative

analysis using internal program data from an ARPA agency.

   Others have leveraged oral histories and interviews with program managers combined with

external archival data to document the practices of ARPA agencies. Fuchs (2010) describes

DARPA’s function as “embedded network governance” based on the program manager’s

engineering of social networks in order to influence technology directions. Supplementing

interviews with invention disclosure data, Colatat (2015) finds that MIT investigators with DARPA

funding were more likely to form novel collaborations than those with funding from other

agencies. Sen (2017) finds that ARPA-like agencies see themselves as “islands” separated from

conventional operations as well as “bridges” between R&D activities and the broader industrial

context.

   Meanwhile, analysts and observers have persisted in the attempt to describe the key elements

of the ARPA model. Defense analyst Richard Van Atta, in his Congressional testimony on lessons

from DARPA for the establishment of ARPA-E, emphasizes that DARPA is “lean and agile, with a


   2
       For insights into this painful process, see the preface of Roland and Shiman (2002).

                                                           6
risk-taking culture” (2007). Bonvillian builds on Roland’s work, depicting DARPA as the heir to a

WWII model of “‘connected’ science, where technology breakthroughs at the fundamental science

stage were closely connected to the follow-on applied stages of development, prototyping and

production” (2009). Greenstein (2011), meanwhile, portrays DARPA as a kind of “skunk works,”

in which innovative projects are insulated from the routine operational concerns of the

organization.

    Much of the discussion about ARPA-like agencies relates to the role of the program manager.

DARPA has a reputation for its flexibility and speed, partially as a result of the forward-looking

and aggressive culture of program managers, often described as “100 geniuses connected by a travel

agent” (Bonvillian 2009). ARPA-E has likewise been described as cultivating an “innovative

startup-like culture” with energetic, highly-qualified program directors (Rohlfing, 2017).3 Van Atta

summed up the importance of the program manager in this way:

             The DARPA program manager is, in fact, the key. He or she is the technical
             champion who conceives and owns the program. He is not told what to do,
             though he does have to have approval from his office director, and from the
             DARPA Director. Once he starts that program, it is his, and he makes it
             happen, and he has to make the choices involved in that. So, in essence, they
             are risk-taking, idea-driven entrepreneurs heading up their own practice.
             (Van Atta, 2007)

    DARPA and ARPA-E program managers leave their positions in academia, industry, or

elsewhere in government to join the agency. They remain continually engaged with the research

community throughout the planning and execution of a technical program (Figure 1), and then

return to work outside the agency after a short three to five year term. Serving as a DARPA

program manager has been a launching pad for prominent careers in science and technology

management across the country: Pradeep Khosla (former Dean of Engineering at Carnegie Mellon

University and current Chancellor of UCSD), Zachary Lemnos (former Chief Technology Officer

    3
      Program Directors at ARPA-E are roughly equivalent to the position of Program Manager at DARPA. We use
each term when referring to the program staff of the relevant agency, and we use “program manager” to refer to the
position in a generic sense.

                                                        7
of MIT Lincoln Laboratory and former U.S. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and

Engineering), Arati Prabhakar (former Director of the U.S. National Institute of Standards and

Technology and former Director of DARPA), and Robert Taylor (founder of Xerox PARC’s

Computer Science Laboratory) were all DARPA program managers earlier in their careers.


                   Figure 1. The Lifecycle of a Program Manager at an ARPA Agency




   In this section, we structure our discussion of the ARPA model by highlighting four common

institutional features of DARPA and ARPA-E. Although each of these may be adhered to by an

ARPA-like agency to varying degrees at any given time, we argue that together they form the core

of the ARPA model. They fit into four buckets: (1) general organizational flexibility, (2) bottom-

up program design, (3) discretion in project selection, and (4) active project management.



                                                 8
Importantly, the last three elements highlight the critical responsibility of program managers

within ARPA-model agencies, and each element corresponds to one stage of an ARPA program:



General Organizational Flexibility. Contrary to most agencies in the federal bureaucracy, the

ARPA model entails significant organizational flexibility, allowing agencies to respond more

quickly to changing technological conditions. Between DARPA and ARPA-E, there are a number

of policies and practices that provide this flexibility:

    Independence. ARPA-E and DARPA both operate independently from other branches of DOE

and DOD respectively. The Director of ARPA-E reports directly to the Secretary of Energy, which

allows ARPA-E to operate outside the many levels of bureaucracy encumbering other research

organizations within DOE. DARPA is also known for reporting “to the top” with minimal

bureaucracy (Van Atta 2007). Indeed, part of the motivation for DARPA’s founding was the

argument that rivalry between the services led to the Soviets being first to space; after early

criticism, ARPA avoided hiring program managers out of the services (Roland 2002).

    Flat organization. Within the agencies, ARPA-E and DARPA both have a flat internal

structure. All ARPA-E program directors report to the agency’s Deputy Director for Technology.

With an order of magnitude larger budget than ARPA-E, DARPA has only one additional degree

of hierarchy with its six program offices. The fact that DARPA only funds extramural research

allows it to be less subdivided than other Department of Defense agencies such as the Army

Research Lab, which is organized into directorates each consisting of multiple divisions.

    Hiring outside of civil service regulations. DARPA and ARPA-E can hire program managers

without being confined by the typical requirements for hiring federal employees or contractors.

This allows them to hire top talent quickly and with more competitive salaries. In the context of

DARPA, existing office directors and program managers often “tap” young star researchers they

meet during their own work at DARPA and encourage them to consider becoming a DARPA

program manager.


                                                    9
   Fixed-term employment. Program managers are hired from technical positions in academia,

industry, and government, and they typically serve one term of 3-5 years (Fuchs 2010, NRC 2017).

This organizational turnover is likely advantageous both for the organization, which receives a

regular infusion of new ideas, and the program directors themselves, who can use this prestigious

appointment as a stepping stone to top-tier science and engineering leadership positions. Rotation

between industry, academic, and government positions is common for leaders in Japan, many of

whom believe that the “bounded vision” of for-profit firms and government can be overcome by

bringing the two together (Fransman 1993).

   Flexible contracting. Performers at ARPA-E and DARPA may be funded through common

mechanisms (grants, contracts, cooperative agreements), but both DOD and DOE also provide

agencies “other transaction authority” or OTA, which they may use in cases where the terms of

traditional agreements are not suitable. Examples include transactions for prototyping, or

technology investment agreements (TIA) with customized terms related to intellectual property

(Institute of Medicine, 2012). This flexible contracting enables DARPA program managers to fund

investigators with millions of dollars practically overnight (Fuchs 2010).

        “I have described the role of DARPA PM like that of a conductor of an
       orchestra. The conductor does not play any instrument, but he must
       understand every instrument and the music. He brings all the harmony
       together.” – DARPA Program Manager


Bottom-Up Program Design. Using the flexibility of the organization as described above, program

managers at ARPA-like agencies are able to pursue technical areas based on the real-time changing

need for innovation and opportunities for progress. These short-lived technical programs

contribute to the reputation for agility at ARPA-like agencies, as they can redirect resources with

relative speed. This bottom-up approach to designing technical programs is the second core

element of the ARPA model.

   At the start of an ARPA-E program director’s three-year term, they are tasked with designing

a technical program—a specific challenge under which a set of projects will be funded, e.g. $30
                                                10
million for a program that may award 10 teams with $3 million each. Program directors engage

with their target research communities and host stakeholder gatherings to refine their idea, and

then they pitch their program to ARPA-E leadership, who either accept the idea or encourage

further exploration. This process can take up to 18 months of a 36-month contract, so each

program director typically creates one program during their tenure. With 15 or so program

directors at a time at ARPA-E, and each program consisting of projects that are typically 3 years

long, there have already been dozens of programs completed in the short lifespan of the agency.

   DARPA uses similar processes for program creation. DARPA program managers identify

technology directions by simultaneously engaging with military liaisons to understand their

mission-related needs, talking to and convening scientists to brainstorm new technology

directions to meet those needs (Fuchs, 2010). Identifying technology directions occurs both

formally through working groups such as the Information Science and Technology (ISAT) group

and informally, through one-on-one conversations and flying out a group of scientists to

brainstorm ideas together (Fuchs 2010).

   When choosing an area of “white space” in which to operate, program managers consult with

industry and other experts, and they seek to address bottlenecks in the innovation system (NRC

2017). They craft programs to tackle areas where a need exists and where a targeted investment

could make a significant difference. The agency’s administration may seed this process by hiring

program managers from a certain technical background, e.g. ARPA-E hiring someone with

experience in geology in hopes that they will explore advanced geothermal energy, but the program

directors are then allowed to explore with relative freedom.

   ARPA programs are often designed with specific technical targets. For example, the ARPA-E

Grid-Scale Rampable Intermittent Dispatchable Storage (GRIDS) program was created in 2010 to

support novel energy storage or battery concepts, but a pre-requisite for funding was a cost

projection of $100 per kilowatt-hour—a step-change in storage costs that would fundamentally

transform the electricity industry. Interestingly, the cost threshold set in this program has become


                                                11
the de facto benchmark for industry costs going forward, as well.4 The specificity of these targets at

the program-level translates to concrete benchmarks for the success of each project, which is

critical for active project management, discussed later in this section. These targets also ensure that

each program is directly aligned with some component of the agency’s mission.

    The structure of bottom-up program creation is key to the ARPA model, in as much as it

enables ideas to meet mission challenges to be emergent and program managers to deliberately

connect people who are otherwise unconnected to shape the direction of research. As one DARPA

program manager described this process, “You get communities together that don’t naturally talk

and you give them some latitude and some life, and you push them forward and see what comes

out of it” (Fuchs 2010). Beginning with pre-program workshops and continuing through quarterly

presentations to each other (in the case of DARPA) or annual meetings of ARPA performers (in

the case of ARPA-E), a community of people is built around a particular goal, and this function

can have lasting impact beyond the specific outcomes of any particular project.


Discretion in Project Selection. The third important feature of the ARPA model is the use of

discretion by program directors to decide how to allocate funds within a program. Any research

funding program must tackle fundamental questions: Which researchers should we support? Who

can offer the greatest return on investment? What technologies fit best within the agency’s

mission? These questions are extremely difficult to answer due to the uncertainty of research

outcomes (Rosenberg 1996). Research creates new knowledge or information, and so by definition,

it is impossible to predict the result of a particular project. Furthermore, even if a project meets its

technical goals, there is great uncertainty in how the research will be used and what the impact of

that application will be. Regardless of which selection criteria a funding program uses, e.g. scientific

merit or applicability (Gans and Murray 2012), the inherent uncertainty of research presents

serious difficulty for evaluating proposed projects.


    4
      See for example, “Eos Energy Storage drives down costs on battery systems to below $100 per kWh”:
https://www.renewableenergymagazine.com/energy_saving/eos-energy-storage-drives-down-costs-on-20170419

                                                    12
   Given this inherent uncertainty, the most common method of coping with technical

uncertainty is peer review, i.e. to solicit opinions of the technical proposals from a panel of expert

reviewers, who are presumably the most informed and least burdened by uncertainty. Of course,

subject matter experts may disagree, so programs typically combine multiple opinions in order to

arrive at a minimally controversial set of proposals. For example, proposals may be sorted on the

basis of mean numeric ratings received from the review panel. There exists a vast literature on the

deficiencies of peer review for research proposals, such as its biases based on demographics,

seniority and, importantly in this context, novelty (Boudreau et al. 2016). This bias against novelty

is particularly concerning for research organizations that are committed to pursuing

transformative research, e.g. ARPA-style programs.

   The alternative strategy employed in the ARPA model allows program directors to use their

own expert judgment in deciding which proposals to fund. Program managers at DARPA have

great latitude in selecting performers and distributing funds without soliciting external peer

review. ARPA-E tends to be under greater scrutiny than DARPA—clean energy being more

politically vulnerable than defense—and so it has adopted a more moderate strategy of collecting

external peer reviews as informational inputs. Goldstein and Kearney (2018a) describes how

ARPA-E program directors select projects from across the distribution of review scores, i.e. average

review scores are only slightly correlated with an increased probability of selection. The authors

construct a counterfactual cut-off line for review scores, below which an application would be

rejected by a selection method based on ranking average scores. In the example program shown in

Figure 2 below, 22 proposals were selected for funding. Goldstein and Kearney (2018a) creates a

hypothetical peer-review score cut-off line to represent the cut-off line used if peer-review scores

completely determined selection. Instead, over half of the projects selected were selected despite

being below the hypothetical peer-review cutoff line. Across the entire ARPA-E portfolio 2009-

2015, approximately half of all projects were similarly “promoted” (Goldstein and Kearney 2018a).




                                                 13
       Figure 2: Review Score Distribution and Project Selection for an ARPA-E Technical Program




   Rather than indiscriminately following the advice of peer reviewers, some program directors

report selecting projects based on the review comments instead (Goldstein and Kearney 2018a).

Program directors at ARPA-E and DARPA often balance programs with complementary, and

potentially competitive, technologies, in order to create a diverse portfolio (Fuchs 2010). To the

extent that expert disagreement is useful in measuring the degree of technical uncertainty within a

research portfolio, the use of individual discretion in the case of ARPA-E results in a portfolio of

projects that carry a higher degree of uncertainty, as defined by disagreement among reviewers.

Moreover, under the premise that uncertainty is a corollary to novelty, individual discretion is an

antidote to novelty bias in peer review.

   In addition to using discretion to select performers, ARPA program staff take an additional

step of actually engineering the teams that submit proposed ideas. At ARPA-E, program directors

work to create connections between different researchers with complementary expertise, such as

introducing academics to potential commercial partners. At DARPA, evidence suggests that

program managers are even more involved in the engineering of research teams (Fuchs 2010,

Colatat 2015). Berlin (2017) documents the case of ARPANET, where the program manager,

                                                  14
Robert Taylor, who went on to become the founder and manager of Xerox PARC, decided to award

the contract to an assembled team of performers including Bolt, Beranek and Newman, rather than

to Raytheon. Ultimately, the program manager believed the assembled team to be a better “cultural

fit.”



Active Project Management. The fourth core element of the ARPA model is active project

management, which entails empowering program staff to make decisions related to capital, tasks,

milestones and technical goals throughout the project. The practice of active project management

is consistent with the literature on R&D project management within the private sector. For

example, Huchzermeier and Loch (2001) detail the importance of maintaining flexibility for a firm

through the use of “real options” for managing a research project, such as delay, abandon, contract,

expand and/or switch. Similarly, Trigeorgis (1997) finds that flexibility improves the potential

upside of a project while limiting downside losses. Dixit and Pindyck (1994) find that as

uncertainty in project payoffs increase, additional measures should be taken by managers to

maintain flexibility.

        ARPA agencies generally stand out among other public grant-making organizations for

retaining control rights over the research after allocating funds. The conventional approach is to

allow researchers to manage their own research process independently. This approach is especially

well-supported for academic researchers, who value having creative control over their research

directions (Aghion et al. 2008; Stern 2004). An often-cited model of investigator independence is

the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI), which funds “people, not projects” and gives its

performers authority to choose their own research direction. Azoulay et al. (2011) found that

HHMI performers, who are free to choose and modify their own research directions, publish more

high-impact papers compared to similarly qualified scientists funded by the National Institutes of

Health (NIH) with pre-defined project aims.




                                                15
    In this context, reducing the level of authority and flexibility held by funded researchers might

be expected to hinder exploratory research (Manso 2011). However, at ARPA agencies, this loss

coincides with the empowerment of ARPA program managers. In the ARPA model, the nexus of

exploration occurs first and foremost at the level of the program director, through the program

creation and project selection processes described above. The program directors themselves have

tolerance for failure as they make decisions, i.e. setting the technical goals, selecting a preferred set

of projects, and managing those projects along the way. For this reason, hiring talented program

staff with a penchant for exploration is pivotal to the success of ARPA-like programs.

    Over its history, DARPA’s project management practices have varied between more and less

active; broad area announcements and betting on the right people were hallmarks of DARPA in

the 1960s and 1990s, while milestones and “go/no-go” reviews were emphasized under Directors

Heilmeier (1975-1977) and Tether (2001-2008) (Fuchs 2010). Throughout these periods DARPA

performers have been required to report quarterly on progress. At ARPA-E, program directors

also remain closely engaged with researchers over the course of a project, receiving quarterly

progress updates and giving feedback on the same schedule (Goldstein and Kearney 2018b).

ARPA-E program directors frequently revise project milestones, budget, and timeline for

deliverables; in some cases, they cancel projects that are not able to meet technical milestones.
                      Figure 3: Budget and Project Length Modifications at ARPA-E




                                                   16
   As seen in Figure 3, budgets and project lengths were more likely to be expanded than to be

cut at ARPA-E. These adjustments correlate significantly with overall quarterly status ratings;

projects rated well are likely to see their budgets increased, and projects that miss major milestones

are far more likely to be terminated (Goldstein and Kearney 2018b). By cutting projects short in

response to poor performance, the agency is able to mitigate any increased risk in their portfolio

caused by funding more controversial projects.



Complementarities. So far in this section, we have outlined the four practices related to

organizational structure, program design, project selection and project management that are the

hallmarks of the ARPA model. Together these choices lodge much more control and decision-

making power with the funding organization than is typical for public research funders. We

propose that this is no coincidence—the elements of the ARPA model may comprise a bundle of

complementary practices. Milgrom and Roberts (1990) articulate both the benefits of

complementary elements within a bundle of organizational practices and the drawbacks to

selecting elements of a bundle that do not cohere; many examples of complementary business

practices have been identified (Brynjolfsson and Milgrom 2013). The parameters of innovation

management discussed in this section may function the same way: adopting one feature increases

the return to adopting another.

   Each of the four elements of the ARPA model relies on a highly talented, independent, and

empowered program staff. These individuals, having been given great autonomy in some aspects

of their position, are better prepared (and may be expecting) to exercise autonomy in other aspects

as well. For this reason, mixing and matching among these elements would be less effective than

implementing them all together. A program that uses individual discretion to select funding

recipients may underperform in the absence of active project management. These interactions

among policy choices are as yet unexplored for R&D programs and are an important area for future

research.


                                                 17
   3. What is ARPA-ble?

   In the previous section, we described four elements of the ARPA model and proposed that

these four are complements with respect to empowerment of the program staff. The obvious next

question is: when should this particular set of research management practices be chosen over

another? In short, what is ARPA-ble? We draw attention here to three important characteristics of

a research area that determine whether it is appropriate for an ARPA-like agency: the presence of

a clear mission, the type of research being conducted, and the status of the broader innovation

system within which technology is researched, developed and deployed (Figure 4).



                                   Figure 4: What is ARPA-ble?




                                               18
Mission Orientation. The first requirement for an ARPA-ble challenge is that it must be possible

to organize the domain of research around a technology-related mission or a set of overarching

goals. According to Sen (2013), transformational innovation programs are targeted specifically

toward desired social or economic outcomes, rather than intangible goals or undefined technical

development. The ARPA model is not appropriate for so-called basic research, which “is

performed without thought of practical ends” (Bush 1945) and is far upstream from any

commercial activities, e.g. high energy physics.

   DARPA and ARPA-E both have specific missions.. In the case of DARPA, the agency’s mission

is to advance technologies that could be critical to national security. In the case of ARPA-E, the

agency’s mission, as codified in statute, is to enhance energy security through the reduction of

energy imports, the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and increasing energy efficiency

throughout the economy. An ARPA agency’s mission is the foundation of the program design

process described in Section 2, in which a program manager seeks a particular innovation or

technological change. He or she then uses active project management to guide the pursuit of

breakthroughs to enable this change (Carleton 2010). Bonvillian (2009) calls this type of challenge-

based model “right-to-left,” in that it moves opposite the archetypal innovation pipeline, starting

with a desired technology and working backwards to determine the research needs.

   Mowery (2006) argues that in addition to a “clear mission” DARPA having the military as its

“single customer” is essential to the agency’s success. However, in contrast to the early years of

DARPA, the military is no longer the primary customer for many of the technologies it needs, such

as computers or microprocessors. As such, DARPA itself has had to find ways to influence

technology directions in technologies critical to the military, but in which the military is only a

very small fraction of overall demand. The military’s clear mission is therefore more important to

DARPA’s function than the military’s role as a customer.

   It is important to note that not every technical area united by a specific mission or challenge is

a good fit for the ARPA model. The mission must be associated with quantifiable goals and sub-


                                                   19
goals with trackable progress metrics. Technical pursuits like the NIH BRAIN Initiative, with the

goal of “revolutionizing our understanding of the human brain”,5 may not be a good fit for an

ARPA model organization, as the degree to which scientists understand the human brain is not

practically measurable. Similarly, agencies such as the Department of Energy’s Office of Science

that pursue “blue sky” or basic research, for which sub-goals are often hard to define, are ill-suited

for the ARPA model. We turn to this topic in our next section.



Nascent S-Curve. From the discussion of mission orientation, it is apparent that ARPA-ble

research is distinct from basic research—and yet it is also distinct from so-called applied research,

which is geared toward performance improvement of existing technologies. The ARPA model’s

emphasis on risk-taking and novelty make it a poor fit for a program focused on extending an

existing technological paradigm. But if ARPA agencies do neither “basic” nor “applied” research,

then how can we describe their function?

   Recent research by Goldstein and Narayanamurti (2018) suggests that ARPA-E occupies a

productive middle ground between basic and applied research. ARPA-E awards have a higher rate

of patenting and the same or higher rate of publishing than similar awards from other branches of

the Department of Energy, which are sharply divided between “basic” and “applied”. ARPA-E

awards are also more likely to produce both a patent and a publication, indicating an openness to

both invention and discovery. Relatedly, soon after its founding, DARPA began to emphasize the

transition of technology out of the laboratory and into the hands of users or producers who would

bring it to full adoption (Roland and Shiman 2002). This role of ARPA-like agencies in bridging

the gap between basic and applied research is our second distinguishing characteristic of ARPA-

ble challenges.

   One way to define the ARPA domain takes advantage of the concept of technology S-curves by

Foster (1986), where technical performance tends to improve as a sigmoidal function of research

   5
       https://www.braininitiative.nih.gov


                                                 20
effort. Individual technologies progress along an individual S-curve, with occasional

discontinuities resulting from a radical breakthrough and creation of a new S-curve. The beginning

of an S-curve represents a novel concept that has not yet been the focus of much effort. Here, the

returns to effort are small. The middle portion of the S-curve includes the inflection point where

the returns to effort are highest. The final segment of the S-curve entails diminishing returns to

effort and slow improvements to technical performance.

   It seems that the ARPA model is optimized for technical areas that reside in nascent S-curves

– the technology exists, is relatively unexplored, and has great potential for improvement. The

practice of program design identifies those areas; the practice of project selection finds uncertain

but promising research efforts in pursuit of the specific technical challenge; and the practice of

project management focuses effort as more information becomes known and some ideas begin to

show more potential than others. Organizational flexibility gives the agency the ability to quickly

respond to opportunities with minimal administrative friction.

   We can also consider the ARPA agencies in the taxonomy introduced by Stokes (1997), in

which research activities are divided across two dimensions: whether the use is considered, and

whether fundamental understanding is the goal. In this framework, research is either purely basic

(Bohr’s quadrant), purely applied (Edison’s quadrant), or use-inspired basic research (Pasteur’s

quadrant). The ARPA model certainly puts “use”, i.e. technology, at the forefront—the potential

applicability of research is the foundation of the ARPA-like agency’s strategy—but what is the role

of science in the ARPA model?

   At the early stage of an S-curve, there may still be scientific challenges to be met before the

technology can progress. Indeed, ARPA agencies are open to advancing the scientific frontier. And

yet, because fundamental understanding is not in itself a goal of the ARPA-like agency, it is not

properly identified as “use-inspired basic research” in Pasteur’s quadrant. Instead, the ARPA

model occupies a portion of Edison’s quadrant wherein the “use” under consideration is still novel

and immature. If scientific discovery is necessary for a given research project, then that project

may journey incidentally into Pasteur’s quadrant as it furthers fundamental understanding.
                                                21
Frictions in the Markets for Ideas and Technology. One final important element to consider for

use of the ARPA model is the state of the broader innovation system in a given technical area. The

economic justification of government funding for research is that private firms would not conduct

the same work. The private sector chronically under invests in R&D because firms cannot accrue

all of the benefit of an innovation. This justification is commonly applied to early-stage, upstream

research, and yet it can also apply to later-stage R&D if private markets are not able to successfully

move technologies to commercialization. If there are frictions in the pathways through

development, demonstration and broad-scale deployment, the ARPA model for intervention is

suitable. The defense and energy industries are two examples of industries where such frictions

curtail innovative effort.

    In the energy industry, the path from idea generation to impact for a new technology can be

extraordinarily arduous. Many innovations require large amounts of capital for demonstration and

scale-up, and innovators generally have to compete with legacy providers immediately upon

market entry. With no clear path to commercialization and significant regulatory constraints,

financing the development of new energy technologies is often extremely challenging. Howell

(2017) documents the presence of financial constraints for technologies in the energy sector that

are particularly acute for early-stage and/or hardware firms. The situation is very different in

the pharmaceutical industry, where there is a well-established commercialization path for new

drugs where a start-up will develop a drug through early stages of clinical trials, and then

more established firms will buy out the start-up for further commercialization (Goldstein et

al. 2017).

    In the defense industry, there are a separate set of frictions that impede the commercialization

process. National security is a public good with an associated collective action problem whereby

there will be chronic underinvestment in mission-critical innovation. In addition, if a firm does

produce an innovative product for the defense department, that product could be subject to secrecy


                                                 22
requirements, whereby the firm may be unable to repurpose the product in other industries or

abroad. While DARPA performers themselves do not typically have military clearances, DARPA

program managers can require sensitive information to connect their funding decisions to specific

military needs.



   4. Challenges for ARPA-like Agencies

   Even in areas where the ARPA model is a good fit, there remain challenges that must be

overcome to maximize the effectiveness of the model:

   Measuring long-term transformation. The mission of an ARPA-like agency often involves

transformation of some industry or market to address a societal need. This transformation

invariably occurs over the long-term, and yet, the ARPA model requires that individual projects

be held to strict timelines; projects often only run for three years. In the case of ARPA-E, for

example, a project that aims to create a new design for an energy storage device may be a

tremendous success, and still the impact in the market and/or the environment will not be seen for

decades. This limitation must be kept in mind during short-term efforts by Congress or the agency

itself to measure the agency’s progress toward its mission.

   One size does not fit all. ARPA model organizations fund a diverse set of performers, including

large firms, academics, start-ups and national labs. They generally have one set of practices that

apply equally to all research teams, despite the very different incentives and organizational contexts

underlying participation across these different types of performers. Successfully implementing the

ARPA model means navigating these differences to avoid conflicting motivations for researchers.

   The dark side of discretion. In the ARPA model, program directors have significant freedom to

craft programs and select and manage projects, and the Director also enjoys freedoms afforded by

the organization’s flexibility. As more freedom is given to both the Director and the program staff,

the quality of the agency’s activities are increasingly dependent on the talent of these individuals.

Any research agency requires a Director with strong leadership ability and staff members with high


                                                 23
technical acumen, and yet the organizational flexibility and program staff empowerment in the

ARPA model raises the stakes on this requirement. The core elements of the ARPA model cannot

exist under micromanagement by the Director or with under-qualified program staff.

    Tension between autonomy and accountability. Another risk faced by the ARPA model is that,

with fewer checks and balances in place, empowered staff members are less accountable for the

impact of their decisions. The Director is accountable to Congress and must defend the

organization’s budget, and the program directors are accountable to the Director, who decides the

funding amount allocated to each program. However, the short tenure of program directors means

that each program is an isolated endeavor, and success or failure of the program does not

necessarily affect the program director’s next career move. Some accountability is levied informally

by the network of program directors within the technical community, in that program directors

who are perceived as having good performance can use ARPA as a stepping stone to subsequent

high-level R&D management opportunities.

    Building trust. The program design and proposal solicitation phases of the ARPA model

depend heavily on the willingness of the researcher to share their ideas and their ongoing, and

potentially confidential, work. If program managers or the agency director do not treat these ideas

with appropriate care, the agency can lose its reputation as a trustworthy partner (Fuchs, 2010).

The agency must cultivate a healthy relationship with the research community in order to maintain

a steady influx of ideas.

    Nurturing culture with high turnover. An energetic and enterprising culture is a hallmark of the

ARPA model. However, culture is a byproduct of the individuals that make up the organization,

and in ARPA-like agencies, the program directors work on three-year contracts. It is a challenge

to maintain and nurture an organization’s culture with such high turnover. Nonetheless, there are

a few mechanisms for perpetuating a culture of risk-taking and exploration: first, in the program

creation process when new program directors pitch their ideas to existing program directors and

the agency’s administration, and second, when the program directors meet again with the


                                                24
administration to justify their selections of which proposals to fund. The alumni networks of

program directors also help to maintain the reputation and culture of the organization.

   Transitioning to market. The focus of the ARPA model is on making progress along technical

S-curves, but innovation also requires diffusion of new technologies. Overseeing the transition

from research to development is a major challenge for ARPA-like agencies, especially when there

is no public customer for the innovation. ARPA-E has a “tech-to-market” team dedicated to

working with all performers on their strategy for transitioning technologies out of the lab, and yet

a recent assessment by a committee of the National Academies found that this program should be

“reconceptualized” (NRC 2017).



   5. Conclusion
   In this paper, we review the key elements of the ARPA model for research funding:

organizational flexibility on an administrative level, alongside significant authority vested with

program directors to design programs, select projects and actively manage projects. We identify

the ARPA model’s domain as mission-motivated research on nascent S-curves within an

inefficient innovation system. We also describe some of the challenges to implementing the ARPA

model.

   It is important to note that the ARPA model is but one part a landscape of research funding

programs, each with different goals and accordingly different approaches. In Figure 5 below, we

depict two dimensions of research management: the source of idea generation, and the locus of

control for project execution. The bottom right quadrant represents the ARPA model, based on

two of the four features that we describe above: ideas are submitted in response to mission-inspired

programs created by the funder, and projects are then actively managed by the funder.

   At the national or regional level, innovation ecosystems could embrace a diversified mix of

funding models, including some programs that adhere to the ARPA model, while others fill out

the rest of the landscape, producing different types of outcomes and associated benefits. The top

left quadrant represents programs where researchers generate ideas and then pursue them with

                                                25
little oversight and often over long time horizons. HHMI and some programs within NIH or NSF

fit this category. Programs in the top right quadrant solicit proposals for a particular mission-

inspired area and then allow the researcher to freely explore, as with the Gates Foundation or the

Chan-Zuckerberg Initiative. In the bottom left quadrant, researchers propose ideas, but program

staff are deeply involved in the execution of the project, as is common in venture capital.


                                Figure 5: Innovation management strategies




   One of the challenges of the ARPA model is the difficulty of evaluating its effectiveness toward

long-term goals, and yet the task of evaluation is critically important nonetheless. Following on the

recent assessment of ARPA-E, research on the ARPA model should continue to probe the

effectiveness of specific features. Within the existing ARPA agencies, there is some low-hanging

fruit for evaluation: varying the tenure of program directors, frequency of reviews, duration of

projects, and funding levels.

   The available evidence on R&D management indicates that different practices yield different

types of innovation-related outcomes. The ARPA model addressed here is one set of practices

geared toward mission-oriented research on nascent technologies. It fits within a broader

innovation landscape that includes support for early-stage “blue sky” research and later-stage

incremental development. Importantly, ARPA-like organizations are not a substitute for other

                                                   26
sources of R&D support, but instead serve as a complementary piece of a diverse innovation

system.


References
110th Congress, 2007. America COMPETES Act. United States.
Aghion, P., Dewatripont, M., Stein, J., 2008. Academic freedom, private sector focus and the
    process of innovation. RAND J. Econ. 39, 617–635.
Allan, R., 2001. A History of the Personal Computer. Allan Publishing, Ontario, CA.
Azoulay, P., Graff Zivin, J.S., Manso, G., 2011. Incentives and Creativity: Evidence from the
    Academic Life Sciences. RAND J. Econ. 42, 527–554.
Berlin, L., 2017. Troublemakers: how a generation of silicon valley upstarts invented the future.
     Simon & Schuster UK.
Belfiore, M.P., 2010. The department of mad scientists: how DARPA is remaking our world, from
     the internet to artificial limbs. Harper.
Bonvillian, W.B., 2009. The Connected Science Model for Innovation—The DARPA Role, in: 21st
   Century Innovation Systems for Japan and the United States: Lessons from a Decade of
   Change. National Academies Press.
Boudreau, K.J., Guinan, E., Lakhani, K.R., Riedl, C., 2016. Looking Across and Looking Beyond
    the Knowledge Frontier: Intellectual Distance and Resource Allocation in Science. Manage.
    Sci.
Bromberg, J., 1991. The Laser in America, 1950–1970. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Brynjolfsson, E., Milgrom, P., 2013. Complementarity in Organizations, in: The Handbook for
    Organization Economics. pp. 11–55.
Bush, V., 1945. Science - The Endless Frontier.
Carleton, T.L., 2010. The Value of Vision in Radical Technological Innovation. Stanford
    University.
Colatat, P., 2015. An organizational perspective to funding science: Collaborator novelty at
    DARPA. Res. Policy 44, 874–887.
DARPA, 2008. DARPA: 50 Years of Bridging the Gap [WWW Document]. Faircount Media Gr.
   URL https://issuu.com/faircountmedia/docs/darpa50 (accessed 4.1.18).
Dixit, A.K., Pindyck, R.S., 1994. Investment under Uncertainty. Princeton University Press.



                                                  27
Flamm, K., 1987. Targeting the computer: government support and international competition.
    Brookings Institution.
Fong, G., 2001. ARPA does windows: the defense underpinnings of the PC revolution. Business
    and Politics 3 (3), 1469–3569.
Foster, R.N., 1986. The S-Curve: A New Forecasting Tool, in: Innovation: The Attacker’s
     Advantage.
Fuchs, E.R.H., 2010. Rethinking the role of the state in technology development: DARPA and the
    case for embedded network governance. Res. Policy 39, 1133–1147.
Gallo, M.E., 2018. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency: Overview and Issues for Congress.
     Congressional Research Service.
Gans, J.S., Murray, F.E., 2012. Funding Scientific Knowledge: Selection, Disclosure, and the Public-
    Private Portfolio, in: Lerner, J., Stern, S. (Eds.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity
    Revisited. University of Chicago Press, pp. 51–103.
Goldstein, A.P., Azoulay, P., Zivin, J.G., and Bulovic. V., 2017. “Promoting Energy Innovation with
    Lessons from Drug Development.” The Hamilton Project.
Goldstein, A.P., Kearney, M., 2018a. Uncertainty and Individual Discretion in Allocating Research
    Funds. Manuscript under review.
Goldstein, A.P., Kearney, M., 2018b. Active Project Management at ARPA-E. Manuscript in
    preparation.
Goldstein, A.P., Narayanamurti, V., 2018. Simultaneous Pursuit of Discovery and Invention in the
    US Department of Energy. Res. Policy. In press. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.05.005
Greenstein, S. (2011) “Nurturing the Accumulation of Innovations: Lessons from the Internet” in
  Henderson and Newell (2011) Accelerating Energy Innovation, Insights from Multiple Sectors,
  The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Huchzermeier, A., Loch, C.H., 2001. Project Management Under Risk: Using the Real Options
    Approach to Evaluate Flexibility in R & D. Manage. Sci. 47, 85–101.
Institute of Medicine, 2012. Accelerating the Development of New Drugs and Diagnostics:
      Maximizing the Impact of the Cures Acceleration Network: Workshop Summary.
Jacobsen, A., 2015. The Pentagon’s brain: an uncensored history of DARPA, America’s top secret
     military research agency. Back Bay Books.
Lazowska, E.D., Patterson, D.A., 2005. An endless frontier postponed. Science 308, 757.
Markoff, J., 2005. Pentagon Redirects its Research Dollars. New York Times.
Manso, G., 2011. Motivating Innovation. J. Finance 66, 1823–1860.


                                                 28
Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., 1990. The Economics of Modern Manufacturing: Technology, Strategy,
    and Organization. Am. Econ. Rev. 80, 511–528.
Mowery, D., 2006. Testimony before the Hearing on “Should Congress Establish ‘ARPA-E’, the Advanced
  Research Projects Agency-Energy?” Committee on Science and Technology, United States House of
  Representatives, Washington DC.
National Research Council, 1999. Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research.
    Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics,
    and Applications, Washington, DC.
National Research Council, 2007. Rising Above the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing
    America for a Brighter Economic Future. Committee on Prospering in the Global Economy
    of the 21st Century: An Agenda for American Science and Technology and Committee on
    Science, Engineering, and Public Policy, Washington, DC.
National Research Council, 2017. An Assessment of ARPA-E. Board on Science, Technology and Economic
    Policy, Policy and Global Affairs, and Board on Energy and Environmental Systems, Division on
    Engineering and Physical Sciences, Washington, DC.
Newman, N., 2002. Net Loss: Internet Prophets, Private Profits, and the Costs to Community.
   Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park, PA.
Rohlfing, E., 2017. Overview and Update on the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy
    (ARPA-E) [WWW Document].
Roland, A., Shiman, P., 2002. Strategic Computing: DARPA and the Quest for Machine Intelligence 1983-
    1993, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Rosenberg, N., 1996. Uncertainty and Technological Change, in: The Mosaic of Economic Growth.
    pp. 334–353.
Scherer, F.M., Harhoff, D., 2000. Technology policy for a world of skew-distributed outcomes. Res.
    Policy 29, 559–566.
Sen, A., 2013. Totally radical: From transformative research to transformative innovation. Sci.
     Public Policy 41, 344–358.
Sen, A., 2017. Island + Bridge: how transformative innovation is organized in the federal
     government. Sci. Public Policy 44, 707–721.
Stern, S., 2004. Do Scientists Pay to Be Scientists? Manage. Sci. 50, 835–853.
Stokes, D.E., 1997. Pasteur’s Quadrant. Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC.
Trigeorgis, L., 1996. Real Options: Managerial Flexibility and Strategy in Resource Allocation. MIT
     Press.




                                                 29
Van Atta, R. H., 2007. Testimony before the Hearing on “Establishing the Advanced Research Projects
   Agency-Energy (ARPA-E),” Subcommittee on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science and
   Technology, United States House of Representatives, Washington DC.
Weinberger, S., 2017. The imagineers of war: the untold history of DARPA, the Pentagon agency
    that changed the world. Knopf.




                                                30
