                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  GLOBAL FINANCIAL CYCLES AND RISK PREMIUMS

                                         Òscar Jordà
                                       Moritz Schularick
                                        Alan M. Taylor
                                          Felix Ward

                                      Working Paper 24677
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24677


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2018




Comments and suggestions from the conference organizers, the editor, and referees have helped
improve the paper Generous support from the Institute for New Economic Thinking, the
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF), and the Volkswagen Foundation
supported our work. We are grateful for their support. The views expressed in this paper are the
sole responsibility of the authors and to not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Òscar Jordà, Moritz Schularick, Alan M. Taylor, and Felix Ward. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Financial Cycles and Risk Premiums
Òscar Jordà, Moritz Schularick, Alan M. Taylor, and Felix Ward
NBER Working Paper No. 24677
June 2018
JEL No. E50,F33,F42,F44,G12,N10,N20

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper studies the synchronization of financial cycles across 17 advanced economies over the
past 150 years. The comovement in credit, house prices, and equity prices has reached historical
highs in the past three decades. The sharp increase in the comovement of global equity markets is
particularly notable. We demonstrate that fluctuations in risk premiums, and not risk-free rates
and dividends, account for a large part of the observed equity price synchronization after 1990.
We also show that U.S. monetary policy has come to play an important role as a source of
fluctuations in risk appetite across global equity markets. These fluctuations are transmitted
across both fixed and floating exchange rate regimes, but the effects are more muted in floating
rate regimes.

Òscar Jordà                                     Alan M. Taylor
Economic Research, MS 1130                      Department of Economics and
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco           Graduate School of Management
San Francisco, CA 94105                         University of California
and University of California, Davis             One Shields Ave
oscar.jorda@sf.frb.org                          Davis, CA 95616-8578
                                                and CEPR
Moritz Schularick                               and also NBER
University of Bonn                              amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
Department of Economics
Adenauerallee 24-42                             Felix Ward
53113 Bonn                                      Institute for Macroeconomics and Econometrics
Germany                                         Bonn Graduate School of Economics
Germany                                         University of Bonn
moritz.schularick@uni-bonn.de                   Kaiserplatz 7-9, Bonn 53113, Germany
                                                felix.ward@uni-bonn.de
                                       1.    Introduction

The Global Financial Crisis highlighted the need for an evolution in macroeconomic
thinking. Added to the urgency to integrate banking and finance into the basic architecture
of macroeconomic models, one could add that there is a also fundamental need to
understand the financial cycle and its interplay with the business cycle. But is there a
financial cycle at all? And if so, how has its operation in the global economy evolved?
   The first goal of this paper is to fill some gaps in our knowledge by analyzing global
financial cycles over the past 150 years across a sample of 17 advanced economies. While
the comovement of real variables has been extensively studied in the literature, financial
cycles have received less attention. This is partly due to the fact that long-run data for
credit growth, house prices, and equity prices have only recently become available (Jordà,
Knoll, Kuvshinov, Schularick, and Taylor, 2017a; Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor, 2016).
   Our analysis reveals that the synchronization of financial cycles across countries has
become increasingly prevalent. We can now speak of a global financial cycle whose
effects are felt widely and more vividly over the past few decades than ever before. For
the most part, financial synchronization has increased hand in hand with international
synchronization of real variables, such as GDP, consumption and investment. Equity
price synchronization follows a different pattern, however, and we find a much more
rapid increase in global synchronicity since the 1990s. Moreover, we find that this rise in
equity price synchronicity exceeds that of dividends, whose international comovement
is more in line with the cyclical comovement in real variables. The explanation for this
divergence is the striking rise in the volatility and global covariation of equity return
premiums, and principally the risk premiums embedded therein. Our analysis thus lends
support to accounts that put asset prices and risk premiums at center stage in explaining
the synchronization of the global economy (Dedola and Lombardo, 2012; Devereux and
Yetman, 2010; Dumas et al., 2003; Fostel and Geanakoplos, 2008; Ward, 2018).1
   The second goal of this paper is to analyze the role that monetary policy plays in
explaining the increased synchronization of global risk appetite. In particular, we find that
U.S. monetary policy is a powerful driver of global risk appetite and thus binds together
global equity prices. Moreover, we show that this synchronization of international risk
taking is a new phenomenon. In contrast, in the first era of globalization, before 1914, we

   1 Dumas  et al. (2003) explain the excessive correlation of equity prices over fundamentals through the
excessive volatility of a common stochastic discount factor.

                                                    1
do not find evidence for linkages in risk appetite internationally. Possible explanations
include current monetary practice and a more prominent role of leveraged financial
intermediaries, dollar fundings markets, and global banks in the world economy today.
   A natural international transmission channel is via exchange rates and hence we
evaluate whether our findings on synchronicity are stronger for countries with fixed
exchange regimes relative to countries that allow their exchange rate to float freely
(see section 4.4). We find some evidence that the transmission effects are stronger for
fixed exchange rate regimes, but they are still sizable for floaters. This finding adds an
important new dimension to the debate about the degree to which international financial
integration undermines monetary policy autonomy. In the case of equity markets, there
is suggestive evidence that monetary policy in the center country triggers swings in risk
appetite that appear to be independent of domestic monetary conditions.
   Links between our findings and the existing literature are numerous. First, we add
a longer-run cross-country perspective to the existing financial cycle literature, such as
Claessens et al. (2011), Drehmann et al. (2012), as well as Aikman et al. (2014) and Schüler
et al. (2015). Second, we confirm recent research regarding the increase in global financial
synchronization over the past two decades (e.g. Bruno and Shin, 2014; Cerutti et al., 2014;
Obstfeld, 2014). Our data provide evidence in support of this trend towards increased
financial synchronization. Third, we extend the literature that studies the relation between
financial– and real–cycle comovements (see Meller and Metiu, 2017). Fourth, our work
builds on an emerging literature that investigates the nexus between monetary policy and
risk taking, asset prices, and global financial synchronization (Miranda-Agrippino and
Rey, 2015).


       2.     Financial and real cycle synchronization, 1870–2013

2.1.   Data
The data that we use in this paper come from a number of sources. GDP, consumption
and investment data come from the latest vintage of the Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor
(2016) Macrohistory Database (available at www.macrohistory.net/data). The dataset
comprises annual data from 1870 to 2013, for 17 countries: Australia, Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, U.K. and the U.S.. Combined, these 17 countries make up
more than 50% of world GDP throughout the period we consider.

                                             2
   Financial cycles are associated with the synchronized ebb and flow in credit aggregates,
house prices, and equity prices across countries (see Aikman et al., 2014; Claessens et al.,
2011; Drehmann et al., 2012). The credit series cover loans of all monetary financial
institutions—including savings banks, postal banks, credit unions, mortgage associations,
and building associations—to the non-financial private sector.
   To study equity- and house-price comovements we rely on the newly collected div-
idend and rental yield series introduced by Jordà, Knoll, Kuvshinov, Schularick, and
Taylor (2017a). The equity premium is defined as the excess total return of equity over
short-term government bonds. Detailed explanations on how these data were constructed
are available in that paper.



2.2.   Methods

To analyze the international comovement of real and financial cycles in this study our
most basic measure of coherence for real and financial cycles is a 15-year rolling-window
Spearman rank correlation coefficients. We prefer this to the more traditional Pearson
correlation as it captures monotone but not necessarily linear relationships. The appendix
reports results based on rolling-window Pearson correlation coefficients, which turn
our to be qualitatively similar. The 15-year rolling-windows that we use are backward-
looking, that is, the correlation coefficient reported for 2000 is based on data from 1986 to
2000. Hence, we denote the Spearman correlation coefficient between countries i and j
                                                                    i,j
calculated over the 15-year window ending at time t as st for i, j = 1, . . . n, where n is
the cross-sectional sample size. A global measure of association can then be constructed
as the average of these bilateral correlations as follows:

                                           i,j
                                ∑i ∑ j <i s t                   n ( n − 1)
                          s̄t =               ;            N=              .                   (1)
                                    N                                2

In terms of notation, t is the rolling-window time index defined earlier, s̄t is the average
                                                 i,j
bilateral correlation coefficient at t and st is the bilateral correlation coefficient for country-
pair i, j. The number of distinct correlations excluding the correlation of one country with
itself is given by the usual formula n(n − 1)/2 where n is the total number of countries
in the sample. In order to account for the cross-sectional and temporal dependencies, all
confidence intervals are constructed using a cross-sectional block-bootstrap procedure
(see Kapetanios, 2008).

                                                       3
    As a robustness check, we also construct a GDP-weighted average version of expression
(1). In particular, we use the relative purchasing power-adjusted real GDP of the bilateral
country pair i, j, that is,

                                           ∑ ∑ ωi,j,t st
                                                         i,j
                                  s̄ω
                                    t =                        ,   with                              (2)
                                            i j <i
                                              ( GDPi,t + GDPj,t )
                                ωi,j,t =                                ,
                                           ∑i ∑ j<i ( GDPi,t + GDPj,t )

where GDPi,t denotes country i’s GDP at time t. Results based on this GDP-weighted
measure are generally very similar to those based on the unweighted measure described
in expression (1) and are therefore reported in the appendix.
    Next, note that to isolate the cyclical component in the series of our database we
rely on the Baxter-King band-pass filter.2 Financial cycles are typically characterized
by relatively low frequency movements, with one cycle lasting between 8 to 16 years
according to Drehmann et al. (2012), while Schüler et al. (2015) find important variation in
credit cycles well above the 20 year periodicity. Results by Cagliarini and Price (2017) in
contrast suggest that financial cycles are not necessarily longer than business cycles. Also,
equity prices, which are also of interest here, exhibit much larger short-term variation.
As a way to accommodate these divergent views, we take a conservative approach and
therefore focus on a broad cycle-band ranging from 2 to 32 years. Before detrending, we
CPI-deflate each series and take its logarithm.
    As a robustness check, we also report results based on an alternative nonparametric
detrending method recently suggested by Hamilton (forthcoming). This approach relies
on the observation that, unlike short-lived cyclical fluctuations, trend components are the
only feature of the data that can be predicted at longer horizons. Yet another approach is
to put more weight on high-frequency annual changes. This has the advantage of not
having to rely on a pre-processing filtering step. Hence, we study annual growth rates
(total loans, house prices, credit prices, GDP, consumption, investment, dividends) and
first differences (real short-term rates, equity return premiums). Finally, we calculate
concordance indices as proposed by Harding and Pagan (2002) in order to address
concerns about heteroskedasticity bias in correlation coefficients (see Forbes and Rigobon,
2002). The concordance measure indicates the fraction of years in which two series

   2 Inthe subsequent correlation analysis we detrend all series with the exception of interest rates and
equity return premiums, which are stationary in the long run.

                                                     4
move into the same direction. It abstracts from the size of such movements, rendering it
immune to heteroskedasticity bias. The appendix shows consistent results using these
alternative approaches for completeness.


2.3.   Financial and real synchronization
This section presents the 15-year rolling window correlation results for the financial and
real variables that have been introduced in section 2.1. All variables have been detrended
as described in section 2.2. Figure 1 displays the average bilateral correlation of three
financial variables – real credit (measured by total loans), real house prices, and real equity
prices—for the 17 country sample. Comovement in credit- and equity price-cycles has
risen substantially over time. In particular, the comovement of credit and equity markets
is at a historical peak today, with Spearman correlation coefficients of about 0.4 and 0.8
respectively. Abstracting from the bouts of house price comovement associated with WW1
and WW2 housing busts, international house prices are also more correlated today than
before, but the divergence in global house prices since the financial crisis has dampened
synchronization in recent years. The rise in equity price correlation to near unity since the
1990s is particularly striking as it exceeds even the correlation in asset prices during the
declines associated with the Great Depression. The comovement in credit, house prices,
and equity prices is higher in the past few decades than in previous periods. In this sense
it is possible to speak about a global financial cycle among developed economies. But how
does this compare to the long-run synchronization of real cycles in GDP, consumption,
and investment?
   Figure 2 shows that the comovement of cycles in real variables also exhibits an upward
trend since the start of the sample. The cyclical behavior GDP across countries is a good
example—even accounting for the blip up due to the Great Depression (see Bordo and
Helbling, 2003). GDP today exhibits an average bilateral correlation of somewhat above
0.5, its highest value since 1870. Similarly, the consumption correlation has trended
upward nearly on a par with GDP, although today it is slightly lower than the correlation
for GDP (see Backus et al., 1992). The international comovement of investment had
already been relatively high in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, but by the 2000s the
comovement in investment reached a new peak.
   International synchronization of the financial and real sectors of economies have
increased in tandem. At some level this is to be expected. Globalization forces would tend
to increase integration in the real economy and with it, the financial sector. However, as

                                              5
                                   Figure 1: Average bilateral financial cycle correlation


                     1.0

                     0.8

                     0.6
       Correlation




                     0.4

                     0.2

                     0.0

             −0.2

                           1885   1900    1915     1930    1945      1960      1975      1990     2005

                                         Total loans          House prices            Equity prices


Notes: Spearman rank correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows. 2 to 32-year period Baxter-
King detrended series. Bars – 95% cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands.


                                    Figure 2: Average bilateral real economy correlation


                     1.0

                     0.8

                     0.6
       Correlation




                     0.4

                     0.2

                     0.0

             −0.2

                           1885   1900    1915     1930    1945      1960      1975      1990     2005

                                         GDP                     Consumption           Investment


Notes: Spearman rank correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows. 2 to 32-year period Baxter-
King detrended series Bars – 95% cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands.


                                                             6
Figures 1 and 2 illustrate, it looks as if the comovement in equity prices has outstripped
the comovement in other variables. This finding is robust to different detrending methods,
as well as other synchronization measures (see figure A.4 to A.10 in the appendix).
   Within our sample, some geographical regions exhibit more real and financial synchro-
nization than others (see Figures A.11 to A.14 in the appendix). Within the euro area and
within Scandinavia for example, GDP, consumption, and investment have reached average
bilateral correlation levels close to 0.8 over the past decades. In the case of Scandinavia,
dividend comovement can explain more of the late 20th century increase in equity price
correlation than it can in other regions. Finally, even within the Pacific region (Australia,
Canada, Japan and the U.S.) equity price correlation has increased to around 0.7 since the
late 20th century, despite there being virtually zero correlation in dividends.
   Summing up, we document a substantial increase in the comovement of equity prices
that is only partly matched by increasing real sector linkages. In the following sections,
we will take a closer look at the drivers of the rising comovement in international equity
markets.


              3.   Understanding equity market comovement

3.1.   Correlation in dividends, risk-free rates, and return premiums
To get a first impression of the sources that lie behind the recent and dramatic increase
in the international comovement of equity prices this section describes the international
comovement of different equity price determinants: dividends, risk-free rates, and equity
return premiums. Figure 3 shows the average bilateral correlation between short-term
and long-term risk-free rates, R. Figure 4 shows the average bilateral correlation between
dividends, D, and the equity return premium, ERP.
   Figure 3 shows that the average bilateral correlation in short- and long-term interest
rates follow a similar time path. Interest rate correlation has been high in the 1980s and
2000s, and relatively low in the 1990s. Interest rate correlation was also high in the 1920s
and 1930s. With the exception of the high-inflation era of the 1970s and 1980s, phases
of high interest rate comovement thus tend to accompany phases of high equity price
comovement. However, in contrast to equity price comovement after 1990, interest rate
comovement has not reached historically unprecedented levels.
   Figure 4 shows that the increases in equity price comovement in the 1920s and 2000s
were also accompanied by a significant increase in the comovement of dividends and

                                             7
                                     Figure 3: Average bilateral interest rate correlations


                    1.0

                    0.8

                    0.6
      Correlation




                    0.4

                    0.2

                    0.0

            −0.2

                          1885     1900    1915     1930     1945     1960       1975   1990     2005

                                                      ST rates        LT rates


Notes: Spearman rank correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows. Based on real interest
rates, calculated as nominal rates minus CPI-inflation. Bars – 95% cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped
confidence bands. ST refers to real short-term and LT to real long-term rates respectively.

                          Figure 4: Average bilateral dividend and equity return premium correlations


                    1.0

                    0.8

                    0.6
      Correlation




                    0.4

                    0.2

                    0.0

            −0.2

                          1885     1900    1915     1930     1945     1960       1975   1990     2005

                                          Dividends                      Equity return premium


Notes: Spearman rank correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows. Dividends: 2 to 32-year
period Baxter-King detrended series. Equity return premium: total equity returns minus short-term risk-
free rate. Bars – 95% cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands.

                                                                 8
equity return premiums. The comovement of dividends peaked around 0.3 in the 2000s,
coming close to its 1930s peak. The international correlation of equity return premiums,
however, has reached historically unprecedented levels, rising from around 0.3 to 0.8.
   These results suggest that the rising comovement of equity return premiums, ERP,
may hold the key to understanding today’s strong equity price synchronization. Various
robustness checks, shown in the appendix, suggest that the finding that the comovement
in equity return premiums has reached a historically unprecedented high is robust to
different detrending methods (see figures A.4 to A.10 in the appendix).


3.2.   Equity price comovement and risk appetite
According to standard asset pricing theory, equity prices are a function of expected
future discounted dividends. Thus, in this section we take a look at whether equity
price comovement can be explained by the comovement in future dividend streams
discounted by future risk-free rates. Let Q RN be the asset price as counterfactually valued
by a risk-neutral investor who prices an asset according to the present value of future
dividends D discounted by risk-free rates R = 1 + r:

                                             ∞
                                        (                 !            )
                                                   k −1
                            QtRN = Et       ∑ ∏ R−t+1j        Dt + k       .             (3)
                                            k =1   j =1


   Furthermore, denote the remaining spread between actual asset prices Qt and the
counterfactual risk-neutral investor’s price Q RN as ρ:

                                        Qt = QtRN ρt .                                   (4)

In the following analysis, we will call the term ρ “risk appetite”. Of course “risk appetite”
thus defined is a summary term, that encompasses all factors that drive a spread between
discounted dividends Q RN and actual equity prices Q. As such, “risk appetite” as we
use it here embodies a diverse range of forces, such as consumption habits, the ability of
intermediaries to supply loans as well as investor sentiment (see Shiller (1981a) and Galı́
and Gambetti (2015) for similar decompositions).
   Using this basic asset pricing machinery, we can then ask the following question: How
much comovement in equity prices is due to comovement in the risk-neutral investor
price? And how much is due to the remainder – “risk appetite”? For this we calculate

                                                   9
Q RN on the basis of future realized dividends and risk-free rates, assuming a terminal
value at the sample end of         1
                                1−∆D/R
                                       ,   where ∆D indicates the sample median growth rate of
CPI-deflated dividends, and R is the sample average of gross short-term safe rates. Given
the terminal value we then calculate Q RN recursively through QtRN             RN
                                                                −1 = Dt /Rt + Qt /Rt
(see Shiller, 1981a,b).3
    Note that the asset pricing equation (3) is formulated in expectations. Here we follow
Shiller (1981a,b) in equalizing ex-ante expected values with their ex-post realized values.
In the following, an important caveat to be aware of is that the ex-post realized values
cease to be good indicators of their ex-ante expected counterparts whenever expectation
errors become large. However, even if expectation errors play a role, seeing how much
equity price comovement would have been justified by ex-post realized fundamentals
is nevertheless interesting. A more elaborate decomposition that attempts to model
expectations through a vector autoregression (VAR) system is presented in Appendix
C (the decomposition is based on the methodology laid out in Ammer and Mei, 1996;
Campbell, 1991; Campbell and Shiller, 1988). The results of this VAR decomposition are
in line with the results of the more accessible analysis discussed in the remainder of this
section.4
    How much of total equity price comovement can be attributed to ex-post realized
dividends and risk-free rates? Figure 5 shows that until the 1990s the comovement
in actual equity prices is mostly accounted for by the comovement in the risk-neutral
investor prices Q RN , i.e., dividends and risk-free rates. After that, however, equity price
comovement starts to escape its fundamentals. After 1990, the risk-neutral price measure
Q RN turns out to account for only about one third of the comovement in equity prices
Q. As a result of the realized covariance between future dividends and risk-free rates,
Q RN turns out to justify a smaller share of equity price comovement than might have
been guessed from the comovement in risk-free rates and dividends. Post-1990 equity
price comovement cannot be accounted for by dividends and risk-free rates; rather, it is
equity return premiums that increasingly bind together equity prices among developed
economies.
   3 While  the terminal value influences the level of Q RN at the end of the sample, the comovement results,
which are based on the detrended Q RN , look very similar for a broad range of terminal value assumptions.
    4 For detrending methods that put more weight on year-to-year changes, the discrepancy between actual

equity price comovement, and risk-neutral price comovement decreases (see figure A.4 to A.10 in the
appendix). This suggests that dividends and risk-free rates are better at explaining equity price comovement
in the short-term than in the medium-term, where discrepancies between the comovement implied by the
risk-neutral price measure and actual equity prices can build up.

                                                     10
                                    Figure 5: Average bilateral equity price correlation


                     1.0

                     0.8

                     0.6
       Correlation




                     0.4

                     0.2

                     0.0

             −0.2

                           1885   1900   1915     1930        1945   1960    1975     1990   2005

                                              Equity prices            Risk neutral price


Notes: Spearman rank correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows. 2 to 32-year period Baxter-
King detrended series. Bars – 95% cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands.


    We are not the first to document that international equity price comovement in the
late 20th century has become increasingly dominated by factors other than dividends and
risk-free rates. Ammer and Mei (1996) and Engsted and Tanggaard (2004) report related
findings for the U.S. and U.K. stock markets and Jordà et al. (2017a) report similar results
for the economies in our sample. More recently, Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015) have
shown that a substantial part of global asset returns since the 1990s can be explained by
one global factor that is closely and inversely related to measures of market volatility and
risk aversion. With this paper, we are the first to show that this is a novel development in
the history of international financial integration that was not present in the first era of
global finance.


            4.             Monetary policy and synchronization of risk taking

What might explain the increasing synchronization of risk appetite across global equity
markets? A popular view, often embraced by practitioners in financial markets, is that
monetary policy in global financial centers, in particular the Federal Reserve, plays an
important role in explaining risk-taking in international financial markets.

                                                               11
    Such effects can occur through different channels as existing studies argue (Bekaert
et al., 2013; Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2015). Fed policy may internationally synchro-
nize the balance sheet capacity of financial intermediaries through its effect on asset prices
(Ward, 2018). U.S. monetary policy may also directly act as a focal point that synchronizes
risk perceptions of international investors (see Bacchetta and van Wincoop, 2013). The
U.S. dollar is also an important vehicle currency and funding currency that underpins
today’s global financial system (Shin, 2012). U.S. monetary policy decisions may thus
have global reach (Canova, 2005; Kim, 2001). Ehrmann et al. (2011) show that about
30% of the fluctuations in euro area financial markets can be attributed to U.S. financial
market fluctuations. Theoretically, Bruno and Shin (2014) propose a model in which
global banks, with access to the financial center’s wholesale money markets, transmit the
financial center’s financing conditions to regional banks around the world. Cetorelli and
Goldberg (2012) present related econometric evidence on how global banks contribute to
the international transmission of liquidity shocks through the lending conducted by their
foreign affiliates.


4.1.      Methods
To investigate whether monetary policy interventions in center countries are a driver of
global risk appetite, we estimate a set of cumulative impulse response functions using
local projections (Jordà, 2005).5 We begin with the following specification:

                        5                      5                     5
   ∆h yi,t+h = αih +   ∑      βhk ∆yi,t−k +   ∑      γkh ∆Rct−k +   ∑ δkh Xi,t−k + ui,t+h ,   h = 1, ..., H ,   (5)
                       k =1                   k =0                  k =0

where αi are country-fixed effects, ∆h yi,t+h = yi,t+h − yi,t−1 is, by our convention, the
h-year cumulative growth rate of y, ∆Rc is the first difference in the center country’s
short-term rate, Xi is vector of control variables and ui,t+h are error terms. The parameters
{γ0h }h=1,...,H in expression (5) allow us to trace out the trajectory of equity prices, divi-
   5 It
      is reasonable to expect a certain degree of cross-sectional dependence in an international macroe-
conomic dataset, because countries are likely to be influenced by common disturbances. Also typical of
macroeconomic data, these disturbances are likely to exhibit temporal persistence. In order to account
for such cross-sectional and temporal dependencies in our data we calculate confidence bands based on
Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with five autocorrelation lags (Driscoll and Kraay, 1998). Driscoll-Kraay
standard errors are a nonparametric technique that is robust to very general forms of dependencies across
time and space. The technique is well suited to our macroeconomic dataset, because it relies on large-T
asymptotics, without placing any restrictions on the limiting behavior of the number of countries.

                                                           12
dends, and risk-free rates over the H years following a center country interest rate change
∆Rct . Note that this specification allows for a contemporaneous effect of the controls and
center rate changes on the outcome variable.
   Our impulse variable is the change in policy in the financial center, ∆Rc . Later, we
will corroborate the results with monetary policy “shock” measures, thus capturing the
unanticipated part of policy changes in recent decades. The idea is to account for potential
cross-country endogeneity contamination.
   The U.S. was not always the world’s financial center country. In the 19th century the
U.K.’s financial system and currency played a similarly central role. The measure Rc is
therefore the U.K. short-term rate prior to 1914 and the U.S. short-term rate after 1947.
During the interwar years, the U.S. became the world’s most important financial center
according to some metrics, while the U.K. retained this title until WW2 according to
others (see Chiţu et al., 2014). Hence, we construct Rc as the average of U.S. and U.K.
short-term rates for the interwar years.
   The control variables are five lags of log differences of GDP, CPI, equity prices, house
prices, total loans, as well as housing return premiums, equity return premiums, and
short-term rates. We additionally control for five lags of the center country’s growth rates
in per capita GDP and inflation. Finally, we also include the center country’s equity prices
into the vector of controls as Rigobon and Sack (2004) document that the Fed tends to
raise rates when the stock market has gone up and vice versa (also see Bjørnland and
Leitemo, 2009; Castelnuovo and Nisticò, 2010; Chadha et al., 2004; Furlanetto, 2011).
   Moreover, in order to test whether financial center monetary policy explains the
increase in the comovement of equity return premiums and risk appetite we separate
the equity price impulse responses into two parts. Log-linearizing equation (3) around a
balanced growth path yields an expression that can be used to calculate that part of the
equity price response which is justified by the dividend and real rate responses, Q RN (see
Galı́ and Gambetti, 2015):

                            ∞            k                                    
                                      D              D
                qtRN       ∑
                                                                          
                       =                          1−         Et dt+k−1 − Et rt+k       +k,   (6)
                           k =1       R              R

where small letters denote the logarithms of the original variables, D is the gross dividend
growth rate along the balanced growth path, R is the respective interest rate, D/R ≡ C < 1
and k denotes a linearization constant (see Cochrane, 2005, p.395). In the following we set
C to 0.96.

                                                         13
   Consider the response to a center country interest rate intervention ∆Rct . On the basis
of expression (6) we can calculate the equity price (cumulative) response that is implied
by any given dividend and interest rate response as:

            ∞                ∞                   ∞                        ∞ ∂r
                                    "                                                     #
                 ∂qtRN                                ∂dt+k+ j−1               t+k+ j
            ∑ ∂R+ck ∆Rct =   ∑ Ck       (1 − C ) ∑         c
                                                         ∂Rt
                                                                 ∆Rct − ∑
                                                                              ∂Rtc    ∆Rct .   (7)
            k =0     t       j =1                k =0                   k =0


The difference between the cumulative response in actual equity prices Q and the cu-
mulative response implied by dividends and risk-free rates Q RN reflects the response of
time-varying risk appetite ρ. For the practical calculation of the cumulative risk-neutral
price response the infinite sums for the dividend and risk-free rate responses have to
be replaced by a finite sum. We opted for seven-year cumulative responses because
the dividend and risk-free rate responses are statistically indistinguishable from zero at
higher time horizons.
   Note that, as in section 3, we equalize ex-ante expected dividends and risk-free rates
with their ex-post realized counterparts. We challenge this assumption in a robustness
check in Appendix C, where we model expectations through a VAR system, and thus
separate expected changes in dividends, risk-free rates, and return premiums from news
about these variables. The conclusions we can draw from this robustness check are in
line with our main results presented here.


4.2.   The response of global equity markets
Figure 6 shows the response in percent changes of equity prices (Q) and risk-neutral
equity prices (Q RN ), as well as the dividend- (D) and interest rate (R) responses from
which the Q RN -response was derived. The risk-neutral response (labelled “Risk-neutral”
in the figure) is the response that shows how a risk-neutral investor would value equity
on the basis of future dividends that are discounted with the risk-free rate. The left
column in Figure 6 shows the full sample results, while the right column focuses on the
post-1980 subsample in order to focus on the period of rising comovement in global risk
appetite.
   Our first key result is that the response of equity prices has become stronger over time.
The international response to a +1 ppt center interest rate hike has almost doubled from
the full sample average of about −4% to the post-1980 trough of −8%. Furthermore, the
negative response has grown more persistent.

                                                   14
                         Figure 6: Decomposing the global equity market response


                                                   Full sample                                  Post-1980
                                        5.0                                      5.0



                                        0.0                                      0.0
                Equity price
                                 %




                                                                          %
                Risk-neutral            -5.0                                     -5.0



                                     -10.0                                    -10.0
                                               0   1     2        3   4                 0   1       2       3   4
                                                       Years                                      Years


                                        5.0                                      5.0



                                        0.0                                      0.0
                                 %




                Dividend                                                  %
                                        -5.0                                     -5.0



                                     -10.0                                      -10.0
                                               0   1     2        3   4                 0   1       2       3   4
                                                       Years                                      Years


                                         1.5                                     1.5



                                         1.0                                     1.0
                                  ppt




                                                                          ppt




                Risk-free rate
                                         0.5                                     0.5
                Center rate

                                         0.0                                     0.0

                                               0   1     2        3   4                 0   1      2        3   4
                                                       Years                                     Years




Notes: Cumulative impulse response functions to +1ppt increase in financial center interest rates. Risk-
neutral – risk neutral price (Q RN ). Center rate – financial center (U.K. and/or U.S.) short-term risk-free rate
own response. Confidence bands calculated on the basis of Driscoll-Kraay standard errors. Risk neutral
price (Q RN ) calculated according to equation (7).




                                                             15
                          Figure 7: Pre-1914 vs. Post-1980 equity price responses


                                                       Pre-1914                                 Post-1980
                                   10.0                                          10.0


                                       5.0                                        5.0


             Equity price              0.0                                        0.0

                               %




                                                                           %
             Risk-neutral
                                       -5.0                                      -5.0


                                   -10.0                                       -10.0

                                               0   1      2        3   4                0   1       2       3   4
                                                        Years                                     Years


                                   15.0                                          15.0
Notes: Cumulative impulse response functions to +1ppt increase in financial center interest rates. Risk-
neutral – risk neutral price (Q RN ).10.0
                                       Center rate – financial center (U.K. and/or
                                                                             10.0  U.S.) short-term risk-free rate
own response. Confidence bands calculated on the basis of Driscoll-Kraay standard errors. Risk neutral
price (Q RN ) calculated according to 5.0 equation (7).                       5.0
                               %




                                                                           %
             Dividend                  0.0                                        0.0

                              -5.0
    Partly this is due to international                      -5.0
                                        dividends and real short-term rates having become
more sensitive to changes in
                          -10.0U.S. monetary policy. In the-10.0
                                                             full sample dividends fell on
average by about 2.5% and interest
                             0     1rates 2peaked
                                               3  at4 0.5 ppt. Since
                                                               0     119802 the respective
                                                                                3    4
                                                        Years                                     Years
numbers have gone up to 5% and 0.75 ppt respectively. Stronger global dividend and real
rate reactions to U.S. monetary
                            1.5 policy, however, are insufficient
                                                           1.5    to explain the stronger
equity price responses.
                                        1.0                                       1.0
    The implied risk-neutral equity price Q RN , calculated according to equation (7) from
                                 ppt




                                                                           ppt




the dividend  and rate
          Risk-free interest rate
                              0.5 responses alone, suggests 0.5
                                                             that dividend and safe rate
responses Center
          explain   only about 25% of the post-1980 equity price response over 4 years.
                 rate
Fluctuations in risk appetite0.0
                              are by far the most important0.0driver, accounting for three
quarters of the response.               -0.5                                     -0.5
                                               0   1      02   1   32  43
    Moreover, Figure 7 shows how muchYears
                                       stronger the response has become
                                                                  Years  from4 one
globalization era to the next. Before 1914, equity markets reacted to rate changes much
as would be expected from a risk-neutral investor. Equity prices declined in response
to a 100 bp increase of the policy rate of the Bank of England, but there is no major
impact above and beyond the risk neutral path. In the post-1980 globalization, this effect
is magnified by the effect on risk appetite.

                                                              16
4.3.   Expected equity return premium responses
So far we have looked at the reaction of global risk appetite to center-country policy
shocks only indirectly, by separating the fundamental component Q RN from the actually
realized equity price response Q. The resulting difference between the two responses
indicates changes in risk appetite. Alternatively, we can look at the direct response of
the equity return premium, ERP. The difficulty here is that we are interested in the
ex-ante expected equity return premium that international investors require, as a measure
of global risk appetite. However, we only observe the ex-post realized equity return
premium.
   In order to get a sense of the response of the ex-ante expected equity return premium
to center-country monetary policy changes we propose a strategy that allows us to derive
a lower bound estimate of the response of ex-ante expected equity return premiums from
their ex-post realized counterparts. Specifically, the h-period ahead expected equity return
premium Et ( ERPt+h ), for h = 0, 1, 2, ..., H, can be decomposed into the ex-post realized
equity return premium ERPt+h and an expectation error ηt+h :

                        Et ( ERPt+1+h ) =        ERPt+1+h            − ηt + h .            (8)
                        |      {z    }           | {z   }
                       ex-ante expected ERP   ex-post realized ERP

                                                                          Q t +1 + Dt +1
Recall the ex-post realized equity return premium is ERPt+1 =             − Rt+1 . In order
                                                                                Qt
to determine how the ex-ante expected equity return premium reacts to center-country
monetary policy changes, we need to know how the expectation error ηt reacts.
    Under rational expectations, the expectation error is fully explained by exogenous
innovations to the shock process and is restricted to the period in which the shock occurs,
i.e. ηt+h = 0 for h > 0. Thus, we only need an estimate for the expectation error in the
contemporaneous period, ηt , in order to translate the ex-post realized ERP response into
the ex-ante expected ERP response.
    An estimate for ηt can be obtained by assuming that the contemporaneous response of
the ex-ante expected ERP is 0, a conservative estimate as will be discussed in a moment:

                                    ∂Et ( ERPt+1 )
                                                   ∆Rct = 0 .                              (9)
                                          ∂Rct

   This implies that, up to a first order Taylor approximation, the estimated contempora-
neous response of the ex-post realized ERP constitutes an estimate of the contemporane-

                                               17
ous expectation error ηt :6

                          ∂ERPt+1        ∂Et ( ERPt+1 )        ∂ERPt+1
                   ηt =       c   ∆Rct −         c      ∆Rct =     c   ∆Rct .                     (10)
                            ∂Rt                ∂Rt               ∂Rt

   On the basis of this estimate for ηt , the cumulative response of the ex-ante expected
ERP can simply be calculated as the cumulative response of the ex-post realized ERP
shifted by the expectation error ηt :

                          H                           H
                               ∂Et ( ERPt+h )            ∂ERPt+h
                          ∑          ∂Rtc     ∆Rt = ∑
                                                c
                                                           ∂Rtc  ∆Rct −ηt .                       (11)
                          h =1                      h =1
                          |           {z        } |         {z     }
                           expected ERP response    realized ERP response

   Note that the resulting impulse response function estimate constitutes a lower bound
estimate, in the sense that most empirical studies on the effects of monetary policy on risk
premiums and risk taking suggest that within the first 12 months after a contractionary
monetary policy shock risk premiums are up and risk appetite is down (see Bekaert et al.,
2013; Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005; Bruno and Shin, 2015; Gertler and Karadi, 2015). Thus,
assuming a 0 contemporary response in the ex-ante expected ERP (see equation 9) is
conservative.
   Figure 8 depicts the resulting impulse response function estimates for the ex-ante
expected ERPs (solid black line), ex-post realized ERPs (dashed blue line), as well
as equity prices for various subsamples. The figure shows that the global impact of
financial center-country monetary policy on global equity prices is mostly a post-WW2
phenomenon, and especially a post-1980 one. Within the post-WW2 sample, the global
response of the ERP grows stronger over time, with equity prices decreasing by about
10% from trend value after a 1 ppt Fed rate hike. The expected ERP that investors require
to hold equity increases by 5 to 10 ppts. In light of these results, U.S. monetary policy is
indeed a powerful driver of return premiums in global equity markets.


4.4.    Exchange rate regimes
Risk-appetite spillovers of US monetary policy are substantial. Do floating exchange rates
help countries avoid such spillovers? Floating exchange rates are thought to insulate
domestic interest rates from foreign interest rates. But it is unclear whether this insulation
   6 Thisis assuming that innovations to center-country rates are not correlated with other shocks. For
correlated shocks the contemporaneous response reflects expectation errors related to different shocks.

                                                   18
                                         Figure 8: Equity prices and equity return premiums

                           Pre-WW2                                 Post-WW2                                 Post-1970                               Post-1980
             5.0                                     5.0                                      5.0                                     5.0
             0.0                                     0.0                                      0.0                                     0.0
     %




                                             %




                                                                                      %




                                                                                                                              %
            -5.0                                    -5.0                                     -5.0                                    -5.0
           -10.0                                   -10.0                                    -10.0                                   -10.0
           -15.0                                   -15.0                                    -15.0                                   -15.0
                       0   1     2   3   4                     0    1     2   3   4                     0   1     2   3   4                     0   1     2   3   4
                               Years                                    Years                                   Years                                   Years

                                                                              Equity price

                           Pre-WW2                                 Post-WW2                                 Post-1970                               Post-1980
           15.0                                    15.0                                     15.0                                    15.0
           10.0                                    10.0                                     10.0                                    10.0
     ppt




                                             ppt




                                                                                      ppt




                                                                                                                              ppt
            5.0                                     5.0                                      5.0                                     5.0
            0.0                                     0.0                                      0.0                                     0.0
           -5.0                                    -5.0                                     -5.0                                    -5.0
                   0       1     2   3   4                 0       1      2   3   4                 0       1     2   3   4                 0       1     2   3   4
                               Years                                    Years                                   Years                                   Years

                                                                   Expected ERP                Realized ERP



Notes: Cumulative impulse response functions to +1ppt increase in financial center interest rates. Confi-
dence bands calculated on the basis of Driscoll-Kraay standard errors.



generalizes to risk premiums and risk appetite more generally. It is natural to ask the
extent to which floating exchange rates effectively decouple domestic financial conditions
from substantial comovements in risk appetite. To address this question we condition our
previous analysis on a country’s exchange rate regime.
   The classification of the exchange rate regime has occupied international economists
for a long time (Klein and Shambaugh, 2015). Before WW2 we define our peg-float
dummy variable following Obstfeld et al. (2004) and Obstfeld et al. (2005); thereafter
we rely on the exchange rate regime classification scheme of Ilzetzki et al. (2017) for
1940–1959, and the Shambaugh exchange rate classification dataset for 1960–2014 (Klein
and Shambaugh, 2008; Obstfeld et al., 2010; Shambaugh, 2004).
   Our peg dummy takes the value of 1 if a country was on the gold standard before
1940. From 1940 onwards, it takes the value of 1 for economies whose exchange rate
stays within a +/- 2% band, and is 0 otherwise. We follow Obstfeld et al. (2005) in not
considering one-off realignements as breaks in the peg regime. Similarly, single-year pegs

                                                                                  19
are recoded as floats, as they quite likely simply reflect a lack of variation in the exchange
rate.
   Using this exchange rate indicator, we estimate local projections according to the
following specification:

                                 L                    L
         ∆h yi,t+h = αih +       ∑   βhk ∆yi,t−k +   ∑ γkh ∆Rct−k
                             k =1                    k =0
                       L                                     L
                  +   ∑δ     h
                                 ∆Rct−k   × f loati,t +     ∑ φkh Xi,t−k + ui,t−1+h ,   h = 1, ..., H ,   (12)
                      k =0                                  k =0

where αi are country-fixed effects, ∆h yi,t+h are h-year changes the dependent variable and
ui,t+h are error terms.
   The {γ0h }h=1,...,H in expression (12) trace out the average response of international
equity prices over the H years following a center-country policy rate shock ∆Rc . The
{δ0h }h=1,...,H capture the difference in the response between pegs and floats. f loati,t is a
dummy variable that is 1 in periods when the exchange rate with respect to the center-
country floats, has been floating for the previous 3 years, and will be floating for the
following 4 years (i.e. the entire projection horizon). Analogously the dummy is 0 in years
when the exchange rate is fixed in the current year, was fixed throughout the previous
3 years and continued to be fixed in the 4 years to come. This definition ensures that
estimated impulse response functions clearly distinguish between pegs and floats. In
all cases we make use of the bilateral peg dummy describing the exchange rate regime
status between any country and the center-country. In addition to the control variables
used previously (see equation (5)) X we also include a binary indicator for the existence
of capital controls. The capital control dummy is described in detail in Jordà, Schularick,
and Taylor (2015).
     Figures 9 and 11 show the international responses of equity prices and ERP for the
full sample. The equity price- and ERP responses tend to be stronger for countries whose
exchange rate is pegged to the USD. Over the full sample, equity prices are down by
3% in year 1, while there is no significant response among floats. On average pegs’ risk
appetite still tends to be more affected than floaters’ risk appetite although the effects
are weak. Tables 1 and 3 show the impulse responses for pegs and floats and the p-value
for a Wald-test for equality of the impulse responses. The tests confirm that historically
the response to center-country monetary policy changes has been significantly more
pronounced for pegs.

                                                            20
    Table 1: Exchange rate regime and equity price responses, full sample: Table and test for equality

                                     (1)            (2)                    (3)                (4)          (5)
                                   Year 0         Year 1                 Year 2             Year 3       Year 4
Pegs                                -0.88        -2.91∗∗∗                 -2.22              -0.46        0.16
                                   (0.69)         (1.08)                 (1.52)             (1.80)       (2.01)

Floats                              0.46            -0.50                  0.00              -0.74        -0.52
                                   (0.40)          (0.62)                 (0.88)            (1.04)       (1.16)
Peg=Float (p-value)                0.05∗          0.02∗∗                      0.14           0.87         0.73
R2                                   0.57          0.57                       0.44           0.37         0.31
Observations                         810           810                        810            810          810
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10,   ∗∗   p < 0.05,     ∗∗∗   p < 0.01.
Wald test for equality of peg and float responses.




               Figure 9: Exchange rate regime and equity price responses, full sample: Figures

                             Pegs                                                         Floats
     4.0                                                     4.0

     2.0                                                     2.0

     0.0                                                     0.0
%




                                                         %




    -2.0                                                     -2.0

    -4.0                                                     -4.0

    -6.0                                                     -6.0
           0         1         2            3        4              0            1          2        3           4
                             Years                                                        Years

                                                Equity price




                                                     21
    Table 2: Exchange rate regime and equity price responses, post-1945: Table and test for equality

                                        (1)            (2)                     (3)               (4)          (5)
                                      Year 0        Year 1                   Year 2            Year 3       Year 4
Pegs                                   -1.46        -8.36∗∗                   -6.94             3.05         6.63
                                      (2.23)         (3.79)                  (5.55)            (6.46)       (7.17)

Floats                                0.94∗         -3.10∗∗∗                   -1.17            0.12         -0.06
                                      (0.57)         (0.97)                   (1.43)           (1.66)       (1.85)
Peg=Float (p-value)                     0.27          0.15                        0.29          0.64         0.34
R2                                      0.74          0.70                        0.55          0.52         0.48
Observations                            577           577                         577           577          577
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10,     ∗∗   p < 0.05,       ∗∗∗   p < 0.01.
Wald test for equality of peg and float responses.




                 Figure 10: Exchange rate regime and equity price responses, post-1945: Figures

                                Pegs                                                          Floats
     20.0                                                       20.0

     10.0                                                       10.0
%




                                                            %




       0.0                                                       0.0

    -10.0                                                       -10.0

    -20.0                                                       -20.0
             0          1         2            3      4                 0                1      2       3       4
                                Years                                                         Years

                                                   Equity price




                                                          22
Table 3: Exchange rate regime and equity return premium responses, full sample: Table and test for equality

                                     (1)           (2)                     (3)          (4)           (5)
                                   Year 0       Year 1                   Year 2       Year 3        Year 4
 Pegs                               0.00        3.56∗∗∗                  2.91∗∗       3.19∗∗         0.84
                                   (1.23)        (1.28)                  (1.28)       (1.26)        (1.31)

 Floats                             0.00        1.90∗∗                    -0.28       2.74∗∗∗       2.39∗∗∗
                                   (0.71)       (0.74)                   (0.74)        (0.73)        (0.75)
 Peg=Float (p-value)                1.00          0.56                   0.07∗          0.71         0.06
 R2                                 0.43          0.46                    0.45          0.48         0.43
 Observations                       810           810                     810           810          810
 Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
 Wald test for equality of peg and float responses (based on realized ERP).




         Figure 11: Exchange rate regime and equity return premium responses, full sample: Figures

                             Pegs                                                     Floats
       6.0                                                    6.0

       4.0                                                    4.0

       2.0                                                    2.0
 ppt




                                                        ppt




       0.0                                                    0.0

       -2.0                                                   -2.0

       -4.0                                                   -4.0
              0      1         2            3       4                0            1     2       3           4
                             Years                                                    Years

                                       Expected ERP            Realized ERP




                                                      23
Table 4: Exchange rate regime and equity return premium responses, post-1945: Table and test for equality

                                 (1)               (2)                   (3)               (4)          (5)
                               Year 0           Year 1                 Year 2           Year 3        Year 4
 Pegs                           0.00            12.73∗∗               19.38∗∗∗          12.85∗∗        4.84
                               (4.96)            (5.03)                (5.06)            (4.93)       (4.87)

 Floats                             0.00        7.64∗∗∗                   4.83∗∗∗       3.36∗∗∗       3.29∗∗∗
                                   (1.28)        (1.30)                    (1.30)        (1.27)        (1.25)
 Peg=Float (p-value)               1.00          0.72                      0.12           0.58         0.26
 R2                                0.52          0.56                      0.54           0.59         0.59
 Observations                       577          577                       577            577          577
 Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
 Wald test for equality of peg and float responses (based on realized ERP).




         Figure 12: Exchange rate regime and equity return premium responses, post-1945: Figures

                             Pegs                                                       Floats
        30.0                                                  30.0

        20.0                                                  20.0
  ppt




                                                        ppt




        10.0                                                  10.0

         0.0                                                   0.0

        -10.0                                                 -10.0
                0    1         2            3      4                  0             1     2       3          4
                             Years                                                      Years

                                       Expected ERP           Realized ERP




                                                       24
   We now turn to the post-WW2 subsample, as our previous results show that this is
the period when risk premium spillovers were strongest. Figures 10 and 12 show the
differential equity price- and ERP responses of pegs and floats to a +1ppt change in the
U.S. rate. We find that for the post-WW2 sample the peg-float dichotomy is somewhat
less stark. Floaters’ equity prices and ERP now also show a response to center-country
interest rate changes, but on a smaller scale. Pegs on average still exhibit a much stronger
response, based on point estimates. However, the precision of these estimates is weak,
Tables 2 and 4 show that a Wald test for equality of responses is unable to reject the null
of equality at conventional confidence levels.


                                  5.    Monetary policy shocks

Although arguably exogenous from the perspective of a small economy, center country
policy changes might not be unanticipated. To address such concerns, we confirm the
above results using the high-frequency instruments (HFIs) for monetary policy changes
discussed by Gürkaynak et al. (2005) and Gertler and Karadi (2015) in a local projection
instrumental variable (LPIV) framework (see Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor, 2017b). These
instruments measure changes in futures markets in a short time window around FOMC
announcements and thereby capture the “surprise” component of a rate change.
   The local projection instrumental variable approach to estimating impulse responses
using high-frequency monetary policy instruments can be laid out as the following 2SLS
setup. First the second-stage LP is specified as:

                       5                      5                         5
  ∆h yi,t+h = αih +   ∑      βhk ∆yi,t−k +   ∑      γkh ∆ R̂i,t
                                                            c
                                                                −k +   ∑ δkh Xi,t−k + ui,t+h ,   h = 1, ..., H , (13)
                      k =1                   k =0                      k =0


where R̂ct is the prediction from a first-stage regression of the effective federal funds rate
Rc on the high-frequency instruments and specified as:

              Rct = θ0 + θ1 FF1t + θ3 FF3t + θ6 ED6t + θ9 ED9 + θ1 2ED12 + et ,                                 (14)

where FF1, FF3, ED6, ED9 and ED12 are the high-frequency instruments. In the order
specified, they are the unexpected changes in the Federal Funds futures of the current
month, the 3-month ahead monthly Fed Funds futures and the 6-, 9- and 12-month ahead
futures on 3-month Eurodollar deposits.

                                                             25
         Figure 13: Decomposing the global equity price response (high frequency instruments)


                                                  Post-1990: Baseline                     Post-1990: HF-Instrument
                                   20.0                                           20.0



                                       0.0                                         0.0

              Equity price
                               %




                                                                            %
              Risk-neutral         -20.0                                        -20.0



                                   -40.0                                        -40.0

                                              0     1      2        3   4                 0    1     2     3     4
                                                         Years                                     Years


                                   20.0                                           20.0



                                       0.0                                         0.0
                               %




              Dividend             -20.0                                    %     -20.0



                                   -40.0                                          -40.0

                                              0     1      2        3   4                 0    1     2     3     4
                                                         Years                                     Years


                                        3.0                                        3.0


                                        2.0                                        2.0
                                 ppt




                                                                            ppt




                                        1.0                                        1.0
              Risk-free rate
              Center rate               0.0                                        0.0


                                       -1.0                                        -1.0

                                              0      1     2        3   4                 0    1     2     3     4
                                                         Years                                     Years



Notes: Cumulative impulse response functions to +1ppt increase in financial center interest rates. Risk-
neutral – risk neutral price (Q RN ). Center rate – U.S. short-term risk-free rate own response. Confidence
bands calculated on the basis of Driscoll-Kraay standard errors. Risk neutral price (Q RN ) calculated accord-
ing to equation 7.



                                                               26
                                   Table 5: First stage regression results

                            (1)              (2)              (3)                    (4)      (5)
 FF1                     1.88∗∗∗                           1.22∗∗∗                         1.46∗∗∗
                          (0.15)                            (0.26)                          (0.28)

 FF3                                      2.13∗∗∗          0.93∗∗∗                         1.08∗∗∗
                                           (0.19)           (0.32)                          (0.38)

 ED6                                                                             1.41∗     -1.75∗
                                                                                 (0.80)    (0.89)

 ED9                                                                              1.92      0.90
                                                                                 (1.38)    (1.26)

 ED12                                                                           -1.84∗∗     0.52
                                                                                 (0.91)    (0.78)
 R2                       0.35              0.31             0.36                 0.17      0.38
 Observations             284               270              270                  342       270
 Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,   ∗∗∗   p < 0.01.
 Dependent variable: federal funds target rate change in ppts.
 All variables in ppts changes; monthly observations.




   We aggregate the monthly first stage predictions up to the annual level by taking the
total sum of the predicted values over the twelve months within each year. Due to the
shorter time span for which the high-frequency instruments are available this setup only
allows us to compare the post-1990 impulse response functions.

   The first stage results are displayed in Table 5. The high-frequency instruments
are clearly relevant with R2 statistics ranging from 0.17 to 0.38, depending on which
instruments are included. The following results are based on the specification including
all HFIs (depicted in column 5).

   The impulse responses we obtain for our baseline approach and the HFI approach are
reassuringly similar in direction and magnitude, indicating that center-country interest
rate changes can indeed be treated as largely exogenous for the rest of the world. Also
note that the post-1990 responses are stronger than the post-1980 ones, indicating that the
impact of U.S. monetary policy on the rest of the world has grown over time—similar to
the results we presented above.

                                                     27
                                            6.    Discussion

What explains the late 20th century rise in international risk premium synchronization?
The post-Bretton Woods synchronization of risk-premiums coincides with a rollback of
capital controls and financial liberalization. These changes may have led to an increase
in the international synchronization of risk premiums via the balance sheets of financial
intermediaries (Ueda, 2012). Cross-country market integration of safe and risky assets
should, by arbitrage, lead to an international equalization of the return on assets within
the same risk-class, and hence an international equalization of risk premiums (Dedola and
Lombardo, 2012). Kollmann et al. (2011) and Alpanda and Aysun (2014) present theoretical
accounts where the equalization of global returns springs from the optimization problem
of a global bank that aims to equalize its returns across regions. The observation that the
post-Bretton Woods synchronization of risk premiums coincides with a period of capital
account liberalization is consistent with such models. However, explanations based on
financial openness beg the question of why risk premium comovement did not occur
already in the first era of financial globalization before 1914 (Quinn and Voth, 2008).7
    Behavioral theories of financial market behavior also offer explanations for investor
overreaction. Behavioral theories attribute excess variation in asset prices to systematic
mis-judgements in human psychology (Akerlof and Shiller, 2010; Kahneman and Tversky,
1979; Shiller, 2000) and to collective manias and panics (Kindleberger, 1978). The wedge
that such ”animal spirits” drive between fundamentals and asset valuations can help
understand observed asset pricing puzzles (Bordalo et al., 2012; Gennaioli and Shleifer,
2010). If globally synchronized, behavioral forces could explain the international comove-
ment of equity prices above and beyond what can be explained by fundamentals. For
example, in a globalized world economy with global news flows, investors’ sentiment
can be synchronized by their exposure to a similar set of information.
    Our empirical investigation does not provide conclusive evidence, but we note that
the temporal pattern of international risk premium comovement again begs the question
why behavioral forces did not induce extensive comovement in risk appetite in earlier
   7 The  extent of international financial market integration in the late 19th and late 20th centuries differs in
several respects. While (net) cross-border capital flows and (net) foreign asset positions are comparable
across both globalizations (Obstfeld and Taylor, 2004), financial globalization in the late 20th century
encompassed a wider range of financial assets than did its late 19th century precursor (Bordo et al., 1998).
In particular late 19th century financial globalization was focused in industries with high tangible capital
that were less plagued by information asymetries, such as railways, public bonds, mining and public
utilities. Put differently, measured risk premiums might not be comparable across time.

                                                       28
periods of financial globalization when international investors presumably were subject
to the same cognitive constraints and similar information flows.
    One explanation of this historical puzzle could be a key difference between the
architecture of the late 19th and late 20th century international monetary systems. Prior to
1914, global money aggregates were linked (to some degree) to global gold supply, which
was fixed in the short run. As a consequence, global liquidity supply was quite inelastic in
the short-run. On a regional level, it was zero-sum, and gold inflows and credit expansions
in one region tended to be somewhat offset by gold outflows and credit contractions in
other regions, as David Hume’s famous theory proposed (Hume, 1742). The pre-1914
gold standard thus introduced a desynchronizing force into global finance that may have
impeded the emergence of globally synchronized risk premiums. In contrast, in the
post-Bretton Woods period, global finance has been built on a fiat money system that
allows for a more elastic supply of liquidity, and no regional zero-sum effects. By and
large, such a system is more likely to accommodate a globally synchronized expansion of
liquidity supply and comovement in risk premiums. Such different elasticities of global
liquidity in the pre-1914 and post-1970 financial globalizations could help to explain the
temporal pattern of risk premium comovement we observe.
    Another strand of the theoretical literature on global financial spillovers that could
account for the observed temporal pattern of risk premium comovement relates to the
form of international financial intermediation. What is new in the late 20th century
financial globalization is that international banks play a central role (Cassis et al., 2016,
ch.11). The earlier financial globalization was not dominated by leveraged financial
intermediaries. Instead, wealthy private individuals and mutual funds were the main
vehicles for international capital flows (see Feis, 1964; Michie, 1986).
    If banks hold foreign assets on their balance sheets and mark them to market, price
changes can synchronize the risk appetite and the trading behavior of banks around the
world (Adrian and Shin, 2009; Bruno and Shin, 2015; Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2015;
Ward, 2018). For instance, if Federal Reserve policy affects U.S. equity prices, falling
asset prices in the U.S. decrease (risk-weighted)-asset-capital ratios of U.S. as well as
international banks which start to cut down their risk-taking in sync with U.S. banks.
If no large risk-neutral player steps in to compensate for the lower risk taking of the
leverage-constrained intermediaries, risk-spreads will increase.8

   8 Foropen economy models where international spillovers become stronger in the level of intermediary
leverage see Devereux and Yetman (2010) and Ueda (2012).

                                                  29
   Schularick and Taylor (2012) show that late 20th century banking is characterized by
an explosion in bank credit and total bank assets, giving rise to a ”financial hockey stick”
pattern in the global credit-to-GDP ratio, that is reminiscient of the temporal pattern
in international risk premium correlations. That this ‘’financial hockey stick” pattern
is closely related to important international business cycle moments has already been
established by Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2016). For instance, investment and credit
growth comovement increases in the bank credit-to-GDP ratio. The broad picture here is
consistent with an important role of intermediary balance sheets for the amplification of
international financial spillovers (Alpanda and Aysun, 2014; Dedola and Lombardo, 2012;
Devereux and Yetman, 2010; Kollmann et al., 2011).


                                   7.   Conclusions

Based on our analysis we draw the following conclusions: First, the comovement in
total loans, house prices, and equity prices has reached historical highs over the past
few decades. In this sense it is possible to speak about a global financial cycle among
developed economies. Second, the post-1980 increase in equity price comovement is
particularly notable, because it has reached historically unprecedented levels and sub-
stantially exceeds the increase in the comovement in other real or financial variables.
Third, the post-1980 synchronization of equity prices cannot be easily accounted for by
the behavior of dividends or risk-free rates, but instead must be attributed to other factors.
Here we have summarized such other factors under the label risk appetite, which includes
factors, such as time variation in investor sentiment, or financial frictions.
   What explains these evolving patterns? Monetary policy in center countries is one
of the common drivers of global financial conditions, and thus one of the potential
explanations for international financial comovement. Our analysis of the international
spillover effects of financial center monetary policy leads us to the following conclusions:
First, we find that the influence of U.S. monetary policy on international equity markets
has increased over the 20th century. Second, a large part of the increasing influence of U.S.
monetary policy on international equity markets cannot be accounted for by its increasing
influence on international dividends and risk-free rates, but instead must be attributed to
the other factors summarized here as risk appetite.
   Our analysis of financial comovement over the past 150 years adds a long-run perspec-
tive to the literature on international financial comovement. The aspects of the Global

                                             30
Financial Cycle we identify have been a pervasive feature throughout modern history,
but right now their intensity has reached a peak. In contrast to the past, shocks to
center-country monetary conditions and investor risk appetite seem to play the driving
role in this outcome



                                         References

Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin. 2009. Money, liquidity, and monetary policy. American
  Economic Review 99(2): 600–605.
Aikman, David, Andrew G. Haldane, and Benjamin D. Nelson. 2014. Curbing the credit cycle.
  Economic Journal 125(585): 1072–1109.
Akerlof, George A., and Robert J. Shiller. 2010. Animal spirits: How human psychology drives the
  economy, and why it matters for global capitalism. Princeton University Press.
Alpanda, Sami, and Uluc Aysun. 2014. International transmission of financial shocks in an
  estimated DSGE model. Journal of International Money and Finance 47: 21–55.
Ammer, John, and Jianping Mei. 1996. Measuring international economic linkages with stock
  market data. Journal of Finance 51(5): 1743–1763.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop. 2013. Sudden spikes in global risk. Journal of
  International Economics 89(2): 511–521.
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland. 1992. International real business cycles.
  Journal of Political Economy 100(4): 745–775.
Bekaert, Geert, Marie Hoerova, and Marco Lo Duca. 2013. Risk, uncertainty and monetary policy.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 60(7): 771–788.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Kenneth N. Kuttner. 2005. What explains the stock market’s reaction to
  Federal Reserve policy? Journal of Finance 60(3): 1221–1257.
Bjørnland, Hilde C., and Kai Leitemo. 2009. Identifying the interdependence between US monetary
  policy and the stock market. Journal of Monetary Economics 56(2): 275–282.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2012. Salience theory of choice under risk.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3): 1243–1285.
Bordo, Michael D., Barry Eichengreen, and Jongwoo Kim. 1998. Was there really an earlier period
  of international financial integration comparable to today? NBER Working Paper 6738.
Bordo, Michael D., and Thomas Helbling. 2003. Have national business cycles become more
  synchronized? NBER Working Paper 10130.
Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. 2014. Cross-border banking and global liquidity. Review of
  Economic Studies 82(2): 535–564.
Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. 2015. Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of
  monetary policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 71: 119–132.
Cagliarini, Adam, and Fiona Price. 2017. Exploring the link between the macroeconmic and
  financial cycles. RBA Working Paper.
Campbell, John Y. 1991. A variance decomposition for stock returns. Economic Journal 101(405):
  157–179.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller. 1988. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
  dividends and discount factors. Review of Financial Studies 1(3): 195–228.

                                                31
Canova, Fabio. 2005. The transmission of US shocks to Latin America. Journal of Applied Economet-
  rics 20(2): 229–251.
Cassis, Youssef, Richard S. Grossman, and Catherine R. Schenk. 2016. The Oxford Handbook of
  Banking and Financial History. Oxford University Press.
Castelnuovo, Efrem, and Salvatore Nisticò. 2010. Stock market conditions and monetary policy in
  a DSGE model for the US. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 34(9): 1700–1731.
Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens, and Lev Ratnovski. 2014. Global liquidity and drivers of
  cross-border bank flows. IMF Working Paper 14/69.
Cetorelli, Nicola, and Linda S. Goldberg. 2012. Banking globalization and monetary transmission.
  Journal of Finance 67(5): 1811–1843.
Chadha, Jagjit S., Lucio Sarno, and Giorgio Valente. 2004. Monetary policy rules, asset prices, and
  exchange rates. IMF Economic Review 51(3): 529–552.
Chiţu, Livia, Barry Eichengreen, and Arnaud Mehl. 2014. When did the Dollar overtake Sterling
  as the leading international currency? Evidence from the bond markets. Journal of Development
  Economics 111: 225–245.
Claessens, Stijn, M. Ayhan Kose, and Marco E. Terrones. 2011. Financial Cycles: What? How?
  When? NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 7(1): 303–344.
Cochrane, John H. 2005. Asset pricing: Revised edition. Princeton University Press.
Dedola, Luca, and Giovanni Lombardo. 2012. Financial frictions, financial integration and the
  international propagation of shocks. Economic Policy 27(70): 319–359.
Devereux, Michael B., and James Yetman. 2010. Leverage constraints and the international
  transmission of shocks. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42(s1): 71–105.
Drehmann, Mathias, Claudio Borio, and Kostas Tsatsaronis. 2012. Characterising the financial
  cycle: Don’t lose sight of the medium term! BIS Working Papers 380.
Driscoll, John C., and Aart C. Kraay. 1998. Consistent covariance matrix estimation with spatially
  dependent panel data. Review of Economics and Statistics 80(4): 549–560.
Dumas, Bernard, Campbell R. Harvey, and Pierre Ruiz. 2003. Are correlations of stock returns
  justified by subsequent changes in national outputs? Journal of International Money and Finance
  22(6): 777–811.
Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher, and Roberto Rigobon. 2011. Stocks, bonds, money mar-
  kets and exchange rates: Measuring international financial transmission. Journal of Applied
  Econometrics 26(6): 948–974.
Engsted, Tom, and Carsten Tanggaard. 2004. The comovement of US and UK stock markets.
  European Financial Management 10(4): 593–607.
Feis, Herbert. 1964. Europe, the world’s banker, 1870-1914: An account of European foreign investment
  and the connection of world finance with diplomacy before the war. Augustus M. Kelley.
Forbes, Kristin J., and Roberto Rigobon. 2002. No contagion, only interdependence: Measuring
  stock market comovements. The Journal of Finance 57(5): 2223–2261.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos. 2008. Leverage cycles and the anxious economy. The American
  Economic Review 98(4): 1211–1244.
Furlanetto, Francesco. 2011. Does monetary policy react to asset prices? Some international
  evidence. International Journal of Central Banking 7(3): 91–111.
Galı́, Jordi, and Luca Gambetti. 2015. The effects of monetary policy on stock market bubbles:
  Some evidence. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(1): 233–257.
Gennaioli, Nicola, and Andrei Shleifer. 2010. What comes to mind. Quarterly Journal of Economics


                                                 32
   125(4): 1399–1433.
Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi. 2015. Monetary policy surprises, credit costs, and economic
   activity. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(1): 44–76.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric T. Swanson. 2005. Do actions speak louder than words?
   The response of asset prices to monetary policy actions and statements. International Journal of
   Central Banking 1(1): 55–93.
Hamilton, James D. forthcoming. Why you should never use the Hodrick-Prescott filter. Review
   of Economics and Statistics.
Harding, Don, and Adrian Pagan. 2002. Dissecting the cycle: A methodological investigation.
   Journal of Monetary Economics 49(2): 365–381.
Hume, David. 1742. Of the balance of trade. In Essays: Moral, Political, and Literary, edited by
   Miller, Eugene F., chapter II, essay V. Liberty Fund Inc., 1987 edition.
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2017. Exchange rate arrangements
   entering the 21st century: Which anchor will hold? NBER Working Paper 23134.
Jordà, Òscar. 2005. Estimation and inference of impulse responses by local projections. American
   Economic Review 95(1): 161–182.
Jordà, Òscar, Katharina Knoll, Dmitry Kuvshinov, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2017a.
   The rate of return on everything, 1870-2015. NBER Working Paper 24112.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2015. Betting the house. Journal of International
   Economics 96: 2–18.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2016. Macrofinancial history and the new
   business cycle facts. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 31(1): 213–263.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2017b. The effects of quasi-random monetary
   experiments. NBER Working Paper 23074.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.
   Econometrica 47(2): 263–291.
Kapetanios, George. 2008. A bootstrap procedure for panel data sets with many cross-sectional
   units. Econometrics Journal 11(2): 377–395.
Kim, Soyoung. 2001. International transmission of US monetary policy shocks: Evidence from
   VAR’s. Journal of Monetary Economics 48(2): 339–372.
Kindleberger, Charles P. 1978. Manias, panics, and crashes: A history of financial crises. New York:
   Wiley, 2005 edition.
Klein, Michael W., and Jay C. Shambaugh. 2008. The dynamics of exchange rate regimes: Fixes,
   floats, and flips. Journal of International Economics 75(1): 70–92.
Klein, Michael W., and Jay C. Shambaugh. 2015. Rounding the corners of the policy trilemma:
   Sources of monetary policy autonomy. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(4): 33–66.
Kollmann, Robert, Zeno Enders, and Gernot J. Müller. 2011. Global banking and international
   business cycles. European Economic Review 55(3): 407–426.
Kuvshinov, Dmitry. 2018. Time-varying risk, sentiment and the macroeconomy. Unpublished
   manuscript.
Meller, Barbara, and Norbert Metiu. 2017. The synchronization of credit cycles. Journal of Banking
   and Finance 82: 98–111.
Michie, Ranald C. 1986. The London and New York stock exchanges, 1850–1914. Journal of
   Economic History 46(1): 171–187.
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Hélene Rey. 2015. World asset markets and the global financial


                                                  33
  cycle. NBER Working Paper 21722.
Obstfeld, Maurice. 2014. Trilemmas and trade-offs: Living with financial globalization. BIS
  Working Paper 480.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2004. Monetary sovereignty, exchange
  rates, and capital controls: The trilemma in the interwar period. IMF Staff Papers 51(1): 75–108.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2005. The trilemma in history: Tradeoffs
  among exchange rates, monetary policies, and capital mobility. Review of Economics and Statistics
  87(3): 423–438.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2010. Financial stability, the trilemma,
  and international reserves. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(2): 57–94.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor. 2004. Global capital markets: Integration, crisis, and growth.
  Cambridge University Press.
Quinn, Dennis P., and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2008. A century of global equity market correlations.
  American Economic Review 98(2): 535–540.
Rigobon, Roberto, and Brian Sack. 2004. The impact of monetary policy on asset prices. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 51(8): 1553–1575.
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor. 2012. Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy, leverage
  cycles and financial crises, 1870–2008. American Economic Review 102(2): 1029–1061.
Schüler, Yves Stephan, Paul Hiebert, and Tuomas A. Peltonen. 2015. Characterising the financial
  cycle: A multivariate and time-varying approach. ECB Working Paper 1846.
Shambaugh, Jay C. 2004. The effect of fixed exchange rates on monetary policy. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 119(1): 301–352.
Shiller, Robert J. 1981a. Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes in
  dividends? American Economic Review 71(3): 421–436.
Shiller, Robert J. 1981b. The use of volatility measures in assessing market efficiency. Journal of
  Finance 36(2): 291–304.
Shiller, Robert J. 2000. Irrational exuberance. Wiley Online Library.
Shin, Hyun Song. 2012. Global banking glut and loan risk premium. IMF Economic Review 60(2):
  155–192.
Ueda, Kozo. 2012. Banking globalization and international business cycles: Cross-border chained
  credit contracts and financial accelerators. Journal of International Economics 86(1): 1–16.
Ward, Felix. 2018. Global risk taking, exchange rates, and monetary policy. Working paper.




                                                 34
                                                                                                     Appendix A: Global averages

                                                                                                                                          Figure A.1: Global average cycles




                                                                                                                                          percent dev. from trend (GDP & C)
                                            9
        percent dev. from trend (L & HP)



                                                                                                     28                                                         8                                                                20                                                    35




                                                                                                           percent dev. from trend (EP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ppt/percent dev. from trend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       percent dev. from trend (I)
                                            6                                                                                                                   6                                                                14                                                    27
                                                                                                     22
                                            3                                                                                                                   4                                                                8                                                     19
                                                                                                     16
                                            0                                                                                                                   2                                                                2                                                     11
                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                0                                                                −4                                                     3
                                           −3                                                        4                                                         −2                                                                −10                                                   −5
                                           −6                                                        −2                                                        −4                                                                −16                                                  −13
                                           −9                                                        −8                                                        −6                                                                −22                                                  −21
                           −12                                                                       −14                                                       −8                                                                                                                     −29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −28
                           −15                                                                       −20                                                      −10                                                                −34                                                  −37
                           −18                                                                       −26                                                      −12                                                                −40                                                  −45
                                                1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                                                                            1885   1905   1925   1945   1965     1985   2005                                                                      1885   1905   1925   1945   1965   1985   2005
                                                          Total loans             Equity prices                                                                                         GDP                  Investment                                                                                           Dividends
                                                          House prices                                                                                                                  Consumption                                                                                                               Equity return premium
35




                            11                                                                                                                                 15


                                                                                                                                          percent dev. from trend (RN EP)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 28




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       percent dev. from trend (EP)
                             9                                                                                                                                 12
                             7                                                                                                                                                                                                   22
                                                                                                                                                                9
        ppt dev. from trend




                             5                                                                                                                                  6                                                                16
                             3                                                                                                                                  3                                                                10
                             1                                                                                                                                  0                                                                4
                            −1
                                                                                                                                                               −3                                                                −2
                            −3
                                                                                                                                                               −6
                            −5                                                                                                                                                                                                   −8
                                                                                                                                                               −9
                            −7                                                                                                                                                                                                   −14
                            −9                                                                                                                                −12
                                                                                                                                                              −15                                                                −20
                           −11
                           −13                                                                                                                                −18                                                                −26
                                                1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                                                                            1885   1905   1925   1945   1965     1985   2005
                                                                     ST rates                                                                                                                 Equity prices
                                                                     LT rates                                                                                                                 Risk−neutral price


     Notes: Global means. All series were detrended with a Baxter-King filter isolating cycles in the 2 to 32-year period range. The equity return
     premium series and interest rate series are depicted in levels. Outliers have been dropped from the graph in order to simplify the graphical
     exposition.
                                                                                             Figure A.2: Global average cycles (2-8 year cycles)




                                                                                                                                     percent dev. from trend (GDP & C)
        percent dev. from trend (L & HP)



                             6                                                                                                                                            7




                                                                                                      percent dev. from trend (EP)
                                                                                                22                                                                                                                               16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ppt/percent dev. from trend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       percent dev. from trend (I)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       25
                             4                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                18                                                                                                                               11                                                    17
                             2                                                                  14                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6                                                      9
                             0                                                                  10                                                                        1                                                      1                                                      1
                            −2                                                                  6                                                                        −1                                                      −4                                                    −7
                            −4                                                                  2                                                                        −3                                                      −9                                                   −15
                            −6                                                                  −2
                            −8                                                                                                                                           −5                                                      −14                                                  −23
                                                                                                −6
                           −10                                                                                                                                           −7                                                      −19                                                  −31
                                                                                                −10
                           −12                                                                  −14                                                                      −9                                                      −24                                                  −39
                           −14                                                                  −18                                                      −11                                                                     −29                                                  −47
                                           1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                                                                                 1885   1905   1925   1945   1965     1985   2005                                                                      1885   1905   1925   1945   1965   1985   2005
                                                     Total loans             Equity prices                                                                                              GDP                  Investment                                                                                           Dividends
                                                     House prices                                                                                                                       Consumption                                                                                                               Equity return premium
36




                            13


                                                                                                                                     percent dev. from trend (RN EP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       percent dev. from trend (EP)
                            11                                                                                                                                            9                                                      22
                             9                                                                                                                                            6                                                      18
        ppt dev. from trend




                             7                                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                          3
                             5                                                                                                                                                                                                   10
                             3                                                                                                                                            0                                                      6
                             1
                                                                                                                                                                         −3                                                      2
                            −1
                            −3                                                                                                                                           −6                                                      −2
                            −5                                                                                                                                                                                                   −6
                                                                                                                                                                         −9
                            −7                                                                                                                                                                                                   −10
                            −9                                                                                                                           −12                                                                     −14
                           −11                                                                                                                           −15                                                                     −18
                                           1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                                                                                 1885   1905   1925   1945   1965     1985   2005

                                                                ST rates                                                                                                                      Equity prices
                                                                LT rates                                                                                                                      Risk−neutral price


     Notes: Global means. All series were detrended with a Baxter-King filter isolating cycles in the 2 to 8-year period range. Outliers have been
     dropped from the graph in order to simplify the graphical exposition.
                                                                                             Figure A.3: Global average cycles (Hamilton filter)




                                                                                                                                     percent dev. from trend (GDP & C)
                            16
        percent dev. from trend (L & HP)



                                                                                                23                                                         8                                                                51                                                    32




                                                                                                      percent dev. from trend (EP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ppt/percent dev. from trend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  percent dev. from trend (I)
                            13                                                                  17                                                         6                                                                43                                                    24
                            10                                                                  11                                                         4                                                                35                                                    16
                             7                                                                  5                                                          2                                                                27                                                     8
                             4                                                                  −1                                                         0                                                                19                                                     0
                             1                                                                  −7                                                        −2                                                                11                                                    −8
                            −2                                                                                                                            −4                                                                3                                                    −16
                                                                                                −13
                                                                                                                                                          −6
                            −5                                                                  −19                                                                                                                         −5                                                   −24
                                                                                                                                                          −8
                            −8                                                                  −25                                                                                                                         −13                                                  −32
                                                                                                                                                         −10
                           −11                                                                  −31                                                      −12                                                                −21                                                  −40
                           −14                                                                  −37                                                      −14                                                                −29                                                  −48
                                           1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                                                                            1885   1905   1925   1945   1965     1985   2005                                                                      1885   1905   1925 1945 1965 1985      2005
                                                     Total loans             Equity prices                                                                                         GDP                  Investment                                                                                            Dividends
                                                     House prices                                                                                                                  Consumption                                                                                                                Equity return premium
37




                                                                                                                                     percent dev. from trend (RN EP)
                                                                                                                                                          20                                                                23




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  percent dev. from trend (EP)
                             7
                             5                                                                                                                            16                                                                17
        ppt dev. from trend




                             3                                                                                                                            12                                                                11
                             1                                                                                                                             8                                                                5
                            −1                                                                                                                             4                                                                −1
                            −3                                                                                                                             0                                                                −7
                            −5                                                                                                                                                                                              −13
                                                                                                                                                          −4
                            −7
                                                                                                                                                          −8                                                                −19
                            −9
                                                                                                                                                         −12                                                                −25
                           −11
                           −13                                                                                                                           −16                                                                −31
                           −15                                                                                                                           −20                                                                −37
                                           1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                                                                            1885   1905   1925   1945   1965     1985   2005
                                                                ST rates                                                                                                                 Equity prices
                                                                LT rates                                                                                                                 Risk−neutral price


     Notes: Global means. All series were detrended with the Hamilton filter, using lags one to four. Outliers have been dropped from the graph in
     order to simplify the graphical exposition.
                                                                Appendix B: Average bilateral correlations

                                                                         Figure A.4: Average bilateral correlation (2-8 year cycles)

                1.0                                                                       1.0                                                                 1.0

                0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                 0.8

                0.6                                                                       0.6                                                                 0.6
      Correlation




                                                                                Correlation




                                                                                                                                                    Correlation
                0.4                                                                       0.4                                                                 0.4

                0.2                                                                       0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.0                                                                       0.0                                                                 0.0

         −0.2                                                                      −0.2                                                                −0.2

                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                        1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945   1965   1985      2005

                                    Total loans          Equity prices                                        GDP                   Investment                                           Dividends
                                    House prices                                                              Consumption                                                                Equity return premium
38




                1.0                                                                       1.0

                0.8                                                                       0.8

                0.6                                                                       0.6
      Correlation




                                                                                Correlation




                0.4                                                                       0.4

                0.2                                                                       0.2

                0.0                                                                       0.0

         −0.2                                                                      −0.2

                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                        1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005

                                           ST rates                                                              Equity prices
                                           LT rates                                                              Risk neutral price


     Notes: Spearman rank correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows. 2 to 8-year period Baxter-King detrended series. Bars – 95%
     cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands.
                                                             Figure A.5: GDP-weighted average bilateral correlation (2-32 year cycles)
                1.0                                                                  1.0                                                                 1.0

                0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                 0.8

                0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                 0.6
      Correlation




                                                                           Correlation




                                                                                                                                               Correlation
                0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                 0.4

                0.2                                                                  0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.0                                                                  0.0                                                                 0.0

         −0.2                                                                 −0.2                                                                −0.2

                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945   1965   1985      2005

                                    Total loans          Equity prices                                   GDP                   Investment                                           Dividends
                                    House prices                                                         Consumption                                                                Equity return premium
39




                1.0                                                                  1.0

                0.8                                                                  0.8

                0.6                                                                  0.6
      Correlation




                                                                           Correlation




                0.4                                                                  0.4

                0.2                                                                  0.2

                0.0                                                                  0.0

         −0.2                                                                 −0.2

                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005

                                           ST rates                                                         Equity prices
                                           LT rates                                                         Risk neutral price


     Notes: Spearman rank correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows. 2 to 32-year period Baxter-King detrended series. Bars – 95%
     cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands.
                                                                         Figure A.6: Average bilateral correlation (Hamilton filter)
                1.0                                                                       1.0                                                                 1.0

                0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                 0.8

                0.6                                                                       0.6                                                                 0.6
      Correlation




                                                                                Correlation




                                                                                                                                                    Correlation
                0.4                                                                       0.4                                                                 0.4

                0.2                                                                       0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.0                                                                       0.0                                                                 0.0

         −0.2                                                                      −0.2                                                                −0.2

                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                        1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945   1965   1985      2005

                                    Total loans          Equity prices                                        GDP                   Investment                                           Dividends
                                    House prices                                                              Consumption                                                                Equity return premium
40




                1.0                                                                       1.0

                0.8                                                                       0.8

                0.6                                                                       0.6
      Correlation




                                                                                Correlation




                0.4                                                                       0.4

                0.2                                                                       0.2

                0.0                                                                       0.0

         −0.2                                                                      −0.2

                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                        1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005

                                           ST rates                                                              Equity prices
                                           LT rates                                                              Risk neutral price


     Notes: Spearman rank correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows. Hamilton filter detrended series (using lags one to four).
     Bars – 95% cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands.
                                                      Figure A.7: Average bilateral correlation (annual growth rates and first differences)
                1.0                                                                  1.0                                                                 1.0

                0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                 0.8

                0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                 0.6
      Correlation




                                                                           Correlation




                                                                                                                                               Correlation
                0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                 0.4

                0.2                                                                  0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.0                                                                  0.0                                                                 0.0

         −0.2                                                                 −0.2                                                                −0.2

                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945   1965   1985      2005

                                    Total loans          Equity prices                                   GDP                   Investment                                           Dividends
                                    House prices                                                         Consumption                                                                Equity return premium
41




                1.0                                                                  1.0

                0.8                                                                  0.8

                0.6                                                                  0.6
      Correlation




                                                                           Correlation




                0.4                                                                  0.4

                0.2                                                                  0.2

                0.0                                                                  0.0

         −0.2                                                                 −0.2

                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005

                                           ST rates                                                         Equity prices
                                           LT rates                                                         Risk neutral price


     Notes: Spearman rank correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows. First differences (for the equity return premium and interest
     rates) and growth rates for all other variables. Bars – 95% cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands.
                                                             Figure A.8: Average bilateral correlation (Pearson correlation coefficient)
                1.0                                                                  1.0                                                                 1.0

                0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                 0.8

                0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                 0.6
      Correlation




                                                                           Correlation




                                                                                                                                               Correlation
                0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                 0.4

                0.2                                                                  0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.0                                                                  0.0                                                                 0.0

         −0.2                                                                 −0.2                                                                −0.2

                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945   1965   1985      2005

                                    Total loans          Equity prices                                   GDP                   Investment                                           Dividends
                                    House prices                                                         Consumption                                                                Equity return premium
42




                1.0                                                                  1.0

                0.8                                                                  0.8

                0.6                                                                  0.6
      Correlation




                                                                           Correlation




                0.4                                                                  0.4

                0.2                                                                  0.2

                0.0                                                                  0.0

         −0.2                                                                 −0.2

                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005

                                           ST rates                                                         Equity prices
                                           LT rates                                                         Risk neutral price


     Notes: Pearson correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows. 2 to 32-year period Baxter-King detrended series. Bars – 95%
     cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands.
                                                                            Figure A.9: Average bilateral correlation (USA)
          1.0                                                                           1.0                                                                 1.0
          0.8                                                                           0.8                                                                 0.8
          0.6
                                                                                        0.6
          0.4                                                                                                                                               0.6
      Correlation




                                                                              Correlation




                                                                                                                                                  Correlation
          0.2                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                            0.4
          0.0                                                                           0.2
         −0.2                                                                           0.0                                                                 0.2
         −0.4
                                                                                 −0.2                                                                       0.0
         −0.6
         −0.8                                                                    −0.4                                                                −0.2
         −1.0                                                                    −0.6
                      1885   1905   1925      1945   1965   1985     2005                     1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945   1965   1985   2005
                               Total loans           Equity prices                                     GDP                  Investment                                             Dividends
                               House prices                                                            Consumption                                                                 Equity return premium
43




                1.0                                                                     1.0

                0.8                                                                     0.8

                0.6                                                                     0.6
      Correlation




                                                                              Correlation




                0.4                                                                     0.4

                0.2                                                                     0.2

                0.0                                                                     0.0

         −0.2                                                                    −0.2


                      1885   1905   1925      1945   1965   1985     2005                     1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005
                                              ST rates                                                         Equity prices
                                              LT rates                                                         Risk neutral price


     Notes: Spearman rank correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows. 2 to 32-year period Baxter-King detrended series. Bars – 95%
     cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands. Average of all bilateral U.S. country-pair correlations.
                                                                          Figure A.10: Average bilateral concordance
                1.0                                                                 1.0                                                               1.0

                0.8                                                                 0.8                                                               0.8
      Concordance




                                                                          Concordance




                                                                                                                                            Concordance
                0.6                                                                 0.6                                                               0.6

                0.4                                                                 0.4                                                               0.4

                0.2                                                                 0.2                                                               0.2

                0.0                                                                 0.0                                                               0.0
                      1885   1905   1925    1945    1965    1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925    1945   1965   1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945   1965   1985   2005
                             Total loans           Equity prices                                  GDP                  Investment                                            Dividends
                             House prices                                                         Consumption                                                                Equity return premium
44




                1.0                                                                 1.0

                0.8                                                                 0.8
      Concordance




                                                                          Concordance




                0.6                                                                 0.6

                0.4                                                                 0.4

                0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.0                                                                 0.0
                      1885   1905   1925    1945    1965    1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925    1945   1965   1985   2005
                                            ST rates                                                     Equity prices
                                            LT rates                                                     Risk neutral price


     Notes: Concordance based on 15-year rolling windows. Peaks defined as highest values in +/-2 year window. Minimum phase length 2 years.
     Minimum cycle length 4 years. Bars – 95% cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands.
                                                                           Figure A.11: Regional correlations: Europe


                1.0                                                                  1.0                                                                 1.0
                0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                 0.8
                0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                 0.6
      Correlation




                                                                           Correlation




                                                                                                                                               Correlation
                0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                 0.4
                0.2                                                                  0.2                                                                 0.2
                0.0                                                                  0.0                                                                 0.0
         −0.2                                                                 −0.2                                                                −0.2
         −0.4                                                                 −0.4                                                                −0.4
                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945   1965   1985      2005
                                    Total loans          Equity prices                                   GDP                   Investment                                           Dividends
                                    House prices                                                         Consumption                                                                Equity return premium
45




                1.0                                                                  1.0
                0.8                                                                  0.8
                0.6                                                                  0.6
      Correlation




                                                                           Correlation




                0.4                                                                  0.4
                0.2                                                                  0.2
                0.0                                                                  0.0
         −0.2                                                                 −0.2
         −0.4                                                                 −0.4
                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005
                                           ST rates                                                         Equity prices
                                           LT rates                                                         Risk neutral price


     Notes: Spearman rank correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows. All series were detrended with a Baxter-King filter isolating
     cycles in the 2 to 32-year period range. Bars – 95% cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands.
                                                                           Figure A.12: Regional correlations: Euro area


                1.0                                                                   1.0                                                                 1.0
                0.8                                                                   0.8                                                                 0.8
                0.6                                                                   0.6                                                                 0.6
      Correlation




                                                                            Correlation




                                                                                                                                                Correlation
                0.4                                                                   0.4                                                                 0.4
                0.2                                                                   0.2                                                                 0.2
                0.0                                                                   0.0                                                                 0.0
         −0.2                                                                  −0.2                                                                −0.2
         −0.4                                                                  −0.4                                                                −0.4
                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                    1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945   1965   1985      2005
                                    Total loans          Equity prices                                    GDP                   Investment                                           Dividends
                                    House prices                                                          Consumption                                                                Equity return premium
46




                1.0                                                                   1.0
                0.8                                                                   0.8
                0.6                                                                   0.6
      Correlation




                                                                            Correlation




                0.4                                                                   0.4
                0.2                                                                   0.2
                0.0                                                                   0.0
         −0.2                                                                  −0.2
         −0.4                                                                  −0.4
                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                    1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005
                                           ST rates                                                          Equity prices
                                           LT rates                                                          Risk neutral price


     Notes: Spearman rank correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows. All series were detrended with a Baxter-King filter isolating
     cycles in the 2 to 32-year period range. Bars – 95% cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands.
                                                                           Figure A.13: Regional correlations: Scandinavia


                1.0                                                                    1.0                                                                 1.0
                0.8                                                                    0.8                                                                 0.8
                0.6                                                                    0.6                                                                 0.6
      Correlation




                                                                             Correlation




                                                                                                                                                 Correlation
                0.4                                                                    0.4                                                                 0.4
                0.2                                                                    0.2                                                                 0.2
                0.0                                                                    0.0                                                                 0.0
         −0.2                                                                   −0.2                                                                −0.2
         −0.4                                                                   −0.4                                                                −0.4
                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                     1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945   1965   1985      2005
                                    Total loans          Equity prices                                     GDP                   Investment                                           Dividends
                                    House prices                                                           Consumption                                                                Equity return premium
47




                1.0                                                                    1.0
                0.8                                                                    0.8
                0.6                                                                    0.6
      Correlation




                                                                             Correlation




                0.4                                                                    0.4
                0.2                                                                    0.2
                0.0                                                                    0.0
         −0.2                                                                   −0.2
         −0.4                                                                   −0.4
                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                     1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005
                                           ST rates                                                           Equity prices
                                           LT rates                                                           Risk neutral price


     Notes: Scandinavia: Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden. Spearman rank correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows.
     All series were detrended with a Baxter-King filter isolating cycles in the 2 to 32-year period range. Bars – 95% cross-sectionally block-
     bootstrapped confidence bands.
                                                                             Figure A.14: Regional correlations: Pacific


                1.0                                                                  1.0                                                                 1.0
                0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                 0.8
                0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                 0.6
      Correlation




                                                                           Correlation




                                                                                                                                               Correlation
                0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                 0.4
                0.2                                                                  0.2                                                                 0.2
                0.0                                                                  0.0                                                                 0.0
         −0.2                                                                 −0.2                                                                −0.2
         −0.4                                                                 −0.4                                                                −0.4
                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945   1965   1985      2005
                                    Total loans          Equity prices                                   GDP                   Investment                                           Dividends
                                    House prices                                                         Consumption                                                                Equity return premium
48




                1.0                                                                  1.0
                0.8                                                                  0.8
                0.6                                                                  0.6
      Correlation




                                                                           Correlation




                0.4                                                                  0.4
                0.2                                                                  0.2
                0.0                                                                  0.0
         −0.2                                                                 −0.2
         −0.4                                                                 −0.4
                      1885   1905   1925    1945      1965   1985   2005                   1885   1905   1925   1945    1965     1985   2005
                                           ST rates                                                         Equity prices
                                           LT rates                                                         Risk neutral price


     Notes: Pacific region: Australia, Canada, Japan, and U.S.A. Spearman rank correlation coefficients based on 15-year rolling windows. All series
     were detrended with a Baxter-King filter isolating cycles in the 2 to 32-year period range. Bars – 95% cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped
     confidence bands.
   Appendix C: Equity return premium covariance decomposition

This section decomposes equity return premiums through a vector autoregression (VAR)
decomposition in the spirit of Campbell (1991). The advantage of such decompositions
over the comovement analyses presented so far is that they explicitly model investor
expectations, and thus do not require the equalization of ex-ante expected values with ex-
post realized ones. A recent example for such a decomposition based on the long-run data
we use is Kuvshinov (2018). In particular, we build on the two-country decomposition
suggested by Ammer and Mei (1996). This approach attributes unexpected fluctuations
in the current equity return premium of country i (ẽit+1 ) to news about future discounted
dividends, risk-free rates and equity return premiums.




The return premium model

Starting from the log gross equity return definition

                                  ht+1 = log( Pt+1 + Dt+1 ) − log( Pt ),                                (15)

where P denotes the equity price and D the dividend paid. A first order Taylor approxi-
mation yields
                            ht+1 ≈ δt − ρδt+1 + ∆dt+1 + k,                         (16)

where ∆d denotes the first difference of the log of the dividend payment D, δ is the
dividend-price ratio, ρ is a (discount) factor smaller than 1 and k is a linearization
constant (see Campbell and Shiller, 1988). Solving (16) forward9 , taking expectations and
plugging the resulting expectation equations for δt and δt+1 back into (16) results in the
following expression for the unexpected change in the log real return on equity:

                                                           ∞                 ∞
                                                      "                                    #
                  ht+1 − Et ht+1 = ( Et+1 − Et )          ∑ ρk ∆dt+1+k − ∑ ρk ht+1+k           ,        (17)
                                                          k =0              k =1

where Et is an expectation operator denoting expectations formed on the basis of infor-
mation available through t. Put in terms of equity return premiums et+1 := ht+1 − rt+1 ,

  9 Note   the assumption of the transversality condition limk→∞ ρk δt+k = 0, as well as Et δt = δt .

                                                       49
where r denotes the log real interest rate, equation (17) can be rewritten as

                                                            ∞                   ∞                ∞
                                                       "                                                        #
            et+1 − Et et+1 = ( Et+1 − Et )                 ∑ ρk ∆dt+1+k − ∑ ρk rt+1+k − ∑ ρk et+1+k                 ,   (18)
                                                           k =0                k =0             k =1

or more compactly, for any country i

                                          ẽit+1 = ẽid,t+1 − ẽr,t
                                                                i          i
                                                                    +1 − ẽe,t+1 .                                      (19)

    The general intuition behind equation 19 is that innovations in the equity return
premium of country i can be decomposed into news about the discounted sum of future
dividend streams, news about the discounted sum of future risk-free real interest rates,
and news about the discounted sum of future equity return premiums. Thus, if the equity
return premium increases, this is either due to news about higher future dividends, lower
future risk-free rates or lower future return premiums.
     Consider the same decomposition for another country j. In order to render real equity
returns in j comparable to those in i it is necessary to introduce a real exchange rate term
ẽq,t+1 :
                            j       j         j         j         j
                          ẽt+1 = ẽd,t+1 − ẽr,t+1 − ẽe,t+1 − ẽq,t+1 ,                (20)

where ẽq,t+1 = ( Et+1 − Et ) ∑∞     k
                               k =0 ρ qt+1+k denotes news about the sum of future discounted
log real exchange rates.10
   We are interested in characterizing the comovement of return premiums in countries i
                    j
and j, ẽit+1 and ẽt+1 . From equations (19) and (20) it follows that the covariance in equity
return premiums Cov(ẽi , ẽ j ) can be decomposed as follows:

                                                   j                       j              j                 j
                 Cov(ẽi , ẽ j ) = Cov(ẽid , ẽd ) − Cov(ẽid , ẽr ) − Cov(ẽid , ẽe ) − Cov(ẽid , ẽq )
                                               j                       j              j                 j
                                − Cov(ẽri , ẽd ) + Cov(ẽri , ẽr ) + Cov(ẽri , ẽe ) + Cov(ẽri , ẽq )
                                               j                       j              j                 j
                                − Cov(ẽie , ẽd ) + Cov(ẽie , ẽr ) + Cov(ẽie , ẽe ) + Cov(ẽie , ẽq ).            (21)

This decomposition allows us to analyze whether the rise in equity return premium
                                                                             j
comovement was due to a rise in the comovement of dividend news Cov(ẽid , ẽd ), risk-free

  10 Note  that while the general setup follows Ammer and Mei (1996), the term ẽr,t+1 refers to foreign log
real interest rates here, instead of domestic log real rates as in Ammer and Mei (1996). This change allows
us to investigate the relative importance of monetary policy synchronization in the synchronicity of equity
return premiums.

                                                                  50
                     j                                               j
rate news Cov(ẽri ẽr ), or return premium news Cov(ẽie , ẽe ).
   Note, that in contrast to the comovement analyses presented in the main text, which
have looked at equity prices, the covariance analysis presented here directly looks at
the comovement in equity return premiums. The results of the two approaches are
comparable in that they both indicate the extent to which international comovement in
equities can be accounted for by fundamentals – dividends and risk-free rates – and how
much must be attributed to other factors – risk appetite, or news about future return
premiums.



The VAR model

In order to compute the variance decomposition (21) we need estimates of the various
news terms in equations (19) and (20). A VAR model serves this purpose. The assumption
is that changes in expectations due to new information arriving between t and t + 1 can be
isolated through the VAR model. We estimate bilateral VARs on the basis of the following
variables: log equity return premiums ei,t , e j,t , log real interest rates ri,t , r j,t , dividend-price
ratios δi,t , δj,t and the first differences of the log bilateral real exchange rate ∆qt . Collecting
                                                                    T
these variables in the vector zt = eit rti δti etj rtj δtj qtj           the VAR model for zt +1 in
companion form is


                                          zt+1 = Azt + et+1 ,                                        (22)

where A is the VAR parameter matrix and e contains the error terms. The inclusion of
variables from countries i and j enables us to study the linkage between both countries.
    The equity return premium model summarized by equations (19) and (20) imposes a
tight set of cross-equation restrictions on the VAR. On the basis of these and the estimated
VAR we compute each of the news components in equations (19) and (20) for each
bilateral country-pair i, j. For this purpose we define picking vectors gk (row k of the
identity matrix) that select the relevant rows from the VAR system:


                                      ẽm         m
                                        t + 1 = g 1 et + 1 ,   m = i, j                              (23)


                                                         −1
                           ẽm        m
                             e,t+1 = g1 ρm A ( I − ρm A ) et+1 ,          m = i, j                   (24)

                                                      51
                                m           m              −1
                              ẽr,t + 1 = g 2 ( I − ρ m A ) et + 1 ,    m = i, j                        (25)


                                      j           j
                                     ẽq,t+1 = g3 ( I − ρ j A)−1 et+1 ,                                 (26)


                                    ẽid,t+1 = ẽit+1 + ẽr,t
                                                          i          i
                                                              +1 + ẽe,t+1 ,                            (27)


                                j          j          j        j          j
                               ẽd,t+1 = ẽt+1 + ẽr,t+1 + ẽe,t+1 + ẽq,t+1 ,                          (28)

We set ρ to 0.96.11 We can use the thus calculated news components in order to deter-
mine whether correlated dividend news (ẽd ), monetary policy news (ẽr ) or news about
future equity return premiums (ẽe ) have historically been most important in driving the
comovement in international equity return premiums.12



Covariance decomposition
Table A.1 shows the covariance decomposition for a pre-WW2 sample, a post-WW2
sample, as well as a post-1980 sample zooming in on the period of high equity price
synchronization. The top row states the equity return premium covariance in our sample,
and all following rows state the median bilateral component-covariances.
   Clearly equity return premium covariance has increased over time, from 1.61 in the
pre-WW2 sample to 1.99 in the post-WW2 sample, and 3.48 in the post-1980 sample.
Among its components, dividend news covariance is the largest. However, dividend
covariance has neither increased, nor decreased substantially over time. One covariance
component that clearly increases over time is the covariance in news about future return
premiums, which roughly doubles in size in the post-1980 sample.
    Covariance in risk-free rate news exhibits a downward trend over time. This is
consistent with many countries moving towards a floating exchange rate regime after the
end of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates. As a consequence international
risk-free rate covariance explains little of the covariance in return premiums after 1980.
  11 This value is directly gleaned from the data according to ρi = (1 + exp(δi )), with δi denoting the mean
of country i’s log dividend-price ratio. For our annual data the values for ρ concentrate around 0.96.
  12 All bilateral VARs have been estimated with one lag, which is our preferred lag order given the

relatively short time span covered by the subsamples we are interested in.

                                                          52
                Table A.1: Decomposition of the covariance in equity return premiums


                                                    Pre-WW2           Post-WW2           Post-1980
 Cov(equity return premiums)                               1.61               1.99              3.48

 Cov(dividends)                                            1.42               1.36              1.56
 -Cov(dividends, risk-free rate)                          -0.36              -0.27               0.1
 -Cov(dividends, future return)                           -0.44               0.41               0.1
 -Cov(dividends, real exchange rate)                       0.16               0.03              0.03

 -Cov(risk-free rate, dividends)                          -0.46               -0.2              0.13
 Cov(risk-free rates)                                      0.54               0.34              0.27
 Cov(risk-free rate, future return)                       -0.07              -0.02             -0.28
 Cov(risk-free rate, real exchange rate)                   0.14              -0.03             -0.01

 Cov(future return, risk-free rate)                        0.32              -0.29              0.01
 -Cov(future return, dividends)                            0.01                0.1               0.4
 Cov(future returns)                                       0.52                0.6              1.23
 Cov(future return, real exchange rate)                   -0.16              -0.04             -0.06

Notes: Bold type – 95% significance-level based on cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands.
All covariances are shown with the sign in which they enter the covariance in equity return premiums
according to equation (21). Thus, summing up rows two to 13 yields the covariance in row one. All
covariances have been rescaled by a factor of 100. Median of bilateral covariances.


Finally, an absolute decrease in some cross-covariance terms, such as the covariance
between dividends and risk-free rates, also contributed to the increase in equity return
premium comovement.
    Overall, the VAR decomposition confirms our earlier result, that neither dividends,
nor risk-free rates can explain the late 20th century surge in equity comovement. Instead
it is risk appetite or, put in terms of the terminology used here, revisions to expected
future return premiums, that are the primary explanation for the increasing comovement
of equities.


International response to U.S. risk-free rate changes
By extending the VAR framework introduced above it becomes possible to trace the effects
of U.S. monetary policy on return premiums, dividend-price ratios and risk-free rates,

                                                   53
within a framework that acknowledges that ex-post realized variables can deviate from
their ex-ante expected counterparts. This is achieved by incorporating U.S. interest rate
policy innovations ∆RUS
                      t into the VAR system (see Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005):


                               zt+1 = Azt + φ∆RUS
                                               t + et + 1 .                          (29)

As our indicator for U.S. short-term rate innovations we use the residuals from a Taylor
rule regression of U.S. real short-term rate changes on changes in U.S. real per capita
GDP, U.S. CPI inflation, and U.S. real stock prices, as well as one lag of each regressor.
The responses of international equity return premiums, dividend-price ratios, and real
short-term rates can then be calculated as Ak φ.
    Figure A.15 displays the resulting impulse response functions for the full sample,
as well as the post-1980 sample of high equity return premium co-movement. For the
full sample dividends and risk-free rates react to U.S. monetary policy innovations, but
not equity return premiums. In contrast, after 1980, equity return premiums exhibit a
marked response. International risk-free rates respond less after 1980, than before, while
the dividend-price ratio responds similarly in the full- and the post-1980 samples.
    In sum, these findings support the evidence presented earlier, which suggests that
the effect of U.S. monetary policy on international equity return premiums has gained
strength in the past few decades.



Explaining the reaction to U.S. risk-free rate changes

We can also decompose the effect of U.S. rate innovations on equity return premiums in
order to determine whether U.S. monetary policy affects international return premiums
through revisions in expectations about future return premiums, dividends or risk-free
rates. This can be achieved by multiplying equations (23) to (25) with φ, the vector
describing the contemporaneous response of all variables in z to U.S. risk-free rate
innovations. Accordingly, the response of the return premium news of country i is

                                   g1i ρi A( I − ρi A)−1 φ,                          (30)

and the response of real risk-free interest rate news is

                                     g2i ( I − ρi A)−1 φ.                            (31)

                                             54
                              Figure A.15: Response to +1ppt U.S. policy rate increase


                         (a) Full sample                                             (b) Post-1980

                     Return premium                                              Return premium
        3                                                           3
        2                                                           2
 %




                                                             %
        1                                                           1
        0                                                           0
       −1                                                          −1
            0        1          2          3     4                      0        1         2         3     4
                              Years                                                      Years

                           D/P ratio                                                   D/P ratio
        3                                                           3
        2                                                           2
        1                                                           1
 %




                                                             %




        0                                                           0
       −1                                                          −1
       −2                                                          −2
            0        1          2          3     4                      0        1         2         3     4
                              Years                                                      Years

                Risk−free rate and U.S. rate                                Risk−free rate and U.S. rate
   1.0                                                         1.0

   0.5                                                         0.5
 ppt




                                                             ppt




   0.0                                                         0.0

  −0.5                                                        −0.5
            0        1          2          3     4                      0        1         2         3     4
                              Years                                                      Years

Notes: Median bilateral impulse response functions to +1ppt increase in U.S. interest rates. Dashed gray
– U.S. short-term real risk-free rate own response. 95% interval based on cross-sectional block-bootstrap
procedure over bilateral country-pairs.




                                                        55
    Table A.2: The impact of U.S. monetary policy on dividends, interest rates and future premiums

                                                    Full sample       Post-1980
                      Current return premium                0.76            1.99

                      -Future return premiums               -0.54           1.97
                      -Risk-free rate                       -0.48          -0.98
                      Dividends                              1.78           1.00


Notes: Bold type – 95% significance-level based on cross-sectionally block-bootstrapped confidence bands.
All components are shown with the sign in which they enter the current return premium according to
equation 19.


In accordance with equation (27) the response of the present value of expected future
dividends is
                    g1i φ + g1i ρi A( I − ρi A)−1 φ + g2i ( I − ρi A)−1 φ.        (32)

   Table A.2 displays the median response over all 16 country-pairs for the full sample,
and the post-1980 sample. The post-1980 results indicate that revisions in the expectation
about future return premiums explains most of the current return premium response.
News about dividends and risk-free rates play smaller roles. In contrast, over the full
sample revisions in the expectation about future dividends explains most of the current
return premium response, while news about future returns and risk-free rates play a
smaller role.
   This confirms our earlier finding based on another methodology. The post-1980
increase in international equity comovement was driven by factors other than dividends
and risk-free rates.




                                                   56
