                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        SELF-FULFILLING DEBT DILUTION:
                   MATURITY AND MULTIPLICITY IN DEBT MODELS

                                       Mark A. Aguiar
                                       Manuel Amador

                                     Working Paper 24683
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24683


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2018




We thank seminar participants at multiple places. We also benefited from discussions with
Fabrice Tourre. Manuel Amador thanks the National Science Foundation for support (award
number 0952816). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.¸˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Mark A. Aguiar and Manuel Amador. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Self-Fulfilling Debt Dilution: Maturity and Multiplicity in Debt Models
Mark A. Aguiar and Manuel Amador
NBER Working Paper No. 24683
June 2018
JEL No. F3,F34

                                           ABSTRACT

We establish that creditor beliefs regarding future borrowing can be self-fulfilling, leading to
multiple equilibria with markedly different debt accumulation patterns. We characterize such
indeterminacy in the Eaton-Gersovitz sovereign debt model augmented with long maturity bonds.
Two necessary conditions for the multiplicity are: (i) the government is more impatient than
foreign creditors, and (ii) there are deadweight losses from default; both are realistic and standard
assumptions in the quantitative literature. The multiplicity is dynamic and stems from the self-
fulfilling beliefs of how future creditors will price bonds; long maturity bonds are therefore a
crucial component of the multiplicity. We introduce a third party with deep pockets to discuss the
policy implications of this source of multiplicity and identify the potentially perverse
consequences of traditional “lender of last resort” policies.


Mark A. Aguiar
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
mark@markaguiar.com

Manuel Amador
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Research Department
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
and NBER
amador.manuel@gmail.com
           Self-Fulfilling Debt Dilution: Maturity and
                   Multiplicity in Debt Models∗
                                                Mark Aguiar
                                          Princeton University

                                             Manuel Amador
           Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and University of Minnesota†

                                                May 30, 2018



                                                    Abstract

           We establish that creditor beliefs regarding future borrowing can be self-fulfilling, leading
       to multiple equilibria with markedly different debt accumulation patterns. We characterize
       such indeterminacy in the Eaton-Gersovitz sovereign debt model augmented with long ma-
       turity bonds. Two necessary conditions for the multiplicity are: (i) the government is more
       impatient than foreign creditors, and (ii) there are deadweight losses from default; both are
       realistic and standard assumptions in the quantitative literature. The multiplicity is dynamic
       and stems from the self-fulfilling beliefs of how future creditors will price bonds; long matu-
       rity bonds are therefore a crucial component of the multiplicity. We introduce a third party
       with deep pockets to discuss the policy implications of this source of multiplicity and identify
       the potentially perverse consequences of traditional “lender of last resort” policies.



1     Introduction
The recent sovereign debt crisis in Europe, along with the associated policy responses, under-
scores the importance of self-fulfilling debt crises. We introduce and analytically solve a tractable
version of the canonical Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) sovereign debt model with long duration
    ∗ Wethank seminar participants at multiple places. We also benefited from discussions with Fabrice Tourre.
    † ManuelAmador thanks the National Science Foundation for support (award number 0952816). The views ex-
pressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the
Federal Reserve System.




                                                        1
bonds and study the vulnerability to self-fulfilling debt crises. The Eaton-Gersovitz model, en-
hanced to incorporate long-term bonds, has become the workhorse paradigm for a large quan-
titative literature that has successfully explained key empirical features of sovereign default.1
However, due to the intractability of the model, it is not known whether and under what cir-
cumstances this environment generates self-fulfilling debt crises.2 This is a major shortcoming,
as long-term bonds are the primary source of government financing around the world. More-
over, they play a key role in bringing the quantitative sovereign debt models closer to the data, in
large part due to the inherent incentive to dilute bondholders. We establish that the same force
generates multiplicity.
    Our analysis introduces a tractable version of the Eaton-Gersovitz model for which we solve
for equilibrium objects explicitly. We show that as long as the government is relatively impatient
and there are deadweight costs to default, there is a parameter configuration and a maturity of
debt that supports multiple equilibria.
    The multiplicity is dynamic. Creditor expectations of future borrowing and default behavior
determine bond prices today. In turn, current and anticipated bond prices affect the government’s
incentives to borrow. To shed light on this feedback mechanism, we characterize two types of
equilibria with markedly different debt dynamics. In a “borrowing” equilibrium, the government
issues bonds until it reaches an endogenous debt limit. In a “saving” equilibrium, the government
reduces its stock of debt until default no longer occurs with positive probability. The tension at
work in both equilibria is the relative impatience of the government and the deadweight costs of
default.
    The government saves in order to enjoy high prices when it rolls over the remaining debt in the
future. However, this incentive is only operable if there is a deadweight loss in default; as prices
are actuarially fair in any equilibrium, they do not provide an incentive to save when default is
zero sum.3 Hence, the combination of deadweight costs and the need to roll over maturing debt
provides the foundation for the saving equilibrium.
    The government’s relative impatience provides a countervailing force that supports the bor-
rowing equilibrium. In the borrowing equilibrium, creditors anticipate future borrowing going
forward (that is, “debt dilution”), and prices are low regardless of the current level of indebted-
    1 Examples, among many others, are Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), Arellano (2008), Yue (2010), Hatchondo and

Martinez (2009), Mendoza and Yue (2012), Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), Arellano and Ramanarayanan (2012),
and Bianchi, Hatchondo and Martinez (forthcoming). See Aguiar and Amador (2014) for a survey.
    2 In a recent contribution, Auclert and Rognlie (2016) show that the Eaton-Gersovitz model with one-period bonds

features a unique equilibrium, but their arguments do not extend to long-term bonds.
    3 While lenders receive zero in the default state, a deadweight cost implies the government’s value is strictly less

than that associated with zero debt. Competitive bond markets imply that creditors are compensated in expectation
for the full loss, while the government does not reap the same expected gain. This provides the government with an
incentive to reduce the probability of default.



                                                           2
ness. In this equilibrium, there is no reward for keeping debt low due to creditor beliefs about
future debt dynamics. Hence, whether relative impatience or deadweight costs of default are the
dominant force in determining debt dynamics depends on creditor beliefs.
     Maturity plays a key role in this indeterminacy, which arises only when debt is of intermediate
maturity. When maturity is sufficiently long, the saving equilibrium cannot be supported, as the
amount of debt to be rolled over at high prices is too small to warrant saving. In particular,
as the probability of default is reduced, the gain from the reduction in the deadweight costs of
default is split between the government, which is issuing new debt at high prices, and holders
of non-maturing bonds, who enjoy a capital gain. As the latter component is irrelevant for the
government’s decision to save, longer maturity bonds eliminate the government’s incentive to
save.
     Conversely, at very short maturities, the government internalizes the gains from reducing the
probability of default. In fact, we show that as maturity becomes arbitrarily short, the govern-
ment’s fiscal policy approaches what would be chosen in a constrained efficient contract between
the lenders and the government, as in Aguiar, Amador, Hopenhayn and Werning (2018). In this
case, the borrowing equilibrium becomes impossible to sustain without a high degree of rela-
tive impatience or zero deadweight costs. For intermediate values of maturity, impatience, and
deadweight costs, either equilibrium can be sustained.
     We show that this multiplicity has novel implications for the design of third-party programs
to eliminate inefficient equilibria. Common prescriptions motivated by rollover crisis intuition,
such as price floors or emergency lending when spreads are high, may have the perverse outcome
of eliminating the preferred equilibrium in the Eaton-Gersovitz model. In our framework, a floor
on prices does not eliminate the borrowing equilibrium; in fact, it may eliminate the saving equi-
librium and select the borrowing equilibrium. The saving equilibrium requires a steep gradient
in prices across the domain of debt to incentivize saving (or prevent dilution). A price floor that
extends across a wide range of debt levels eliminates this important feature of the saving equi-
librium. A more effective policy to prevent borrowing would be to either limit debt explicitly or
promise a price floor conditional on remaining within an exogenous bound on debt that is strictly
tighter than the equilibrium debt limit. Such a policy would select the saving equilibrium and not
require on-equilibrium resources. However, as with the lender of last resort, off-equilibrium cred-
ibility is key. The failure of such explicit debt limits in Europe (and traditional conditionality of
the IMF) suggests that such credibility is difficult to establish in practice.4
     The recent literature exploring multiplicity has built on two canonical frameworks, namely,
the works of Calvo (1988) and Cole and Kehoe (2000). The Calvo multiplicity arises due to the
   4 Bocola and Dovis (2016) explore the efficacy of a price floor in a quantitative model of the European debt crisis.
The policy they consider to rule out rollover crises similarly imposes a price floor combined with a debt limit.



                                                          3
feedback of prices to the budget set. This is easiest to see in a framework in which the government
is forced to raise a certain amount of revenue from a bond auction. A low price (or high spread) for
bonds forces the government to issue a greater quantity of debt in terms of face value. This raises
the debt payments going forward, increasing the incentive to default and therefore supporting
the low price at auction. Conversely, a high price requires lower debt payments and thus may
also be an equilibrium. Calvo-style multiplicity is studied in dynamic settings by Lorenzoni and
Werning (2013) and Ayres, Navarro, Nicolini and Teles (2015). Lorenzoni and Werning provide
an antecedent to our paper by analyzing the role of long-term bonds in Calvo-style multiplicity.
     The multiplicity we study differs from the Calvo literature in that the crucial element is what
price will prevail if the government were to save versus borrow. That is, what incentives are
present in the slope of the price schedule as a function of debt. If the government saves, does it
anticipate rolling over its debt at low or high prices, shifting the emphasis from current prices as
in Calvo to how prices vary across the entire state space of debt.
     The Cole-Kehoe multiplicity is a “static” multiplicity. Specifically, holding future equilibrium
behavior constant, the market clearing price for bonds is not determined. A high price for bonds
allows the government to roll over its maturing debt. However, a zero price forces the gov-
ernment to repay all maturing bonds out of current endowment, making default optimal.5 This
type of multiplicity has been extended recently by Aguiar, Chatterjee, Cole and Stangebye (2017)
and explored quantitatively by Bocola and Dovis (2016). In our framework, the multiplicity is
inherently dynamic in that future expectations over future equilibrium behavior are crucial in
supporting the alternative equilibria. The Cole-Kehoe multiplicity emphasizes the vulnerability
of short-maturity bonds to crises and favors lengthening maturity to avoid self-fulfilling crises.
Our analysis shows that such lengthening opens up the economy to both inefficiencies and a new
form of multiplicity.
     A recent pair of papers, Stangebye (2015) and Stangebye (2018), shares our interest in mul-
tiplicity in a Eaton-Gersovitz framework. Stangebye computationally constructs a version in
which there is a unique Markov equilibrium. However, he shows that introducing a sunspot may
lead to self-fulfilling “panics.” Our discussion is restricted to Markovian equilibria. Moreover,
our analysis highlights how beliefs determine the dominant factor among the competing forces
of incentives to dilute versus the potential efficiency properties of rolling over maturing bonds.
Nevertheless, given the common structure, there are many points of overlap in the nature of the
multiplicity studied in the two independent papers, and we view our analysis as complementary
   5A  related point on the possibility of a liquidity crisis in sovereign debt markets had been made by Sachs (1984)
in a model with bank lending. Defaulting because of the inability to roll-over maturing debt generates coordination
failures on the lenders side. Detragiache (1996) presents a related analysis of how investment can also generate
multiple equilibria. In both of these papers, the multiplicity arises even with finite horizons.




                                                         4
to Stangebye’s.
    The rest of the paper is as follows: Section 2 lays out our benchmark analytical model; Section
3 discusses efficient allocations from a benchmark planning problem; Section 4 contains the main
analysis of the alternative equilibria; Section 5 discusses the role of maturity in generating mul-
tiplicity; Section 6 explores how commonly proposed third-party policies may or may not select
a particular equilibrium; and Section 7 concludes.


2      Environment
We study an infinite-horizon small open economy. Time is continuous and indexed by t. The
economy receives a constant flow endowment y. Consumption and savings decisions for the
economy are made by a government. The government has access to a non-contingent bond that
it trades with atomistic, risk-neutral lenders. The lenders discount at the world risk-free interest
rate R = (1 + r ). The small open economy assumption implies that R is invariant to the govern-
ment’s borrowing or default decisions. Lenders are risk-neutral, atomistic, and have sufficient
wealth as a group to hold an arbitrary quantity of bonds.
     The asset space is restricted to a single type of bond. To incorporate maturity in a tractable
manner, we follow Leland (1994), Hatchondo and Martinez (2009), and Chatterjee and Eyigungor
(2012) by considering random maturity bonds. A bond matures with a constant hazard rate δ ,
at which point a payment of 1 is required. More precisely, consider an interval of time ∆t. The
probability that an individual bond has not matured by the end of the interval is e −δ ∆t . We as-
sume that bonds mature independently. Appealing to a law of large numbers, this implies that
a deterministic fraction δ of any non-degenerate portfolio of bonds matures each instant. The
expected life span of a bond is 1/δ ; hence, δ is a measure of (inverse) expected maturity. The
advantage of this formulation is that all bonds that have yet to mature are identical; in particular,
they all have the same expected maturity going forward regardless of when they were issued.
     We normalize the coupon of a bond to be the risk-free rate r . That is, a bond pays a flow coupon
r each instant through maturity. This implies that a risk-free bond has price 1 in equilibrium,
which serves as the upper bound on the price of the sovereign’s bond.
     If the government misses a coupon or principal payment, it is in default. As in Aguiar et al.
(2018), the value of default is a random variable and captures any punishment that can be imposed
by creditors, including lost endowment, as well as any utility costs (or benefits) to the government
from defaulting. Changes in the value of default represent the source of risk to creditors in our
analysis.
     Specifically, let N (t) denote a Poisson counting process with intensity λ.6 For a given path
    6 That is,   N (t) has independent increments, and in any interval [t, t +s), the random increment N (t +s) − N (t) ≥ 0


                                                               5
N (t), let V D (t) be the associated time-path of the value of default. In particular, V D (t) = V for all
t except where N (t) is discontinuous; and, at points of discontinuity, V D (t) = V > V .
     In words, the government almost always has the option to default and receive a payoff of
V D (t) = V . With constant arrival probability λ, this default value temporarily increases to V D (t) =
V > V . The higher value represents an opportunity to default with lower consequences for
punishment. If the government does not exercise this high default value option when it arrives,
the default value returns to V until the next arrival of V .
     To define preferences, let c = {c(t)}t ≥0 denote a deterministic consumption stream that char-
acterizes the government’s consumption until default.7 We assume linear flow utility, u(c) = c.
This allows an explicit characterization of the equilibrium objects while incorporating key eco-
nomic forces that are robust to curvature in utility. Consumption at each point in time is restricted
to lie in the interval [C, C]. Let C denote the space of consumption sequences with c(t) ∈ [C, C]
for all t.8
     Given a consumption sequence c, we define the government’s expected value. Let T denote
the time at which the government defaults, if ever, at the low outside default value. The value to
the government of a consumption sequence c, V (t, c), is recursively defined by:

                                               T
                                  ( ∫                                                    
              V (t, c) = sup                       e   −ρ(s−t)
                                                                 c(s)ds + e          V e −λ(T −t) +
                                                                              −ρ(T −t)
                           T ≥t            t
                                      T            s
                              ∫           ∫                                                                                   )
                                                       e          c(τ )dτ + e
                                                           −ρ(τ −t)             −ρ(s−t)
                                                                                          maxhV (s, c), V i λe   −λ(s−t)
                                                                                                                           ds
                                  t            t
                                  ∫      T
                        = sup           e −(ρ+λ)(s−t)c(s)ds + e −(ρ+λ)(T −t)V +                                                     (1)
                           T ≥t    t
                                ∫ T                                     
                             λ       e −(ρ+λ)(s−t)
                                                   maxhV (s, c), V ids .
                                      t

The first line is the value absent the arrival of the high default outside option, where the prob-
ability that T is reached before the first arrival of the high outside option is e −λ(T −t) . The inner
integral in the second term is the value conditional on the high outside option arriving at time
s < T , which is then integrated over all possible s ∈ [t,T ). The second equality follows from
straightforward integration. Standard methods verify that there is a unique bounded fixed point
V that satisfies (1) given c. From (1), we have immediately that V (t, c) ≥ V for all t and c, as
T = t is always an option.
is a Poisson random variable with parameter λs.
    7 The fact that c(t) is not indexed to N (t), that is, the realization of V D , anticipates the fact that without contingent

bonds, consumption will be deterministic conditional on no default.
    8 Given our restriction that c ∈ [C, C], it would be equivalent to define u for the entire real line but set u(c) = C

for c ≥ C and u(c) = −∞ for c ≤ C.


                                                                          6
    We make the following assumptions on the primitives of the environment:

Assumption 1. (i) ρ ≥ r ; (ii) y ≥ ρV ; (iii) C > y; (iv) C < (ρ + λ)V − λV .

The first item ensures that the government is relatively impatient (as compared to the market
interest rate) and does not accumulate infinite assets. The second states that consuming the en-
dowment forever is weakly greater than the high default value. If V were strictly greater than
this value, the government may prefer default to holding a small amount of assets. When y > ρV ,
there is a deadweight loss in default; in particular, from the lenders’ perspective, all debt is zeroed
out once default occurs, but the government receives a value that is strictly less than full debt
forgiveness. In the original Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), this difference reflected the loss of insur-
ance. In the recent quantitative literature starting with Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) and Arellano
(2008), an additional endowment cost is imposed during default. In the current environment, the
gap y − ρV makes default inefficient (in terms of joint borrower-lender surplus) and will play
an important role in equilibrium debt dynamics. The third condition ensures that consuming the
endowment is always feasible. The final condition guarantees that it is feasible to deliver the low
default value to the government without imposing an immediate default.
    Some of the assumptions above were made to obtain tractability. However, the underlying
economics are robust to the inclusion of endowment risk, concave utility, and discrete time. We
have constructed numerical examples of the multiplicity studied below in these extended envi-
ronments.


3    Constrained Efficient Allocations
We first study an efficient allocation that maximizes the joint surplus between a risk-neutral
lender and the government subject to the government’s lack of commitment to repay. The efficient
allocations provide a useful benchmark to understand the competitive equilibria studied in the
next section.
     Consider a Pareto planning problem that maximizes the expected payments to a risk-neutral
lender conditional on delivering a value weakly greater than v to the government. As in Aguiar et
al. (2018), the planning problem chooses a consumption stream c, but the planner cannot prevent
the government from defaulting when the government finds it optimal to do so. In particular,
for consumption sequence c, the government’s value is defined by (1). When the government is
indifferent to default or continuing, the planner can break the tie.
     Given an allocation c and time T that maximizes (1) at time t = 0, the expected payments to




                                                  7
the lender can be defined as:
                                              ∫     T        ∫t
                                                                  r +1[V (s, c)<V ] λds
                                  P(c,T ) =             e−   0                            [y − c(t)]dt,                 (2)
                                                0

where 1[x] is an indicator function that takes value one if x is true and zero otherwise. The inte-
grand represents the flow payments to the lender, which are discounted by r and the probability
of default prior to period T . Here we have incorporated that the government does not default
when indifferent upon the arrival of the high default value, which is without loss given that we
will focus on Pareto efficient allocations.

Definition 1. An allocation {c,T } is efficient if T maximizes (1) at t = 0 given c, and if there is no
alternative allocation (c̃, T̃ ) such that V (0, c̃) ≥ V (0, c) and P(c̃, T̃ ) ≥ P(c,T ), with one inequality
strict.

    Toward characterizing efficient allocations, we define the following planning problem:

                                P ?(v) =      sup P(c,T )                                                               (3)
                                           c∈C ,T ≥0

                                                  V (0, c) = v
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                       subject to
                                                  T maximizes (1) at t = 0.
                                                  
                                                  

We define P ? on the domain v ∈ [V , Vmax ] ≡ V. It is infeasible to deliver v < V . It is also
infeasible to deliver higher value than C/ρ, and we assume Vmax < C/ρ.9 Note that if P ? is strictly
decreasing, it characterizes the Pareto frontier. In what follows, we assume C is sufficiently low
to guarantee that P ? is strictly decreasing.10
     The first result states that we can restrict attention to allocations in which default occurs only
if V D (t) = V :

Lemma 1. It is weakly optimal in problem (3) to default only if V D (t) = V . That is, in any efficient
allocation, T = ∞.

    This lemma allows us to substitute T = ∞ in (3). The value function P ?(v) has the following
standard properties:
   9 The  fact that Vmax is strictly less than C/ρ ensures that the planner can set vÛ < 0 at the upper bound of the
domain, a controllability requirement used in some of our proofs.
   10 The reason why P ? (v) may not be decreasing is that the threat of default is so severe that the planner would

rather “forgive debt” by raising v to v 0 > v(0) instantaneously at t = 0 without compensating lenders. If C is
sufficiently low, forgiveness is dominated by setting c = C until v(t) = v 0. As C → −∞, this approximates a lump-
sum payment at t = 0, which allows the planner to move v arbitrarily fast relative to the first arrival of V . Specifically,
limC→−∞ (P ? (v) − P ? (v 0)) ≥ v 0 − v.


                                                                     8
Lemma 2. The solution to the planner’s problem, P ?(v), is bounded and Lipschitz continuous.

  To solve problem (3), we appeal to standard recursive techniques and study the following
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation:

                                  (r + 1[v<V ]λ)P ?(v) = sup             y − c + P ?0(v)vÛ ,
                                                                        
                                                                                                           (P)
                                                              c∈[C,C]


subject to
                                                                   h      i
                                            vÛ = −c + ρv − 1[v<V ]λ V − v                                  (4)

and the state-space constraint v ∈ V.
    Lemma 2 states that P ? is bounded and Lipschitz continuous, and hence differentiable almost
everywhere. However, there may be isolated points of non-differentiability. At such points, P ?
satisfies (P) in the viscosity sense. In particular:

Proposition 1. Suppose a bounded, Lipschitz continuous function p(v) with domain V has the
following properties:

 (i) p satisfies (P) at all points of differentiability;

 (ii) If limv↑V p 0(v) > limv↓V p 0(v) and limv↑V p 0(v) ≥ −1, then p(V ) = (y − ρV )/r ;

(iii) At a point of non-differentiability ṽ , V , we have limv↑ṽ p 0(v) < limv↓ṽ p 0(v);

(iv) If p 0(V ) < −1, then p(V ) = (y − ρV + λ(V − V ))/(r + λ);11 and

 (v) p 0(Vmax ) ≤ −1;

then p(v) = P ?(v).

    The first condition of the proposition ensures that the candidate value function satisfies the
HJB wherever it is smooth. The second condition concerns the case when V is a locally stable
stationary point; this will be relevant when we consider an efficient “saving allocation” defined
below. The third condition states that any other point of non-differentiability has a “convex” kink.
The final two conditions are sufficient to ensure that v remains in V.
    Problem (P) implies that we can divide the state space into two regions. For v ∈ [V , V ), default
occurs with probability λ. Following Cole and Kehoe (2000), we refer to this subset of the domain
as the Crisis Zone. For v ∈ [V , Vmax ], default does not occur even if the high outside default value
is available. We refer to this subset as the Safe Zone.
  11 For   the endpoints of V, we interpret p 0(V ) ≡ limv ↓V p 0(v) and p 0(Vmax ) ≡ limv ↑Vmax p 0(v).

                                                               9
    Let C?(v) denote an optimal policy associated with the recursive formulation. From (P), the
first-order condition for an interior consumption is

                                                      P ?0(v) = −1.                                            (5)

If this condition holds, the planner is indifferent over c ∈ [C, C]. If P ?0(v) < −1, then C?(v) = C
is strictly optimal, and C?(v) = C is optimal for P ?0(v) > −1.12
     To characterize Pareto efficient allocations, we proceed in steps: we conjecture a candidate
efficient allocation; we solve (P) under this conjecture; and then we verify if and when the can-
didate allocation satisfies the optimality conditions set out in Proposition 1. Our conjectures are
guided by the two competing forces driving debt dynamics; namely, relative impatience favors
debt accumulation, while the costs of default favor debt reduction. The next two subsections de-
rive solutions assuming that the borrowing and saving forces dominate, respectively. With the
solutions in hand, we verify under what parameter configurations they solve the Pareto problem.
We also verify that there are no parameter configurations for which neither the borrowing nor
the saving solution is valid.


3.1     Efficient Borrowing Allocations
We first conjecture that the borrowing incentive dominates. Given the linearity of utility, a rea-
sonable conjecture is that consumption is at the upper bound until v reaches V . In particular, we
define

                                               C for v ∈ (V , V ]
                                               
                                               
                                    CB?(v)
                                               
                                             ≡
                                                (ρ + λ)V − λV for v = V .
                                               
                                               

    This sets consumption at its maximum possible level, C, for the entire state space except at
the lowest possible value V . This implies vÛ < 0 for v > V . At v = V , the value cannot be further
reduced given the government’s option to default. Hence, consumption is set to deliver vÛ = 0.
From equation (4), vÛ = 0 at V implies that c = (ρ + λ)V − λV .
    With the conjectured consumption policy function in hand, we solve (P), using consumption
at V to pin down the boundary condition P ?(V ). In particular, we define
  12 Note that a necessary condition for optimality in Problem (P) is that the value function is weakly higher than
the value generated by a stationary policy:

                                                      y − ρv + 1[v <V ] λ(V − v)
                                          P ? (v) ≥                                .
                                                            r + 1[v <V ] λ

This is implied by the first-order condition.


                                                             10
  (i) For v ∈ [V , V ]:
                                           "                           r +λ #
                                        1          (C + λV − (ρ + λ)v) ρ+λ
                             PB?(v) ≡       y −C +                      r −ρ  .
                                      r +λ         (C + λV − (ρ + λ)V ) ρ+λ

 (ii) For v ∈ (V , Vmax ]:
                                        "                                    r #
                                      1                             (C − ρv) ρ
                             PB?(v) ≡    y − C + (C − y + rPB?(V ))           r  .
                                      r                             (C − ρV ) ρ

Remark 1. To gain some insight into these expressions, let us take the limit as C becomes arbitrarily
large. In this case, for any v,

                                     lim PB?(v) = PB?(V ) − (v − V ),                                (6)
                                    C→∞


where PB?(V ) = (y − (ρ + λ)V + λV )/(r + λ) for all C. Expression (6) states that the payment
to the lenders is the maximal incentive-compatible payment minus a lump sum consumed by the
government in the initial period. This limiting result holds over the entire domain of v, as C → ∞,
the implied dynamics become infinitely fast, and whether the initial state is in the Safe Zone or the
Crisis Zone becomes irrelevant.

     For PB? to be a solution to the planning problem requires PB?0(v) ≤ −1 for v > V at points of
differentiability. For v ∈ [V , V ), we immediately have PB?0(v) ≤ −1. For v ∈ (V , Vmax ], note that
PB? is strictly concave. Therefore, it suffices to check the first-order condition at v ↓ V . This turns
out to be the same condition as PB?(V ) ≥ (y − ρV )/r . Summarizing:

Proposition 2. PB? is a solution to the planning problem if and only if

                                           rPB?(V ) ≥ y − ρV .                                       (7)

    This condition has the following interpretation: it is efficient to borrow into the Crisis Zone
rather than remain in the Safe Zone indefinitely. The left-hand side is the annuitized value of
the objective from borrowing into the Crisis Zone. The right-hand side is the net payments to
the lender from setting vÛ = 0 at the boundary of the Safe Zone. The decision of whether to
exit the Safe Zone is the crucial question given the inefficiencies associated with default, and the
proposition states that this is the only restriction on parameter values that needs to be checked
to verify that the borrowing allocation is efficient.


                                                   11
    To interpret this condition, consider the two forces identified above: relative impatience and
the deadweight costs of default. The right-hand side of (7) represents the deadweight costs of
default. The larger this is, the more costly it is to enter the Crisis Zone and the more stringent
this condition.
    To see the role of impatience, the left-hand side captures the value of delivering utility to
the government by front-loading consumption. Moreover, when ρ = r , we have PB?(V ) = (y −
ρV )/(r + λ). Hence, condition (7) cannot be satisfied if both r = ρ and y > ρV , that is, if there is
a deadweight cost to default and the government is not impatient.
    Finally, note that PB?(v) is strictly decreasing for v ∈ [V , Vmax ]. As a result, PB? traces out
the Pareto frontier when the borrowing allocation is efficient. It will be useful when studying
the competitive equilibria to consider the inverse of PB?, which we denote VB?. The function VB?
maps the present value of promised payments to the lender into the government’s value under
the borrowing allocation. For reference:

                                                         ρr   !
                                                 C−y+rp
                             
                               1
                                 C − (C − ρV )                           for p ∈ (−a, P B ]
                             
                             
                             ρ                  C−y+rP B
                             
                             
                  VB?(p) =
                             
                                                            ρ+λ
                                                                     !                              (8)
                                            (C−y+(r +λ)p ) r +λ
                                1
                                   C + λV −                              for p ∈ (P B , P B ],
                             
                                                              ρ−r
                             
                              ρ+λ
                             
                                            (C−y+(r +λ)P B ) r +λ
                             
                             

where a ≡ (C − y)/r is the maximal net inflows that can be consumed by the government; P B ≡
PB?(V ) is the threshold of the Safe Zone; and P B ≡ PB?(V ) is the maximal value that can be extracted
from the government in a borrowing allocation.
    For reference, we repeat Proposition 2 using the inverse notation:

Corollary 1. PB? is a solution to the planning problem if and only if
                                                            !
                                                     y − ρV
                                           V ≤ VB?            .                                     (9)
                                                        r

The left-hand side is the government’s value at the Safe Zone threshold. The right-hand side
is the value of the government when it promises to pay lenders (y − ρV )/r in expected value.
One way to deliver this is to pay y − ρV each period indefinitely. This implies the government’s
consumption is ρV , which delivers value V , making this allocation compatible with no default.
The corollary states that the planner can do weakly better than this by borrowing into the Crisis
Zone.




                                                     12
3.2   Efficient Saving Allocations
An alternative to borrowing into the Crisis Zone is to save into the Safe Zone. This allocation
favors reducing the probability of default over the relative impatience of the government.
   We start then by conjecturing that the Safe Zone is an absorbing state. In particular, for the
Safe Zone, we let consumption be

                                               C      if v ∈ (V , C/ρ)
                                               
                                               
                                    CS?(v)
                                               
                                             ≡                                                 (10)
                                                ρV
                                                      if v = V .
                                               

This implies that in the interior of the Safe Zone, the government receives the maximal consump-
tion. However, at the boundary, the government receives the consumption that sets vÛ = 0, and
hence v never transits from the Safe Zone into the Crisis Zone.
    Substituting this consumption policy into (P), and using the boundary condition PS?(V ) =
(y − ρV )/r , we obtain that PS? is

                            1
                                             ρ−r
                                                 ρ
                                                            ρr 
                 PS?(v)   ≡    y − C + C − ρV        C − ρv        for v ∈ [V , Vmax ].        (11)
                            r

    For the Crisis Zone, the planner decides between saving toward the Safe Zone or remaining
in the Crisis Zone. We denote the former scenario with a “hat.” In particular, the linearity of the
problem leads us to conjecture that if saving is efficient, consumption will be at its lower bound.
Thus, we define

                                        Ĉ(v) ≡ C for v ∈ [V , V ).                            (12)

The associated value from this policy is obtained by solving (P) using PS?(V ) as a boundary con-
dition:
                                                                                   r +λ
                                                                                 ! ρ+λ
                                                               C + λV      + λ)v
                                                                                       
                      1      y − C + (C − y + (r + λ)P ?(V ))        − (ρ
            P̂(v) ≡                                                                     .
                                                                                       
                                                       S                                       (13)
                    r +λ     
                                                                   C − ρV
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                                                                                       

Remark 2. To gain some insight into the above expression, we take the limit as C → −∞. In this
case, the dynamics in the saving allocation become arbitrarily fast and

                                       lim P̂(v) = PS?(V ) + V − v.                            (14)
                                     C→−∞


That is, the conjectured allocation calls for an initial lump sum payment by the government that is


                                                      13
sufficient to reach the boundary of the Safe Zone immediately.

    The value from saving into the Safe Zone is one building block of the efficient saving alloca-
tion. However, the planner may find it optimal to abandon the savings strategy in the Crisis Zone
and instead pursue the borrowing one. As a result, our conjectured value function in the Crisis
Zone is the upper envelope of the savings and the borrowing conjectures:13

                               PS?(v) ≡ maxhP̂(v), PB?(v)i for v ∈ [V , V ).                              (15)

     Using the expressions above, it is possible to show that P̂ and PB? cross at most once for v ∈
[V , V ]. We denote by v I ∈ [V , V ] such a crossing point and set v I = V if they do not cross. The
point v I has a particular interpretation: the planner is indifferent between saving out of the Crisis
Zone versus remaining in the Crisis Zone indefinitely at that point. For values of v above v I , the
planner finds it optimal to save, while for values below v I , the planner finds it optimal to borrow.
With this result in hand, we can complete the characterization of the policy function by setting

                                               C          if v ∈ [v I , V )
                                               
                                               
                                    CS?(v)
                                               
                                             ≡                                                            (16)
                                                CB?(v)
                                                          if v ∈ [V , v I ).
                                               

    We now verify under what conditions PS? solves the planning problem. Condition (ii) of Propo-
sition 1 is relevant in this case, as V is a locally stable stationary point. The crucial condition is
whether at the boundary of the Safe Zone, the objective is maximized by staying put versus bor-
rowing to the upper bound. The following is proved in Appendix B:

Proposition 3. PS? is a solution to the planning problem if and only if

                                       rPS?(V ) = y − ρV ≥ rPB?(V ).                                      (17)

Note that this condition is the mirror image of Proposition 2, which established the efficiency of
the borrowing allocation. Summarizing the results of the previous two subsections, we have that
efficiency is characterized by a simple condition:

Corollary 2. The borrowing allocation is efficient if and only if PB?(V ) ≥ (y − ρV )/r , and the saving
allocation is efficient if and only if PB?(V ) ≤ (y − ρV )/r .
  13 TheCole-Kehoe model also features a savings and a borrowing region within the Crisis Zone (for certain pa-
rameter values) when the government is impatient. See, for example, Cole and Kehoe (1996), Figure 2.




                                                      14
    For reference, we provide the expression for the inverse of PS?:

                                                    ρr !
                                            C−y+rp
                     
                       ρ −1 C − (C − ρV )                                          for p ∈ (−a, P S ]
                     
                     
                                            C−y+rP
                     
                     
                     
                                                  S
                     
                                                                        ρ+λ
            VS?(p) =
                     
                                                                        r +λ
                                                            y−(r +λ)p−C                                    (18)
                       (ρ + λ)−1 C + λV + (ρV − C)                                 for p ∈ (P S , p I ]
                                ©                                              ª
                                                            ρV
                               ­                                              ®
                     
                                                              −λP S −C
                     
                     
                               «                                              ¬
                         ?                                                         for p ∈ (p I , P S ],
                     
                     VB (p)
                     
                     
                     

where P S ≡ (y − ρV )/r = PS?(V ); P S ≡ PS?(V ); and p I ≡ PS?(v I ).


4     Competitive Equilibria
We now discuss competitive equilibria, and, as we will see, the efficient allocations provide a
useful benchmark in the characterization. Recall that we define VB? and VS? in equations (8) and
(18) to be the inverses of PB? and PS?, respectively. Keep in mind that the domain of V ? is the
expected promised value to the lender, without a notion of maturity or face value.
    For the competitive equilibrium, recall that we restrict attention to non-contingent bonds with
random maturity. Specifically, a bond is a promise to pay a coupon normalized to the risk-free
rate r until the bond matures, which occurs with probability δdt over a vanishingly small interval
of time dt.
    We consider Markov equilibria. The payoff relevant states are the face value of debt b and
default payoff V D . Recall that the high default payoff state is only relevant if the government
exercises the option to default; otherwise, the low default payoff state resumes. Therefore, we
subsume the notation for the default payoff state V D = V when defining prices and values con-
ditional on repayment.


4.1    The Government’s Problem
Let V (b) denote the government’s equilibrium value of repayment given the face value of debt b.
Strategic default implies repayment if V (b) ≥ V D , and default otherwise.
    Parallel to the analysis of Section 3, it is useful to split the state space into two regions. Given
an equilibrium value V , we define the following: the Safe Zone is b ∈ [−a, b] where b satisfies
V (b) = V and recall that a ≡ (C − y)/r is the upper bound on assets that can be consumed; and
the Crisis Zone is b ∈ (b, b], where b satisfies V (b) = V . In each of the equilibria we study, we
will establish the existence of the thresholds. As in the preceding analysis, the Safe Zone is the
space of debt (and assets) such that the government will not default if the high default payoff


                                                        15
state arrives. However, the government may default at some point in the future. The Crisis Zone
is the space of debt such that the government will default upon the arrival of V D = V . For
b > b, the debt level is so high that, if the initial state is in this region, the government defaults
immediately regardless of the payoff state. This region is beyond the endogenous borrowing limit
and will never be reached from below in equilibrium. We denote the relevant debt state space in
a competitive equilibrium by B ≡ [−a, b].
    To characterize the government’s problem, assume that the government faces an equilibrium
price schedule q : B → [q, 1], where q > 0 is defined below. At each point in time, the govern-
ment chooses consumption as well as decides whether to pay its debt obligations or default after
observing the realized V D . Given consumption c, the government’s debt evolves according to

                                  q(b)[bÛ + δb] = c + (r + δ )b − y,                              (19)

where bÛ denotes the derivative of debt with respect to time. The left-hand side represents revenue
from bond auctions, where the term in brackets is the change in the face value of debt plus the
fraction of debt that matured, which is net new issuances. The terms on the right represent
consumption plus payments of interest and principal minus income.
    It may be the case that q(b) is discontinuous at some debt level b0 . This will occur when
the government is indifferent between borrowing or saving. When indifferent, we break the tie
by having the government save, which implies that the equilibrium price at b0 is the highest of
the prices consistent with the two possible strategies. For technical reasons, we place one more
constraint on debt issuance policies around points of price discontinuity. We impose that for an
arbitrarily small neighborhood around b0 , debt buybacks occur at price approaching q(b0 ). The
specifics are spelled out in Appendix B.5. Debt buybacks occur when bÛ < −δb, that is, when
debt decreases faster than existing debt matures. Imposing that buybacks occur at the higher of
the two prices around the discontinuity allows us to apply recent results in optimal control with
discontinuous dynamics. Note that this condition is imposed only around points of discontinuity
in the price schedule and for an arbitrarily small interval around them. We flag when we use this
restriction in footnotes 17 and 21. In what follows, we suppress this constraint in the notation
for the government’s HJB equation.
    We prove in Appendix Lemma A.1 that the government’s value function, V , is strictly de-
creasing and Lipschitz continuous. In addition, it is the unique, bounded, continuous solution to




                                                 16
the following HJB equation on B, given a price schedule q:

                                                    c + (r + δ )b − y
                                                                         
                   (ρ + Λ(b))V (b) = max c + V (b)     0
                                                                      − δb +Λ(b)V ,                               (20)
                                    c∈[C,C]               q(b)
                                                   |          {z          }
                                                                         bÛ

where

                                                Λ(b) = λ1[V (b)<V ] .                                             (21)

More precisely, as in the planning problem, V (b) satisfies (20) in the viscosity sense. The coun-
terpart to Proposition 1 for the government’s problem is:

Proposition 4. Consider the government’s problem given a compact debt domain B and a price
schedule q : B → [q, 1] that has a (bounded) derivative at almost all points in B. If a strictly
decreasing, Lipschitz continuous function v : B → [V , C/ρ] has the following properties:

  (i) v satisfies (20) at all points of differentiability;

 (ii) If limb↑b v 0(b) > limb↓b v 0(b), then ρv(b) = ρV = y − [r + δ (1 − q(b))]b;

(iii) At a point of non-differentiability b̃ , b, we have limb↑b̃ v 0(b) < limb↓b̃ v 0(b);

(iv) ρv(−a) = C; and

 (v) (ρ + λ)v(b) = y − [r + δ (1 − q(b))]b + λV ;

then v(b) = V (b) is the government’s value function.

    The conditions listed in the proposition are similar to those from Proposition 1. Namely, that
the value function satisfies the HJB equation with equality wherever smooth; there may be a local
attractor that corresponds to b if the government saves; other points of non-differentiability have
convex kinks; and the endpoints of the domain deliver the value of holding debt constant.14


4.2     The Lenders’ Problem
The equilibrium condition from the lenders’ problem is that lenders must be indifferent to pur-
chasing the government’s bonds versus holding risk-free assets that return R. We consider b ≤ 0
to represent risk-free assets held abroad that have a price of one. For b > 0, b represents the lia-
bilities of the government. To price debt in equilibrium, consider starting from a debt level b > 0,
  14 Condition (v), at b, is stronger than necessary, as the key requirement is that bÛ ≤ 0 at the upper bound on debt;
however, in the equilibria described below, the stronger condition is always satisfied.

                                                           17
and using the government’s policy C(b) and the budget constraint (19) to derive the equilibrium
path of debt going forward, b(t). The present value “break-even” bond pricing equation for the
lender is
                                   ∫ ∞              ∫t
                                          −(r +δ )t− 0 Λ(b(s))ds
                            q(b) =      e                        (r + δ )dt .               (22)
                                            0

The integrand is the coupon payment r plus principal δ . The discount factor is the interest rate
r plus the rate at which bonds mature δ plus a further discount to reflect the default survival
probability.


4.3     Definition of Equilibrium
We are ready to define an equilibrium:

Definition 2. An equilibrium consists of a compact domain B and functions of debt, {q, V , C},
such that: (i) given the government’s consumption policy C and strategic default, lenders break even
in expectation at prices q; (ii) given a price schedule q, the government’s maximal value conditional
on repayment is V (b), which is achieved by consuming C(b) ∈ [C, C]; and (iii) for b ∈ B = [−a, b],
V (b) ≥ V , with V (b) = V .

    In the definition of equilibria, we require that V (b) = V . That is, b represents the maximal
endogenous borrowing limit. We do this to eliminate the possibility of generating equilibria that
depend on ad hoc borrowing limits.
    Note that b is the face value of debt, which defines the government’s promised payments
absent default. The expected present value of payments in equilibrium is the market value of
debt: q(b)b. This distinction is useful to bear in mind when comparing competitive equilibria to
the Pareto problem studied in Section 3.
    Mirroring the analysis of efficient allocations, we focus on two types of equilibria. In a bor-
rowing equilibrium, the government borrows up to its borrowing limit b regardless of initial con-
ditions. In particular, if the government starts in the Safe Zone (or with assets), it borrows into
the Crisis Zone and eventually defaults. In a saving equilibrium, the Safe Zone is an absorbing
state.15
   15 In Appendix A, we discuss a third type of Markov equilibrium, which we denote a hybrid equilibrium because it

combines features of both the saving and borrowing equilibria. Given the multiplicity we discuss below, one could
also construct sunspot equilibria.




                                                        18
4.4    The Borrowing Equilibrium
We denote equilibrium objects in the borrowing equilibrium with the subscript B; that is, CB , VB , qB
are the consumption, value, and price functions, respectively. Similarly, let b B denote the thresh-
old between the Safe and Crisis Zones, and b B the endogenous upper bound on debt.
     We first state the conjectured borrowing equilibrium and then discuss when it satisfies the
equilibrium conditions. In the borrowing equilibrium, we conjecture that the government bor-
rows to its endogenous debt limit. Given the linearity of preferences and weak impatience, a
reasonable conjecture is that the government consumes at its upper bound until b = b B . At the
debt limit, the government pays coupons and rolls over maturing bonds until the first arrival of
V , at which point it defaults.
     Although the borrowing limit is yet to be solved for, we can exploit the analysis of the efficient
borrowing allocation to pin down consumption at the limit. Specifically, recall that CB?(V ) is the
consumption level that delivers value V conditional on default when V first arrives. Hence, we
define

                                          C             if b ∈ [−a, b B )
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                 CB (b) ≡                                                         (23)
                                           CB?(V )
                                                        if b = b B .
                                          

    To complete the definition of CB , we need to derive b B . We first define

                                                    r +δ
                                            q≡            .                                       (24)
                                                  r +δ +λ

This is the break-even price assuming that the government always defaults on the first arrival of
VD = V.
    At b B , our conjecture is that debt remains constant. From equation (19), the consumption that
sets bÛ = 0 at b B is

                                   CB (b B ) = y − (r + δ )b B + δqb B .                          (25)

Setting this equal to CB?(V ) and rearranging, we have

                                            b B ≡ PB?(V )/q.                                      (26)

The right-hand side is the expected promised payments to the lenders at the efficient borrow-
ing limit divided by the equilibrium price. That is, the market value of debt in the borrowing
equilibrium at b B , qb B , equals the lender’s value in the efficient borrowing equilibrium, PB?(V ).
   The parallelism between the equilibrium and efficient allocation is intuitive in the borrowing

                                                    19
scenario. In both allocations, the government consumes the maximal amount until it reaches the
indifference point between repaying and defaulting at value V .
    In particular, given an equilibrium price schedule qB , we define

                                                 VB (b) ≡ VB?(qB (b)b).                                                     (27)

That is, the government’s value at b is the same as in the borrowing planning problem for the
associated market value of debt. This equivalence follows from the fact that in both allocations,
the government consumes C until reaching the limit and then CB?(V ) thereafter (until default). In
both cases, payments to lenders and default decisions are the same.
    This similarity may not be surprising: if the efficient allocation has the government consum-
ing the maximum, this can be implemented in a Markovian equilibrium. However, the close
connection between the borrowing equilibrium and the efficient borrowing allocation should not
be viewed as suggesting that there is no time consistency problem in the competitive equilib-
rium. It turns out that there is a major caveat: we show below that the borrowing equilibrium is
a competitive equilibrium even in cases when the borrowing allocation is not efficient.
    Given (23), we can solve for qB (b) using (22). As the Crisis Zone is an absorbing state in a
borrowing equilibrium, we immediately have the equilibrium price

                                              qB (b) ≡ q for b ∈ [b B , b B ],                                              (28)

where we define

                                                     b B ≡ PB?(V )/q.                                                       (29)

   Given the price schedule in the Crisis Zone, we use (22) to extend qB into the Safe Zone. In
particular, setting Λ(b) = 0 in the safe zone, we differentiate (22) with respect to time to obtain16

                                     qÛB (b) = q0B (b)bÛ = (r + δ )qB (b) − (r + δ ).                                       (30)

With the boundary condition qB (b B ) = q, the solution to this first-order ordinary differential
equation (ODE) is defined implicitly by
                                                           r
                                                       ! r +δ
                                          1 − qB (b)                C − y + rqB (b)b
                                                                =                           .                               (31)
                                            1−q                      C − y + rqb B
                                                                       ∫∞                    ∫s
  16 Note   that (22) evaluated at an arbitrary time t is q(b(t)) =     t
                                                                            e −(r +δ )(s−t )− t   Λ(b(τ) dτ
                                                                                                              [r + δ ]ds.




                                                                20
For each b ∈ [0, b B ), there is a unique solution for qB (b) ∈ [q, 1]. Recall that for b < 0, we have
qB (b) = 1 regardless of the government’s policies.17
    Let BB ≡ [−a, b B ]. This completes our conjecture of the borrowing equilibrium, as we have
constructed conjectures for the domain, as well as for VB , CB , and qB .
    Figure 1 depicts the equilibrium objects for a parameterized borrowing equilibrium. Panel
(a) depicts the value function. The dotted horizontal lines represent the two default values, V
and V . The Safe Zone is demarcated by the vertical line at b B . By definition, VB (b B ) = V at
this point. Similarly, the endogenous upper bound of debt, b B , occurs when VB (b B ) intersects
V . For reference, the dashed line depicts the value of setting bÛ = 0, given the equilibrium price
schedule and the equilibrium default policy. The stationary value has a discontinuity at b B because
defaulting when V arrives is strictly better than the stationary value. The stationary value is the
same as the equilibrium value at the upper bound b B .
    Panel (b) of Figure 1 depicts the price schedule. The price is monotonically decreasing in the
Safe Zone and then is flat at q for b ∈ [b B , b B ].
    The consumption policy function is depicted in Panel (c). For reference, the dashed line depicts
the stationary consumption level, given the equilibrium price schedule. Consumption is strictly
above the dashed benchmark until b = b B , at which point consumption drops to the stationary
level.
    To verify when the conjectured borrowing equilibrium satisfies the equilibrium conditions,
we need to check that VB is a (viscosity) solution of (20). In this case, the important condition
is that starting from the Safe Zone, the government prefers to borrow into the Crisis Zone and
eventually default rather than remain in the Safe Zone. We have:

Proposition 5. The conjectured borrowing equilibrium {CB , VB , qB , BB } is a competitive equilib-
rium if and only if

                                       y − [r + δ (1 − qB (b))] b
                            VB (b) ≥                              , for all b ∈ [0, b B ].                         (32)
                                                   ρ

    The right-hand side of (32) is the value of indefinitely consuming the stationary level of con-
sumption at equilibrium prices. Thus, borrowing into the Crisis Zone is an equilibrium outcome
if doing so dominates remaining in the Safe Zone.
    Crucially, condition (32) is a weaker condition than for borrowing to be efficient, condition
  17 Note that there may be a discontinuity in q B at b = 0. Recall that at points of discontinuity, we impose that debt
buybacks occur at a price of one in the neighborhood around a discontinuity. This restriction eliminates the technical
complication of the government attempting to issue debt at one price and near-simultaneously repurchasing at a
lower price in an attempt to exploit this discontinuity. The restriction we impose ensures that the choice set is convex
despite the discontinuity in price, and hence the government has no motive to “mix” by moving consumption back
and forth while keeping debt at the point of discontinuity.


                                                          21
                                       Figure 1: Borrowing Equilibrium




                          (a) VB                                                      (b) q B




                                                        (c) CB
The figure depicts the value, price, and consumption functions in a borrowing equilibrium, respectively. The equilib-
rium functions are represented by the bold solid blue lines. The horizontal lines in the value function plots represent
the two default values. The dashed line in the value function plots represents the stationary value function at the
corresponding equilibrium prices. The dashed line in the consumption plots represents the level of consumption
associated with the stationary value. The equilibrium is constructed with parameters r = 1, ρ = 2, y = 1, λ = 2,
δ = 10, C = 1.2, V = .8y/ρ, and V = .95y/ρ.




                                                          22
                              Figure 2: Joint Surplus: Borrowing Equilibrium




          The figure depicts the joint surplus in the borrowing equilibrium. The solid line is a parametric
          plot of (VB (b), q B (b)b) for b ∈ [0, b B ]. The dashed reference line is P ? (v) for v ∈ [V , VB (0)].
          The parameters are the same as in Figure 1.


(9). As stated in footnote 12, and using that P = qB (b)b, a necessary condition for optimality in
the planning problem in the Safe Zone is that

                                                        y − rqB (b)b
                          VB (b) = VB? (qB (b)b) ≥                   , for all b ∈ [0, b B ].                        (33)
                                                             ρ

     Both equations (32) and (33) compare the value function to the value that would be generated
by keeping the level of debt constant. The difference between equations is the price used to
compute this stationary value. In equation (32), the comparison uses the equilibrium prices. In
equation (33), the comparison uses the planner’s cost of rolling over the lender’s value, qB (b)b,
at risk-free prices (that is, at an implied interest rate of r ). Given that rqB (b)b ≤ rb ≤ [r +
δ (1 − qB (b))]b, the competitive equilibrium thus imposes a weaker condition. Hence, efficiency of
borrowing is a sufficient but not necessary condition for the borrowing equilibrium.
     In Figure 2, we plot the market value of debt, qB (b)b, against the corresponding value for
the government, VB (b), using the same parameters as in Figure 1. Specifically, the solid line
in the figure depicts the joint surplus between the lenders and the government in a competitive
equilibrium. The dashed line is the efficient frontier, which in this parameterization is the efficient
saving value, PS?(v). The efficient borrowing value, PB?, is identical to the equilibrium frontier. The
inefficiency of the borrowing equilibrium reflects that the government borrows in the competitive
equilibrium, while the planner would like to implement the saving allocation.
     The key difference between the efficiency and equilibrium conditions is that in the latter, the
government must pay a default premium reflected in qB (b) < 1. This difference stems from a
time consistency problem. In the planning problem, remaining in the Safe Zone is contemplated


                                                            23
under the assumption of paying the lender a flow r times the value of debt indefinitely, which
corresponds to rolling over debt at the risk-free interest rate. As we are in the Safe Zone, this
is consistent with the government not defaulting. This may not be a feasible option for the gov-
ernment in a competitive equilibrium. In the borrowing equilibrium, lenders expect that the
government in the future will borrow into the Crisis Zone and eventually default. If the govern-
ment were to remain in the Safe Zone today, because of these expectations with regard to its future
behavior, the price of the bonds would remain lower than one. Hence, it would nevertheless pay
a default premium, rolling debt over at a yield greater than r . Thus, the crucial time consistency
problem in the borrowing equilibrium is the inability to credibly commit not to exit the Safe Zone
at some point in the future. The link between creditor beliefs about future fiscal policy and the
government’s best response to the resulting equilibrium price schedule will provide the source
of multiplicity discussed in the next section.
    Maturity is at the heart of this time consistency problem. To see this, let us consider what
happens when δ → ∞, that is, as the bonds mature instantaneously (the appropriate continuous
time analog of one-period debt). In the proof of the next proposition, we show that qB (b) → 1
and δ (1 − qB (b)) → 0 for b ∈ [0, b B ), as δ → ∞. Hence, the equilibrium condition (32) and the ef-
ficiency condition (33) become identical.18 More generally, the proof of the following proposition
establishes that condition (32) becomes stronger as δ increases. Summarizing the above,

Proposition 6. The following holds:

  (i) If the borrowing allocation is efficient, then the conjectured borrowing equilibrium is a compet-
      itive equilibrium for any δ ;

 (ii) If the borrowing equilibrium exists for δ 0 , then it exists for any δ ∈ [0, δ 0 ]; and

(iii) If the borrowing allocation is not efficient, then there exists a δ 1 < ∞ such that the conjectured
      borrowing equilibrium is not a competitive equilibrium for δ > δ 1 .


4.5    The Saving Equilibrium
We now consider an alternative equilibrium that features saving out of the Crisis Zone. As in
the efficient saving allocation, we conjecture that the Safe Zone is an absorbing state and the
Crisis Zone can potentially be divided into a saving region and a borrowing region. Let VS? de-
note the inverse of the efficient saving solution, PS?. Let (−a, b S ] denote the Safe Zone, (b S , b I ]
the saving region in the Crisis Zone, and (b I , b S ] the borrowing region in the Crisis Zone. Let
  18 Note that δ has no effect on VB? because the planning problem is independent of maturity. Even though b B is
affected by changes in δ , q B (b B )b B remains constant.



                                                       24
{V̂ , Ĉ, q̂} denote the conjectured equilibrium objects in the saving region. We define these ob-
jects below. The functions {VB , qB , CB } correspond to the borrowing equilibrium defined in the
previous subsection.
     The conjecture for the saving equilibrium is

                                          VS?(b)        for b ∈ [−a, b S ]
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                 VS (b) ≡ V̂ (b)        for b ∈ (b S , b I ]
                                         
                                         
                                                                                                  (34)
                                         
                                                        for b ∈ (b I , b S ];
                                         
                                         VB (b)
                                         
                                         
                                         

and

                                                    for b ∈ [−a, b S ]
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                           1
                                          
                                  qS (b) ≡ q̂(b)    for b ∈ [b S , b I ]
                                          
                                          
                                                                                                  (35)
                                          
                                                    for b ∈ (b I , b S ];
                                          
                                          q
                                          
                                          
                                          

and

                                        C ?(V ?(b))        for b ∈ [−a, b S ]
                                       
                                       
                                        S S
                                       
                                       
                                                           for b ∈ (b S , b I ]
                                       
                                       
                               CS (b) ≡ Ĉ(b)                                                     (36)
                                       
                                                           for b ∈ (b I , b S ].
                                       
                                       
                                        CB (b)
                                       
                                       

The equilibrium objects are depicted in Figure 3, which follows the layout of Figure 1.
    The Safe Zone is straightforward: because it is an absorbing region, there is no risk of default
starting from b ≤ b S . Hence, the price is one and the values and consumption are equivalent to
their efficient counterparts. Similarly, the boundary of the Safe Zone parallels that of the planning
problem; that is, b S is the level of debt that delivers value V when debt is constant and the price
is one:

                                                          y − ρV
                                       b S ≡ PS?(V ) =           .                                (37)
                                                             r

At the boundary of the Safe Zone, VS and CS equal the stationary values and consumption, re-
spectively.
    The borrowing region of the Crisis Zone is also an absorbing state and corresponds to the
equilibrium discussed in the previous subsection. Note that in this region, the price is q.
    The final step is to characterize the saving region of the Crisis Zone as well as the boundaries
  I
{b , b S }. In the saving region, we have to deviate from the prescription of the efficient allocation.


                                                   25
                                         Figure 3: Saving Equilibrium




                          (a) VS                                                     (b) q S




                                                       (c) CS
The figure depicts the value, price and consumption functions in a saving equilibrium, respectively. The equilibrium
functions are represented by the bold solid blue lines. The horizontal lines in Panel (a) represent the two default
values. The dashed line in Panel (a) represents the stationary value function at the corresponding equilibrium prices.
The dashed line in Panel (b) represents the level of consumption associated with the stationary value. The equilibrium
is constructed with the same parameters as Figure 1: r = 1, ρ = 2, y = 1, λ = 2, δ = 10, C = 1.2, V = .8y/ρ, and
V = .95y/ρ. The value of C is set low enough so that it never binds in equilibrium.




                                                         26
The reason is that the efficient savings policy, which sets consumption at its lower bound C,
cannot be sustained in a competitive equilibrium. That is, the efficient savings rate is not privately
optimal in an equilibrium with long-term bonds. We provide intuition for this result below.
    We conjecture instead that the government saves by consuming at an interior optimum.19
When consumption is interior, the linearity of the government’s objective function in (20) implies
that it is indifferent across alternative consumption choices, including the consumption level that
sets bÛ = 0. Hence, the government must be indifferent between the equilibrium consumption
strategy and its associated stationary value:20

                                                  y − [r + δ (1 − q̂(b))]b + λV
                                       V̂ (b) ≡                                 .                                       (38)
                                                              ρ +λ

    Interior consumption requires V̂ 0(b) = −q̂(b). Using this, differentiating (38), and solving the
resulting ODE with q̂(b S ) = 1 as a boundary condition yields

                                                           − ρ+λ+δ
                                                                 δ
                                                           b
                                                r +δ +     bS          (λ + ρ − r )
                                      q̂(b) ≡                                         .                                 (39)
                                                            ρ +λ +δ

The lenders’ break-even condition (22) requires q̂0(b)bÛ = (r + δ + λ)q̂(b) − (r + δ ). Hence, we can
solve for the conjectured debt dynamics:

                                                       q̂(b) − q
                                      bÛ = −δb ­                          ® ≡ f (b).                                    (40)
                                               ©                          ª
                                                              (ρ−r )q̂(b)
                                               « q̂(b) − q +   r +δ +λ ¬

Using (19), we obtain

                                    Ĉ(b) ≡ y − [r + δ (1 − q̂(b))]b + q̂(b)f (b).                                      (41)

     In the Crisis Zone, VS (b) = maxhV̂ (b), VB (b)i. As before, b I is the intersection point of these
two alternatives. If no such b I ∈ [b S , b B ] exists, we set it to b S . The value of b S is such that
VS (b S ) = V , and we define BS ≡ (−a, b S ].21
   19 Throughout the following analysis, we assume C is sufficiently low that an interior consumption choice is fea-

sible.
   20 The fact that the government’s value is equal to the stationary value while consumption is interior is discussed

in Tourre (2017) and DeMarzo, He and Tourre (2018). The authors give an interpretation of a durable monopolist in
the spirit of the Coase conjecture.
   21 If b I < b , then q is discontinuous at b I , which is the case depicted in Figure 3. As previously discussed when
                B        S
stating the government’s problem, and echoed in footnote 17, we rule out the government issuing at q S (b I ) and then
immediately repurchasing at limb 0 ↓b I q S (b 0) < q S (b I ) in an attempt to set bÛ = 0 by alternating between issuing and
repurchasing. Let us also note that the multiplicity result we obtain later on does not hinge on this particular issue:


                                                             27
                                  Figure 4: Joint Surplus: Saving Equilibrium




            The figure depicts the joint surplus in the saving equilibrium. The solid line is a parametric
            plot of (VS (b), q S (b)b) for b ∈ [0, b B ]. The upper and lower dashed reference lines are PS? (v)
            and P B? (v), respectively, for v ∈ [V , VB (0)]. The parameters are the same as in Figure 1.


    As in our discussion of efficient allocations, the question is whether it is optimal to remain
in the Safe Zone or borrow to the upper bound. Crucially, for the equilibrium, the question is
now whether the government finds it privately optimal. The condition for saving to be a valid
equilibrium outcome is stated in the following proposition:

Proposition 7. The conjectured saving equilibrium {CS , VS , qS , BS } is a competitive equilibrium if
and only if

                                                   VS (b S ) ≥ VB (b S );                                          (42)

or, equivalently,

                                                        y − ρV
                                                 bS ≡          ≥ bB .                                              (43)
                                                           r

    To see why saving can be an equilibrium outcome, first note that the government always has
the option to remain in the Crisis Zone and wait for the high default option. As V > VS (b) in the
Crisis Zone, this is a plausible alternative. The cost of this strategy is that the government must
roll over its debt at a discounted price while waiting for V . If instead the government saves to
the Safe Zone, it can roll over its debt at the risk-free price. This increase in price ensures that
the government internalizes the gain from reducing the probability of default and provides the
government with the incentive to save.
    However, the government’s private incentive to save in equilibrium is weaker than that of
it is possible to obtain parameter values such that b I = b S and for which multiple equilibria coexist.


                                                            28
the planner. We see this in two ways. First, recall from Proposition 3 that saving is a solution
to the planning problem if (y − ρV )/r ≥ PB?(V ) = qb B .22 As q < 1, condition (43) is stronger
than the efficiency condition. Thus, efficiency of saving does not imply that it can be sustained in
equilibrium. That is, a necessary but not sufficient condition for a saving equilibrium to exist is
that the saving allocation is efficient.
     Second, even when the government saves, it does not do so at the same rate as the planner.
In the debt dynamics equation (40), the term in parentheses is less than one in magnitude, and
thus bÛ ≥ −δb. That is, while saving, the government never repurchases non-matured bonds; it
deleverages by letting bonds mature and not fully replacing them with new bonds. This reflects
the inefficiency of long-term debt discussed by Aguiar et al. (2018). The government does not
capture the full return to eliminating the probability of default and thus does not have an incentive
to save as quickly as possible. This leads to a divergence between the saving equilibrium allocation
and the efficient saving allocation.
     Figure 4’s solid line plots the market value of debt, qS (b)b, against the government’s value,
VS (b). The upper and lower dashed lines are the efficient frontier for the saving and borrowing
allocation, respectively. The saving allocation dominates the borrowing allocation and hence
represents the Pareto frontier. For v ∈ [V , VS (b I )], that is, for b ∈ (b I , b B ], the government borrows
when it is efficient to save. For v ∈ [VS (b I ), V ], or b ∈ [b S , b I ], the government saves, but at a rate
that is inefficiently slow. Hence the equilibrium surplus remains within the Pareto frontier. Note
that the discontinuity in the equilibrium price schedule at b I is reflected in the sharp change in
the lender’s value around this threshold. For v ≥ V , or b ≤ b S , the government is in the Safe
Zone, and the efficient and equilibrium allocations coincide.
     The gap between the efficient allocation and the equilibrium outcome highlights the weak
incentives provided by prices when bonds have longer maturity. Recall that in the saving region,
b ∈ (b S , b I ), the government is indifferent across consumption choices given equilibrium prices.
The purchasers of new bonds break even and are also indifferent. However, the legacy bondhold-
ers strictly prefer c = C, as this minimizes the risk of default going forward (and maximizes the
secondary market value). However, there is no market mechanism that ensures the government
internalizes the interests of legacy bondholders, leading to the inefficiency depicted in Figure 4
on the domain v ∈ [VS (b I ), V ).23
     Relatedly, the difference between efficiency and equilibrium, and the private incentives to
save, depends on maturity. In particular, the greater the fraction of debt rolled over each period,
the stronger the government’s private incentive to save, while maturity is irrelevant for the effi-
  22 The latter equality uses the fact that VB (b B ) = VB? (qb B ) = V and V ? is the inverse of P ? .
  23 Asshown in Aguiar et al. (2018), the inefficiency of the competitive equilibrium with longer-term debt survives
when the government has the ability to replace long-term bonds with short-term debt through competitive market
transactions.


                                                        29
cient allocation. At one extreme, if δ = 0 and bonds are perpetuities, the government never saves
in equilibrium regardless of efficiency; at the other extreme, as δ → ∞, the conditions for saving
to be efficient and to be an equilibrium outcome converge. Collecting results:

Proposition 8. A necessary condition for {CS , VS , qS , BS } to be a competitive equilibrium is that
saving is efficient. If saving is strictly efficient, that is, PS?(V ) > PB?(V ), there exists a δS ∈ [0, ∞),
defined by

                                                   λPB?(V )
                                        δS ≡                       − r,                                 (44)
                                               PS?(V ) − PB?(V )

such that {CS , VS , qS , BS } is a competitive equilibrium if δ ≥ δS , and is not an equilibrium otherwise.
If ρ > r , then δS > 0.

    The fact that maturity drives a wedge between efficiency and equilibria anticipates the next
section. Even when saving is efficient and can be supported as an equilibrium, it is still possible
that the borrowing allocation remains a valid competitive equilibrium. In the next section, we
discuss the role of maturity in this multiplicity.


5     Maturity and Multiplicity
The preceding section provided necessary and sufficient conditions for both the borrowing and
saving equilibria. This allows us to explore under what parameterizations the model has multi-
plicity as well as the economics behind the multiplicity.
      The key condition to sustain either equilibrium is whether the government prefers to remain
in the Safe Zone or borrow into the Crisis Zone. Importantly, the government makes this deci-
sion taking the equilibrium price schedule as given. This is the crucial distinction between the
equilibrium problem and the planning problem and is at the heart of the potential multiplicity.
      First, consider the borrowing equilibrium depicted in Figure 1. While in the Safe Zone (b <
b B ), there is no threat of immediate default as VB (b) ≥ V . Nevertheless, the bond price lies strictly
below one. The creditors require a default premium because they anticipate that the government
will borrow into the Crisis Zone (b > b B ), and then potentially default, before the debt matures.
Hence, the government does not have the option to remain in the Safe Zone at risk-free prices.
Rather, the question is whether to maintain its debt position in the Safe Zone at a price below
one, or borrow into the Crisis Zone. As can be seen, the stationary value in the Safe Zone lies
strictly below the equilibrium value function. Given that the price schedule offers no reward for
remaining in the Safe Zone, the creditors’ pessimistic expectations become self-fulfilling.


                                                     30
    Now consider the saving equilibrium depicted in Figure 3, constructed with the same param-
eter values. Note that the equilibrium price is one throughout the Safe Zone and then declines
in the Crisis Zone. This nonlinearity in the price schedule is reflected in the government’s value
function. The payoff to saving out of the Crisis Zone is the high price at the boundary of the Safe
Zone.
    Interestingly, across the two equilibria, the government borrows when prices are low (spreads
are high), while it saves when prices are high (spreads are low). The important element of the
price schedule is not the level, but the incentives or disincentives to borrow. In the saving equi-
librium, the price schedule declines steeply once the government enters the Crisis Zone. In the
borrowing equilibrium, the price schedule is flat at the boundary of the Safe Zone. In this way, the
self-fulfilling dynamics we uncover in this paper provide an alternative view of the “gambling for
redemption” hypothesis that explains the debt accumulation of debt-distressed European coun-
tries during the debt crises (see Conesa and Kehoe, 2017). In our model, low debt prices and debt
accumulation both arise endogenously.
    Note that the multiplicity in the model is dynamic in that it depends on expectations of future
equilibrium behavior. In particular, the equilibria are supported by different expectations about
whether the government will borrow or save, and whether bond prices will be the risk-free price
or something lower. The underlying tension is between the incentive to dilute long-term bond-
holders versus the incentive to economize on rollover costs. Which effect dominates in equilib-
rium depends on beliefs in a non-trivial part of the parameter space. Moreover, these competing
forces highlight why maturity plays a central role in the existence of multiple equilibria.
    For the limiting case of arbitrarily large C, we can state a simple condition that determines
when it is possible for both equilibria to be supported:

Proposition 9. If the parameters satisfy the following condition:
                                             !                      !
                                     V −V              λ     V −V
                             1+ρ                 >        >r        ,                           (45)
                                    y − ρV           ρ −r    y − ρV

there exists an M and a non-empty interval ∆ ⊂ [0, ∞), such that for all C > M and all δ ∈ ∆, both
the borrowing and saving equilibria exist.

    The second inequality in (45) guarantees that the saving allocation is efficient for arbitrarily
large C. We know from Proposition 8 that this is a necessary condition and sufficient for high
enough δ for the saving equilibrium to exist.
    The first inequality in (45) guarantees the existence of the borrowing equilibrium, for any
finite δ , when C becomes arbitrarily large. When C becomes arbitrarily large, the price of the
bond converges to q throughout the Safe Zone, as the rate at which the government exits the

                                                     31
Safe Zone becomes arbitrarily fast. The first inequality verifies that the government prefers to
borrow into the Crisis Zone when facing a price close to q for all debt levels in the Safe Zone.
   This proposition shows that multiplicity is an endemic feature of this model when the gov-
ernment is impatient and there are deadweight losses from default. That is,

Corollary 3. If ρ > r and y > ρV , there always exists a triplet {δ, λ, C} such that both savings and
borrowing equilibria exist.


6    Third-Party Policies
The existence of multiple equilibria raises the question of whether a deep-pocketed third party,
such as the IMF or ECB, could induce market participants to play the preferred equilibrium. In the
rollover crisis model of Cole and Kehoe (2000), a price floor would eliminate the crisis equilibrium.
Similarly, in a Calvo-style crisis, a price floor (or a cap on spreads) would also eliminate the bad
equilibrium. More importantly, such a policy would require no resources along the equilibrium
path, as long as they were credible off equilibrium.
    A natural policy question in our framework is how to prevent coordination on the borrowing
equilibrium when saving is efficient. Debt forgiveness does not select a particular equilibrium
because both equilibria co-exist at low debt levels. Hence, in the borrowing equilibrium, debt
forgiveness provides only a temporary reduction in debt levels, as in the debt-overhang model of
Aguiar and Amador (2011). Similarly, a price floor does not eliminate the inefficient equilibrium.
In particular, with a lower bound on prices greater than q, the borrowing equilibrium remains an
equilibrium and the government would borrow up to its borrowing limit at the better price. The
policy not only would fail, but also would cost resources along the equilibrium path.
    More formally, consider a parameterization such that both saving and borrowing equilibria
exist, with subscripts B and S denoting the respective equilibrium objects, as before. This param-
eterization is the natural launching point for policy intervention.
    The intervention we study involves a third party that is willing to purchase government bonds
at a price q? as long as b ≤ b ?. This combines a price floor with a quantity restriction. To highlight
the role of the price floor versus the quantity restriction, we consider two polar cases. In our
first scenario, let b ? = b B . That is, the quantity restriction is not tighter than the endogenous
borrowing limit in the borrowing equilibrium. The second scenario sets b ? = b S . This is a tight
quantity restriction, designed such that interventions potentially involve only risk-free debt.
    Let the superscript P indicate equilibrium objects in the presence of the third-party policy.




                                                  32
The break-even condition for foreigners is
                             ∫   T                    ∫t                                                                        
                                          −(r +δ )t−        ΛP (b P (s))ds
               P
             q (b) = sup              e                0                     (r + δ )dt + e   −(r +δ )T
                                                                                                          1[b P (T )≤b ?]q   ?
                                                                                                                                     ,   (46)
                      T ≥0    0


where b P (s) denotes the equilibrium evolution of bonds, starting from b, under the third-party
policy. The equation captures that an investor considers the best among all possible hold-and-
sell strategies: after purchasing the bonds, the investor can hold them up to any time T , at which
point, if the total debt remains below b ?, the investor has the option to sell them to the third party
for a price of q?. Note that the assumption that all the investors are identical means we do not
need to consider the strategies where one investor sells to another.
    Given the price schedule, the problem of the government continues to be characterized by the
HJB (20). As a result, in any equilibrium, there will be a Safe Zone and a Crisis Zone, demarcated
           P                                 P
by {b P , b }, with V P (b P ) = V and V P (b ) = V .
    As in the analysis without the third party, we will consider two equilibrium conjectures: a
borrowing one and a saving one. Similarly to our benchmark analysis, in a conjectured borrowing
equilibrium, starting from a debt level in the Safe Zone, the debt eventually reaches the Crisis
Zone. In a conjectured saving equilibrium, the Safe Zone is an absorbing state.
    Consider first the case where b ? = b B . In this case, the policy does not eliminate the borrowing
equilibrium. But if it is generous enough (that is, if q? is high enough), then it eliminates the
saving equilibrium:

Proposition 10 (Loose quantity restriction). Assume the inequalities in Proposition 9 are satisfied
and b B > b S . Suppose q? ∈ (q, 1] and b ? = b B , and let C be sufficiently large. Then,

 (i) There always exists a borrowing equilibrium. That is, there is an equilibrium where C P (b) = C
     for all b < b ?. In this equilibrium, the third party incurs losses.

 (ii) There is a q̃ < 1 such that for all q? > q̃, the saving equilibrium does not exist.

    A better policy is to impose a tighter quantity restriction, that is, b ? = b S . In this case, the
policy selects the saving equilibrium for high enough q?:

Proposition 11 (Tight quantity restriction). Assume the inequalities in Proposition 9 are satisfied.
Suppose q? ∈ [q, 1] and b ? = b S . Then,

 (i) The saving equilibrium is always an equilibrium. The third party incurs zero losses.

 (ii) There is a q̂ < 1 such that for all q? > q̂, the borrowing equilibrium does not exist.



                                                                     33
     The propositions above show that a price floor policy has very different implications, depend-
ing on the quantity restriction that accompanies it. If the quantity restriction is loose, a generous
price floor ends up incentivizing borrowing and generates losses for the third party. However,
if the quantity restriction is tight enough, a generous price floor eliminates the sub-optimal bor-
rowing equilibria, and no resources are lost by the third party on equilibrium. In fact, in the latter
case, the third party never needs to purchase debt in equilibrium.
     Recall that the multiplicity reflects the trade-off between saving for a better price versus the
desire to borrow due to impatience. With a price floor absent a tight quantity restriction, the
third party reduces the incentive to save. The saving equilibrium is supported by the gap between
prices in the Safe Zone and princes in the Crisis Zone as well as the need to roll over bonds. A
generous price floor in the Crisis Zone eliminates the price differential that incentivizes saving
in equilibrium.
     Rewarding the government for saving, or punishing them for borrowing, is a policy that can
induce the saving equilibrium. A borrowing limit at the boundary of the Safe Zone, which is
tighter than the endogenous limit, would be effective. However, such a policy raises the question
of how to enforce the limit if the initial debt is beyond it. Third-party purchases conditional on
fiscal austerity are reminiscent of policies pursued in the European debt crisis as well as many
IMF programs. However, the events in Europe and elsewhere reflect the difficulties of enforcing
explicit debt limits. Unfortunately, in the Eaton-Gersovitz framework studied in this paper, there
is no effective policy that does not involve a similar type of off-equilibrium commitment to punish
overborrowing.
     Finally, note that a tight quantity restriction policy may not be effective if delayed too long. In
particular, once b > b I , the saving equilibrium is no longer distinguishable from the borrowing
equilibrium, and thus policy interventions will fail to be effective once debt has reached suffi-
ciently high levels. This highlights that interventions during debt crises may need to be quick to
be successful, and policies that “kick the can down the road” may eventually fail. This same point
about delay, although in a different environment, was emphasized by Lorenzoni and Werning
(2013).


7    Conclusion
This paper shows that debt dilution generates multiplicity in a standard sovereign debt frame-
work. In particular, the extent of dilution in equilibrium depends on self-fulfilling expectations
of future prices and future fiscal policy. A relatively impatient government, an intermediate debt
maturity, and deadweight losses from default provide the conditions for multiplicity of equilibria.
Importantly, these are common features of observed debt markets as well as the recent quantita-

                                                  34
tive models proposed in the literature.
    The framework presented above is designed for analytical clarity and thus involves some
special assumptions. However, the mechanism at work is robust to including endowment fluctu-
ations and risk aversion, which, while bringing the model closer to empirical debt markets, does
not eliminate the self-fulfilling debt dilution identified in the tractable model. One can easily
construct simple numerical examples of multiplicity with these elements. The quantitative model
analyzed by Stangebye (2015) also appears to be driven by a mechanism similar to that studied
in this paper. Indeed, the fact that the Eaton-Gersovitz model is vulnerable to dilution is at the
heart of the recent quantitative literature that attempts to match empirical sovereign debt crises.
We show that the same force leads to indeterminacy. The fact that multiplicity stems from the
incentives to dilute places novel restrictions on effective third-party interventions.


References
Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, “Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates and the Current Account,”
 Journal of International Economics, 2006, 69 (1), 64–83.

   and Manuel Amador, “Growth in the Shadow of Expropriation,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2011, 126 (2), 651–697.

   and , “Sovereign Debt,” in Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,
  Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4, North-Holland Elsevier, 2014, pp. 647–687.

  , , Hugo Hopenhayn, and Iván Werning, “Take the Short Route: Equilibrium Default and
  Debt Maturity,” 2018. Working paper.

  , Satyajit Chatterjee, Harold L. Cole, and Zachary R. Stangebye, “Self-Fulfilling Debt
  Crises, Revisited: The Art of the Desperate Deal,” 2017. NBER Working Paper 23312.

Arellano, Cristina, “Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies,” American
  Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3), 690–712.

   and Ananth Ramanarayanan, “Default and the Maturity Structure in Sovereign Bonds,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (2), 187–232.

Auclert, Adrien and Matthew Rognlie, “Unique Equilibrium in the Eaton-Gersovitz Model of
 Sovereign Debt,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2016, 84, 134–146.

Ayres, Joao, Gaston Navarro, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles, “Sovereign Default: The
  Role of Expectations,” May 2015. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper 723.

                                                35
Bianchi, Javier, Juan Carlos Hatchondo, and Leonardo Martinez, “International Reserves
  and Rollover Risk,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Bocola, Luigi and Alessandro Dovis, “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises: A Quantitative Analysis,”
  2016. NBER Working Paper 22694.

Bressan, Alberto, “Errata Corrige,” Networks and Heterogeneous Media, 2013, 8 (2), 625–625.

   and Yunho Hong, “Optimal Control Problems on Stratified Domains,” Networks and Hetero-
  geneous Media, 2007, 2 (2), 313–331.

Buchanan, H.E. and T.H. Hildebrandt, “Note on the Convergence of a Sequence of Functions
  of a Certain Type,” Annals of Mathematics, 1908, 9 (3), 123–126.

Calvo, Guillermo A., “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations,” American Economic
  Review, 1988, 78 (4), 647–661.

Chatterjee, Satyajit and Burcu Eyigungor, “Maturity, Indebtedness, and Default Risk,” Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 2012, 102 (6), 2674–2699.

Cole, Harold L. and Timothy J. Kehoe, “A Self-Fulfilling Model of Mexico’s 1994-1995 Debt
 Crisis,” Journal of International Economics, 1996, 41 (3-4), 309–330.

  and     , “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 2000, 67 (1), 91–116.

Conesa, Juan Carlos and Timothy J Kehoe, “Gambling for Redemption and Self-Fulfilling
 Debt Crises,” Economic Theory, 2017, 64 (4), 707–740.

DeMarzo, Peter, Zhiguo He, and Fabrice Tourre, “Commitment Problems, Welfare Costs and
  Sovereign Debt,” 2018. Working Paper.

Detragiache, Enrica, “Rational Liquidity Crises in the Sovereign Debt Market: In Search of a
  Theory,” Staff Papers (International Monetary Fund), 1996, 43 (3), 545–570.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and Em-
  pirical Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies, 1981, 48 (2), 289–309.

Hatchondo, Juan Carlos and Leonardo Martinez, “Long-Duration Bonds and Sovereign De-
 faults,” Journal of International Economics, 2009, 79 (1), 117–125.

Leland, Hayne, “Bond Prices, Yield Spreads, and Optimal Capital Structure with Default Risk,”
  1994. IBER Finance Working Paper 240.


                                                36
Lorenzoni, Guido and Ivan Werning, “Slow Moving Debt Crises,” July 2013. NBER Working
  Paper 19228.

Mendoza, Enrique G. and Vivian Z. Yue, “A General Equilibrium Model of Sovereign Default
 and Business Cycles,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (2), 889–946.

Sachs, Jeffrey D, “Theoretical Issues in International Borrowing,” in “Princeton Studies in Inter-
  national Finance” number 54, Princeton University, July 1984.

Stangebye, Zachary R., “Dynamic Panics: Theory and Application to the Eurozone,” 2015.
  Working Paper.

  , “Belief Shocks and Long-Maturity Sovereign Debt,” 2018. Working Paper.

Tourre, Fabrice, “A Macro-Finance Approach to Sovereign Debt Spreads and Return,” 2017.
  Working Paper.

Yue, Vivian Z., “Sovereign Default and Debt Renegotiation,” Journal of International Economics,
  2010, 80 (2), 176–187.




                                               37
Appendix A:                  The Hybrid Equilibrium
In this appendix, we present a third type of competitive equilibrium, which we label the “hybrid” equilib-
rium because it combines features of both borrowing and saving equilibria. In particular, the government
never saves, as in the borrowing equilibrium, but part of the Safe Zone is absorbing, as in the saving equi-
librium. The main purpose of introducing the hybrid equilibrium is to show existence of a competitive
equilibrium; in particular, we prove that if neither the borrowing nor the saving equilibrium exists, then
a hybrid equilibrium exists. The equilibrium objects are depicted in Figure A.1 using the same parameters
as in Figures 1 and 3.
     More formally, given VB in (27), define the threshold

                                                                   y − rbH
                                                    VB (bH ) =             ,                                      (47)
                                                                      ρ

if such a threshold exists on the domain [0, b B ] ∩ [0, b S ]. The equilibrium conjecture is that for b ≤ bH ,
the government borrows up to bH and then remains there indefinitely. This behavior is similar to the
Safe Zone policy in the saving equilibrium, but the threshold bH may be strictly below b S . At bH , given
that VB (b H ) = (y − rbH )/ρ, the government is indifferent to remaining at bH at risk-free prices versus
borrowing to the debt limit at the borrowing equilibrium price schedule. The conjecture is that for b > bH ,
the government borrows. In a hybrid equilibrium, therefore, bH is a stationary point that is stable from
the left but not the right.
     For b < bH , we solve the government’s HJB assuming c = C to obtain a candidate VH on this domain,
using the boundary condition ρVH (bH )y − rbH . For b > bH , the hybrid equilibrium coincides with the
borrowing equilibrium. Setting b H ≡ b B , the hybrid equilibrium value function is therefore
                                                                         ρ
                                                                          r
                                                           
                                                              C +r b−y
                                        
                                          C− (C+r b   −y )
                                        
                                                   H
                                                             C +r b H −y
                             VH (b) =                                          for b ≤ bH
                                        
                                        
                                                          ρ                                                       (48)
                                        
                                        VB (b)
                                        
                                                                               for b ∈ (bH , b H ].
                                        
The associated price schedule is
                                                     (
                                                       1 for b ≤ bH
                                        q H (b) =                                                                 (49)
                                                       q B (b) for b ∈ (bH , b H ].

Finally, the policy function for consumption is

                                                  
                                                  
                                                  C for b < bH
                                          CH (b) = y − rbH for b = bH
                                                  
                                                  
                                                                                                                  (50)
                                                  
                                                   CB for b ∈ (bH , b H ].
                                                  
                                                  
    We state the following:

Proposition A.1. Suppose neither the borrowing equilibrium nor the saving equilibrium exists. Specifically,
suppose that b S < b B and that there exists a b̂ ∈ [0, b B ] such that ρVB (b̂) < y − [r + δ (1 − q B (b̂))]b̂. Then a
hybrid equilibrium exists.

Proof. The conjectured price schedule q H is consistent with the lenders’ break-even condition given the
assumed government policy. Thus, to establish the conditions of an equilibrium, it is sufficient to prove
that VH is a solution to the government’s HJB.

                                                                38
 (i) For b ∈ [b S , b B ]: By premise, b B > b S . This implies that ρVB (b S ) > V = y − rb S ≥ y − [r + δ (1 −
     q B (b S ))]b S . For b > b S , we have ρV > y − rb. As VB ≥ V for b ≤ b B , we have VB (b) ≥ y − rb for b ∈
     [b S , b B ]. From the proof of Proposition 5, this implies that VH (b) = VB (b) satisfies the government’s
     HJB on this domain. The proof of Proposition 5 extends this to b ∈ [b B , b B ] as well.

 (ii) For b ≤ b S : Note that the premise implies there exists a b̂ ∈ [0, b B ] such that ρVB (b̂) < y − [r + δ (1 −
      q B (b̂))]b̂ ≤ y − r b̂. The above established that ρVB (b) > y − rb for b ∈ [b S , b B ]. Hence, b̂ < b S . By
      continuity, there exists a bH ∈ (b̂, b S ) such that ρVB (bH ) = y − rbH . Note as well that this implies
      VB0 (bH ) = limb ↓bH VH0 (b) ≥ −r /ρ. From the expression for VH , we have limb ↑bH VH (bH ) = −1 ≤ −r /ρ.
      Hence, VH is either differentiable or has a convex kink at bH , satisfying the conditions for a solution
      to the government’s HJB at bH . For b < bH , VH0 (b) ≥ −1, implying that the HJB is satisfied on this
      domain as well. Finally, VH (b) > V for b ≤ bH , rationalizing the government’s non-default on this
      domain.

                                                                                                                   

    This establishes that at least one of the three types of equilibria always exists. We note that the hybrid
may coexist with the other equilibria as well. In fact, as C → ∞, the condition for multiplicity presented
in Proposition 9 also implies the existence of a hybrid equilibrium.




                                                        39
                                       Figure A.1: Hybrid Equilibrium




                          (a) VH                                                     (b) q H




                                                       (c) CH
The figure depicts the value, price, and consumption functions in a hybrid equilibrium, respectively. The equilibrium
functions are represented by the bold solid blue lines. The horizontal lines in Panel (a) represent the two default
values. The dashed line in Panel (a) represents the stationary value function at the corresponding equilibrium prices.
The dashed line in Panel (c) represents the level of consumption associated with the stationary value. The equilibrium
is constructed with the same parameters as in Figure 1: r = 1, ρ = 2, y = 1, λ = 2, δ = 10, C = 1.2, V = .8y/ρ, and
V = .95y/ρ. The value of C is set low enough so that it never binds in equilibrium.




                                                         40
Appendix B:                                Proofs
This appendix contains all proofs except those for Propositions 1 and 4, which are presented in Appendix
C, along with a discussion of viscosity solutions more generally.


B.1     Proof of Lemma 1
Proof. To generate a contradiction, suppose there is an efficient allocation {c,T }, with T < ∞. Note from
(1) we have V (T , c) = V . To see this, suppose instead that V (T , c) > V ; that is,
                                ∫     T0                                                                   ∫    T0
                                                                            −(ρ+λ)(T 0 −T )
       V (T , c) = sup                     e   −(ρ+λ)(s−T )
                                                              c(s)ds + e                       V +λ                  e −(ρ+λ)(s−T ) maxhV (s, c), V ids
                       T 0 ≥t     T                                                                         T
                  > V.

Hence, there exists a T 0 > T such that
           ∫ T0                                               ∫                            T0
                                          −(ρ+λ)(T 0 −T )
                e −(ρ+λ)(s−T )
                               c(s)ds + e                V +λ                                      e −(ρ+λ)(s−T ) maxhV (s, c), V ids > V .
              T                                                                        T

This implies at time t < T ,
                  ∫    T                                                               ∫       T
                           e   −(ρ+λ)(s−t )
                                                 c(s)ds + e     −(ρ+λ)(T −t )
                                                                               V +λ                e −(ρ+λ)(s−t ) maxhV (s, c), V ids <
                   t                                                                       t
                  ∫    T0                                                                ∫         T0
                                                                −(ρ+λ)(T 0 −t )
                            e   −(ρ+λ)(s−t )
                                                  c(s)ds + e                    V +λ                    e −(ρ+λ)(s−t ) maxhV (s, c), V ids.
                   t                                                                           t

Hence, T was never a sup of the original problem. This establishes that V (T , c) = V .
    Now consider an alternative allocation (c̃, ∞). The alternative consumption allocation equals c for
t < T , but differs for t ≥ T . We choose c̃(t) = (ρ + λ)V − λV < y for t ≥ T so that for all t ≥ T :

                                                                            c̃(t) + λV
                                                              V (t, c̃) =
                                                                               ρ +λ
                                                                        (ρ + λ)V − λV + λV
                                                                       =
                                                                               ρ +λ
                                                                       =V.

Thus, V (0; c) = V (0; c̃). Moreover, the alternative allocation delivers strictly more than zero to the lender
in expectation for t ≥ T as c̃(t) < y. As the government is indifferent and the lender receives strictly more
in expected present value, the original allocation is not efficient.                                         




                                                                                  41
B.2      Proof of Lemma 2
Proof. Lemma 1 allows us to set T = ∞ in the planning problem (3) to obtain
                                 ∫ ∞ ∫t
                    ?
                   P (v) = sup       e − 0 r +1[v (s )<V ] λds [y − c(t)]dt                                         (51)
                                      c∈C,   0

                                                  v(0) = v
                                                 (
                                   subject to                                            h        i
                                                  v(t)
                                                  Û       = −c(t) + ρv(t) − 1[v(t )<V ] λ V − v(t) ,

defined on the domain v ∈ V. P ? is bounded above by (y − C)/r and below by (y − C)/r . To see that P ?
is Lipschitz continuous in v, consider v 1 , v 2 ∈ V, with v 2 > v 1 . A feasible strategy starting from v(0) = v 2
is to set consumption to C until v(t) = v 1 . Let ∆ denote the time v(t) reaches v 1 . Suppose v(t) > V for
t ∈ [0, ∆1 ) and v(t) < V for t ∈ (∆1 , ∆]. Let ∆2 = ∆ − ∆1 . If v 2 < V , then ∆1 = 0 and if v 1 > V , then ∆2 = 0.
The dynamics of v(t) imply

                                                         C − ρ max{v 2 , V }
                                             e −ρ∆1 =
                                                         C − ρ max{v 1 , V }
                                                         C + λV − (ρ + λ) min{v 2 , V }
                                         e −(ρ+λ)∆2 =                                      .
                                                         C + λV − (ρ + λ) min{v 1 , V }

Using this, one can show that

                                                 1 − e −ρ∆1 −(ρ+λ)∆2 ≤ L|v 2 − v 1 |,                               (52)

with L ≡ (ρ + λ)/(C − ρVmax ) ∈ (0, ∞).
    As this is a feasible strategy for v 2 , integrating the objective function, we obtain
                                                                             
                                                      e −r ∆1 1 − e −(r +λ)∆2
                                         1−e −r ∆ 1
                 P ? (v 2 ) ≥ (y − C) ­­            +                           ® + e −r ∆1 −(r +λ)∆2 P ? (v 1 ).
                                       ©                                        ª
                                           r                   r +λ             ®
                                       «                                        ¬

As y < C, we have

                                                1 − e −r ∆1 −(r +λ)∆2
                                                                     
                               ?
                             P (v 2 ) ≥ (y − C)                         + e −r ∆1 −(r +λ)∆2 P ? (v 1 ),
                                                          r

which implies
                                                                          !
                                                        C − y                                  
                              P ? (v 1 ) − P ? (v 2 ) ≤       + P ? (v 1 ) 1 − e −r ∆1 −(r +λ)∆2 .
                                                          r

As P ? (v 1 ) ≤ (y − C)/r , we have
                                                                     !
                                                               C − C                         
                                     P ? (v 1 ) − P ? (v 2 ) ≤           1 − e −r ∆1 −(r +λ)∆2 .
                                                                 r




                                                                 42
As C > C and ρ ≥ r , this implies
                                                                !
                                                          C − C                        
                                P ? (v 1 ) − P ? (v 2 ) ≤           1 − e −ρ∆1 −(ρ+λ)∆2
                                                            r
                                                                !
                                                          C −C
                                                        ≤         L|v 2 − v 1 |,
                                                            r

where the second line uses (52). As v 1 < v 2 , and hence P ? (v 1 ) ≥ P ? (v 2 ) as P ? is the efficient frontier, we
have

                                         |P ? (v 1 ) − P ? (v 2 )| ≤ K |v 2 − v 1 |,

where
                                           !              !
                                      C −C        C −C       ρ +λ
                                                                  
                                   K≡        L=                     .
                                        r       C − ρVmax      r

Hence, P ? is Lipschitz continuous with coefficient K ∈ (0, ∞).                                                     

B.3     Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. We need to check the conditions of Proposition 1. Note that P B? is bounded, Lipschitz continuous,
and differentiable everywhere except V , where limv ↑V P ?0(v) < limv ↓V P ?0(v). This inequality implies that
condition (ii) in the proposition is irrelevant. Condition (iii) of Proposition 1 is satisfied trivially. Condition
(iv) is satisfied by construction.
     At points of differentiability, the first-order condition for consumption requires P B?0(v) ≤ −1 for c = C
to be optimal. Starting with v ∈ [V , V ), differentiating the candidate function yields P B?0(v) ≤ −1. Hence C
is optimal, and P B? satisfies the HJB on this domain. Turning to v > V , note that P B? (v) is concave on this
domain. Thus, if limv ↓V P B?0(v) ≤ −1, then P B?0(v) ≤ −1 for v ∈ (V , Vmax ]. We have

                                                             C − y + rP B? (V )
                                         lim P B?0(v) = −                          .
                                         v ↓V                     C − ρV

This quantity is less than −1 when rP B? (V ) ≥ y − ρV . This is the condition stated in the proposition. This
condition is necessary and sufficient for P B? to satisfy the HJB on (V , Vmax ). Moreover, it is sufficient to
ensure that condition (v) of Proposition 1 is satisfied.                                                      

B.4     Proof of Proposition 3
Proof. The proposed solution PS? is differentiable everywhere save V and v I . At V we have limv ↑V PS?0(v) ≥
−1 ≥ limv ↓V PS?0. Hence, condition (ii) of Proposition 1 is relevant and is satisfied by the candidate value
function. PS? satisfies condition (iii) at v I as it features a convex kink by construction. Condition (iv) is
also satisfied by construction.
     On the domain v ∈ (V , Vmax ], we have PS?0(v) ≤ −1, and hence PS? satisfies the HJB as well as condition
(v) of Proposition 1.
     Turning to v < V , we now show that PS? (V ) ≥ P B? (V ) is necessary and sufficient for PS? to satisfy the
conditions of Proposition 1.

                                                            43
      For sufficiency, suppose that PS? (V ) ≥ P B? (V ). Let X ≡ {v ∈ [V , V )|PS? (v) ≥ P B? (v)} = [max{v I , V }, V ).
On the domain X , PS? (v) = P̂(v). One can show that P̂ 0(v) ≥ −1 if and only if P̂(v) ≥ (y − (ρ + λ)v +
λV )/(r + λ). As the latter term is the value associated with setting vÛ = 0, the inequality is satisfied as
P̂(v) ≥ P B? (v) ≥ (y − (ρ + λ)v + λV )/(r + λ). Hence c = C is optimal on X , and the HJB is satisfied. If
P̂(V ) ≥ P B? (V ), then X = [V , V ), and hence the HJB is satisfied on the whole domain V. If instead there
exists v I > V , then the HJB is satisfied for v < v I from Proposition 2.
      For necessity, suppose instead that PS? (V ) < P B? (V ). Comparison of the slopes implies that as long
as PS? (v) < P B? (v) for v ∈ [V , V ), then PS?0(v) < P B?0(v), and the two lines will never cross. Moreover,
P B?0(v) ≤ −1, and hence PS?0(v) < −1. This implies that c = C is strictly sub-optimal and the HJB is
violated.                                                                                                              


B.5      Proof of Lemma A.1
Lemma A.1. In any competitive equilibrium such that q(b) ∈ [q, 1] for b ∈ B = [−a, b], V is bounded,
strictly decreasing, and Lipschitz continuous on B.

Proof. The boundedness of V follows directly from C/ρ ≥ V (b) ≥ V for any b ∈ B.
     To see that V is strictly decreasing, suppose b1 > b2 for b1 , b2 ∈ B. If b2 = −a ≡ (y − C)/ρ, then
V (b2 ) = C/ρ > V (b1 ), where the latter inequality follows from the budget set at b1 > b2 . Now consider the
following policy starting from b2 ∈ (−a, b1 ): Set c = C until b(t) = b1 . As

                                           Û = c + (r + δ )b(t) − y − δb,
                                           b(t)
                                                     q(b(t))

                                                              Û > 0. Let t˜ ∈ (0, ∞) denote when b(t) = b1 .
and C > y − rb ≥ y − [r + δ (1 − q(b))]b for b ≥ b2 , we have b(t)
As it is feasible for the government to follow this policy and not default while doing so, we have
                                                     ∫       t̃
                                         V (b2 ) ≥                Cdt + e −ρ t̃ V (b1 )
                                                         0
                                                                      C
                                                = 1 − e ρ t̃                    + e −ρ t̃ V (b1 ).
                                                                            ρ

Subtracting V (b1 ) from both sides yields:
                                                                               !
                                                                  C
                                   V (b2 ) − V (b1 ) ≥ 1 − e ρ t̃     − V (b1 ) > 0.
                                                                    ρ

    For continuity, we proceed in a similar fashion. Starting from b1 , consider the policy of setting c = C
until b(t) = b2 . Let t ∗ denote the time where b(t) = b2 . Given that C < y − (r + δ )b ≤ y − (r + δ )b(t) and
q(b(t)) ∈ [q, 1], t ∗ < ∞. Moreover, the same statements imply that
                                                         ∫        t∗
                                          b2 − b1 ≥                    C + rb(t) − y dt
                                                                                    
                                                              0
                                                         ∫       t∗    
                                                     ≥      C + rb − y dt
                                                       0        
                                                     = C + rb − y t ∗ ,



                                                                       44
where the first inequality follows from q(b) ≤ 1.
                                                                  −1
    The above implies that t ∗ ≥ L|b1 − b2 |, with L ≡ y − rb − C      ∈ (0, ∞).
    As this is a feasible strategy, we have
                                                  ∫   t∗
                                                                             ∗
                                      V (b1 ) ≥            e −ρt Cdt + e −ρt V (b2 )
                                                  0
                                                               ∗   C        ∗
                                             = (1 − e −ρt )          + e −ρt V (b2 ),
                                                                   ρ

where the inequality in the first line also reflects that the right-hand side is the value assuming the gov-
ernment never defaults, which is weakly below the optimal default policy. Subtracting V (b2 ) from both
sides and rearranging, we have

                                                                              C
                                                                               
                                                            −ρt ∗
                                 V (b2 ) − V (b1 ) ≤ (1 − e       ) V (b2 ) −     .
                                                                              ρ
                                                                    ∗
Using the fact that C/ρ > V (b) ≥ V > C/ρ and 1 − e −ρt ≤ t ∗ , we have

                                                                      C
                                                                       
                                 0 < V (b2 ) − V (b1 ) ≤ t V (b2 ) −
                                                          ∗
                                                                      ρ
                                                                   !
                                                             C −C
                                                       ≤L            |b1 − b2 |.
                                                               ρ
                                                         
Hence, |V (b2 ) − V (b1 )| ≤ K |b2 − b1 | with K ≡ L C − C /ρ ∈ (0, ∞).                                         


B.6     Proof of Proposition 5
Proof. By construction, the price schedule q B is consistent with the lenders’ break-even condition, given
the conjectured government policy. The remaining step is to verify if and when the government’s policy
is optimal given the conjectured q B . Hence, to prove the proposition, we need to establish that VB satisfies
the conditions of Proposition 4 if and only if (32) holds.
    For C to be optimal for all b < b B , the first-order condition for the HJB requires 1 + VB0 (b)/q B (b) ≥ 0
wherever VB0 (b) exists. Thus, if VB0 (b) ≥ −q B (b), then c = C is optimal. Recalling that VB was constructed
by assuming that the Hamiltonian is maximized at c = C, then VB0 (b) ≥ −q B (b) is both necessary and
sufficient to verify that the HJB is satisfied at points of differentiability.
    We proceed to show that (32) is equivalent to VB0 (b) ≥ −q B (b) at points of differentiability.
    For b < 0, we have
                                                                                        ! ρr
                                                                        C + rb − y
                                  ρVB (b) = C − (C − ρVB (0))                                  .
                                                                           C −y

Note that VB is concave on this domain. For C to be optimal, it is therefore sufficient that limb ↑0 VB0 (b) ≥ −1.
This will be true if and only if ρVB (0) ≥ y. Hence, the condition in equation (32) evaluated at b = 0 is
necessary and sufficient for the HJB to hold for b ∈ (−a, 0). For b = −a = (y −C)/ρ, we have VB (−a) = C/ρ,
which is condition (iv) in Proposition 4.
     For b ∈ (0, b B ], we use the fact that VB (b) = VB? (q B (b)b), where VB? is the inverse of P B? . Hence,
VB (b) = VB?0(q B (b)b) q B (b) + q B0 (b)b . From the lenders’ break-even condition, in the Safe Zone, we have
 0



                                                              45
                                                                     
(r + δ )q B (b) = q B0 (b)bÛ = q B0 (b) C + [r + δ (1 − q B (b))]b − y . Substituting in and rearranging, we have for
b ∈ (0, b B ]
                                                                                       !
                                                                  C − ρVB (b)
                                      VB (b) = −q B (b)
                                        0
                                                                                         .
                                                        C − [r + δ (1 − q B (b))]b − y

Hence, for b ∈ (0, b B ], the HJB is satisfied if and only if ρVB (b) ≥ y − [r + δ (1 − q B (b))]b, which is the
condition in equation (32).
   For b ∈ (b B , b B ], we have q B (b) = q and

                                                                                               ρ +λ
                                                             C − y + (r + λ)qb r +λ
                   (ρ + λ)VB (b) = C + λV − C + λV − (ρ + λ)V ­                       .
                                                              ©                     ª
                                                                C − y + (r + λ)qb B
                                                                                    ®
                                                              «                     ¬

Note that VB (b) is concave in b, hence we need to check the condition at b → b B . We have for b ∈ (b B , b B ]

                                                     C + λV − (ρ + λ)V
                                       VB0 (b) ≥ −                         = −1,
                                                     C − y + (r + λ)qb B

where the final equality uses the definition of b B ; hence, for this region the optimality condition always
holds.
     By construction, for b = b B , condition (v) of Proposition 1 is satisfied.
     Note that as VB (b B ) = V , the derivative of VB is continuous at b B . The only point of non-differentiability
is b = 0. In particular, note that limb ↓0 VB0 (b) = − limb ↓0 q B (b)(C −ρVB (0))(C −y). Hence, if limb ↓0 q B (b) < 1,
then there is a convex kink at b = 0. This is consistent with condition (iii) in Proposition 4.
     Hence, the conditions of Proposition 4 hold if and only if (32) holds.                                           


B.7     Proof of Proposition 6
Proof. There are three claims in the proposition:

Part (i). If a borrowing allocation is efficient, it must be that

                                                  rP B? (v) ≥ y − ρV

for any V ≥ V (from footnote 12). This implies that
                                                                y − rP
                                                  VB? (P) ≥
                                                                  ρ




                                                           46
for P ≤ P B (V ). Using that P = q B (b)b and that VB (b) = VB? (q B (b)b), we have that

                                                             y − rq B (b)b
                              VB (b) = VB? (q B (b)b) ≥
                                                                  ρ
                                                  r q B (b)
                                         y−   r +δ (1−q B (b)) (r   + δ (1 − q B (b)))b
                                     =
                                                          ρ
                                       y − (r + δ (1 − q B (b)))b
                                     ≥                            for all b ∈ [0, b B ],
                                                   ρ

where the last inequality follows from rq B (b) ≤ r + δ (1 − q B (b)) for all δ ≥ 0, q B (b) ≤ 1 and b ≥ 0. And
thus condition (7) is satisfied.

Part (ii). Let p = q B (b)b. For b ∈ [0, b B ], Condition (7) becomes

                                         ρVB? (p) − (y − (r + δ )b + δp) ≥ 0

Now, from the price equation (31), we have
                                                              r
                                                          ! r +δ
                                            1 − q B (b)                 C − y + rp
                                                                    =                ,                       (53)
                                              1−q                       C − y + rp

where p ≡ P B? (V ) = qb B . From this expression, we can define q B (b) = F (δ, p), holding the other parameters
constant. Recall that condition (7) is restricted to b ∈ [0, b B ]; hence, the domain of interest for p is [0, p],
which is independent of δ . We shall use the fact that
                                                                 1 − q 
                                 ∂F (δ, p) 1 − F (δ, p)
                                                        
                                          =              q + ln               ,                              (54)
                                    ∂δ        r +δ               1 − F (δ, p)

keeping in mind that q = (r + δ )/(r + δ + λ) and hence varies with δ .
   Condition (7) can be written:

                                 G(δ, p) ≡ ρVB? (p) − y + (r + δ )p/F (δ, p) − δp.

Taking the derivative with respect to δ , we have that:

                          ∂G(δ, p)      p              (r + δ )p ∂F (δ, p)
                                   =           −p −
                            ∂δ       F (δ, p)          F (δ, p)2 ∂δ
                                        p                         (r + δ ) ∂F (δ, p)
                                                                                    
                                   =             1 − F (δ, p) −
                                     F (δ, p)                     F (δ, p) ∂δ
                                     p(1 − F (δ, p))                     (r + δ ) ∂F (δ, p)
                                                                                           
                                   =                      F (δ, p) −
                                         F (δ, p)2                   (1 − F (δ, p)) ∂δ
                                                                              1 − q 
                                     p(1 − F (δ, p))
                                                        
                                   =                      F (δ, p) − q − ln                 .
                                         F (δ, p)2                            1 − F (δ, p)




                                                              47
Note that ∂G/∂δ ≤ 0 if
                                                                   1−q         
                                         F (δ, p) − q − ln                          ≤ 0.
                                                                 1 − F (δ, p)

For p = p, F (δ, p) = q, and this term is zero. Moreover, this expression is increasing in p as ∂F /∂p < 0.
Hence, ∂G(δ, p)/∂δ ≤ 0 for p ∈ [0, p]. Thus, if G(δ 0 , p) ≥ 0, then G(δ, p) ≥ 0 for δ ∈ [0, δ 0 ].

Part (iii). The fact that saving is efficient implies

                                               y − ρV
                                                      > P B? (V ) = qb B ,
                                                  r

where the last equality follows from the definition of b B . By continuity, there exists a V0 > V such that

                                            y − ρV0
                                                    > P B? (V0 ) ≡ p0 < p,
                                               r
where the last inequality follows from the fact that P B? is strictly decreasing. As V0 = VB? (p0 ) by definition,
this is equivalent to

                                                  ρVB? (p0 ) < y − rp0 .

    Evaluated at p = p0 , condition (7) is

                                                              rp0
                                                                                           
                                                                                   1
                           G(δ, p0 ) =   ρVB? (p0 )   −y +            + p 0δ              −1 .               (55)
                                                           F (δ, p0 )          F (δ, p0 )

Note that limδ →∞ q = 1, and hence F (δ, p) ≥ q also converges to 1. Hence, ρVB? (p0 ) − y + rp0 /F (δ, p0 ) →
ρVB? (p0 )−y +rp0 < 0. We now show that the last term in (55) converges to zero; that is, δ (1−F (δ, p0 )) → 0.
From the definition of F in (53), we have
                                                                                           r +δ
                                                                                             r
                                                                     ©             ª
                                                        λδ           ­ C − y + rp0 ®
                                                                     ­             ®
                                δ (1 − F (δ, p0 )) =                 ­             ®              .
                                                     r +δ +λ         ­ C − y + rp ®
                                                                     ­             ®
                                                                     ­| {z }®
                                                                     «     <1      ¬
As the ratio raised to the power (r + δ )/r is strictly less than one as p0 < p, the right-hand side goes to
zero as δ → ∞. Hence, there exists a δ 1 such that for all δ > δ 1 , G(δ, p0 ) < 0, violating the condition for
the borrowing equilibrium.
                                                                                                             


B.8     Proof of Proposition 7
Proof. We proceed to show the necessity and sufficiency parts of the proposition independently.

The “only if” part. Toward a contradiction, suppose that VS (b S ) < VB (b S ) (or equivalently b B > b S ),
and the conjectured saving equilibrium is indeed an equilibrium. First, note that q S (b) ∈ [q, 1], as the


                                                             48
government defaults only with the arrival of V D = V .
   By construction, V̂ (b S ) = VS (b S ) = V . As VS is strictly decreasing, we have VS (b B ) < V = VB (b B ).
Hence, VS and VB do not intersect in [b S , b B ], and b I > b S , and VS (b B ) = V̂ (b B ).
   We also have for b ≥ b B : V̂ 0(b) = −q S (b) ≤ −q ≤ VB0 (b), where the latter inequality uses a property
of the borrowing allocation value function (shown in the proof of Proposition 5). This implies that V̂ (b) <
VB (b) for all b ≥ b B , and there is no point of intersection to generate b I and VS = V̂ for all b ∈ [b S , b S ]. Now
at b S , we must have (as an equilibrium requirement) that V̂ (b S ) = V < VB (b S ), where the latter inequality
follows from the fact that V̂ < VB on this domain. Thus, b S < b B . However, we have

                                        (ρ + λ)V = y − [r + δ (1 − q)]b B + λV
                                                    < y − [r + δ (1 − q)]b S + λV
                                                    ≤ y − [r + δ (1 − q S (b S )]b S + λV
                                                    = (ρ + λ)V̂ (b S ) = (ρ + λ)V ,

where the first line uses the definition of b B ; the second line uses b B > b S ; the third uses q S (b) ≥ q; and
the final two equalities use the fact that V̂ (b) is the stationary value at price q S and the definition of b S ,
respectively. Hence, we have generated a contradiction.

The “if” part. We first verify that VS satisfies the conditions of Proposition 4 and establish that qS is a
valid equilibrium price schedule.
      First, consider the government’s problem.
      Condition (iv) and (v) of Proposition 4 are satisfied by construction. For b = b S , condition (ii) of
Proposition 4 applies and is satisfied by construction.
      For b < b S , the conjectured value function is differentiable. For the HJB to hold with c = C given that
q S (b) = 1 in this region, we require VS0(b) ≥ −q S (b) = −1. On this domain, VS (b) = VS? (b), where the latter
is the inverse of the efficient solution PS? . As PS?0(v) ≤ −1, we have VS0(b) ≥ −1 = −q S (b). Hence, c = C is
indeed optimal, and the HJB holds with equality.
      For b ∈ (b S , b I ), VS (b) = V̂ (b), and thus VS is differentiable and satisfies the HJB with equality by
construction. Note that if q S (b) ≥ q (something we check below), then bÛ ≤ 0 in (bS , b I ) by equation (19)
(consistent with the equilibrium conjecture that the government is saving in this region). This implies that
C S (b) = Ĉ(b) ≤ C, and thus the conjectured policy function is a valid one (recall that we are assuming that
C is sufficiently low and can thus be ignored as a constraint).
      For b ∈ (b I , b S ), VS (b) = VB (b) and differentiability of VB implies that VS is differentiable. The proof of
Proposition 5 establishes that the HJB holds with equality in this domain, given that q S (b) = q.
      This confirms that condition (i) of Proposition 4 holds.
      If b I ∈ (b S , b S ), VS (b I ) = VB (b I ), and there is a potential point of non-differentiability at b I . If q S (b I ) ≥ q
(something that we check below), we have that this kink is convex. Thus, condition (iii) of Proposition 4
holds.
      Hence, given the conjectured q S , the value function is a viscosity solution to the government’s HJB
equation.
      Next, let us consider the price function. The only thing left to check is that q S (b) ∈ [q, 1] for b ∈ (b S , b I ),




                                                                 49
where b I ∈ (b B , b B ). In this region, q S (b) ≤ 1 by equation (39). In addition,

                                  (ρ + λ)VS (b) = y − r + δ (1 − q S (b)) b + λV
                                                                        

                                                     ≥ (ρ + λ)VB (b)
                                                     ≥ y − r + δ (1 − q) b + λV ,
                                                                       


where the first equality and second inequality follow from the equilibrium construction on b ∈ (b S , b I ).
The last inequality follows from the construction of VB (b) for b ∈ (b B , b B ). Comparison of the first and last
lines establishes that q S (b) ≥ q.                                                                             


B.9     Proof of Proposition 8
Proof. The fact that the efficiency of saving is a necessary condition for a saving equilibrium is established
in the text. Turning to equation (44), multiply both sides of equation (43) by q to obtain the following
necessary and sufficient condition:

                                                qPS? (V ) ≥ qb B = P B? (V ).

Using q = (r + δ )/(r + δ + λ) and the fact that PS? (V ) > P B? (V ), we solve for δ to obtain

                                       λP B? (V )               (r + λ)P B? (V ) − rPS? (V )
                            δ ≥                          −r =                                  ≥ 0,
                                  PS? (V ) − P B? (V )               PS? (V ) − P B? (V )

where the last inequality is strict when ρ > r , as seen in the definition of P B? . Thus, this is a necessary and
sufficient condition for the saving equilibrium, proving the proposition.                                        


B.10      Proof of Proposition 9
Proof. Note that P B? (v) is increasing in C. Hence,

                                         P B? (V ) ≤ lim P B? (V )
                                                        C→∞
                                                     y − ρV + (ρ − r )(V − V )
                                                    =
                                                              r +λ
                                                       ?
                                                     rP (V ) + (ρ − r )(V − V )
                                                    = S                         .
                                                              r +λ
Then a sufficient condition for saving to be strictly efficient is

                                                        rPS? (V ) + (ρ − r )(V − V )
                                         PS? (V ) >                                  ,
                                                                   r +λ
or

                                                       λ    r (V − V )
                                                          >            ,
                                                     ρ −r    y − ρV

which is the last inequality in the proposition.


                                                                50
      Similarly,

                                                           λPS? (V ) − (ρ − r )(V − V )
                                  PS? (V ) − P B? (V ) ≥                                ,
                                                                      r +λ
and
                                                                                       
                                λP B? (V )               λ rPS? (V ) + (ρ − r )(V − V )
                                                  −r ≤                                      −r
                           PS? (V ) − P B? (V )            λPS? (V ) − (ρ − r )(V − V )
                                                           (r + λ)(ρ − r )(V − V )
                                                    =                                   ≡ δ.
                                                         λPS? (V ) − (ρ − r )(V − V )

From Proposition 8, a sufficient condition for a saving equilibrium, given that saving is efficient, is that δ
is greater than δ . Note that δ is strictly positive and independent of C.
     For the borrowing equilibrium, we need to show that the condition in equation (7) is satisfied as C
becomes arbitrarily large. Specifically, fix any δ = δ > δ . Define

                                   A(b) ≡ ρVB (b) − (y − [r + δ (1 − q B (b))]b),

where A implicitly depends on C and δ . Note by condition (7) in Proposition (5) that if A(b) > 0 on
[0, b B ] ⊇ [0, b B ], then a borrowing equilibrium exists.
     To establish the properties of A(b) as C → ∞, first note that b B is independent of C. In addition,

                                             lim VB (b) = V + q(b B − b),
                                            C→∞

where we use the fact that q B (b) → q for b ∈ [0, b B ] as C → ∞. As the point-wise limit is continuous in
b, and by Lemma A.1 VB (b) is monotonic given C, the convergence is uniform on the compact set [0, b B ]
(see Theorem A of Buchanan and Hildebrandt (1908)).
    Similarly, for b ∈ [0, b B ],

                    lim {y − [r + δ (1 − q B (b))]b} = y − [r + δ (1 − q)]b = y − (r + λ)qb.
                    C→∞

Again, the convergence is uniform by the same logic.
   Hence, A(b) converges uniformly on [0, b B ] to

                           A(b) ≡ lim A(b) = ρV + ρq(b B − b) − (y − (r + λ)qb).
                                    C→∞

    We now establish that A(b) > 0 for b ∈ [0, b B ]. The linearity of A(b) in b implies that if the inequality
holds for b = 0 and b = b B , it is satisfied for all intermediate points. For b = 0, we have

                             A(0) = ρV + ρqb B − y
                                      (ρ − r − λ)(y − ρV ) + ρλ(V − V )
                                    =
                                                    r +λ
                                      (ρ − r − λ)(y − ρV ) + (ρ − r )ρ(V − V )
                                    =                                          > 0,
                                                       r +λ



                                                             51
where the second line uses the definition of qb B and the final inequality uses the condition in the propo-
sition. Similarly,

                                          A(b B ) = ρV − (y − (r + λ)qb)
                                                    = λ(V − V ) > 0.

Hence, minb ∈[0,b B ] A(b) = min{A(0), A(b)} > 0.
    As A → A uniformly on [0, b B ], for every ϵ > 0, there exists an M such that for all C > M, we have
A(b) > A(b) − ϵ for b ∈ [0, b B ]. Setting ϵ < minb ∈[0,b B ] A(b), we have A(b) > 0 for all b ∈ [0, b B ] and
C > M. By Proposition 5, this is sufficient to establish the existence of a borrowing equilibrium for δ = δ
when C > M. By part (ii) of Proposition 6, we have a borrowing equilibrium for all δ ∈ [0, δ ].
    Combining results, there exists a non-empty interval ∆ ≡ [δ, δ ] and M such that for all C > M and
δ ∈ ∆, both saving and borrowing equilibria coexist.                                                      


B.11      Proof of Proposition 10
Proof. We first sketch out the borrowing equilibrium under the assumed policy. Let {VBP , q BP } denote the
equilibrium policy and price functions. The conjectured policy is for the government to borrow to b B ,
which is the endogenous limit in the borrowing equilibrium absent the policy. From (46), it is optimal
for the bondholders to sell their bonds at price q ∗ > q as soon as b = b PB , where the latter is defined by
V P (b PB ) = V . That is, bondholders sell their bonds to the third party as soon as debt enters the Crisis Zone.
We have

                                                    y − [r + δ (1 − q ∗ )]b B + λV
                                     VBP (b B ) =
                                                                ρ +λ
                                                         δ (q ∗ − q)b B
                                               =V +                       .
                                                            ρ +λ

The last term reflects that the government rolls over debt at q ∗ rather than q once it reaches the borrowing
limit. The expression assumes that the government defaults upon the arrival of V . To see that this is
optimal, note that the alternative of never defaulting yields the value

                               y − [r + δ (1 − q ∗ )]b B   y − rb B y − rb S
                                                         ≤         <         =V.
                                          ρ                   ρ        ρ

Facing q BP (b) = q ∗ in the Crisis Zone, the government’s value can be obtained from the HJB, and it is
straightforward to verify that the first-order condition for c = C holds on this domain. As q ∗ > q, b PB > b B ,
where the latter is the benchmark borrowing equilibrium’s threshold for the Safe Zone. Note as well that
q ∗ > q implies that the third party takes a loss in expectation in the Crisis Zone.
     For b ∈ [0, b P ], bondholders purchase debt at price q BP (b) and collect r plus maturing principal until
b = b PB , at which point they sell at q ∗ . The equilibrium is recovered by solving the system of differential




                                                            52
equations:

                                                      ρVBP (b) = C + VBP 0(b)bÛ
                                              (r + δ )q BP (b) = r + δ + q BP 0(b)bÛ
                                                                     C + (r + δ )b − y
                                                                bÛ =                   − δb,
                                                                          q BP (b)

with the boundary conditions VBP (b PB ) = V and q BP (b PB ) = q ∗ . Note that these equations are identical to
those in the benchmark borrowing equilibrium except that the boundary condition b PB > b B and q ∗ > q.
    As is the case in the benchmark equilibrium, a necessary and sufficient condition for VBP to be a solution
to the government’s problem when facing q BP is

                                                                 y − [r + δ (1 − q BP (b))]b
                                                VBP (b) ≥                                    ,
                                                                             ρ

for all b ∈ [0, b B ]. Following the same approach as in the proof of Proposition 9, we show that this
inequality holds as C → ∞ uniformly over the full debt domain [0, b B ].
    As C → ∞, we have for b ∈ [0, b B ],

                                                          lim VBP (b)         = VBP (b B ) + q ∗ (b B − b)
                                                         C→∞
                                          y − [r   + δ (1 − q BP (b))]b           y − [r + δ (1 − q ∗ )]b
                                    lim                                       =                           .
                                  C→∞                       ρ                               ρ

Recall from the proof of Proposition 9, that

                                                                            y − [r + δ (1 − q)]b
                                     A(b) = V + q(b B − b) −                                        ≥0
                                                                                      ρ

under the conditions of the proposition. Note that this implies

                           y − [r + δ (1 − q BP (b))]b            δ (q ∗ − q)b B                        δ (q ∗ − q)
                                                       !
       lim    VBP (b)    −                               = A(b) +                + (q ∗ − q)(b B − b) −             b.
      C→∞                              ρ                              ρ +λ                                    ρ

This expression is linear in b, and hence it is sufficient to verify the inequality at the endpoints b = 0 and
b = b B . The fact that A(0) > 0 and q ∗ > q implies that the limit is strictly positive at b = 0. For b = b B , we
have

                         δ (q ∗ − q)b B       δ (q ∗ − q)
             A(b B ) −                    −                 bB
                             ρ +λ                 ρ
                 y − [r + δ (1 − q)]b B + λV               y − [r + δ (1 − q)]b B          δ (q ∗ − q)b B       δ (q ∗ − q)
             =                                         −                               +                    −                 bB
                              ρ +λ                                      ρ                     ρ +λ                  ρ
                   −λ                                      −λ                                    
             =            y − [r + δ (1 − q ∗ )]b B − ρV =          r (b S − b B ) − δ (1 − q ∗ )b B > 0,
                 ρ(ρ + λ)                                  ρ(ρ + λ)

where the last inequality uses b B > b S . This completes the proof of part (i).



                                                                        53
    For part (ii), the saving equilibrium requires VBP (b S ) ≤ V . As C → ∞,

                     VBP (b S ) = VBP (b B ) + q ∗ (b B − b S )
                                y − rb B + λV                                         δ (1 − q ∗ )b B
                               =               + b B − b S − (1 − q ∗ )(b B − b S ) −
                                    ρ +λ                                                  ρ +λ
                                                                                             !
                                     (ρ + λ − r )(b B − b S )                           δb B
                               =V +                           − (1 − q ∗ ) b B − b S +          .
                                            ρ +λ                                       ρ +λ

As the second term is strictly positive, there exists a q̃ < 1 such that this expression exceeds V for q ∗ > q̃,
hence violating the necessary condition for a saving equilibrium.
                                                                                                             


B.12      Proof of Proposition 11
Proof. For part (i), note that in the saving equilibrium undistorted by policy, q S (b) = 1 for b ≤ b S . Hence,
imposing a price floor restricted to the Safe Zone does not alter the saving equilibrium, which exists by
Proposition 9. Hence, the price floor is irrelevant under the saving equilibrium.
    Using the notation introduced in the proof of Proposition 10, a necessary condition for the borrowing
equilibrium under the policy is for b ∈ [0, b PB ]

                                         y − [r + δ (1 − q BP (b))]b y − [r + δ (1 − q ∗ )]b
                             VBP (b) ≥                              ≥                        .
                                                     ρ                         ρ

Recall that in the construction of the borrowing equilibrium, b B is defined by solving the HJB assuming
q B (b) = q. Hence, VBP (b) = VB (b) for b > b S , as the policy is restricted to b ∈ [0, b S ]. As VB (b S ) < V by the
inequality of Proposition 9, we have b PB < b S . For b = b PB , we have

                                                              y − rb S   y − rb PB
                                           VBP (b PB )   =V =          <           ,
                                                                 ρ          ρ

where the first two equalities use the definitions of b PB and b S , respectively. Hence, there exists a q̂ < 1
such that
                                                             y − [r + δ (1 − q ∗ )]b PB
                                             VBP (b PB )   <                            ,
                                                                        ρ

for q ∗ > q̂, violating the necessary condition for a borrowing equilibrium. This proves part (ii).
                                                                                                                      




                                                                   54
Appendix C:                   Viscosity Solutions on Stratified Domains and
                              the Proofs of Propositions 1 and 4
In this appendix, we establish the equivalence between the sequence problems and the viscosity solutions
of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equations. The two complications are that the objective and/or
the dynamics are not necessarily continuous in the state variables. We rely on the results of Bressan
and Hong (2007) (henceforth, BH) to establish the validity of the recursive formulation. This appendix
introduces their environment and summarizes their core results. Relative to BH, we make minor changes
in notation and consider a maximization problem while the original BH studies minimization. We then
prove Propositions 1 and 4.


C.1       The Environment of Bressan and Hong (2007)
Let X ⊂ RN denote the state space. In the benchmark BH environment, X = RN ; however, they show how
to restrict attention to an arbitrary subset by extending the dynamics and payoff functions to RN such
that the subset is an absorbing region. Let α(t) ∈ A denote the control function, where A is the set of
admissible controls. Dynamics of the state vector x are given by x(t)Û = f (x(t), α(t)).
    Given a discount factor β and a flow payoff `(x, α), the sequence problem is
                                                ∫ ∞
                                  W (x̄) = sup       `(x(t), α(t))dt                               (56)
                                           α ∈A 0
                                                   (
                                                    x(0) = x̄ ∈ X
                                        subject to
                                                    x(t)
                                                     Û       = f (x(t), α(t)).

    The complication BH address is that f may not be continuous in x. In particular, assume there is a
decomposition X = M1 ∪ ... ∪ M M with the following properties. If j , k, then M j ∩ Mi = ∅. In addition,
if M j ∩ M k , ∅, then M j ⊂ M k , where M k is the closure of Mk .
    BH’s assumption H1 ensures that dynamics are well behaved within Mi :

Assumption. H1: For each i = 1, ..., M, there exists a compact set of controls Ai ⊂ Rm , a continuous map
fi : Mi × Ai → RN , and a payoff function `i , with the following properties:

(a) At each x ∈ Mi , all vectors fi (x, a), a ∈ Ai are tangent to Mi ;

(b) | fi (x, a) − fi (z, a)| ≤ Ki |x − z|, for some Ki ∈ [0, ∞), for all x, z ∈ Mi , a ∈ Ai ;

(c) Each payoff function `i is non-positive and |`i (x, a) − `i (z, a)| ≤ Li |x − z|, for some Li ∈ [0, ∞), for all
    x, z ∈ Mi , a ∈ Ai ;24

(d) We have f (x, a) = fi (x, a) and `(x, a) = `i (x, a) whenever x ∈ Mi , i = 1, ..., M.

    The key assumption is (b); namely, that dynamics are Lipschitz continuous when confined to tangent
trajectories. This does not restrict how the dynamics change when crossing the boundaries of Mi .
    Let TMi (x) denote the cone of trajectories tangent to Mi at x ∈ Mi :

                                                    inf z ∈Mi |x + hy − z|
                                                                            
                                              N
                             TMi (x) ≡ y ∈ R lim                           =0 .
                                                h→0            h
  24 We   strengthen part (c) to incorporate the Lipschitz continuity condition stated in BH equation (46).


                                                           55
Part (a) of H1 is equivalent to fi (x, a) ∈ TMi for all x ∈ Mi , a ∈ Ai .
     For x ∈ Mi , let Fˆ(x) ⊂ RN +1 denote the set of achievable dynamics and payoffs for the set of controls
Ai :

                                Fˆ(x) ≡ {(x,
                                          Û u)|xÛ = fi (x, a), u ≤ `i (x, a), a ∈ Ai } ,                           (57)

where i is such that x ∈ Mi . To handle discontinuous dynamics, BH use results from differential inclusions.
In particular, let G(x) denote an extended set of feasible trajectories and payoffs:

                                G(x) ≡ ∩ϵ >0co (x,Û u) ∈ Fˆ(x 0) |x − x 0 | < ϵ ,
                                               
                                                                                                        (58)

where coS denotes the closed convex hull of a set S.
     The next key assumption is that G(x) does not contain additional trajectory-payoff pairs when re-
stricted to tangent trajectories:

Assumption. H2: For every x ∈ RN , we have

                               Fˆ(x) = (x,Û u) ∈ G(x)|xÛ ∈ TMi .
                                        
                                                                                                                   (59)

    BH define the Hamiltonian using G(x) as the relevant choice set:

                                           H (x, p) ≡       sup       {u + pxÛ }.                                  (60)
                                                        (x,u)∈G(x
                                                         Û        )

The corresponding HJB is

                                               βw(x) = H (x, Dw(x)),                                               (61)

where D is the differential operator. BH define the following concepts:

Definition 3. A continuous function w is a lower solution of (61) if the following holds: If w −φ has a local
maximum at x for some continuously differential φ, then

                                             βw(x) − H (x, Dφ(x)) ≤ 0.                                             (62)

Definition 4. A continuous function w is an upper solution of (61) if the following holds: If x ∈ Mi , and
the restriction of w − φ to Mi has a local minimum at x for some continuously differential φ, then

                                     βw(x) −          sup             {u + DφxÛ } ≥ 0.                             (63)
                                               (x,u)∈G(x
                                                Û        ), xÛ ∈TMi


Definition 5. A continuous function w, which is both an upper and a lower solution of (61), is a viscosity
solution.

    Note that the second definition differs from the first by restricting attention to Mi when describing
the properties of w − φ, which relaxes the set of φ that satisfies the condition. However, the trajectories
in the Hamiltonian are restricted to lie in the tangent set.25 The added properties are the core distinction
between the definition of viscosity solution used here versus the standard definition.26
  25 The fact that trajectories are restricted to TMi in the definition of an upper solution was unintentionally omitted
in Bressan and Hong (2007) but is corrected in Bressan (2013).
   26 Note that we place the restriction on the upper solution while the original BH place it on the lower solution as

we consider a maximization problem.

                                                            56
    With these definitions in hand, we summarize the core results of BH:

  (i) (BH Theorem 1) If H1 and H2 hold, and there exists at least one trajectory with finite value, then
      the maximization problem admits an optimal solution.

 (ii) (BH Proposition 1) Let assumptions H1 and H2 hold. If the value function W is continuous, then it
      is a viscosity solution of (61).

(iii) (BH Corollary 1) Let assumptions H1 and H2 hold. If the value function W is bounded and Lipschitz
      continuous, then W is the unique non-positive viscosity solution to (61).27


C.2     The Planner’s Problem
To map problem (3) into BH, we make a few modifications and consider a generalized problem. First, we
let the planner randomize when the government is indifferent to default or not. This helps to convexify
the choice set. In particular, let π (t) ∈ [0, 1] be an additional choice, where π (t) is the probability the
government defaults when V arises and the current value is V . It will always be efficient to set π (t) = 0
when v(t) = V , and so this does not alter the solution to the planner’s problem. We denote the set of
possible paths, π = {π (t) ∈ [0, 1]}t ≥0 , by Π. The controls are α = (c, π) ∈ A ≡ C × Π.∫
                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                       1[v (s )<V ]ds
    Recall that in (3) the objective is discounted by the probability of repayment, e −λ          0                     . Let us
define Γ(t) as follows:
                                                       ∫t
                                                            (π (s)1[v (s )=V ] +1[v (s )<V ] ds
                                     Γ(t) ≡ Γ(0)e −λ   0



for some Γ(0) ∈ (0, 1]. Note that Γ(t)/Γ(0) is the discount factor in the original problem with π = 0. By
adding Γ(t) as an additional state variable, we will be able to keep track of the probability of survival in
our recursive formulation.
    Let X = V × (0, 1] denote the state space for x = (v, Γ). Let f (x, α) = (v,   Û Γ)
                                                                                      Û given the control α = (c, π ):
                                                                          h         i
                                           vÛ = −c + ρv − 1[v <V ] λ V − v
                                           
                                           
                                f (x, α) =
                                           
                                                     h                        i                                 (64)
                                           
                                            Γ
                                             Û  = −λ   π 1 [v=V ] + 1 [v <V ]   Γ.
                                           
   The flow value must be non-positive. We therefore subtract the constant (y − C)/r from the value. To
convert this into a flow payoff, let

                                         `(x, a) ≡ Γ(y − c) − (y − C) ≤ 0,

where the inequality uses y > C and Γ ≤ 1. Note that ` is Lipschitz continuous in x.
   Hence, we consider the following problem, where x(t) ≡ (v(t), Γ(t)):
                                            ∫ ∞
                            P̃(v, Γ) = sup       e −r t `(x(t), α(t))dt                                                     (65)
                                       α∈A 0
                                               (
                                                 (v(0), Γ(0)) = (v, Γ)
                                    subject to
                                                 (v(t),
                                                   Û Γ(t))Û       = f (x(t), α(t)).
  27 BH state a weaker continuity condition than Lipschitz continuity (BH H3) that is not necessary given our

environment.




                                                             57
We then have a one-to-one mapping between P̃ and P ? :

                                               P̃(v, Γ) = ΓP ? (v) − (y − C)/r .                                 (66)

As P ? is bounded and Γ ∈ (0, 1], P̃ is bounded. Similarly, P̃ is Lipschitz continuous in the state vector (v, Γ).
    We now verify the conditions of BH. Define five regions of the state space:

                                                   M1 ≡ {V } × (0, 1]
                                                   M2 ≡ (V , V ) × (0, 1]
                                                   M3 ≡ {V } × (0, 1]
                                                   M4 ≡ (V , Vmax ) × (0, 1]
                                                   M5 ≡ {Vmax } × (0, 1].

Let Ai denote the controls that produce trajectories that are tangent to Mi :28

                                        Ai ≡ {(c, π )|c ∈ [C, C], π ∈ [0, 1], xÛ ∈ TMi }
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                              {ρV − λ(V − V )} × [0, 1] if i = 1
                                              {ρV } × [0, 1] if i = 3
                                             
                                             
                                           =
                                             
                                                                                                                 (67)
                                             
                                             
                                              {ρVmax } × [0, 1] if i = 5
                                              [C, C] × [0, 1] otherwise.
                                             
                                             
                                             
Within each Mi , the dynamics f are Lipschitz continuous in x for all a ∈ Ai . It is straightforward to verify
that we satisfy Assumption H1.
    Let us now verify Assumption H2. There two cases:

Case 1: i ∈ {2, 4}. In this case, G(x) = Fˆ(x), and BH Assumption H2 is straightforward to verify.

Case 2: i ∈ {1, 3, 5}. We show the i = 3 case (as the others are similar). We have29
                                    n                                                         o
                             Fˆ(x) = (x,
                                      Û u)|vÛ = 0, ΓÛ = −πλΓ, u ≤ `(x, (ρV , π )), π ∈ [0, 1]                    (68)
                                    n                                                       o
                                   = (x,
                                      Û u)|vÛ = 0, ΓÛ ∈ [−λΓ, 0], u ≤ Γ(y − ρV ) − (y − C)
                                   = {0} × [−λΓ, 0] × (−∞, Γ(y − ρV ) − (y − C)].                                (69)

Let x 0 = (v 0, Γ 0) be in the neighborhood of x = (V , Γ). We have
                                            n
                                   Fˆ(x 0) = (x,
                                              Û u)
                                                  vÛ = −c + ρv 0 − λ1 {v 0 <V } (V − v 0),
                                                  ΓÛ ∈ [−λ1 {v 0 <V } Γ, 0],
                                                                                         o
                                                  u ≤ Γ(y − c) − (y − C), c ∈ [C, C] .

  28 For i   = 1, 3, 5, the tangent trajectories set vÛ = 0. Otherwise, they are the full set of trajectories.
  29 Note    this is the only case where the choice of π is relevant.




                                                               58
We have that
                                                         n
                        ∪ |x 0−x | ≤ϵ Fˆ(x 0) ⊆ R(x, ϵ) ≡ vÛ = −c + θ,
                                                               ΓÛ = [−λ(Γ + ϵ), 0],
                                                              u ≤ (Γ + ϵ − 1)y − (Γ − ϵ)c + c,
                                                              θ ∈ [ρ(V − ϵ) − λϵ, ρ(V + ϵ)]
                                                                        o
                                                              c ∈ [C, C] .

Note that R(x, ϵ) is convex and G(x) = ∩ϵ >0R(x, ϵ). Also note that

                                         Fˆ(x) = {(x,
                                                   Û u) ∈ G(x)|xÛ ∈ TM3 },

where the equivalence uses the definitions of G, Fˆ, and the tangent trajectories TM3 . This verifies BH H2
for M3 .
    Similar steps hold for i = 1 and 5, verifying Assumption H2 for all domains.30
    As noted above, P̃ is bounded and Lipschitz continuous. Hence, by BH Corollary 1, it is the unique
viscosity solution with such properties for the HJB:

             r P̃(v, Γ) = H ((v, Γ), (P̃V , P̃ Γ )) ≡         Γ(y − c) − (y − C) + P̃v vÛ + P̃ Γ ΓÛ ,
                                                            
                                                      sup                                                (70)
                                                  (c, π )∈[C,C]×[0,1]


where vÛ and ΓÛ obey equation (64). Here, we have used the fact that G(x) contains the full set of trajectories
generated by c ∈ [C, C] and π ∈ [0, 1]. Note that it is optimal to set π to 0, and thus we can ignore this
choice in the Hamiltonian in what follows. We shall use the fact that H is convex in P̃v .


C.3      Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. Suppose that p(v) satisfies the conditions in the proposition. We shall show that p̃(v, Γ) ≡ Γp(v) −
(y − C)/r is a viscosity solution of (70). p̃ is differentiable in Γ at all points, and in v at points where p(v)
is differentiable. We now check the conditions for a viscosity solution. We proceed by checking on each
domain Mi .

  (i) (v, Γ) ∈ M2 ∪ M4
      As p is differentiable on this part of the domain, by condition (i) of the proposition, we have
                                                   n                             o
                                   rp(v) = sup y − c + p 0(v)vÛ + 1[v <V ]p(v)
                                              c ∈[C,C]

                                            = sup         y − c + Γ −1p̃v vÛ + Γ −1p̃ Γ ΓÛ ,
                                                         
                                              c ∈[C,C]

                                                        Û = −λ1
      where the second line uses p̃v = Γp 0(v) and p̃ Γ Γ/Γ     [v <V ]p. Multiplying through by Γ ∈ (0, 1]

  30 For v= V , we extend the dynamics to both sides of V by setting vÛ = −c +ρv −λ(V −v) in the neighborhood v < V
and ` arbitrarily low. Thus, the dynamics are continuous at x = (V , Γ). Similarly for v = Vmax , we set vÛ = −c + ρv.




                                                             59
    and subtracting (y − C)/r from both sides yields

                    r p̃(v) = r (Γp(v) − (y − C)) = sup                      Γ(y − c) − (y − C)/r + p̃v vÛ + p̃ Γ ΓÛ
                                                                         
                                                              c ∈[C,C]

                                                         = H ((v, Γ), (p̃v , p̃ Γ )).

    Hence, p̃ satisfies (70).
    Now consider a point of non-differentiability ṽ. As (v, Γ) < M3 , ṽ , V , and hence condition (iii)
    of the proposition is applicable. Condition (iii) states that pṽ− ≡ limv ↑ṽ p 0(v) < limv ↓ṽ p 0(v) ≡ pṽ+ ).
    Hence, there is a convex kink. In this case, the lower solution does not impose additional conditions,
    leaving the conditions for an upper solution to be verified. Suppose φ is differentiable and p̃ − φ has
    a local minimum at (ṽ, Γ). Then φv ∈ [pṽ− , pṽ+ ]. As p̃ is differentiable in Γ, we have φ Γ = p̃ Γ . Note that

                                    r p̃(ṽ) = H ((ṽ, Γ), (pṽ− , p̃ Γ )) = H ((ṽ, Γ), (pṽ+ , p̃ Γ )),              (71)

    as the HJB holds with equality at points of differentiability in the neighborhood of ṽ, and using the
    continuity of H .
    Note that there exists α ∈ [0, 1] such that φv = αpṽ+ + (1 − α)pṽ− . The convexity of H with respect to
    φv implies that

                       H ((ṽ, Γ), (φv , φ Γ )) = H ((ṽ, Γ), (αpṽ+ + (1 − α)pṽ− , φ Γ ))
                                                ≤ αH ((ṽ, Γ), (pṽ+ , φ Γ )) + (1 − α)H ((ṽ, Γ), (pṽ− , φ Γ ))
                                                = r p̃(ṽ),

    where the last equality uses (71) and φ Γ = p̃ Γ . Hence, p̃(ṽ) satisfies the conditions of an upper solution.

(ii) (v, Γ) ∈ M3 = {V } × (0, 1]
    Turning to v = V , we redefine pv+ ≡ limv ↓V p 0(v) and pv− ≡ limv ↑V p 0(v). Given the continuity of p
    and the fact that it satisfies the HJB in the neighborhood of V with equality, we have

                                          rp(V ) = sup {y − c + pv+v}
                                                                   Û                                                   (72)
                                                       c ∈[C,C]

                                                   = sup {y − c + pv−vÛ − λp(V )},
                                                       c ∈[C,C]


    where vÛ = −c + ρV . As setting c = ρV is always feasible, this implies rp(V ) ≥ (y − ρV ) ≥ 0.
    To verify that p̃ is a viscosity solution to (60), note that if p̃ is differentiable, then it satisfies the HJB
    with equality by condition (i) of the proposition.
    If it is not differentiable, we consider convex and concave kinks in turn.
    Suppose that pv− < pv+ . Then the conditions for a lower solution do not impose any restrictions. For
    an upper solution, consider a φ such that p̃ − φ has a local minimum at (V , Γ). Again, φ Γ = p̃ Γ = p(V ).
    Recall that for an upper solution, we need only consider trajectories that are in TM3 , that is, vÛ = 0




                                                                 60
     and thus c = ρV . Hence:

                    r p̃(V ) = r Γp(V ) − (y − C)
                            ≥ Γ(y − ρV ) − (y − C)
                                     
                                                                           
                                                                            
                                     
                                                                         
                                                                            
                            = sup Γ(y − c) − (y − C) + φv −c + ρV
                                     
                                                                           
                                                                            
                              c=ρV 
                                                                           
                                     
                                                                | {z }    
                                                                            
                                                                     vÛ    
                                              
                                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                              
                                                                                          
                                                                                             
                            =                   Γ(y − c) − (y − C) + φv −c + ρV − p(V ) × πλΓ ,
                                              
                                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                  sup
                              c=ρV , π ∈[0,1] 
                                                                                            
                                                                        | {z } | {z }      
                                                                                      φ Γ ×Γ
                                                                                           Û
                                                                                            
                                                                           vÛ               

     where the last equality uses p(V ) ≥ 0. Note that final term is the Hamiltonian maximized along
     tangent trajectories in TM3 . Thus, the conditions of an upper solution are satisfied.
    For the lower solution, we must consider the case in which p̃ − φ has a local maximum at (V , Γ).
    This requires pv− ≥ pv+ and φv ∈ [pv+ , pv− ]. Again, as p̃ is differentiable with respect to Γ, we have
    φ Γ = p̃ Γ = p(V ).
     If pv+ ≤ −1, then condition (ii) in the proposition implies that

                     r p̃(V ) = Γ(y − ρV ) − (y − C)
                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
                                                     Γ(y − c) − (y − C) + φv (−c + ρV ) +φ Γ (−πλΓ)
                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
                              ≤       sup
                                c ∈[C,C], π ∈[0,1] 
                                                                            | {z }          | {z } 
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
                                                                                vÛ             ΓÛ  
                            = H ((V , Γ), (φv , φ Γ )),

     where the second to the last line follows from φ Γ = p(V ) ≥ 0. Hence, p̃(V ) = Γp(V ) − (y − C)/r
     satisfies the condition for a lower solution when pv+ ≤ −1.
     Alternatively, if pv+ > −1, then

                                            rp(V ) = sup {y − c + pv+ (−c + ρV )}
                                                          c ∈[C,C]

                                                     = y − C + pv+ (ρV − C)
                                                     ≤ y − C + φv (ρV − C),

     for φv ≥ pv+ as ρV > C. Hence,
                                                    
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                      
                     r p̃(V ) ≤                          Γ(y − c) − (y − C) + φv (−c + ρV ) +φ Γ (−πλΓ)
                                                    
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
                                        sup
                                  c ∈[C,C], π ∈[0,1] 
                                                                                | {z }          | {z } 
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
                                                                                    vÛ             ΓÛ  

     for φv ∈ [pv+ , pv− ] and φ Γ = p(V ), satisfying the condition for a lower solution.

(iii) (v, Γ) ∈ M1 = {V } × (0, 1]


                                                                 61
For v = V , the condition for p̃ to be an upper solution is
                                                          
                        r p̃(V , Γ) ≥ Γ y − ρV + λ(V − V ) − (y − C) − λp(V )Γ,

where the right-hand side is the Hamiltonian evaluated at vÛ = 0. As p̃ satisfies the HJB with equality
in the neighborhood of V , we have

               p(V , Γ) = lim r p̃(v, Γ) = lim H ((v, Γ), (Γp 0(v), p(v)))
                          v ↓V             v ↓V
                                                n                                    o
                                         ≥ lim Γ y − ρv + λ(V − v) − (y − C) − λp(v)Γ,
                                           v ↓V
                                                                   
                                         = Γ y − ρV + λ(V − V ) − (y − C) − λp(V )Γ.

Hence, p̃ is an upper solution.
Turning to the lower solution, suppose p̃ − φ has a local maximum at (V , Γ). As V is at the boundary
of the state space, this implies φv ≥ p̃v (V , Γ) and φ Γ = p(V ). A lower solution requires

                                        r p̃(V , Γ) ≤ H ((V , Γ), (φv , φ Γ )).

Suppose p 0(V ) < −1. Then, condition (iv) of the proposition implies

             r p̃(V , Γ) = r Γp(V ) − (y − C)
                                                   !
                              y − ρV + λ(V − V )
                       = rΓ                          − (y − C)
                                       r +λ
                                  λ
                                                           
                       = 1−             Γ y − ρV + λ(V − V ) − (y − C)
                               r +λ
                                  
                                                                                     
                                                                                      
                                                                                     
                       ≤ sup Γ(y − c) − (y − C) + φv (−c + ρV − λ(V − V )) +φ Γ (−λΓ)
                                  
                                                                                     
                                                                                      
                         c ∈[C,C] 
                                                           |      {z   }       |{z} 
                                                                                     
                                                                   vÛ            ΓÛ 
                       = H ((V , Γ), (φv , φ Γ )),

where the inequality uses

                                  −φ Γ λΓ = −p(V )λΓ
                                                                            λ
                                          = − y − ρV + λ(V − V )                 Γ.
                                                                            r +λ
This verifies that p̃ is a lower solution if p 0(V ) < −1.




                                                      62
    Turning to p 0(V ) ≥ −1,

                H ((V , Γ),(φv , φ Γ )) =
                                        
                                                                                          
                                                                                           
                                                                                          
                            = sup Γ(y − c) − (y − C) + φv (−c + ρV − λ(V − V )) +φ Γ (−λΓ)
                                        
                                                                                          
                                                                                           
                              c ∈[C,C] 
                                                         |        {z        }       |{z} 
                                                                                          
                                                                   vÛ                 ΓÛ 
                          = Γ(y − C) − (y − C) + φv (−C + ρV − λ(V − V )) +φ Γ (−λΓ)
                                                    |       {z         }
                                                                         >0
                          ≥ Γ(y − C) − (y − C) + p̃v (V , Γ)(−C + ρV − λ(V − V )) + φ Γ (−λΓ)
                          = H ((V , Γ), (p̃v , p̃ Γ )) = r p̃(V , Γ),

    where the second equality uses the fact that C is optimal when φv ≥ Γp 0(v) ≥ −Γ; the inequality uses
    the fact that φv ≥ p̃v and the term multiplying φv is positive; and the last line uses the continuity of
    the Hamiltonian and the value function, and that C is optimal given p 0(V ) ≥ −1. This verifies that p̃
    is a lower solution if p 0(V ) ≥ −1.

(iv) (v, Γ) ∈ M5 = {Vmax } × (0, 1]
    For v = Vmax , the condition for p̃ to be an upper solution is

                                       r p̃(Vmax , Γ) ≥ Γ (y − ρVmax ) − (y − C),

    where the right-hand side is the Hamiltonian evaluated at vÛ = 0. As p̃ satisfies the HJB with equality
    in the neighborhood of Vmax , we have

                        r p̃(Vmax , Γ) = lim r p̃(v, Γ) = lim H ((v, Γ), (Γp 0(v), p(v)))
                                        v ↑Vmax          v ↑Vmax

                                                        ≥ lim Γ (y − ρv) − (y − C)
                                                                 
                                                                   v ↑Vmax

                                                                 = Γ (y − ρVmax ) − (y − C).

    Hence, p̃ is an upper solution.
    For the lower solution, suppose p̃ − φ has a local maximum at (Vmax , Γ). This implies φv ≤ p̃v =
    Γp 0(Vmax ) and φ Γ = p(Vmax ). The condition for a lower solution is
                                                     
                                                                                              
                                                                                               
                                                                                              
                        r p̃(Vmax , Γ) ≤ sup         Γ(y − c) − (y − C) + φv (−c + ρVmax )
                                                     
                                                                                              
                                                                                               
                                           c ∈[C,C] 
                                                                            | {z }       
                                                    
                                                                                   vÛ
                                                                                           
                                                                                          
                                        = H ((V , Γ), (φv , φ Γ )).

    By condition (v) of the proposition, we have p 0(Vmax ) ≤ −1, implying that φv ≤ −Γ. Hence, c = C




                                                            63
      achieves the optimum in H ((V , Γ), (φv , φ Γ )). That is,

                             H ((V , Γ), (φv , φ Γ )) = Γ(y − C) − (y − C) + φv (−C + ρVmax )
                                                                                |    {z    }
                                                                                    vÛ
                                                    ≥ Γ(y − C) − (y − C) + p̃v (−C + ρVmax )
                                                    = r p̃(Vmax , Γ),

      where the inequality uses φv ≥ p̃v and C ≥ ρVmax ; and the final line uses continuity of H and p̃.
      Hence, p̃ is a lower solution at (Vmax , Γ).

    We have shown that p̃ implied by a p satisfying the conditions of the proposition is a viscosity solution
of the planner’s problem.                                                                                   


C.4     The Competitive Equilibrium
This section maps the government’s problem into the BH framework.
    Let us first define the following operator T that takes as an input a candidate value function, Ṽ (b),
assumed to be bounded and Lipschitz continuous, and a debt dynamics function f (b, c) that embeds the
price function, q(b):
                                            ∫ ∞                               
                                 T Ṽ (b) =     e −(r +λ)t c(t) + λD(b(t)|Ṽ )                        (73)
                                                0
                                           subject to:
                                             Û = f (b(t), c(t))
                                             b(t)
                                             b(0) = b,

where

                                          D(b |Ṽ ) ≡ 1[Ṽ (b)<V ] (V − Ṽ (b)).

The government’s equilibrium value function is a fixed point of this operator. We shall map the right-hand
side problem into the BH framework and use recursive techniques to solve the optimization. Toward this
goal, let
                                        `(b, c) ≡ c + λD(b |Ṽ ).
Note that `(b, c) so defined is Lipschitz continuous and bounded. To be consistent with BH, we also need
a non-positive `. This can be achieved by subtracting the maximum value of `. Rather than carrying this
notation through, we proceed with the objects defined above, recognizing that all flow utilities and values
can be appropriately translated (as we did explicitly in the planning problem).
    Turning to the dynamics, f (b, c), suppose the government faces a closed, convex domain B and an
equilibrium price schedule q : B → [q, 1] that is differentiable almost everywhere with |q 0(b)| < M < ∞.
    Let b0 ≡ −a; b1 , ..., b N denote the N points of non-continuity in q; and b N +1 ≡ b. We consider equilibria
in which lim supb→bn q(b) = q(bn ), as our tie-breaking rule is that the government chooses the action that
maximizes the price when indifferent.
    To define the domains, let Mn ≡ (bn−1 , bn ), n = 1, ..., N +1, be the open sets on which q is differentiable.
Let M N +1+n ≡ {bn }, n = 1, ..., N be the isolated points of non-differentiability. Finally, we have the
endpoints of the domain: {−a} and {b}.


                                                            64
   In the neighborhood of a discontinuity, we rule out repurchases at the “low price” (see footnotes 17
and 21). We do this while ensuring the continuity of dynamics. Specifically, let ∆ > 0 be arbitrarily small;
and in particular, ∆ < inf n |bn − bn−1 |/2. Define α(b) ≡ min{|b − bn |/∆, 1}, where bn is the closest point of
non-differentiability to b. Note that α(b) ∈ [0, 1], and equals one if |b − bn | ≥ ∆. Debt dynamics are given
by
                                     ( c−y+(r +δ )b
                                           q(b)     − δb              if c ≥ y − (r + δ )b
                          f (b, c) =         c−y+(r +δ )b                                                   (74)
                                       α (b)q(b)+(1−α (b))q(bn ) − δb if c < y − (r + δ )b.

Note that f (b, c) is Lipschitz continuous in b and c within the domains Mn .
    On the open sets Mn , n = 1, ..., N +1, any c ∈ An ≡ [C, C] results in a tangent trajectory. For n > N +1,
c ∈ An ≡ y − [r + δ (1 − q(bn ))]bn is the singleton set that generates a tangent trajectory to the isolated
point Mn . Hence, BH assumption H1 is satisfied.
    Following BH, define
                                          Û u) bÛ = f (b, c), u ≤ `(b, c), c ∈ An .
                                 Fˆ(b) ≡ (b,
                                        
                                                                                                          (75)

If b = bn for some n, we have

                              Fˆ(bn ) = {0} × {u ≤ `(b, y − [r + δ (1 − q(bn ))]bn )}.                      (76)

Otherwise,
                        n                                                                        o
                          Û u) bÛ ∈ [f (b, C), f (b, C)], u ≤ `(b, q(b)(bÛ + δb) + y − (r + δ )b) .
                 Fˆ(b) = (b,                                                                                (77)

    Finally, define
                                             Û u) ∈ Fˆ(b 0) such that |b 0 − b| < ε .
                            G(b) ≡ ∩ε >0 co (b,
                                           
                                                                                                            (78)

To characterize this set, if b , bn , then G(b) = Fˆ(b) as f is continuous within the open set Mn , n =
1, ..., N + 1, and the tangent trajectories are generated by c ∈ [C, C]. For b = bn for some n, we have
                                       n                                             o
                             G(bn ) = (b, Û u)|bÛ = f (b, c), u ≤ `(b, c), c ∈ [C, C] .

For this case, restricting attention to c = y − [r + δ (1 − q(bn ))]bn yields Fˆ(bn ). Hence BH assumption H2
is satisfied.
     We use the assumption regarding repurchases around a point of discontinuity in q to rule out the
following. Suppose that the following trajectory was feasible: bÛ < −δb and c = lim inf b→bn q(bn )(bÛ − δb) −
(r + δ )b + y > q(bn )(bÛ − δb) − (r + δ )b + y. Then, in the convexification generating G(bn ), a trajectory
featuring bÛ = 0 and c > y − [r + δ (1 − q(bn ))]b would appear. This new trajectory would be generated
by locating two trajectories featuring bÛ < −δb and bÛ > −δb, such that their convex combination leads to
bÛ = 0. Because for the trajectory with bÛ > −δb we have that c = C, the associated convex combination of
the consumptions of these two trajectories would then be strictly greater than the stationary consumption
in Fˆ(bn ), violating H2.
     BH Proposition 1 and Corollary 1 then imply that the solution to T Ṽ is the unique bounded, Lipschitz




                                                        65
continuous viscosity solution to

                            ρ(T Ṽ )(b) = sup        c + λD(b|Ṽ ) + (T Ṽ )0(b)f (b, c) .
                                                    
                                         c ∈[C,C]

As V is a fixed point of the operator, the government’s value V is a viscosity solution to
                                                n                                          o
                 ρV (b) = H (b, V 0(b)) ≡ sup c + λ1[V (b)<V ] (V − V (b)) + V 0(b)f (b, c) ,               (79)
                                          c ∈[C,C]


where the term λ1[V (b)<V ] (V −V (b)) is taken as a given function of b in verifying the viscosity conditions.


C.5     Proof of Proposition 4
Proof. We need to verify that if v satisfies the conditions of the proposition, it also satisfies the conditions
for a viscosity solution. The proof and details parallel that of the proof for Proposition 1, and we omit some
of the identical steps.

Lower solution conditions. In regard to the conditions for a lower solution, condition (i) in the
proposition ensures these are met wherever v is differentiable on the interior of B. At the boundaries, −a
and b, conditions (iv) and (v) of the proposition state that v equals the stationary value. Hence, ρv(b) ≤
H (b, φ 0(b)), b ∈ {−a, b}, for any φ 0(b), as bÛ = 0 is always feasible.
     For a non-differentiability at b, the same argument as for P(V ) in the proof of Proposition 1 applies.
That is, if v has a concave kink, then condition (ii) imposes that value must be the stationary value, which
is (weakly) less than H (b, φ 0(b)) for any φ 0(b). For a convex kink, the lower solution does not impose any
restrictions.
     At all other points of non-differentiability, condition (iii) states that v has a convex kink, and therefore
v − φ cannot have a local maximum for a smooth function φ. Thus, the lower solution does not impose
any restrictions.

Upper solution conditions. For the upper solution, condition (i) of the proposition states that v
satisfies the definition of an upper solution wherever it is differentiable. For points of non-differentiability
at b̃ , b, first suppose that q is continuous at b̃. Condition (iii) guarantees that v has a convex kink at b̃,
and as in the proof of Proposition 1, then the convexity of H (b, φ 0(b)) in φ 0(b) ensures the upper solution
inequality is satisfied. If q is not continuous at b̃, then the “tangent trajectories” are restricted to bÛ = 0.
Hence, we need to check that v is weakly greater than the stationary value. This is satisfied by a continuity
argument that parallels that in the proof of Proposition 1.
                                                                                                               




                                                          66
