                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE MORBIDITY COST OF AIR POLLUTION:
                  EVIDENCE FROM CONSUMER SPENDING IN CHINA

                                       Panle Jia Barwick
                                          Shanjun Li
                                          Deyu Rao
                                       Nahim Bin Zahur

                                      Working Paper 24688
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24688


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2018




The authors thank Yongmiao Hong, Solomon Hsiang, Matthew E. Kahn, Koichiro Ito, Doug
Miller, Lucija Muehlenbachs, Matthew Turner, Shuang Zhang and seminar participants at Beijing
University, Beihang University, Carnegie Mellon University, Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Clemson University, Jinan University, MIT, National University of Singapore, Penn State,
University of Arizona, University of Chicago, 2017 China India Insights Conference, the 10th
Annual Conference on China's Economic Development at George Washington University, and
2018 NBER Environmental and Energy Economics Workshop for helpful comments. Partial
financial support from CDOT79841-CTECH is acknowledged. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Panle Jia Barwick, Shanjun Li, Deyu Rao, and Nahim Bin Zahur. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Morbidity Cost of Air Pollution: Evidence from Consumer Spending in China
Panle Jia Barwick, Shanjun Li, Deyu Rao, and Nahim Bin Zahur
NBER Working Paper No. 24688
June 2018
JEL No. I15,Q51,Q53

                                          ABSTRACT

Developing and fast-growing economies have some of the worse air pollution in the world, but
there is a lack of systematic evidence on the health especially morbidity impact of air pollution in
these countries. Based on the universe of credit and debit card transactions in China from 2013 to
2015, this paper provides to our knowledge the first analysis of the morbidity cost of PM2.5 for
the entire population of a developing country. To address potential endogeneity in pollution
exposure, we construct an instrumental variable by modeling the spatial spillovers of PM2.5 due
to long-range transport. We propose a flexible distributed-lag model that incorporates the IV
approach to capture the dynamic response to past pollution exposure. Our analysis shows that
PM2.5 has a significant impact on healthcare spending in both the short and medium terms that
survives an array of robustness checks. The annual reduction in national healthcare spending
from complying with the World Health Organization’s annual standard of 10 mg/m3 would
amount to $42 billion, or nearly 7% of China’s total healthcare spending in 2015. In contrast to
the common perception that the morbidity impact is modest relative to the mortality impact, our
estimated morbidity cost of air pollution is about two-thirds of the mortality cost from the recent
literature.

Panle Jia Barwick                                Deyu Rao
Department of Economics                          Warren Hall
Cornell University                               Dyson School of Applied Economics
462 Uris Hall                                    and Management
Ithaca, NY 14853                                 Cornell University
and NBER                                         dr526@cornell.edu
panle.barwick@cornell.edu
                                                 Nahim Bin Zahur
Shanjun Li                                       Cornell University
Cornell University                               107 East State Street, Apt 510,
405 Warren Hall                                  Commons West
Ithaca, NY 14853                                 Ithaca, NY 14850
and NBER                                         nz96@cornell.edu
SL2448@cornell.edu
1     Introduction
The health impact of air pollution is an important component of the overall benefit of environ-
mental regulations. A rich literature from epidemiology and more recently from economics has
consistently shown a positive association between exposure to air pollution, such as particulate
matter and carbon monoxide, and mortality. These findings have provided guidance on the estab-
lishment and improvement of air quality regulations. For example, research on the health impacts
of particulate matter led the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to establish a standard
for PM10 in 1987 and for PM2.5 in 1997 (Dockery, 2009).
     There is a growing literature in economics that tries to quantify the causal impact of air pollution
on health by using quasi-experimental methods to mimic random assignment of pollution exposure.
The literature has shown significant impacts of air pollution on mortality (Chay and Greenstone,
2003; Currie and Neidell, 2005; Currie and Walker, 2011; Knittel et al., 2015; Clay et al., 2016)
and contemporaneous health (Neidell, 2004; Moretti and Neidell, 2011; Schlenker and Walker,
2015). The literature has mainly focused on mortality risk, in particular for infants, in the U.S. and
Europe and lacks a commonly agreed method to measure the cost of morbidity (WHO, 2015). This
gap in the literature is likely driven by the fact that while data on mortality is routinely collected,
morbidity outcomes are harder to measure and collect on a large scale.1
     Due to increased pressure from economic development and lax environmental regulations, de-
veloping countries and especially emerging economies such as China and India are currently ex-
periencing the worst air pollution in the world. This is especially concerning given the size of the
population and the lack of access to adequate health care in these countries. While policy makers
are increasingly aware of the negative impacts of air pollution on human health and quality of life,
there is a lack of comprehensive data and rigorous studies on the benefit of pollution reduction in
these countries. As a result, the dose-response relationships (between pollution exposure and health
outcomes) estimated using data from developed countries are often used as inputs for evaluating
environmental regulations in developing countries, raising the question of external validity of this
approach (Arceo et al., 2015).
     This study fills these two gaps in the literature by estimating the morbidity cost of PM2.5 in
China. To do so, we combine hourly air pollution readings from all monitoring stations from 2013
to 2015 with the universe of credit and debit card transactions in China during the same period. This
is to our knowledge the first comprehensive analysis of how air pollution affects health expenditures
from all medical conditions for the entire population of a developing country.2 The causal impact
1 Among    the research commendations on the economic cost of pollution, Landrigan et al. (2018) argue that further
  research is needed to improve the cost estimate of morbidity, which is challenging due to its diverse endpoints.
2 A growing literature uses health insurance claims data to examine the impact of air pollution on healthcare spending

  in the U.S. (Deschenes et al., 2017; Williams and Phaneuf, 2016; Deryugina et al., 2017). However, health insurance
  tends to be inadequately provided in developing countries.


                                                          2
of air pollution on out-of-pocket healthcare spending is one of the key components in consumer
Willingness-to-pay (WTP) for improved air quality. The reliance on healthcare spending and health
outcomes to directly bound WTP is in contrast to the revealed preference literature that relies on
the implicit trade-off between risk factors and prices in product choices. The estimates based on
these different approaches can be used for cross-validation purposes.
    There are a couple of key empirical challenges in identifying the causal effect of air pollution
on healthcare spending. The first challenge is the potential endogeneity in contemporaneous and
lagged PM2.5 that we use to capture pollution exposure. The endogeneity can arise from multiple
sources, including unobservables that affect both the pollution level and consumer spending (e.g.,
economic conditions) and avoidance behavior in response to air pollution (e.g., reduced outdoor
activities). In addition, there could be measurement errors in proxying pollution exposure using air
quality monitoring data. The pollution level varies across locations within a city. Ideally residents’
pollution exposure should be measured by the population weighted local pollution level in different
parts of the city. However, monitoring stations are located sparsely and this prevents us from
constructing population weighted averages. To the extent that measurement errors are classical,
they would attenuate the estimates toward zero.
    To deal with this challenge, we construct instrumental variables by modeling the spatial spillovers
of PM2.5 due to the property of long-range transport of fine particles. Our IV approach is similar to
the identification strategy used in Bayer et al. (2009), Williams and Phaneuf (2016), and Deryugina
et al. (2017). The first two studies construct the IV based on air quality predictions from the EPA’s
source-receptor matrix using distant polluting facilities as inputs, while the latter uses changes in
daily wind direction in a county as exogenous shocks to local air pollution.3 Specifically, we use
a parsimonious and transparent model of PM2.5 concentration that allows us to disentangle the
contribution of local and non-local sources. The model uses wind patterns and other weather con-
ditions, lagged pollution levels in other cities, and geographic information as inputs to generate
PM2.5 predictions from both local and non-local sources. Our instruments can be considered as
various weighted sums of lagged PM2.5 levels in other cities where the weights are a function of
the distance between the origin and destination city, wind direction and speed, and other weather
conditions in these two cities.
    To address the concern of spatial correlation of economic activities, we create a buffer zone of
150 km and only use pollution sources outside of the buffer zone in generating these instruments.
Our results are robust to reasonable choices of the buffer zone and a host of robustness checks
to control for unobservables and spatial correlations in economic activities as discussed in detail
in Section 4.2.2. Our identification strategy is different from the regression discontinuity (RD)

3 Inour model, we do not specify specific pollution sources (e.g., power plants), but instead use the pollution levels in
 other cities as the influencing factors for the pollution level of a given city.


                                                           3
approach based on the Huai River heating policy used in Chen et al. (2013), Ito and Zhang (2016),
and Ebenstein et al. (2017). The RD design is better suited to study long-term impacts, such as that
on mortality, by relying on the long-term cross-sectional variation in the data. This study focuses
on the short- and medium-term impacts, and the IV approach allows us to leverage rich spatial and
temporal variations in our data.
    The second challenge in estimating the causal effect of pollution on healthcare spending arises
from the nature of the high-frequency data at the daily level. On the one hand, the data environment
allows us to characterize the dynamic impacts of past pollution exposure. On the other hand,
daily pollution measures exhibit a high serial correlation. A direct OLS or IV estimation that
includes many lagged terms leads to oscillating estimates that are imprecise. We propose a flexible
distributed-lag model that extends the Almon technique (Almon, 1965) and uses finite-order B-
splines (Corradi, 1977) to flexibly capture the effects of long lags. We combine this framework
with the IV method to address endogeneity in contemporaneous and lagged air pollution measures.
    Based on the OLS analysis of city-level daily healthcare spending with a rich set of temporal
and location fixed effects, a temporary increase of 10 µg/m3 in PM2.5 concentration that lasts
for a week is associated with an increase of 0.11% in the total number of hospital and pharmacy
transactions. A permanent elevation of 10 µg/m3 in PM2.5 concentration would raise the number of
healthcare transactions by 0.86%. The results from IV analysis indicate impacts that are three times
as large: a temporary increase of 10 µg/m3 in PM2.5 would lead to a 0.65% increase in healthcare
transactions, while a permanent increase of the same magnitude would lead to a 2.65% increase
in the number of healthcare transactions. The impact of PM2.5 differs across health facilities:
spending in Children’s hospitals is more than twice as responsive as spending in other types of
health facilities. For non-healthcare spending, we find a negative impact of PM2.5 in the short-term
but no significant impact beyond two weeks. In addition, a projected worsening of air quality the
next day increases the current day’s spending in both health and non-healthcare categories. Taken
together, these results provide evidence of avoidance behavior whereby consumers reduce outdoor
activities (such as shopping) to mitigate pollution exposure.
    The estimates of health impacts of PM2.5 survive a variety of robustness checks including vari-
ous parametric specifications of the medium-term impact, different buffer zones in constructing the
IV, and the inclusion of other pollutants such as CO, SO2 , and average PM2.5 in nearby cities. In
monetary terms, a permanent reduction of 10 µg/m3 in daily PM2.5 would lead to total annual sav-
ings of 59.6 billion yuan ($9.2 billion in 2015 terms) in healthcare spending, implying a saving of
$22.4 per household per year.4 Bringing down China’s PM2.5 to the World Health Organization’s
(WHO) annual standard of 10 µg/m3 could lead to savings exceeding $42 billion, nearly 7% of
China’s national healthcare spending or 0.4% of China’s GDP in 2015.

4 We   use an exchange rate of 1$ = 6.5 yuan throughout this analysis.


                                                            4
     How does the estimated morbidity cost from this study compare to the mortality cost estimates
in the literature? Ebenstein et al. (2017) examine the mortality impact of PM10 in China for different
age groups and find that a 10 unit increase in PM10 raises cardiorespiratory mortalities by 8% on
average. The monetized mortality cost based on the Value of a Statistical Life (VSL) is $13.4
billion from a 10 unit increase in PM10 . Our estimated morbidity cost is therefore about two-thirds
of the mortality cost estimated from the literature. This comparison is similar to that in Deschenes
et al. (2017) from reductions in NOx emissions in the U.S. These findings contribute to a better
understanding of the morbidity cost of air pollution and contrast with the common perception that
morbidity is a minor part of the overall health impact of air pollution.5
     Our analysis on healthcare spending provides a lower bound of consumer WTP for improved
air quality, a key input in the cost-benefit analysis of environmental regulations. Through a simple
theoretical framework, we show that consumer WTP for clean air includes several components, one
of which is the impact of air pollution on healthcare spending. Our results suggest that the annual
household WTP for improved air quality due to savings in out-of-pocket healthcare cost alone is
$11.3 for a 10 µg/m3 reduction in PM2.5 . Taking into account the mortality cost estimated from
Ebenstein et al. (2017), the WTP for a 10 µg/m3 reduction in PM2.5 would be $40.6 per household,
or $16.6 billion annually for the whole country.
     Our study makes four contributions to the literature. First, to our knowledge, this is the first
comprehensive study that analyzes the effect of pollution on the healthcare spending of the entire
population of a developing country. Our analysis is made possible by a unique and rich data set
that is composed of the universe of credit card and debit card transactions in China from 2013 to
2015. There are 2.7 billion credit and debit cards that contribute to 34 trillion yuan of economic
transactions annually. Besides covering fifty percent of private healthcare spending in China, this
data set also includes spending in over three hundred non-healthcare categories.
     Second, a common practice in evaluating the health impact of air pollution in developing coun-
tries is to take the dose-response function estimated in developed countries and interpolate the
mortality or morbidity benefit from reduced air pollution in developing countries (e.g. Lelieveld et
al. (2015) and World Bank (2007)). This benefit-transfer approach may lead to large inaccuracies
given the differences in air pollution levels, baseline health conditions, and access to health care
between these two groups of countries. In contrast, our paper directly estimates the health impact
of air pollution in a developing country, adding to the nascent literature that uses the same approach
(Arceo et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2013; Greenstone and Hanna, 2014; He et al., 2016; Ebenstein et al.,
2017). Different from other studies in this literature, which focus on mortality, the high-frequency
nature of our data allows us to identify the short- and medium-term impacts on healthcare spending.

5 EPA(2011) estimates that the mobility benefit from the Clean Air Act from 1990 to 2020 is about 8% of the mortality
benefit. WHO (2015) applies an additional 10% of the overall mortality cost as an estimate for the morbidity cost.


                                                         5
    Third, traditionally, consumer WTP for improved air quality is estimated using the revealed
preference approach that infers WTP based on the implicit trade-offs between risk levels and prices
in housing and other consumer goods (Chay and Greenstone, 2005; Bayer et al., 2009; Ito and
Zhang, 2016). Resorting to the utility maximization framework, this approach typically invokes
behavioral assumptions, such as perfect information on the health impact of air pollution, to infer
consumer WTP. If consumers systematically underestimate the health impacts (for example due to
a lack of awareness), the estimated WTP would be biased toward zero. Different from the revealed
preference literature, this study uses realized healthcare spending data and contributes to the grow-
ing literature that estimates WTP for improved air quality using medical expenditures (Deschenes
et al., 2017; Williams and Phaneuf, 2016; Deryugina et al., 2017). This approach does not rely on
the informational assumption: the estimates are derived from the fact that elevated pollution leads
to illnesses that are treated through healthcare spending. Whether or not consumers know about
the underlying causes for their illnesses is irrelevant for our estimates. The disadvantage of this ap-
proach is that the components of WTP such as impacts on morbidity, mortality, labor productivity,
and quality of life would need to be estimated from different data sources.
    Fourth, the rich spatial and temporal variations in our data allow us to examine both the short-
and medium-term impacts of air pollution on healthcare spending. The aforementioned studies
using health insurance data all focus on the contemporaneous impact by using daily or quarterly
data. We are interested in both the contemporaneous and future health consequences of pollution.
However, as mentioned above, directly controlling for lagged daily measures leads to unstable
estimates. Our flexible distributed-lag model with IVs is computationally light and has several
advantages over existing methods such as VARs or local projection methods. It delivers a smooth
impulse response function, allows researchers to estimate both the short-term and long-run effects,
and can easily incorporate instrumental variables. To our knowledge, our study is the first analysis
in the environmental literature that uses this technique to estimate the short- and medium-term
impacts with high frequency data.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and the air pollution
challenges facing China. Section 3 provides a stylized model to illustrate that the estimated impact
on healthcare spending can be used as a lower bound for consumer WTP for clean air. Section
4 discusses our empirical framework and the identification strategy. Section 5 presents empirical
results and Section 6 discusses our findings in relation to the literature. Section 7 concludes.


2    Data
Our analysis is based on three comprehensive, nation-wide, micro-level datasets of air pollution,
consumer spending by category, and meteorology conditions from 2013 to 2015, aggregated to


                                                  6
daily and city-level. These datasets enable us to evaluate the impact of air pollution on spending in
both the short- and medium-term, as well as heterogeneous impacts across pollution levels.


2.1     Air Pollution
For nearly four decades, China has maintained its GDP growth at an annual rate of nearly 10%
and has transformed from an agricultural economy to a manufacturing-dominated economy. China
became the world’s largest exporter of goods in 2009 and the largest trading nation in 2013. This
unprecedented economic growth is largely propelled by fossil fuels, with coal accounting for about
two-thirds of aggregate energy consumption and oil nearly twenty percent. China is by far the
world’s largest energy consumer, accounting for roughly a quarter of world total energy consump-
tion and half of world coal consumption.
    Fast economic growth and rising energy consumption have put enormous pressure on the en-
vironment, with air, water, and soil pollution becoming serious challenges that adversely affect
human health, ecosystems, and the quality of life.6 Improving air quality has become an important
policy goal for the central government, which extensively revised the Environmental Protection
Law in 2014 and defined goals of pollution abatement in both the 12th (2011 - 2015) and 13th
(2016 - 2020) five-year plans.
    Fine-scale air quality data at monitoring stations became publicly available in 2013. The Min-
istry of Environmental Protection (MEP) publishes hourly measures of PM2.5 , CO, SO2 , NO2 , and
O3 . The number of monitoring stations and cities covered increased steadily from 1003 stations in
159 cities in 2013 to 1582 stations in 367 cities in 2015. We calculate the daily concentration of
PM2.5 and other pollutants at the city level by averaging data across monitoring stations within a
city.
    Figure 1 plots the three-year average of PM2.5 from 2013 to 2015 across cities. The nationwide
average during this period is 56 µg/m3 (with a standard error of 46 µg/m3 ), which is much higher
than the annual standard of 12 µg/m3 that is set by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and
the standard of 35 µg/m3 by the China MEP.7 Notably, there is considerable regional disparity.
Cities in northern and central China with a high concentration of manufacturing industries suffer
from the most severe pollution, with many of them experiencing a three-year average PM2.5 con-
centration of 90 µg/m3 or higher. The less-developed regions in the west and wealthy regions in
the south have better air quality. The latter, especially regions along the coast, has seen notice-
able improvement in air quality as a result of shutting down or relocating polluting industries and
6 Lelieveld et al. (2015) estimate that air pollution led to 1.3 million premature deaths in China in 2010, accounting for
  40% of the world’s total premature deaths in the same year. World Bank (2007) puts the health cost of air pollution
  at 1.2-3.8% of China’s GDP in 2003.
7 The EPA’s daily standard is 35 µg/m3 and annual standard is 12 µg/m3 . China’s MEP sets limits on PM
                                                                                                            2.5 for the first
  time in 2012 to take effect in 2016: the daily standard is 75 µg/m3 and annual standard is 35 µg/m3 .


                                                             7
reorienting the industry structure toward high tech and service industries.
     One advantage of our empirical analysis is the rich variation in pollution measures both across
cities and over time. To illustrate the time-series variation, we present in Figure 2 the daily PM2.5
concentration for the nation (the top panel) and each of the four broad regions (the bottom panel). In
all regions of the country, the daily PM2.5 concentration is higher than 35 µg/m3 , the official MEP
standard, for most days. The northern regions have more pronounced peaks in the winter than the
southern region, largely because of the coal-fired central heating systems north of the Huai River
(Chen et al., 2013). The pollution level is trending downwards in all regions, driven by tightened
government regulations, private and public investment in waste treatment, and changes in China’s
overall industry structure.


2.2       Consumer Spending
The second main database for our analysis is the universe of credit and debit card (or ‘bank card’)
transactions in China settled through the UnionPay network. The UnionPay network is the only
inter-bank payment network in China and is state-owned. It is the largest network in the world in
terms of both the number and value of transactions, ahead of Visa and Mastercard. There were 2.7
billion cards in use from 2013 to 2015 with transactions covering over 300 merchant categories.8
The database includes 34 trillion yuan of annual economic activities. We observe the location,
time, merchant name, and amount for each transaction and we aggregate the data to daily spending
by category by city from 2013 to 2015. To our knowledge, this is the most comprehensive and
fine-scale data in temporal and spatial dimensions on consumer spending in China, and we are the
first to utilize them for academic research.
     Health care in China is financed by out-of-pocket spending, health insurance, and government
programs that are similar to the Medicare in the US. Medical expenses that are covered by the
Chinese government programs are often directly billed on medicare cards, most of which are set-
tled through the UnionPay network and enter the database as regular transactions. Commercial
health insurance companies usually require patients to pay for medical expenses first and get reim-
bursed later by filing claims. If consumers pay for these expenses via their bank cards, then these
transactions will be included in our database.9
     Our data account for 31% of aggregate private healthcare spending in 2013, and as card penetra-

8 There  are seven major categories and 300 subcategories. The major categories are: retail; wholesale; direct sales; real
  estate and finance; residential and commercial service; hotel, restaurant, and entertainment; and education, health,
  and government service. Merchants are classified by these categories.
9 The healthcare system and the insurance market in China have been improving with significant government support.

  In 2009-2011, China’s central government provided 850 billion yuan to overhaul its healthcare system and increase
  the basic health insurance coverage. In 2011, the insurance coverage through three major government supported
  insurance programs reached nearly 95% from 65% in 2009 (Yu, 2015).


                                                            8
tion grew, the coverage rose to 51% in 2015, similar to the share of bank card transactions in other
sectors. The high penetration of bank cards in retail spending in China is remarkable given its short
history (the first credit card was issued in 1998 and it was not until the late 2000s that consumers
began to adopt bank cards). According to official statistics from the Central Bank of China (2015),
bank card transactions accounted for 48% of overall spending in retail sales of consumer goods in
the third quarter of 2015, increasing from only 17% in 2006. In the U.S., spending from credit and
debit cards accounts for 55% of all consumer spending (Bagnall et al., 2014).
    Figure 3 shows the spatial pattern of card adoption by plotting the number of active cards per
registered resident by city in 2015. We assign each card to one primary city based on the location
of its most frequent usage. Card adoption is higher in coastal or high-income cities. Table C1 in
Appendix C correlates cross-sectional card adoption with city demographics. It shows that cities
with a higher household income and education and a younger population are associated with higher
adoption.
    Despite the richness and uniqueness of the credit and debit card transactions, they cover only
about half of private healthcare spending in 2015. In order to interpret our health impacts as the
population impacts, we need to assume that the health impacts are not correlated with the method
of payment. To the extent that the elderly are more vulnerable to air pollution but less likely to
use credit and debit cards, our estimates provide a lower bound of the population impacts, though
elderly Chinese tend to be cared for by their children who likely accompany them to hospital visits
and pay the bill. In addition, low-income residents might have a lower baseline health status. If
this implies that air pollution has a more severe health impact on them, then our analysis would
underestimate the population impacts.
    Healthcare spending includes transactions at hospitals, pharmacies, and other healthcare facili-
ties (e.g. small health clinics). In 2015, hospitals account for 83.5% of healthcare spending in our
data, and 56.8% of transactions. Different from pharmacies in the U.S., such as CVS or Walgreens,
pharmacies in China only carry medicine and rarely sell daily necessities. Pharmacies account for
6.0% of total healthcare spending, and 31.0% of transactions in 2015. We separate hospitals and
pharmacies from other healthcare facilities. Within hospitals, we distinguish People’s hospitals
and Children’s hospitals from other hospitals. People’s hospitals are state-owned general hospitals
and tend to be the largest health care facilities in a city. Each city has at least one People’s hos-
pital. Children’s hospitals accept mostly child patients. Birth centers and infant health centers are
grouped into Children’s hospitals. People’s and Children’s hospitals account for 24.1% and 4.2%
of total healthcare spending respectively, and 26.2% and 9.0% of the total number of transactions
in 2015.10
    In addition to healthcare spending, we also analyze spending in non-healthcare categories, such

10 We   use hospital names and keyword matching to identify People’s hospitals and Children’s hospitals.


                                                           9
as daily necessities. We closely follow the United Nations’ Classification of Individual Consump-
tion According to Purpose (COICOP) in defining necessity goods.11 Relative to healthcare spend-
ing, spending on daily necessities is three times as large and transactions three times as frequent.
A unique feature of Chinese consumers’ shopping behavior is their frequent trips to supermarkets
for groceries (often on a daily basis) . We therefore use supermarket spending as another proxy for
daily consumption, in addition to spending on necessities.12 Spending in supermarkets is over four
times as large as healthcare spending in value and five times as frequent in 2015.
    To illustrate inter-temporal spending patterns, Figure 4 plots weekly healthcare spending and
the number of transactions at the national level from 2013 to 2015. There is a significant drop in
both the spending amount and the transaction frequency during holidays. In addition, both variables
have more than tripled during our sample period due to the diffusion of bank cards. We control for
these two salient features in our regression analysis through holiday fixed effects and city-specific
time trends.


2.3     Meteorology Data and Summary Statistics
Besides pollution, weather conditions could also directly affect health outcomes (Deschenes et al.,
2009). We obtain meteorology data from the Integrated Surface Database (ISD) that is hosted by
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The ISD dataset includes hourly mea-
sures of temperature, precipitation, wind speed, and wind direction for 407 monitoring stations in
China.13 We match cities with the nearest weather station according to their geographic coordinates
and compute daily temperature and wind speed from a simple average of the hourly data.
    ISD’s hourly measure of precipitation suffers from noticeable measurement errors, so we use
daily precipitation from NOAA’s Global Surface Summary of the Day database (GSOD) instead.14
Daily wind direction is calculated by adding up twenty-four hourly vectors of wind direction, where
the length of each vector is the hourly wind speed.
    Table 1 reports the summary statistics for all variables used in our study at the city-day level.
The daily PM2.5 concentration is on average 56 µg/m3 between 2013 and 2015, with the inter-
quartile range being from 27 to 69 µg/m3 and the maximum being 985 µg/m3 . Sixty-seven percent
of these city-day observations record a concentration level that is above the U.S. daily standard of
35 µg/m3 . For healthcare spending, the average daily number of transactions is 7,229 per city, and
the average daily spending is 6.7 million yuan.

11 United  Nations’ COICOP defines necessity goods as 1) food and non-alcoholic beverages, 2) alcoholic beverages,
   tobacco and narcotics, 3) clothing and footwear, 4) recreation and culture, and 5) restaurants and hotels.
12 We exclude supermarkets from necessity spending because they sell a large variety of goods other than necessities.
13 These stations cover most major Chinese cities from as early as the 1940s to the present.
14 GSOD reports daily precipitation using Greenwich Mean Time, which is the cumulative rainfall from 8 a.m. Beijing

   time to 8 a.m. the next day. We use this measure as our daily precipitation.


                                                         10
3       Theoretical Model
Air pollution affects human health mainly through its impact on respiratory and cardiovascular
systems. Several decades of study in epidemiology and more recently in economics has associated
exposure to air pollution with increases in mortality and morbidity risks (Brunekreef and Holgate,
2002; Pope and Dockery, 2012). Fine particles (PM2.5 ) are especially detrimental to health as they
can penetrate deep into lungs and carry toxins to other organs. High levels of PM2.5 irritate respi-
ratory and cardiovascular systems and can lead to aggravated asthma, lung disease, heart attacks,
and stroke.
    In this section we provide a theoretical model to illustrate the relationship between the esti-
mated impact of PM2.5 on healthcare spending and consumer WTP for improved air quality. The
seminal paper by Grossman (1972) first proposed the utility maximization framework of health pro-
duction where consumers choose optimal health care spending to alleviate the negative impact of
air pollution exposure. Following this tradition, Deschenes et al. (2017) and Williams and Phaneuf
(2016) show that the marginal effect of air pollution exposure on total healthcare spending is one
of the components of consumers’ WTP for improved air quality, with other components being the
mortality impact, the loss of productivity, and quality of life. In addition, the defense spending such
as purchases of air purifiers or face masks and avoidance behavior such as staying indoors should
also be accounted for. While the literature has largely neglected the role of avoidance behavior and
reduction in quality of life, here we present a static model to account for both.
    There is a continuum of consumers of measure 1. Each consumer i chooses healthcare spending
(mi ), non-healthcare offline spending (ci ), and non-healthcare online spending (oi ), subject to his
budget constraint. The consumer is exposed to air pollution whenever he goes outdoors, and we
assume that pollution exposure e(a, mi +ci ) is an increasing and convex function of the air pollution
level a (which is exogenous to consumer i’s spending) and spending activities mi + ci , but is not
affected by online spending oi .15
    Consumer i has an endowed health stock h0 , which evolves as a result of exposure to air pollu-
tion and his own healthcare spending that mitigates the negative consequences of pollution. Indi-
viduals differ in how sick they become when exposed. This is captured by gi (ei ), where gi ∼ Fi is a
non-decreasing function that is individual-specific and represents how much the individual’s health




15 Wecombine all non-healthcare spending (except online spending) in c and assume each $1 of spending results in
 the same amount of pollution exposure independent of purpose. Convexity implies that on more polluted days, the
 marginal impact of spending activities on pollution exposure is larger.


                                                      11
stock changes with respect to ei .16 Thus the health stock equation can be written as:

                                                hi = h0 + mi − gi (ei )

    Consumers have health insurance, with π denoting the premium and p the proportion of health-
care spending that needs to be paid out-of-pocket.17 Thus, if the consumer undergoes hospital
treatments that cost a total of mi , the consumer’s out-of-pocket spending is equal to pmi , where
p < 1. Income y(hi ) is composed of non-wage income y0 , which is exogenous and does not de-
pend on health, and wage income w(hi ), which is affected by health. Wage income is lower with
diminished health, for example due to productivity loss or sick days. The budget constraint is:

                                       y(hi ) ≡ y0 + w(hi ) = π + pmi + ci + oi

    Consumer utility U(hi , ci , oi , ei ) depends on health stock (hi ), offline consumption (ci ), online
spending (oi ), and pollution exposure (ei ). We allow utility to be both directly and indirectly af-
fected by pollution exposure. The indirect effect comes through reduction in health stock which
could capture the mortality impact. The direct mechanism arises because consumers value quality
of life, which decreases with air pollution. Heavy haze and smoky air reduce consumers’ utility
even if their health stock is restored (i.e. held constant). For example, Levinson (2012) finds that
people report lower levels of happiness on days with worse local air pollution.
    Consumer i chooses spending to maximize utility, subject to his budget constraint and the rule
of health stock evolution:

                                  max U[hi , ci , oi , e(a, mi + ci )],
                                {mi ,ci ,oi }

                                      s.t. y(hi ) ≡ y0 + w(hi ) = π + pmi + ci + oi ,
                                     and hi = h0 + mi − gi (e(a, mi + ci )),

   Our specification of pollution exposure e(a, mi + ci ) makes it explicit that all offline spending,
whether health-related or not, affects pollution exposure because it involves time spent outdoors.18
This is the key difference between our model and those in Deschenes et al. (2017) and Williams
and Phaneuf (2016). In addition, our model incorporates utility from health (for example, through

16 An  example is gi (ei ) = αi ei , where αi ∼ U[0, 1]. Individuals with αi = 0 remain healthy even after being exposed to
   air pollution; individuals with αi = 1 get very sick upon being exposed to air pollution and experience a significant
   decline in their health stock.
17 We assume that every consumer has health insurance. In 2011, nearly 95% of China’s population was covered by

   one of the three major public health insurance programs (Yu, 2015).
18 In the short-term, consumer could reduce pollution exposure by delaying hospital visits or reducing time spent

   outdoors. In the long term, both mi and ci will respond to changes in pollution.


                                                           12
morbidity) and allows income to depend on health, both of which are absent in Williams and
Phaneuf (2016)’s model.
   The Lagrangian can be written as:

                         Li = U[hi , ci , oi , e(a, mi + ci )] + λi [y(hi ) − π − pmi − ci − oi ],

The first-order conditions are:

                       ∂ Li∗
                               = Uh (1 − g0i (ei )em ) +Ue em + λi (yh (1 − g0i (ei )em ) − p) = 0,
                       ∂ mi
                       ∂ Li∗
                               = −Uh g0i (ei )ec +Uc +Ue ec − λi (yh g0i (ei )ec + 1) = 0,
                       ∂ ci
                       ∂ Li∗
                               = Uo − λi = 0,
                       ∂ oi
                       ∂ Li∗
                               = y(h∗i ) − π − pm∗i − c∗i − o∗i = 0.
                       ∂ λi

where Uh ,Ue ,Uc ,Uo are partial derivatives of the utility function with respect to health stock, pol-
lution, consumption, and online spending, respectively. We assume Uh > 0,Uc > 0,Uo > 0,Ue < 0,
since health and consumption are desirable but pollution is not. As consumers are exposed to air
pollution whether buying food or seeing a doctor, we set em = ec > 0 to be the marginal impact
of spending activities on pollution exposure e. The net impact of medical spending on health,
 dhi
dmi = 1 − em , is assumed to be positive, since the health benefit of medical treatment should be
much larger than the incremental risk of pollution exposure from hospital visits.19 Exposure in-
creases with pollution (ea > 0). Finally, yh is the effect of health on income and is assumed to be
positive.
     Denote Vi (a, h0 , y0 ) as the indirect utility function and Li∗ (a, h0 , y0 ) as the optimal value of the
Lagrangian. The marginal WTP for reduction in air pollution can be obtained as:

                                                           ∂Vi         ∂ Li∗
                                                           ∂a
                                               MW T Pi = − ∂V      = − ∂∂La∗
                                                              i            i
                                                           ∂ y0        ∂ y0

    As shown in Appendix A, individual i’ marginal WTP can be expressed as:

                                ∂ m∗i        dh∗   Uh dh∗      Ue de∗ Uc −Uo ∂ c∗i
               MW T Pi = p            + yh (− i ) + (− i ) + (− ) i +       (−     )                       (1)
                                 ∂a          da    λi da       λi da     λi    ∂a

   Equation (1) illustrates the relationship between the impact of air pollution on healthcare spend-
                                        ∂ m∗
ing (the morbidity effect), given by ∂ ai , and MWTP for improved air quality. Changes in an

19 Optimal   healthcare spending is 0 if 1 − em < 0.


                                                            13
individual’s out-of-pocket healthcare spending is one of the determinants of his MWTP. The dif-
ference between the two quantities is determined by the last four terms in the equation. The first
             dh∗
term, yh (− dai ), measures reduction in income due to a lower productivity as a result of pollution
 dh∗                                dh∗
( dai < 0). The second term, Uλhi (− dai ), denotes the disutility from reduced health stock which could
                                                                    de∗
capture the mortality impacts. The third term, (− Uλei ) dai , captures the monetized utility loss in the
                                                                                              ∂ c∗
quality of life due to increased pollution exposure. The last term Uc λ−U
                                                                        i
                                                                          o
                                                                            (− ∂ ai ) denotes reduction in
monetized utility due to the sub-optimal level of consumption caused by pollution exposure (e.g.,
avoidance behavior). As shown in Appendix A, these four terms are all positive under fairly weak
assumptions.
   Our model encompasses that of Deschenes et al. (2017), which abstracts away the exposure
associated with consumption (ec = 0), as well as the utility loss of reduced quality of life (Ue = 0).20
When eo = Ue = 0, the FOCs indicates Uc = Uo = λ , and

                                                       ∂ m∗i     dh∗ Uh dh∗i
                                       MW T Pi = p           − yh i −        .
                                                        ∂a       da   λ da

    In addition, if hi is preset (i.e. kept at a subsistence level with ∂∂hai = 0) and income y is
exogenous, as suggested by Williams and Phaneuf (2016), then our expression for the marginal
willingness-to-pay collapses to theirs:21

                                                                   ∂ m∗i
                                                   MW T Pi = p           .
                                                                    ∂a

    To summarize, the utility maximization framework illustrates that consumer WTP for clean air
can be estimated by adding up different components of the impact of the air pollution on popu-
lation health and behavior. In the empirical analysis, we focus on quantifying the impact of air
                                  ∂ m∗                                                 ∂ c∗
pollution on healthcare spending ( ∂ ai ), and use changes in non-healthcare spending ( ∂ ai ) to assess
the importance of avoidance behavior. Then we contrast the morbidity component based on our
parameter estimates with the mortality component based on the recent literature for China.




20 In Deschenes et al. (2017), MW T P = w ds
                                          dc  + pa ∂dca − Uλs dc
                                                              ds
                                                                 , where w is wage rate (equivalent to yh in our framework), s
   denotes number of sick days (equivalent to a negative change in health stock), a is defensive behavior, pa is the price
   of taking defensive measures, and c is the concentration of pollutants (same as air pollution a in our framework.)
21 In Williams and Phaneuf (2016), MW T P = p ∂ m∗ + ∂ π . They consider the case of a competitive insurance provider,
                                                   ∂a      ∂a
   and argue that the equilibrium insurance premiums will adjust in response to expected pollution. In our setting, given
   that insurance reimbursement rates for China’s public insurance programs are rarely adjusted year-to-year and are
   the same across cities despite the large variance in pollution across cities, we find it more reasonable to assume that
   ∂π
    ∂ a = 0.


                                                             14
4     Empirical Framework
In this section, we first present a flexible econometric model that allows us to estimate the short-
and medium-term impacts of air pollution on healthcare spending. Then we discuss our estimation
strategy and the construction of instrumental variables.


4.1    Flexible Distributed-Lag Model
Air pollution has both short- and long-term consequences on healthcare spending. Different from
quarterly or annual data commonly used in the literature, our daily level data allow us to character-
ize the path of health impacts from both contemporaneous and past air pollution exposure. We use
the following distributed lag model (DL) to capture this relationship:

                                       k
                               yct = ∑ βi pc,t−i + xct α + κct + ξc + ηw + εct                                    (2)
                                      i=0

where yct is daily healthcare spending in a city, and pc,t−i is either contemporaneous (i = 0) or
lagged pollution exposure (i ≥ 1). xct includes a rich set of controls such as weather conditions,
holiday fixed effects, day-of-week fixed effects, seasonality, etc. κct is city-specific linear time
trend, ξc is city fixed effect, and ηw is week fixed effect. The key parameters of interest are β ’s,
which capture the short- and longer-term causal impacts of pollution exposure on healthcare spend-
ing.
    Let us assume for a moment that there is no measurement error in pollution exposure pc,t−i and
that there is no avoidance behavior or omitted variables (three important issues that we will return
to in the next section). Then the DL model can be estimated using OLS. But the linear estimation
with a large number of lags is undesirable due to the high serial correlation among the lag terms
pc,t−i . The parameter estimates tend to be imprecise with artificial oscillations. To reduce the
number of parameters that need to be estimated while allowing for flexible and smooth longer-term
impacts, we follow Almon (1965) and Corradi (1977) and specify βi ’s as cubic B-spline functions
of time with z segments, where z is a constant chosen by econometricians.22 The intuition is that
any smooth function (here βi can be treated as a function of time) defined on a closed interval [a, b]
can be uniformly approximated arbitrarily closely by basis splines. Take z = 1 as an example, in
which case the B-splines amount to a simple 3rd order polynomial:

                                      βi = F(i) = γ0 + γ1 i + γ2 i2 + γ3 i3 .                                     (3)
22 Almon (1965) first proposed approximating the lag coefficients with polynomial functions. Poirier (1975), Corradi
 and Gambetta (1976) and Corradi (1977) suggested using spline functions, which impose weaker restrictions on the
 lag coefficients than polynomials while maintaining the ability to estimate the model using a relatively small number
 of parameters.


                                                        15
where the contemporaneous effect of pollution on spending is captured by γ0 , the effect of yester-
day’s pollution is β1 = γ0 + γ1 + γ2 + γ3 , while the effect of pollution from i days’ in the past is
βi = γ0 + γ1 i + γ2 i2 + γ3 i3 . Appendix B describes how to extend this to the more general case where
there are multiple segments and the coefficients βi are piecewise polynomials in i.
    Plug (3) into (2) and rearrange terms, we have:

                 k
         yct = ∑ βi pc,t−i + xct α + κct + ξc + ηw + εct
               i=0
             = γ0 pct + (γ0 + γ1 + γ2 + γ3 )pc,t−1 + ... + (γ0 + γ1 i + γ2 i2 + γ3 i3 )pc,t−i + ...
                 + (γ0 + γ1 k + γ2 k2 + γ3 k3 )pc,t−k + xct α + κct + ξc + ηw + εct
             = γ0 (pct + pc,t−1 + pc,t−2 + ... + pc,t−k )
                 + γ1 (1 × pc,t−1 + 2pc,t−2 + ... + kpc,t−k )
                 + γ2 (12 × pc,t−1 + 22 pc,t−2 + ... + k2 pc,t−k )
                 + γ3 (13 × pc,t−1 + 23 pc,t−2 + ... + k3 pc,t−k ) + xct α + κct + ξc + ηw + εct .

    With this reformulation, we only need to estimate four coefficients γ’s rather than k + 1 coeffi-
cients (the number of lags plus current day). The four key regressors are:

                              v1t = pct + pc,t−1 + pc,t−2 + ... + pc,t−k ,
                              v2t =        pc,t−1 + 2pc,t−2 + ... + kpc,t−k ,
                                                                                                      (4)
                              v3t =        pc,t−1 + 4pc,t−2 + ... + k2 pc,t−k ,
                              v4t =        pc,t−1 + 8pc,t−2 + ... + k3 pc,t−k .

where the first term is the sum of past pollution exposure, and the others are a weighted sum of past
exposure with the weights being polynomial terms of time.
    This approach has several advantages over competing distributed lag models, the most popular
one being the geometric decay model. One advantage of this approach is that these new regressors
as defined in equation (4) exhibit much less multicollinearity than lags of pc,t−i themselves. Second,
this model allows for much more flexible decaying patterns than those in geometric decay models.
Third, it is straightforward to impose additional restrictions that are either generated by economic
theories or reflect a prior knowledge of the data generating process. For example, if tomorrow’s
pollution exposure (forward one period) should not affect current healthcare spending, then β−1 =
0. If pollution exposure prior to k lags should not affect current healthcare spending, then βk+τ =
0, ∀τ ∈ N and τ > 0. These assumptions can be imposed individually or jointly as constraints in
the estimation and can be tested as linear restrictions. Fourth, this specification does not require
instruments for the lagged dependent variable as in the geometric decay model, which is often


                                                     16
challenging. Finally, we allow for an arbitrary correlation between the contemporaneous error term
and past error terms, which is difficult in geometric decay models.
   Once we choose the number of lags k, the order of B-spline polynomials q, the number of
segments z, and additional restrictions on γ’s, the estimation can be carried out in (constrained)
OLS and β ’s can be recovered from the parameter estimates.


4.2      Identification
4.2.1     Sources of Endogeneity

There are multiple sources of potential endogeneity in the key variable of interest, pollution expo-
sure. As is common in the literature on estimating the health impact of air pollution, our measure of
pollution exposure likely suffers from measurement errors. This arises from the fact that pollution
levels vary across locations within a city and that we average the pollution data from monitoring
stations to the city level. For example, among the 9 monitoring stations in the urban core of Bei-
jing, the average difference between the maximum and minimum pollution level in a day is about 35
µg/m3 in 2014 while the daily average at the city level is 87 µg/m3 . Since population is not evenly
distributed within a city and the spatial distribution of monitoring stations does not align with resi-
dential areas, the arithmetic mean across all stations within a city may not accurately reflect the city
population’s exposure to pollution. An ideal measure should be the population-weighted average
of local air quality, but this is impractical due to the lack of air pollution data at the finer spatial
level (e.g., city block or zip code) and the fact that many monitoring stations are located outside
of population centers. In addition, our daily pollution measure is a simple average of hourly mea-
surements and abstracts away the temporal variation. To the extent that the measurement errors are
classical, our OLS estimates would suffer from the attenuation bias.23
    Second, pollution exposure is potentially endogenous due to avoidance behavior in both the
short- and longer-term. Chinese consumers now have a high awareness of air quality and its im-
pact on health. PM2.5 readings are becoming readily accessible through cell phone apps and from
government websites in recent years.24 During days of severe air pollution, consumers may reduce
outdoor activities, shift the timing of consumption (e.g. postpone visits to hospitals for non-acute
conditions), or undertake defensive measures such as wearing face masks and using air purifiers
indoors (Mu and Zhang, 2016; Ito and Zhang, 2016; Sun et al., 2017). These types of behavior,
in response to contemporaneous air quality variations, could reduce healthcare spending and ren-

23 Satellite data on Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) offer an alternative measure of the ground level pollution with finer
   spatial resolutions (e.g., 3 km by 3 km from Terra satellite and 10 km by 10 km from Aqua). However, there are a lot
   of missing values at the daily level, in addition to noises from inferring PM2.5 based on the AOD data.
24 Hourly air pollution data in major Chinese cities have been published on the website of the Ministry of Environment

   Protection and other non-governmental websites since 2013.


                                                         17
der the pollution measure endogenous. In the long run, air pollution trends could affect migration
across cities as documented in the U.S. (Banzhaf and Walsh, 2008). Consumers who are more
vulnerable to air pollution or have a high valuation of clean air would choose to move away from
more polluted cities. As a result, air pollution could be correlated with the error term (such as the
health stock of local residents).
    In a short or medium time frame, such as the one used in our analysis, location-specific time
trend help control for migration and other long-run avoidance behavior. However, the short-run
avoidance behavior as responses to contemporaneous air pollution is more challenging and cannot
be absorbed by location fixed effects. In addition, it is not obvious that endogeneity arising from
avoidance behavior could be addressed by the instrumental variable strategy since avoidance di-
rectly responds to air pollution (and hence will be correlated with shocks that affect air pollution).
We use spending on daily necessities and at supermarkets to quantify avoidance behavior. Our
results indicate that avoidance behavior reduces spending in the short term (i.e., up to two weeks)
through inter-temporal substitutions, but there is no significant aggregate impact over a longer pe-
riod (a month or longer).
    Another source of endogeneity in pollution measures is unobservables. Despite our rich set
of controls for weather and local conditions (e.g., city specific time trend and seasonality), there
is various temporal variation that can not be adequately controlled. For example, permanent local
shocks to healthcare spending, such as income shocks, could be correlated with economic activities
and thus with air quality. Temporary local shocks, such as major sport and political events, could
affect both the air pollution level and healthcare spending (and consumer activities in general).
These unobservables that are not absorbed by our location and trend/seasonality interactions could
render the air quality variable endogenous.

4.2.2   IV Construction

To address the concern of endogeneity, we exploit the spatial spillovers of PM2.5 due to its long-
range transportability to construct instruments. PM2.5 particles are light, can travel at a speed of
10 mph, and often reside in the atmosphere for 3-4 days. Their region of influence is determined
by wind speed and direction. Based on atmospheric modeling, Zhang et al. (2015) document
significant regional pollutant transport in China. For example, nearly half of the pollution in Beijing
originates from sources outside of the municipality. These results suggest that PM2.5 from other
cities could serve as exogenous shocks to the pollution level for a given city.
    The approach of constructing instruments exploiting PM2.5 ’s region of influence is in spirit
similar to the source-receptor matrix constructed by the US EPA for air pollution prediction. We
take each city as both a pollution source and a receptor and develop a parsimonious model to
predict the air pollution level of a given city based on lagged pollution levels in the same city

                                                  18
and other cities, wind patterns (direction and speed), other weather conditions (precipitation and
temperature), and distances between city pairs.25 This model allows us to estimate the contribution
to the PM2.5 level in a given city from non-local sources. We construct a buffer zone to minimize
the correlation in unobserved regional economic shocks and only use pollution from cities outside
of the buffer zone to construct the instruments.
    Our identification assumption is that pollution shocks (e.g., economic activities) in regions
outside of the buffer zone are uncorrelated with local shocks to spending. This assumption would
be violated if spending shocks (e.g., high temperature that leads to more hospital visits as well as
increased demand for electricity) in a given city affect production activities in other cities (e.g.,
electricity generation) outside of the buffer zone, which in turn affect the pollution level in those
cities. We address this concern in four ways. First, we test the robustness of our results to the
buffer-zone radius in section 5 and show that the results are robust to different radii. Second, our
instruments are weighted sums of lagged pollution levels in other cities, with the weights being a
function of wind patterns and other weather conditions as well as the distance between cities. To
the extent that economic shocks in a given city affect production and hence pollution in other cities,
this should induce correlation between the error term and future pollution levels rather than lagged
pollution levels in other cities. In addition, the exogenous variation in wind speed and direction
should reduce such correlations. Third, in one of the robustness analysis, we include the average
PM2.5 in other cities outside of the buffer zone but within the same region as an additional regressor
to control for regional spillovers in economic activities. The parameter estimates on local PM2.5
levels are very similar to those in the benchmark analysis. Fourth, we construct an alternative IV
based on the weather variables and the average PM2.5 in other cities. The within-city variation of
this IV is solely driven by the wind pattern and other weather conditions (rather than time-varying
pollution levels in other cities), hence should not be correlated with unobserved economic shocks.
The results from this specification are very similar to the benchmark results.
    In principle, our identification assumption implies that any function of pollution and weather
conditions in cities outside the buffer zone is a valid instrument for pollution in city i. The set of
such instruments, however, is very large and includes many weak instruments. We use a simple
model of air pollution transmission to guide our construction of instrumental variables.
    Denote the pollution level of city i in time t as pit . We model pit as a function of past pollution
and pollution from other cities:

                                    pit = θ1 pi,t−1 + ∑ p+j→i, t + µit ,                                  (5)
                                                       j6=i



25 Williams
          and Phaneuf (2016) construct their IV for air pollution using pollutants 60 km away (or 120 km away)
 without exploiting wind patterns.


                                                     19
where θ1 captures the amount of pollution that is carried over from the previous day, which can be
affected by local meteorological conditions. p+j→i, t denotes the amount of PM2.5 pollutants in city i
at time t that is originated from city j. µit is the error term. The contribution of non-local sources to
the pollution level of a given city could be affected by a host of weather and topography conditions
and is the subject of sophisticated air quality modeling. We use the following parsimonious model
to capture the key feature that PM2.5 pollutants dissipate over time and across space as they move:
                                        
                                        cos Φ p f (d , w , w
                                                jt    ij  jt i,t+si jt ), if cos Φ > 0,
                     p+j→i, t+si jt   =                                                                      (6)
                                        0,      otherwise.

     p+j→i, t+si jt is the amount of pollution that enters city i on day t +si jt , having originated from city
 j on day t. Φ denotes the angle between the wind direction and the direction from city j to city i.
We invoke a simple vector decomposition and assume that the amount of pollutants carried toward
city i from city j is cos(Φ)p jt at speed cos(Φ)S jt , where S jt is the wind speed in city j. Pollution
decays over time as it travels and only part of the pollution from city j enters the atmosphere of
city i. This is represented by f (di j , w jt , wi,t+si jt ) ∈ [0, 1], a function of the distance between the two
cities (di j ), weather conditions in the source city when the pollution is generated (w jt ), and weather
conditions in the destination city when the pollution enters its atmosphere (wi,t+si jt ). The number of
days it takes pollutants to travel from city j to city i, si jt , is calculated as the following and rounded
to the next smallest integer:                                          
                                                               di j
                                               si jt =                    .
                                                           cos(Φ)S jt
    Figure 5a shows the wind-pollution vectors from over 300 cities on Dec. 5, 2013 (denoted as
Day 0). Each arrow’s length indicates the wind speed, rescaled to match the exact distance the
arrow can travel in a day. The arrow width indicates the level of PM2.5 concentration at the source
city. To illustrate how we predict city-day PM2.5 , Figure 5b shows all subvectors of pollutants that
are blown towards Beijing on the same day. The pollution level of the receptor city, Beijing in
this example, is predicted by pollutants carried through the subvectors that reach Beijing at time t,
together with the lagged local pollution levels, as stated in equation (5).
    The decay function f (di j , w jt , wi,t+si jt ) in equation (6) is unknown. We approximate it by poly-
nomial functions ul (1/di j , w jt , wi,t+si jt ):

                       p+j→i, t+si jt = max(0, cos Φ)p jt     ∑ γl ul (1/di j , w jt , wi,t+si jt )          (7)
                                                               l

    We now describe how to construct instruments using the above model . Let r denote the radius
of the buffer zone. For most of our results we assume a buffer zone of 150 km, but we also check
that results are robust to different values of r. The total amount of pollution imported from cities


                                                         20
                                           f ar
outside of the buffer zone, p̂it , is the following (interchanging the summation signs in the third
equation):

                           f ar
                         p̂it =            ∑       p+j→i, t
                                      j: di j >r

                                  =        ∑       max(0, cos Φ)p j,t−si jt ∑ γl ul (1/di j , w j,t−si jt , wi,t )
                                      j: di j >r                                   l

                                  = ∑ γl           ∑        max(0, cos Φ)p j,t−si jt ul (1/di j , w j,t−si jt , wi,t )
                                       l       j: di j >r

                                  = ∑ γl Zitl
                                       l


where Zitl = ∑ j: di j >r max(0, cos Φ)p j,t−si jt ul (1/di j , w j,t−si jt , wi,t ).
    A natural strategy is to use Zitl , l = 1, ..., L as instruments for pit . These are valid instruments
since they depend only on weather within city i, which we control for in our regressions, and on
pollution and weather variables in cities outside of the buffer zone, which are uncorrelated with
local shocks to spending by our identification assumption. We assume second-order polynomials
and include wind speed, precipitation, and temperature as the weather variables in ul (.), leading to
15 instruments in Zl . An alternative approach is to estimate the unknown parameters γl in equation
                  f ar                 f ar
(7), construct p̂it , and then use p̂it as an instrument for pit . The benefit of our approach of using
Zl directly as instruments is that we avoid having to make functional form assumptions in order to
estimate γl .26
    Notice that although we do not estimate the air pollution transmission model directly, we exploit
a number of model restrictions to construct more powerful IVs. For example, if the prevailing wind
conditions are such that it takes a couple of days for pollution generated in city j to reach city i,
we would expect p j,t to affect pi,t+2 instead of pi,t . Our IVs take into account these considerations
and thus out-perform naive approaches such as the sum of pollution levels in all cities outside the
buffer zone. As documented below, the first-stage cluster-robust F-stats of excluded instruments
vary from 38 to 62 across specifications, indicating a strong predictive power of the endogenous
variables. It is important to note that the goal of our first-stage model is not to maximize the
accuracy of air quality predictions. Instead, we want to create instruments that are both predictive
of local air pollution and at the same time exogenous to shocks to healthcare spending. This is why
we base our analysis on a relatively conservative definition of the buffer zone and exclude PM2.5
from cities within 150 km (although our results are robust to the choice of buffer radius).


26 Asa robustness check, we tried the alternative approach of estimating γl and constructing p̂itf ar as the IV. We also
  constructed p̂itf ar using an exponential decay function to proxy for f (di j , w jt , wi,t+si jt ). The results are similar to what
  we report in the paper, though the first-stage is slightly weaker.


                                                                          21
5       Empirical Results

5.1     Short-Term Impacts
Our empirical analysis begins with the contemporaneous effect of air pollution on health. In the
discussion below, we use the logarithm of the number of transactions as the dependent variable
rather than the value of transactions as in the literature using similar transaction-level purchase
data (Einav et al., 2014). The distribution of healthcare spending is right-skewed with many large
transactions (e.g., surgeries) that are unlikely caused by air pollution in the short run. In Appendix
C, we report results using the value of transactions as the dependent variable. They are similar in
magnitude to those based on the number of transactions but less precise.
    In all of the regressions, we include city fixed effects to control for time-invariant unobservables
and week fixed effects to control for nationwide shocks. City-specific time trend and city-specific
seasonality (i.e., interactions of city fixed effects and quarterly dummies) are added to the regression
to control for trends in credit/debit card adoption and seasonal diseases. We also add fixed effects
for state holidays, working weekend,27 day of the week, as well as weather variables to control for
their direct effects on spending. For example, people may reduce non-urgent hospital visits during
holidays or on days with bad weather. All standard errors are clustered at the city level.
    Table 2 summarizes the short-term impacts estimated with OLS. A 10 µg/m3 increase in the
daily PM2.5 concentration is associated with a 0.11% increase in the total number of healthcare
transactions. Transactions in Children’s hospitals are more sensitive to air pollution, with an impact
of 0.18% from a 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 . This is intuitive since children are more vulnerable
to air pollution. In contrast, a temporary increase in PM2.5 reduces transactions in daily necessities
and supermarkets. This could be due to two possibilities. The first is the effect of the budget
constraint: if consumers have to spend more in heath care to mitigate the negative health impact of
air pollution, they may have less to spend on non-health-related categories. The second is avoidance
behavior: consumers postpone or reduce shopping trips in response to poor air quality to reduce
pollution exposure. We test these two possibilities in Section 5.5.
    To graphically illustrate the relationship between pollution and spending, we plot the log num-
ber of transactions against PM2.5 in Figure 6. All other controls (weather, city trend, etc.) are
partialled out, so the figure displays the net effect of pollution on spending. For ease of presenta-
tion, we group PM2.5 by percentiles and plot the in-group average of log number of transactions
against each percentile of PM2.5 . In addition to the aggregate number of healthcare transactions
(top left), we also plot the relationship separately for pharmacies, People’s hospitals, Children’s

27 In
    mainland China, weekends near multi-day holidays are usually swapped with weekdays next to actual holidays (if
  possible) to create a longer holiday period. As a result, businesses and schools would treat that weekend as a working
  weekend.


                                                          22
hospitals, and two non-healthcare categories (necessities and supermarkets). PM2.5 has a positive
relationship with spending in all health categories across nearly all quantiles of PM2.5 . The data
points tightly center around the fitted curve, which is consistent with the fact that our standard
errors are small.
    To address the issue of endogeneity and measurement errors, we instrument PM2.5 using vari-
ables constructed from pollutants outside of the 150 km buffer zone as discussed in Section 4.2.
Table 3 reports IV results. The first-stage cluster-robust F-statistics on the instruments (reported in
the last row of the table) vary from 52 to 62, suggesting a strong correlation between the instrument
and the endogenous variable. The IV estimates are considerably larger than the OLS estimates,
with most coefficients 3 to 7 times as large as their OLS counterparts. A 10 µg/m3 increase in
PM2.5 in a day is associated with a 0.65% contemporaneous increase in transactions in the aggre-
gate health care sector. The effect of air pollution on spending at Children’s hospitals is the largest
among different health care categories and is nearly twice as large as that for overall healthcare
spending.
    The large difference between OLS and 2SLS results on the health impact of air pollution is
common in this literature (Knittel et al., 2015; Schlenker and Walker, 2015). The bias toward
zero in OLS estimates for health spending is consistent with the attenuation bias due to (classical)
measurement errors in PM2.5 as an imperfect proxy for population pollution exposure. The down-
ward bias could also be driven by temporary local shocks that are positively correlated with air
pollution such as economic activities or big events, which reduce healthcare spending but increase
non-healthcare spending (more outdoor activities and fewer hospital visits).
    As discussed below in more detail in Section 5.6, our estimated short-term impact includes both
the direct positive effect on healthcare spending and the indirect negative effect through avoidance
behavior. Therefore, the direct effect of air pollution on healthcare spending is likely larger.


5.2    Longer-Term Impacts
Exposure to PM2.5 could have dynamic longer-term health impacts that are unlikely to be linear.
Directly estimating the coefficients of a large number of lagged PM2.5 in equation (2) suffers from
high serial correlation and imprecise estimates. Instead, we employ the flexible Distributed-Lag
model discussed in Section 4.1 and allow pollution impacts to follow a smooth path of decay.
    Table 4 reports the cumulative effects for different time periods across categories from the OLS
regressions. Our benchmark specification incorporates 90 lags (daily pollution exposure for the
previous three months) and three segments for the cubic B-splines, where the decaying pattern for
each month is characterized by separate cubic polynomials. Effects beyond 90 days are modest and
often imprecisely estimated. The standard errors are clustered at the city level and are reported in


                                                  23
parentheses. We examine the robustness of our results to the choice of lags and B-spline segments
in section 5.4.
    The first column of Table 4 shows that a temporary surge of 10 µg/m3 in PM2.5 concentration
increases today’s transactions in all healthcare facilities by 0.03%. A permanent elevation of 10
µg/m3 raises the number of transactions by 0.86%, eight times as large as the effect reported in
Table 2 when only the contemporary PM2.5 concentration is controlled. The last two columns
report a statistically significant negative impact on necessities and supermarket spending within
two weeks, but not in the long run.
    To deal with the endogeneity in PM2.5 , we use the instruments discussed in Section 4.2. Specif-
ically, we instrument for the local pollution on day s, pis , using the instruments Zcs   l , which are

functions of pollution in faraway sources that reach city i on day s. The contemporary and cumula-
tive effects across different time spans are presented in Table 5.
    Several important findings emerge from Table 5. First, the estimated longer-term impacts of
PM2.5 on healthcare spending across all categories from 2SLS are positive and much larger than
their OLS counterparts, consistent with the comparison for the short-term impact discussed in Sec-
tion 5.1. Specifically, a permanent increase of 10 µg/m3 in PM2.5 concentration raises the number
of transactions in the health sector by 2.65%. Second, the impact on Children’s hospitals is the
largest and more than twice as large as the impact on aggregate healthcare spending, consistent
with the fact that children are among the most vulnerable groups. Pharmacy is the second most
responsive category among the four healthcare categories. When elevated air pollution aggravates
symptoms for people with respiratory problems, they may go to pharmacies to purchase drugs
without visiting hospitals.28 Third, the effects on daily necessities and supermarket spending are
all negative and appear to be short-lived.
    To examine how the impact on spending changes over time, Figure 7 plots the estimates of
both current and past 90 days of pollution exposures for different categories.29 The (dotted) solid
part of each line indicates the impact being statistically (in)significant. There are several noticeable
patterns. First, PM2.5 has a positive impact on healthcare spending in the short term across all
health categories. The impact diminishes over time and becomes small and imprecise after three
months. Second, air pollution has a negative impact on spending on necessities and in supermarkets
in day zero, but the effect disappears after two weeks. This temporal reduction is inconsistent with
the budget constraint hypothesis, since a permanent increase in healthcare spending would lead to a
permanent reduction in necessities and supermarkets with a fixed budget. Instead, our result lends
28 The  Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security maintains the National Reimbursement Drug List (NRDL).
   Only the drugs on this list are covered by China’s national medical insurance programs, some in full (type A drugs)
   and others partially (type B).
29 The optimal number of lags should in theory differ across categories. For example, the effect of pollution on non-

   healthcare categories appears to be short-lived, while for children’s hospitals it could last for more than 3 months. To
   keep the results comparable, we impose the same lag structure on all categories.


                                                           24
support to the hypothesis of avoidance behavior. We return to this issue in Section 5.5.

    Our results so far suggest that a 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 would lead to an increase in the
number of health-related transactions by 2.65% in the long term. In terms of the value of transac-
tions, the effect is 1.5% (Table C2 in Appendix C). The estimates are somewhat less precise than
those based on the number of transactions. This is likely due to the larger noise inherent in the
value of healthcare spending. For example, some of largest incidences of healthcare transactions
are surgeries which might not be related to air pollution.30 The smaller impact on the value of trans-
actions makes intuitive sense in that elevated pollution could reduce the desire to go to hospitals for
minor illnesses (and other outdoor activities), leading to a larger impact on transaction frequency.
The heterogeneity across different types of healthcare facilities and the impact on non-healthcare
spending are similar to results using the number of transactions, but less precise.


5.3      Nonlinearity
Among the underlying concerns for the external validity of the benefit-transfer approach is the
potential nonlinearity of the dose-response function. The pollution level observed in developing
countries such as China and India is far greater than the prevailing level studied in the literature.
The potential nonlinearity could lead to under- or over-estimation of the health costs of air pollution
in developing countries based on the linear projections in the benefit-transfer approach (Lelieveld
et al. (2015) and World Bank (2007)). Despite of its important implications, there is a lack of
empirical evidence on the nonlinearity of the dose-response function (Lelieveld and Poschl, 2017).
The rich spatial and temporal variation in our data allows us to examine the health impacts of PM2.5
for a wide range of pollution levels.
     To capture nonlinearity, we include the quadratic term of PM2.5 in addition to its linear form.31
The top panel of Figure 8 plots the estimated surface of the marginal response for varying levels
of PM2.5 and along the time path for up to 100 days. For each value of PM2.5 , the slice of the
surface along the p-axis is the estimated dynamic response as in Figure 7a. The surface is slightly
tilted upwards with a higher marginal response for a higher pollution level, indicating an increasing
marginal impact of PM2.5 on healthcare spending. To further illustrate this, we plot the cumulated
marginal effect over three months (∑t βt ) against pollution level in the bottom panel of Figure 8.
Interestingly, the marginal impact on healthcare spending increases in PM2.5 but at a diminishing
rate. The cumulative effect ranges from 2.16% when PM2.5 is near zero to 2.25% when the concen-


30 Our  analysis focuses on transactions that cost less than 200,000 yuan. Among this sample, the 95th percentile of the
   transaction value is 6,000 yuan and the 99th percentile is 10,000 yuan.
31 To conserve the number of parameters, we use one-segment instead of three-segment B-splines, since results are very

   similar across different segments (see section 5.4).


                                                          25
tration reaches 150 µg/m3 (i.e., the 90 percentile of the daily average).32 Overall, the nonlinearity
of the health impact appears modest. Based on this finding, we extrapolate our estimates across a
wide range of pollution levels in the discussion below.
    Figure 9 examines the impact of air pollution across cities with different per capita income. In
2015, China’s city average annual disposable income per capita varied from 12,000 yuan to 53,000
yuan, with an average of 25,530 yuan. The top panel depicts the marginal response across income
levels and over time and the bottom panel plots the cumulative long-term impact against income.
Healthcare response appears largest in cities with the lowest income. This may be driven by the
limited avoidance behavior (e.g., use of air purifier) among low income households. To the extent
that low-income cities have a lower penetration of UnionPay cards, as shown in Table C1, this
finding suggests that we might underestimate the overall health impact of air pollution based on
bank cards rather than all payment methods, though it is unlikely a major concern given the limited
heterogeneity across income levels.


5.4      Robustness Checks
We conduct a variety of robustness checks. Table 6 reports the cumulative impact for overall
healthcare spending under three different numbers of B-spline segments (1, 2, and 3) and five
different numbers of lags (60, 90, 120 and 150). The estimates across different numbers of segments
are very similar. We choose three segments for our base specification since it provides a good
balance between flexibility and precision.33 The cumulative impact tends to be smaller with 60
days of lags and larger with 120 days of lags than that with 90 days, but the difference is small.
The cumulative impact using 30-day lags is considerably smaller.34 We choose 90 lags because the
estimated effects for many of the lagged pollution measures are significant until around 90 days
and start to lose significance for earlier periods.
    Our second set of robustness checks is with regard to the radius size of the buffer zone in
constructing the IV. We fix the radius at 150 km in the benchmark specification and assume that
unobservables outside of the buffer zone of a city would not affect healthcare spending in that city.
There is an inherent trade-off in the choice of the radius. On the one hand, the larger the buffer
zone, the easier it is for the exclusion restriction to hold. On the other hand, the bigger the radius,
the weaker the correlation between the predicted PM2.5 using non-local pollution and the observed
PM2.5 in a given city. Table 7 presents several choices of the buffer zone from 50 km to 300 km with
an increment of 50 km. The top panel reports the first-stage results. Generally, both the R2 and the

32 Our preferred estimate of the cumulative effect is 2.65%, at the high end of this range, because the estimation
   constraints are nonlinear.
33 Results from more than three segments suffer from the over-fitting problem and exhibit large swings over time.
34 Cross-validation results indicate that models with long lags are preferred to the model with 30 days of lags.



                                                       26
F-statistics decrease with the radius of the buffer zone, suggesting a weaker correlation between
the IV and the endogenous variable as the buffer zone gets larger. The bottom panel shows the
cumulative long-term impact on healthcare spending, which varies from 2.42% to 2.88% across
different radii when PM2.5 increases by 10 µg/m3 permanently. Our preferred specification with a
150 km radius delivers an estimate that is in the middle of this range.
    The third set of robustness checks controls for other pollutants including O3 , SO2 , NO2 and
CO. Emission sources such as electricity generation and transportation produce both particulate
matters and other pollutants, which also have harmful health impacts. Therefore, the estimated
health impact from PM2.5 could be confounded by other pollutants especially in OLS regressions.
The IV strategy should address this issue to some extent in that it leverages the long-range transport
property of PM2.5 which is different for other pollutants, especially O3 and CO. That is, the pre-
dicted PM2.5 should be less correlated with the observed level of local pollutants. Table 8 reports
estimates with these four pollutants as additional controls. The results for both healthcare spending
and non-healthcare spending categories are very similar to those in Table 5 without controlling for
other pollutants.35
    The fourth set of robustness checks further addresses the concern of regional economic spillovers
by controlling for the average level of PM2.5 of nearby cities in the same region outside of the buffer
zone. If regional economic activities have systematic spillover effects beyond the buffer zone, one
might be concerned with the exogeneity of our IVs: local unobservables could be correlated with
economic activities in other cities, which are in turn correlated with pollution levels in other cities.
Including the average level of PM2.5 of nearby cities in the regressions could help control for eco-
nomic activities in other cities. Table 9 presents estimation results with this additional control, and
the results are very close to the benchmark specifications.
    To further address the concerns on the exogeneity of the instruments, we create an alternative
IV where all of the variation comes from changing wind patterns. In our main specification, the
IVs are functions of both the level of pollution in source cities and prevailing wind directions and
speeds. In this robustness check, we use the historical average (time-invariant) level of air pollution
in the source city rather than the actual observed pollution level that could be subject to regional
economic spillovers. All of the within-city variation in these IVs comes from variation in wind and
weather patterns, and thus, after controlling for city fixed effects, the IVs should be uncorrelated
with any unobserved economic shocks. Table 10 presents results from this specification. Though
the IVs are not as strong as those in the main specification, as indicated by a decrease in the F-
statistic, the estimated effect of pollution on healthcare spending is very similar to the benchmark
specification.
    As a final robustness check, we drop the following large cities from the analysis: Beijing,

35 The   correlation coefficient between PM2.5 and O3 , SO2 , NO2 and CO is -0.13, 0.55, 0.66, 0.03, respectively.


                                                            27
Shanghai, Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Wuhan, Chongqing, Chengdu, and Nanjing. Due to having su-
perior medical facilities and being large transportation hubs, these cities receive a large number
of hospital patients from other areas. If some of these out-of-town patients come from cities that
export pollution to these major cities, this could lead to correlation between the instruments and
unobserved healthcare spending shocks. Table 11 reports the estimated long-term effect of air pol-
lution when these cities are removed from the estimation sample. The estimates are similar to those
in the benchmark specification.


5.5        Avoidance Behavior
The analyses of both the short-term and longer-term impact suggest that elevated PM2.5 leads to
increased healthcare spending and reduced non-healthcare spending. This negative impact on non-
healthcare spending could be driven by two underlying mechanisms: the budget constraint and
avoidance behavior. As we argued in Section 5.2, the short-lived nature of the negative conse-
quences is inconsistent with the budget constraint hypothesis. In this section, we examine whether
households engage in avoidance behavior to mitigate their pollution exposure.
    A key insight of our analysis is that when consumers engage in avoidance behavior, expectations
of future pollution levels should affect current consumption. For example, if consumers expect
pollution to improve in the near future, they may postpone their consumption to avoid exposure
today. On the other hand, an expectation of worse air tomorrow may encourage them to make the
consumption in advance. To investigate this, we assume that the consumers are aware of whether
the next day’s air quality is better or worse than the current day’s.36
    We add the dummy variable 1{pi,t+1 > pi,t } in our baseline specification and report the results in
Table 12. The coefficient on this dummy variable indicates a 0.41% increase in healthcare transac-
tions when consumers anticipate worse air quality the next day. In addition, spending in necessities
and supermarkets increases when next-day pollution is expected to deteriorate. The coefficient is
also found to be larger for pharmacies than hospitals, consistent with the fact that hospital visits are
often scheduled in advance and are less substitutable intertemporally. The estimated cumulative
impact on healthcare spending that is associated with a permanent reduction of 10 µg/m3 of PM2.5
is 2.71%, slightly higher than when we do not control for avoidance.


5.6        Morbidity Cost
Our preferred specifications show that a 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 would lead to a 2.65% increase
in the number of health-related transactions in the long term (Table 5) and a 1.5% increase in the

36 Giventhe ubiquitous forecasts and apps on PM2.5 , this appears a reasonable assumption. Note that it is much weaker
 than assuming consumers know about the actual level of tomorrow’s pollution.


                                                        28
value of transactions (Table C2). To better understand the size of our morbidity estimates, we
compare our results with the findings in the related literature in Table 13. In a study on preventive
expenditure, Mu and Zhang (2016) estimate that face mask purchases in China increase by 5.45%
for a 10-point increase in Air Quality Index (AQI), and 7.06% for anti-PM2.5 masks. Given that
the translation from PM2.5 concentration to AQI is piecewise linear, a 10-point increase in AQI
is equivalent to an increase of anywhere between 7.5 µg/m3 to 15 µg/m3 in PM2.5 concentration.
This means that exposure to 10 µg/m3 more PM2.5 leads to an increase ranging from 3.6% to 7.3%
in preventive spending.
    Williams and Phaneuf (2016) use similar estimation methods and data in the U.S. context and
find that a one-standard-deviation change in PM2.5 (roughly 3.78 µg/m3 for their data) leads to
8.3% more spending on asthma and COPD, which is equivalent to a 22% increase for 10 µg/m3
more PM2.5 . According to China’s National Health Commission, spending on respiratory diseases
accounts for 8% of total health expenditure in 2012. Assuming all additional spending induced by
air pollution is for respiratory diseases, our estimates translate to a 33% increase in respiratory-
related spending, about one and a half times as large as the estimate from Williams and Phaneuf
(2016).
    Based on the parameter estimates, we now conduct back-of-the-envelope calculations to esti-
mate the morbidity cost from elevated PM2.5 . Credit and debit card transactions (i.e., bank card
transactions) account for about half of the total private spending in the health care industry, with
the rest from cash transactions and government transfers. Assuming that the health impact is the
same for non-bank-card spending, the 1.5% impact translates to 59.6 billion Yuan ($9.2 billion)
from a 10 µg/m3 (about 18%) increase in PM2.5 . These numbers can directly inform the overall
welfare cost of PM2.5 and related policy discussions. For example, a 2016 report by OECD based
on the benefit-transfer approach estimates that PM2.5 and ground level ozone are associated with
a $20 billion direct cost on health expenditures (due to morbidity) worldwide, with half of these
costs coming from non-OECD countries.37 A simple linear interpolation based on our estimates
implies $42 billion in added healthcare spending in China owing to elevated PM2.5 (56 µg/m3 on
average) relative to WHO’s recommended level of 10 µg/m3 .38
    These results indicate that the OECD report significantly underestimates the health cost from
outdoor air pollution, potentially up to an order of magnitude for developing countries. The under-
estimation from the OECD report could be due to: (1) the downward bias from endogeneity in the
dose-response function; (2) the inherent differences in the dose-response function across countries;

37 The report, titled “The Economic Consequences of Air Pollution”, is available at http://www.oecd.org/env/

   air-pollution-to-cause-6-9-million-premature-deaths-and-cost-1-gdp-by-2060.
   htm.
38 According to China’s National Health Commission, aggregate health expenditure, including both private and public

   spending, was more than four trillion yuan ($614 billion) in 2015.


                                                        29
and (3) the monetization of the disease incidences. The discrepancy highlights the importance of
empirical studies using data on health spending from developing countries.
    In addition to the direct healthcare cost, the morbidity cost should also include the value of lost
time from the illnesses including hospital visits. Based on the fact that our database recorded 670
million health-related transactions in 2015 which accounted for 50% of private health spending,
our estimate implies 35.5 million additional trips to healthcare facilities from a 10 µg/m3 increase
in PM2.5 . To monetize the lost time, we assume that each trip takes three hours and the value of
time (VOT) is 100% of the hourly wage, which is an upper-end estimate of VOT in the literature
(Small, 2012; Wolff, 2014). The total value of the lost time from additional trips to healthcare
facilities amounts to 2.3 billion Yuan in 2015, compared to 59.6 billion Yuan in additional health-
care costs from a 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 . This suggests that the direct healthcare cost is the
major component of the overall morbidity cost, recognizing that we are not accounting for the lost
productivity and loss in quality of life.


5.7     WTP for Clean Air
As illustrated in Section 3, consumer WTP for clean air is composed of several components includ-
ing the impact on healthcare spending, mortality, labor productivity and the quality of life. While
there is a growing literature on the impact of air pollution on labor productivity and the quality
of life (Levinson, 2012; Zivin and Neidell, 2012; Chang et al., 2016; He et al., 2018), there is a
need for comprehensive country-level analysis in China. In the following analysis, we focus on the
morbidity and mortality cost in order to provide a lower bound for consumer WTP for clean air,
recognizing that the full WTP calculation would necessitate additional empirical evidence on other
components.
    Our analysis suggests that a 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 would lead to an increase of 59.6
billion yuan (or $9.2 billion) in overall healthcare spending. This can be considered as the social
cost of air pollution due to increased spending in healthcare. To examine the private cost of air
pollution and consumers’ private WTP for air quality, we need to take into consideration that the
vast majority of consumers have health insurance and do not bear the full cost of their treatment.
For urban residents, the proportion of healthcare spending that is paid for out-of-pocket equals 32%
for employees and 52% for non-employees. For the rural population, the share of out-of-pocket
spending is 56%. An increase in overall healthcare spending of 59.6 billion yuan translates into 30.2
billion yuan (or $4.6 billion) additional out-of-pocket spending.39 This implies that the morbidity
component of consumer WTP is 74 yuan per household (or $11.3) for a 10 µg/m3 reduction of

39 In
    2011, there were 252 million urban employees, 221 million urban non-employees, and 832 million rural residents
  enrolled in China’s public insurance programs (Yu, 2015). The population-weighted average proportion of healthcare
  spending that must be covered out-of-pocket thus equals 50.7%.


                                                        30
PM2.5 .
    We estimate the mortality cost based on Ebenstein et al. (2017). Using detailed mortality data by
gender, age cohort, and disease types in 161 representative counties across China, they estimate that
a 10 µg/m3 increase of PM10 would increase the cardiorespiratory mortality rate by 8% on average
and the impact varies across age cohorts by not across gender. We take two steps to monetize
the mortality impact. First, we rely on the benefit transfer approach to estimate the VSL for the
Chinese population due to the lack of a national-level estimate of VSL for China. Ashenfelter and
Greenstone (2004) provides an upper-bound VSL estimate of $2.27 million (in 2015) for the U.S.
population. This value is used in Deschenes et al. (2017) to estimate the mortality cost of NOx
emissions reductions.40 To adjust for income differences between the U.S. and China, we use the
transfer elasticity of 1.2 as suggested by Narain and Sall (2016). This leads to an estimate of $0.21
million (in 2015) for VSL in China.41 Second, we develop estimates of the VSL for each age group
based on the age-adjustments in Murphy and Topel (2006). The VSL is at the full value for people
less than 40 years old but reduced to 40% of its full value by age 65 and 15% by age 80. Similar
to what Deschenes et al. (2017) find, this adjustment is important because although the age groups
with age 65 and above account for less than 9% of the total population, they account for nearly
75% of the avoided mortalities from an improvement in air quality.
    This back-of-the-envelope analysis implies that a 10 µg/m3 increase of PM2.5 would generate a
mortality impact in the neighborhood of $13.4 billion in 2015 in China (Table C3 in Appendix C).42
In comparison, the corresponding healthcare cost is $9.2 billion, which is 69% of the mortality cost.
In terms of consumer WTP for clean air, the mortality component amounts to $29.3 per household
for a 10 µg/m3 reduction of PM2.5 . Taking into account both morbidity and mortality impacts,
consumer WTP for a 10 µg/m3 reduction of PM2.5 would be $40.6 per household.
    Using a discrete choice framework to estimate the demand of indoor air purifiers in China, Ito
and Zhang (2016) estimate a consumer WTP of $11 for a 10-unit reduction in PM10 based on the
trade-off between price and quality (purifiers’ ability to remove PM10 ). Note that the benefit of
an air purifier is confined to the location where the equipment is installed (e.g., a room) and does
not apply elsewhere. Consumers’ WTP for a uniform reduction of ambient pollution (e.g., indoors
and outdoors) is likely bigger. Though the context and approach are different, our estimate of the
morbidity component of WTP is broadly in line with their findings.
    Using the hedonic model for the U.S. housing market, Chay and Greenstone (2005) find that

40 Primarily  based on studies of compensating wage differentials in the labor market, U.S. EPA recommends a central
   estimate of $8.7 million (in 2015) as the VSL value for their benefit and cost analysis. Other studies have estimated
   a lower value in the neighborhood of $2 million (Alberini et al., 2004; Ashenfelter and Greenstone, 2004).
41 The transfer elasticity measures the income elasticity of VSL. Narain and Sall (2016) suggest a transfer elasticity of

   1.2 for transferring the VSL from U.S. or a developed country to a developing country with low or middle income.
42 PM                                                                                                                   3
       2.5 accounts for about 60% of PM10 during our data period. We assume that the mortality cost of a 10 µg/m
                                                      3
   increase of PM2.5 is the same as that of a 10 µg/m increase of PM10 .


                                                          31
consumers are willing to pay $450 - $1,050 more in housing price (in 1982-84 dollars) for a one
µg/m3 reduction in total suspended particles (TSP). With a 30-year time span and 5% annual dis-
count rate, this translates to an annual WTP of $72.9 - $168.5 in 2015 dollars. Based on the
discrete-choice framework that is also applied to the U.S. housing market, Bayer et al. (2009) es-
timate the annual household WTP to be $23.9 - $29.5 in 2015 dollars for a one-unit reduction in
PM10 . These estimates are larger than ours for at least two reasons. First, the average household
income in China in 2015 is about one-seventh of that in the U.S., and the environmental quality is
shown to be a luxury good (Kahn and Matsusaka, 1997). Second, our estimate of WTP reflects a
lower bound and does not account for the impacts on the loss of productivity and quality of life,
etc. as discussed above, while the WTP estimates using the revealed preference approach should in
theory reflect those impacts (provided that consumers are well-informed and rational).
    In many major urban centers in Northern China, the annual average concentration of PM2.5 is
close to or even exceeds 100 µg/m3 , compared to the WHO recommended level of 10 µg/m3 . The
National Plan on Air Pollution Control, the first national policy enacted in China, was developed
by the State Council in 2013 and set a goal of reducing PM2.5 by 25%, 20%, and 15% in 2017
relative to the 2012 levels in the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei, Yangtze River Delta, and Pearl River Delta
regions, respectively. The findings from this study imply that the targeted reductions could lead to
significant economic benefits.


6    Conclusion
WHO’s global air pollution database shows that the world’s most polluted cities in terms of PM2.5
in 2016 were all from developing countries such as China, India, Iran, Pakistan, Philippines, and
Saudi Arabia. The database also shows that 98% of cities in low- and middle-income countries
with more than 100,000 residents do not meet WHO air quality guidelines. However, past research
from epidemiology and economics going back several decades has focused on the impacts of air
pollution on human health, particularly mortality, in developed countries. This study provides the
first comprehensive analysis on the direct healthcare cost from PM2.5 based on the universe of credit
and debit card transactions in China.
     To address the potential endogeneity in the air pollution measure, we develop an air quality
prediction model in the spirit of the US EPA’s source-receptor matrix that allows us to isolate
exogenous variations in local air quality using the spatial spillovers of PM2.5 . We propose a flexible
distributed-lag model to estimate the temporal effect on healthcare spending. Our IV results, three
to four times larger than those from OLS, suggest that a 10 µg/m3 decrease in PM2.5 would lead to
at least $9.2 billion reduction in healthcare spending annually, or 1.5% of national annual healthcare
expenditure. The estimated healthcare cost exceeds two-thirds of the mortality cost based on the


                                                  32
recent literature. China’s elevated PM2.5 level relative to the WHO’s annual standards entails $42
billion additional healthcare expenditure in 2015. Together, these results indicate that the recent
report by OECD (2016) drastically underestimates the worldwide impact of air pollution on health
expenditure ($10 billion for all non-OCED countries including China).
    We offer to our knowledge the first national-level analysis of the impact of air pollution on
healthcare spending in a developing country context. The air pollution level in urban centers in de-
veloping countries is often an order of magnitude higher than that observed in developed countries.
As urbanization continues and development pressure rises, air pollution could get worse before it
gets better. The aggregate impact of air pollution on economic growth, including factors such as hu-
man capital accumulation, productivity, talent loss due to migration, and foreign direct investment,
is an interesting and important area for future research.




                                                33
References
Alberini, Anna, Maureen Cropper, Alan Krupnick, and Nathalie B. Simond, “Does the value
  of a statistical life vary with age and health status? Evidence from the US and Canada,” Journal
  of Environmental Economics and Management, 2004, 48 (1), 769–792.
Almon, Shirley, “The distributed lag between capital appropriations and expenditures,” Economet-
  rica, 1965, pp. 178–196.
Arceo, Eva, Rema Hanna, and Paulina Oliva, “Does the Effect of Pollution on Infant Mortality
  Differ Between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence from Mexico City,” Economic
  Journal, 2015, 126, 257–280.
Ashenfelter, Orley and Michael Greenstone, “Using Mandated Speed Limits to Measure the
  Value of a Statistical Life,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112, S226–67.
Bagnall, John, David Bounie, Kim P Huynh, Anneke Kosse, Tobias Schmidt, Scott D Schuh,
  and Helmut Stix, “Consumer cash usage: A cross-country comparison with payment diary
  survey data,” ECB Working Paper, 2014.
Banzhaf, H. Spencer and Randall P. Walsh, “Do People Vote with Their Feet? An Empirical
  Test of Tiebout,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98, 843–863.
Bayer, Patrick, Nate Keohane, and Christopher Timmins, “Migration and Hedonic Valuation:
  The Case of Air Quality,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2009, 58,
  1–14.
Brunekreef, Bert and Stephen T Holgate, “Air Pollution and Health,” Lancet, 2002, 360, 1233–
  1242.
Central Bank of China, “General Report on the Operations of Chinese Payment System, 2015
  Q3,” Technical Report, Central Bank of China 2015.
Chang, Tom, Joshua Graff Zivin, Tal Gross, and Matthew Neidell, “The effect of pollution on
 office workers: Evidence from call centers in china,” 2016. Working Paper.
Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone, “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality:
 Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2003, 118, 1121–1167.
   and , “Does air quality matter? Evidence from the housing market,” Journal of political
  Economy, 2005, 113 (2), 376–424.
Chen, Yuyu, Avraham Ebenstein, Michael Greenstone, and Hongbin Li, “Evidence on the


                                               34
  impact of sustained exposure to air pollution on life expectancy from China’s Huai River policy,”
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2013, 110, 12936–12941.
Clay, Karen, Joshua Lewis, and Edson Severnini, “Canary in a Coal Mine: Impact of Mid-20th
  Century Air Pollution on Infant Mortality and Property Values,” 2016. Working Paper.
Corradi, Corrado, “Smooth Distributed Lag Estimators and Smoothing Spline Functions in
  Hilbert Spaces,” Journal of Econometrics, 1977, 5 (1), 211–219.
   and G. Gambetta, “The Estimation of Distributed Lags by Spline Functions,” Empirical Eco-
  nomics, 1976, 1 (1), 41–51.
Currie, Janet and Matthew Neidell, “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn from
 California’s Recent Experience,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, 120, 1003–1030.
   and W. Reed Walker, “Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from E-ZPass,” Ameri-
  can Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3, 65–90.
Deryugina, Tatyana, Garth Heutel, Nolan Miller, David Molitor, and Julian Reif, “The Effect
  of Pollution on Health and Health Care Utilization: Evidence from Changes in Wind Direction,”
  2017. Working Paper.
Deschenes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Jonathan Guryan, “Climate Change and Birth
  Weight,” American Economic Review, May 2009, 99 (2), 211–217.
  , , and Joseph Shapiro, “Defensive Investments and the Demand for Air Quality: Evidence
  from the NOx Budget Program,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (10), 2958–89.
Dockery, Douglas W., “Health Effects of Particulate Air Pollution,” Annals of Epidemiology, 2009,
  19, 257–263.
Ebenstein, Avraham, Maoyong Fan, Michael Greenstone, Guojun He, and Maigeng Zhou,
  “New evidence on the impact of sustained exposure to air pollution on life expectancy from
  China’s Huai River Policy,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2017, 114,
  10384–10389.
Einav, Liran, Dan Knoepfle an Jonathan Levin, and Neel Sundaresan, “Sales Taxes and Inter-
  net Commerce,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (1), 1–26.
EPA, The benefits and costs of the Clean Air Act from 1990 to 2020, Washington, DC: United
  States Environmental Protection Agency, 2011.
Greenstone, Michael and Rema Hanna, “Environmental Regulations, Air and Water Pollution,
 and Infant Mortality in India,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104, 3038–3072.



                                               35
Grossman, Michael, “On the Concept of Health Capital and Demand for Health,” The Journal of
 Political Economy, 1972, 80, 223–255.
He, Guojun, Maoyong Fan, and Meigong Zhou, “The Effect of Air Pollution on Mortality in
 China: Evidence from the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games,” Journal of Environmental Economics
 and Management, 2016. forthcoming.
He, Jiaxiu, Haoming Liu, and Alberto Salvo, “Severe Air Pollution and Labor Productivity:
 Evidence from Industrial Towns in China,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
 2018.
Ito, Koichiro and Shuang Zhang, “Willingness to Pay for Clean Air: Evidence from Air Purifier
   Markets in China,” 2016. Working Paper.
Kahn, Matthew E. and John G. Matsusaka, “Measuring Environmental Demand: Evidence from
 California Voting Initiatives,” Journal of Law and Economics, 1997, 40 (1), 137–173.
Knittel, Christopher R., Douglas L. Miller, and Nicholas J. Sanders, “Caution, Drivers! Chil-
 dren Present: Traffic, Pollution, and Infant Health,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2015,
 98, 350–366.
Landrigan, Philip, Richard Fuller, Nereus J R Acosta, Olusoji Adeyi, Maureen Cropper, Alan
  Krupnick, Michael Greenstone, and et al., “The Lancet Commission on pollution and health,”
  The Lancet, 2018, 391 (10119), 462–512.
Lelieveld, J., J. S. Evan, M. Fnais, D. Giannadaki, and A. Pozzer, “The contribution of outdoor
  air pollution sources to premature mortality on a global scale,” Nature, 2015, 525, 367–371.
Lelieveld, Jos and Ulrich Poschl, “Chemists can help to solve the air-pollution health crisis,”
  Nature, 2017, 551, 291–293.
Levinson, Arik, “Valuing public goods using happiness data: The case of air quality,” Journal of
  Public Economics, 2012, 96 (9), 869–880.
Moretti, Enrico and Matthew Neidell, “Pollution, Health, and Avoidance Behavior: Evidence
 from the Ports of Los Angeles,” Journal of Human Resources, 2011, 46, 154–175.
Mu, Quan and Junjie Zhang, “Air pollution and defensive expenditures: evidence from
 particulate-filtering face masks,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2016.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel, “The Value of Health and Longevity,” Journal of Polit-
 ical Economy, 2006, 114 (5), 871–904.
Narain, Urvashi and Chris Sall, Methodology for Valuing the Health Impacts of Air Pollution:
  Discussion of Challenges and Proposed Solutions, The World Bank, 2016.

                                              36
Neidell, Matthew, “Air Pollution, Health, and Social-economic Status: the Effect of Outdoor Air
  Quality on Childhood Asthma,” Journal of Health Economics, 2004, 23, 1209–1236.
OECD, “The Economic Consequences of Air Pollution,” 2016. http://www.oecd.org/env/air-
 pollution-to-cause-6-9-million-premature-deaths-and-cost-1-gdp-by-2060.htm.
Poirier, Dale J., “On the Use Of Bilinear Splines in Economics,” Journal of Econometrics, 1975,
  3 (1), 23–34.
Pope, C. Arden and Douglas W. Dockery, “Health Effects of Fine Particular Air Pollution: Lines
  that Connect,” Journal of the Air and Waste Management Association, 2012, 56, 709–742.
Schlenker, Wolfram and W. Reed Walker, “Airports, Air Pollution, and Contemporaneous
  Health,” Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 0, 1–43.
Small, Kenneth A, “Valuation of travel time,” Economics of transportation, 2012, 1 (1), 2–14.
Sun, Cong, Siqi Zheng, and Matthew E. Kahn, “Self-protection investment exacerbates air pol-
  lution exposure inequality in urban China,” Ecological Economics, 2017, 131, 468–474.
WHO, Economic cost of the health impact of air pollution in Europe: Clean air, health and wealth,
 Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe, 2015.
Williams, Austin M. and Daniel J. Phaneuf, “The Impact of Air Pollution on Medical Expendi-
 tures: Evidence from Spending on Chronic Respiratory Conditions,” 2016. Working Paper.
Wolff, Hendrik, “Value of time: Speeding behavior and gasoline prices,” Journal of Environmental
 Economics and Management, 2014, 67 (1), 71–88.
World Bank, Cost of Pollution in China: Economic Estimates of Physical Damages, The World
 Bank, 2007.
Yu, Hao, “Universal health insurance coverage for 1.3 billion people: What accounts for China’s
  success?,” Health Policy, 2015, 119 (1), 1145–1152.
Zhang, Lin, Licheng Liu, Yuanhong Zhao, Sunling Gong, and Xiaoye Zhang, “Source attribu-
  tion of particulate matter pollution over North China with the adjoint method,” Environmental
  Research Letters, 2015, 10 (8).
Zivin, Joshua Graff and Matthew Neidell, “The impact of pollution on worker productivity,”
  American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (7), 3652–73.




                                               37
                               Figure 1: Three-Year Average PM2.5 Concentration

                                             Jan. 2013 - Dec. 2015, µg/m3




Notes: Each dot represents a city. There are 329 cities in total.




                                                            38
                                     Figure 2: Daily PM2.5 Concentration
                                              Jan. 2013 - Dec. 2015
                                      National and Regional Average, µg/m3




                  (a) Northern Region                                     (b) Northeastern Region




                (c) Northwestern Region                                      (d) Southern Region




Notes: The Red line in all subfigures indicates the daily standard set by the US EPA: 35 µg/m3 . The Northeastern
region includes Heilongjiang, Jilin, Liaoning, and the northeastern part of Inner Mongolia. The Northern region
includes Beijing, Tianjin, Hebei, Shanxi, Shandong, Henan, and the rest of Inner Mongolia. The Northwestern region
includes Shanxi, Gansu, Qinghai, Ningxia, and Xinjiang. The Southern region includes Guangdong, Guangxi, Hainan,
Guizhou, Yunnan, Shanghai, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Anhui, Fujian, Jiangxi, Hubei, Hunan, Chongqing, and Sichuan. Tibet
is excluded in the regional plots due to a sparse coverage.
                                                       39
                        Figure 3: The Number of Active Bank Cards per Capita, 2015




Notes: Bank cards include debit and credit cards. Active bank cards are defined as cards that have been used at least
once in the given year. Each card is assigned to one primary city based on the location of its most frequent usage.
Population measure is year-end registered population of each city.




                                                         40
                         Figure 4: National Weekly Healthcare Spending, 2013 - 2015




                                Figure 5: Wind-Pollution Vector Decomposition

            (a) Day 0: Wind-Pollution Vectors                   (b) Day 0: Wind-Pollution Vectors toward Beijing




Notes: Day 0 refers to Dec. 5, 2013. Subfigure 5a depicts the wind-pollution vector fields on Day 0, with each vector’s
length indicating wind speed (rescaled to match the distance traveled per day) and width indicating PM2.5 concentration
level in the source city. Subfigure 5b plots the decomposed subvectors pointing towards Beijing.



                                                         41
         Figure 6: Residuals of Log Number of Transactions v. PM2.5 Concentration, by Category


               (a) Total Healthcare Industry                                      (b) Pharmacies




                  (c) People’s Hospitals                                      (d) Children’s Hospitals




                      (e) Necessities                                            (f) Supermarkets




Notes: Each dot denotes the in-group average residuals, partialing out city FEs, weekly FEs, city-specific time trends,
city-specific seasonality, day-of-week FEs, dummies for holidays and working weekends, and weather controls (tem-
perature, precipitation, wind speed). Groups are binned by percentiles of PM2.5 , which is depicted by the x-axis.



                                                         42
      Figure 7: Impact of Air Pollution on Number of Transactions from IV Regressions with 90 Lags




           (a) Health Total                            (b) All Hospitals                         (c) Pharmacies




                              (d) People’s Hospitals                  (e) Children’s hospitals




                                 (f) Necessities                           (g) Supermarkets




Notes: The y-axis indicates the percentage change in the number of transactions per 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5
concentration. On the x-axis, 0 refers to current pollution, 50 refers to pollution 50 days ago, etc. Solid line indicates
significance at the 5% level. Gray areas are 95% confidence intervals.



                                                             43
                                  Figure 8: Nonlinear Impacts of Air Pollution




Notes: The y-axis in the top panel indicates the percentage change in the number of transactions for a 10 µg/m3
increase in PM2.5 at a specific level of pollution concentration and on a given day. On the t-axis, 0 refers to current
pollution, 50 refers to pollution 50 days ago, etc. The y-axis in the bottom panel indicates the percentage change in the
number of transactions for a permanent 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 . The x-axis denotes different levels of pollution.
Results are from the IV estimation.



                                                          44
                           Figure 9: Impacts of Air Pollution Across Income Levels




Notes: The y-axis in (a) indicates the percentage change in the number of transactions for a 10 µg/m3 increase in
PM2.5 on a given day. The t-axis (from 0 to 90) refers to current pollution, pollution in the previous day, pollution
t days before, etc. The y-axis in (b) indicates the percentage change in the number of transactions for a persisting
10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 during the last three months. The x-axis denotes different levels of disposable income.
Results are from the IV estimation.



                                                         45
                                           Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                           Mean      Std. Dev.       Min.           Max.            N
 Pollution
  PM2.5 Concentration, µg/m3                               56.33         46.37           0        985.18     198,246

 Number of Transactions, Daily
  Healthcare Industry, Total                             7,229.2      21,308.6           0      330,974      211,318
   All Hospitals                                         4,122.7      14,503.9           0      237,525      210,539
    People’s Hospitals                                   1,060.6       2,800.4           0       40,332      203,407
    Children’s Hospitals                                   464.7       1,290.5           0       18,227      158,637
   Pharmacies                                            2,245.3       7,063.3           0       96,336      210,001
  Comparison Groups, from 1% card sample
   Daily Necessities                                       233.3         628.6           0        10,865 211,318
   Supermarkets                                            393.4         990.3           0        15,224 210,493

 Total Value of Transactions, Daily, thousand yuan
  Healthcare Industry, Total                 6,701.8                  17,818.9           0 301,108.7         211,318
   All Hospitals                             5,556.5                  15,066.8           0 275,883.0         210,539
    People’s Hospitals                       1,588.1                   3,401.2           0 56,856.9          203,407
    Children’s Hospitals                       363.9                     843.3           0 10,324.3          158,637
   Pharmacies                                  407.4                   1,109.5           0 16,735.1          210,001
  Comparison Groups, from 1% card sample
    Daily Necessities                          236.9                     551.3           0      9,532.4      211,318
    Supermarkets                               232.8                     643.4           0     14,404.7      210,493

 Weather
  Mean Temperature, ◦ F                                    60.11         18.92 -27.50              101.6 211,317
  Precipitation, inch                                       0.13          0.42      0               15.6 211,318
  Mean Wind Speed, mph                                      5.50          3.11      0               48.7 211,296
  Wind Direction, navigational bearing                         -             -      0               360 211,263

Notes: Data sources include China’s Ministry of Environmental Protection, Integrated Surface Database (ISD), and
Global Surface Summary of the Day (GSOD) Database. Data for comparison groups are calculated from a subsample
that uses a randomly selected 1% of bank cards. Transactions larger than 200,000 yuan ($29,000) are excluded from
the total value of transactions. The arithmetic mean and standard deviation of wind directions do not have statistical
meaning and are left out in the table.




                                                         46
                                  Table 2: OLS Estimates of the Pollution Impact on Health Spending: Contemporaneous Effects

                                                                  Health-Related Consumption                                  Comparison Groups
                                                Health      All Hospital      Pharmacy       People’s Children’s           Necessities     Supermarket
                                                  (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)           (5)              (6)              (7)
                    PM2.5 , Current Day        0.11*** 0.11***                0.12***        0.13***       0.18***         -0.06***        -0.03
                                               (0.02)  (0.02)                 (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.05)          (0.02)          (0.02)
                    N                          192,586      191,814           191,277        185,773       146,224         192,035         191,766

     Notes: The dependent variable is log(number of transactions). The controls are city FEs, weekly FEs, city-specific time trends, city-specific seasonality, day-of-week
     FEs, dummies for holidays and working weekends, and weather controls (temperature, precipitation, wind speed). Each column reports the percentage change in
     the number of transactions per 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 concentration. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the city level. Significance levels are
     indicated by *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and * p < 0.10.
47




                                   Table 3: IV Estimates of the Pollution Impact on Health Spending: Contemporaneous Effects

                                                                  Health-Related Consumption                                  Comparison Groups
                                                Health      All Hospital      Pharmacy       People’s Children’s           Necessities     Supermarket
                                                  (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)           (5)              (6)              (7)
                    PM2.5 , Current Day        0.65*** 0.73***                0.60***        0.77***       1.13***         -0.09           -0.10
                                               (0.09)  (0.11)                 (0.15)         (0.13)        (0.37)          (0.15)          (0.12)
                    N                          192,586 191,814                191,277        185,773       146,224         192,035         191,766
                    First-stage F              61.93   61.77                  61.78          59.47         52.32           61.92           61.97

     Notes: The dependent variable is log(number of transactions). The IVs are various interactions of (both current and lagged) wind patterns, weather conditions and
     PM2.5 in cities more than 150 km away, which capture non-local PM2.5 . Same controls as in Table 2. Each column reports the percentage change in the number of
     transactions per 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 concentration. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the city level. Significance levels are indicated by ***
     p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and * p < 0.10. Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistics are reported in the last row and are cluster-robust at the city level.
                                                       Table 4: Cumulative Effect of Pollution, OLS with 90 Lags

                                                                Health-Related Consumption                                   Comparison Groups
                                               Health      All Hospital      Pharmacy       People’s Children’s          Necessities     Supermarket
                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)              (7)
                    Current Day        0.03***             0.04***           0.05***        0.04***      0.06***         -0.03***        -0.02**
                                       (0.01)              (0.01)            (0.01)         (0.01)       (0.02)          (0.01)          (0.01)
                    Current + Past 3d  0.12***             0.11***           0.18***        0.13***      0.19**          -0.11***        -0.07**
                                       (0.03)              (0.03)            (0.04)         (0.04)       (0.08)          (0.03)          (0.03)
                    Current + Past 7d  0.19***             0.16***           0.32***        0.21***      0.25*           -0.16***        -0.11***
                                       (0.05)              (0.06)            (0.07)         (0.06)       (0.15)          (0.05)          (0.04)
                    Current + Past 14d 0.25***             0.16              0.49***        0.30***      0.20            -0.16**         -0.13**
48




                                       (0.08)              (0.10)            (0.10)         (0.08)       (0.28)          (0.07)          (0.06)
                    Current + Past 28d 0.38***             0.18              0.80***        0.39***      0.12            -0.15           -0.09
                                       (0.13)              (0.15)            (0.16)         (0.14)       (0.50)          (0.12)          (0.11)
                    Current + Past 56d 0.66***             0.27              1.42***        0.47**       0.57            -0.27           0.03
                                       (0.19)              (0.20)            (0.29)         (0.24)       (0.74)          (0.21)          (0.18)
                    Current + All Lags 0.86***             0.34              1.81***        0.59*        0.38            -0.08           0.02
                                       (0.27)              (0.28)            (0.42)         (0.36)       (1.14)          (0.27)          (0.21)
                    N                         141,794      141,657           141,567        137,853      110,259         141,770         141,652

     Notes: The dependent variable is log(number of transactions). The effect of current and past air pollution is estimated using the Flexible Distributed-Lag Model
     with 90 lags and 3 evenly-split segments. Same controls as in Table 2. Each row reports the cumulative percentage change in the dependent variable in response to
     a 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 for the corresponding period. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the city level. Significance levels are indicated by ***
     p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and * p < 0.10.
                                                        Table 5: Cumulative Effect of Pollution, IV with 90 Lags

                                                                 Health-Related Consumption                                    Comparison Groups
                                                Health      All Hospital      Pharmacy        People’s Children’s          Necessities      Supermarket
                                                  (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)               (7)
                     Current Day        0.12***             0.12***           0.07*           0.14***      0.19***         -0.14***         -0.06***
                                        (0.02)              (0.03)            (0.04)          (0.04)       (0.07)          (0.03)           (0.02)
                     Current + Past 3d  0.40***             0.40***           0.23*           0.47***      0.65***         -0.45***         -0.21***
                                        (0.07)              (0.08)            (0.12)          (0.13)       (0.23)          (0.09)           (0.07)
                     Current + Past 7d  0.61***             0.62***           0.39**          0.75***      1.04***         -0.64***         -0.34***
                                        (0.10)              (0.12)            (0.18)          (0.19)       (0.36)          (0.13)           (0.10)
                     Current + Past 14d 0.74***             0.75***           0.57***         0.97***      1.40***         -0.63***         -0.45***
                                        (0.14)              (0.16)            (0.21)          (0.22)       (0.50)          (0.16)           (0.12)
49




                     Current + Past 28d 0.91***             0.90***           0.99***         1.24***      2.12***         -0.44*           -0.41**
                                        (0.22)              (0.25)            (0.30)          (0.27)       (0.79)          (0.23)           (0.21)
                     Current + Past 56d 1.97***             1.71***           2.31***         2.01***      4.65***         -0.85**          -0.23
                                        (0.42)              (0.47)            (0.54)          (0.46)       (1.56)          (0.41)           (0.36)
                     Current + All Lags 2.65***             2.18***           2.80***         2.13***      6.37***         -0.55            -0.57
                                        (0.68)              (0.71)            (0.89)          (0.75)       (2.33)          (0.58)           (0.47)
                     N                         141,794 141,657                141,567         137,853      110,259         141,770          141,652
                     First-stage F             38.35   38.36                  38.37           39.69        47.79           38.29            38.29

     Notes: The dependent variable is log(number of transactions). The effect of current and past air pollution is estimated using the Flexible Distributed-Lag Model with
     90 lags and 3 evenly-split segments. The IVs are various interactions of (both current and lagged) wind patterns, weather conditions and PM2.5 in cities more than
     150 km away, which capture non-local PM2.5 . Same controls as in Table 2. Each row reports the cumulative percentage change in the dependent variable in response
     to a 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 for the corresponding period. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the city level. Significance levels are indicated by ***
     p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and * p < 0.10. Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistics are reported in the last row and are cluster-robust at the city level.
           Table 6: IV Cumulative Effects of Pollution: Different Number of Lags and Segments

                                                                 Lag k
                   Segments z 30 days            60 days       90 days      120 days      150 days
                          1         1.18***      2.12***       2.42***      2.60***       2.58*
                                    (0.25)       (0.51)        (0.69)       (0.98)        (1.48)
                          2         1.41***      2.26***       2.67***      2.80***       2.62*
                                    (0.25)       (0.52)        (0.69)       (0.95)        (1.43)
                          3         1.28***      2.16***       2.65***      2.74***       2.41*
                                    (0.25)       (0.49)        (0.68)       (0.93)        (1.40)

Notes: The dependent variable is log(number of transactions). Each row indicates the number of segments for the
cubic B-splines. Each column reports the cumulative percentage change in the dependent variable in response to a 10
µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 , over different numbers of days. Same IVs and controls as in Table 5. Standard errors are in
parentheses, clustered at the city level. Significance levels are indicated by *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and * p < 0.10.



                   Table 7: IV Cumulative Effects of Pollution: Different Buffer Zone Radii

                                                            Radius for the Buffer Zone
                                      50 km         100 km       150 km       200 km       250 km       300 km
      First Stage Regression
      N                               192,586 192,586 192,586 192,586 192,586 192,586
      R2                              0.502   0.486   0.474   0.467   0.464   0.462
      First-stage F                   34.48   46.69   38.35   34.14   35.36   35.33
      IV Regression
      Total Long-Term Effect          2.56*** 2.42*** 2.65*** 2.86*** 2.86*** 2.88***
                                      (0.78)  (0.60)  (0.68)  (0.71)  (0.72)  (0.70)

Notes: The dependent variable is log(number of transactions). Each column uses a different buffer zone radius in
constructing the instruments and reports the cumulative percentage change in the dependent variable in response to a
permanent 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 . Same controls as in Table 5. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at
the city level. Significance levels are indicated by *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and * p < 0.10. Kleibergen-Paap Wald
rk F-statistics are reported in the last row and are cluster-robust at the city level.




                                                          50
                                        Table 8: IV Cumulative Effects of Pollution: Controlling for O3 , SO2 , NO2 and CO

                                                                 Health-Related Consumption                                  Comparison Groups
                                               Health      All Hospital      Pharmacy       People’s Children’s          Necessities      Supermarket
                                                  (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)               (7)
                    Current Day        0.09***             0.09***           0.05           0.12***       0.16**         -0.16***         -0.05**
                                       (0.02)              (0.03)            (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.08)         (0.03)           (0.02)
                    Current + Past 3d  0.32***             0.31***           0.16           0.40***       0.56**         -0.51***         -0.18***
                                       (0.07)              (0.08)            (0.12)         (0.13)        (0.24)         (0.09)           (0.07)
                    Current + Past 7d  0.50***             0.49***           0.29           0.65***       0.91**         -0.73***         -0.31***
                                       (0.11)              (0.12)            (0.18)         (0.19)        (0.37)         (0.14)           (0.10)
                    Current + Past 14d 0.64***             0.63***           0.48**         0.89***       1.27**         -0.71***         -0.44***
                                       (0.14)              (0.16)            (0.22)         (0.23)        (0.50)         (0.16)           (0.13)
                    Current + Past 28d 0.84***             0.82***           0.93***        1.19***       2.01**         -0.49**          -0.44**
                                       (0.22)              (0.25)            (0.31)         (0.27)        (0.79)         (0.23)           (0.20)
51




                    Current + Past 56d 1.87***             1.60***           2.24***        1.91***       4.51***        -0.88**          -0.30
                                       (0.43)              (0.47)            (0.55)         (0.46)        (1.55)         (0.41)           (0.36)
                    Current + All Lags 2.55***             2.07***           2.73***        2.01***       6.21***        -0.55            -0.69
                                       (0.69)              (0.72)            (0.91)         (0.76)        (2.34)         (0.58)           (0.46)
                    N                         141,779 141,642                141,552        137,838       110,244        141,755          141,637
                    First-stage F             39.76   39.85                  39.75          41.61         50.98          39.71            39.71

     Notes: The dependent variable is log(number of transactions). Same IVs as in Table 5. In addition to controls in Table 5, daily average concentration levels of O3 ,
     SO2 , NO2 and CO are included. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the city level. Significance levels are indicated by *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and *
     p < 0.10. Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistics are reported in the last row and are cluster-robust at the city level.
                                          Table 9: IV Cumulative Effects of Pollution: Controlling for Economic Spillovers

                                                                 Health-Related Consumption                                   Comparison Groups
                                                Health      All Hospital      Pharmacy       People’s Children’s          Necessities      Supermarket
                                                  (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)               (7)
                     Current Day        0.11***             0.10***           0.05           0.13***      0.19***         -0.15***         -0.05***
                                        (0.02)              (0.03)            (0.04)         (0.04)       (0.07)          (0.03)           (0.02)
                     Current + Past 3d  0.35***             0.34***           0.17           0.44***      0.64***         -0.46***         -0.19***
                                        (0.07)              (0.08)            (0.12)         (0.13)       (0.23)          (0.09)           (0.07)
                     Current + Past 7d  0.55***             0.54***           0.31*          0.71***      1.03***         -0.66***         -0.32***
                                        (0.11)              (0.13)            (0.18)         (0.19)       (0.37)          (0.14)           (0.10)
                     Current + Past 14d 0.70***             0.68***           0.50**         0.95***      1.39***         -0.65***         -0.43***
52




                                        (0.14)              (0.17)            (0.21)         (0.23)       (0.51)          (0.16)           (0.13)
                     Current + Past 28d 0.89***             0.87***           0.96***        1.23***      2.13***         -0.46**          -0.41*
                                        (0.22)              (0.25)            (0.30)         (0.27)       (0.80)          (0.23)           (0.21)
                     Current + Past 56d 1.94***             1.66***           2.27***        1.99***      4.66***         -0.86**          -0.22
                                        (0.42)              (0.47)            (0.54)         (0.46)       (1.57)          (0.41)           (0.36)
                     Current + All Lags 2.62***             2.15***           2.76***        2.12***      6.37***         -0.56            -0.56
                                        (0.68)              (0.72)            (0.89)         (0.76)       (2.34)          (0.59)           (0.47)
                     N                         138,390 138,254                138,164        134,544      107,345         138,366          138,250
                     First-stage F             37.53   37.49                  37.54          38.91        45.28           37.49            37.48

     Notes: The dependent variable is log(number of transactions). Same IVs as in Table 5. In addition to controls in Table 5, we include the average pollution level
     in cities outside of the buffer zone but within the same region to control for regional economic spillovers. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the city
     level. Significance levels are indicated by *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and * p < 0.10. Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistics are reported in the last row and are
     cluster-robust at the city level.
                              Table 10: Cumulative Effects of Pollution: IV constructed using source cities’ time-invariant pollution

                                                                 Health-Related Consumption                                       Control Groups
                                                 Health     All Hospital      Pharmacy        People’s Children’s          Necessities      Supermarket
                     Current Day        0.11***                0.18***           0.01         0.21***        0.27**         -0.22***          -0.10***
                                         (0.03)                 (0.03)          (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.12)           (0.05)            (0.03)
                     Current + Past 3d  0.37***                0.55***           0.07         0.68***       0.83**          -0.70***          -0.35***
                                         (0.09)                 (0.11)          (0.15)         (0.18)        (0.37)           (0.14)            (0.11)
                     Current + Past 7d  0.54***                0.77***           0.19         0.99***       1.13**          -1.04***          -0.54***
                                         (0.14)                 (0.16)          (0.22)         (0.27)        (0.54)           (0.21)            (0.16)
                     Current + Past 14d 0.62***                0.77***          0.50*         1.07***         1.01          -1.13***          -0.64***
                                         (0.18)                 (0.20)          (0.28)         (0.34)        (0.69)           (0.26)            (0.20)
                     Current + Past 28d 0.83***                0.84***          1.25**        1.19***         0.86           -0.90**           -0.57*
                                         (0.29)                 (0.29)          (0.51)         (0.40)        (0.96)           (0.36)            (0.31)
                     Current + Past 56d 2.34***                2.20***         3.25***        2.49***       3.19***         -1.65***            -0.44
53




                                         (0.40)                 (0.38)          (0.76)         (0.55)        (1.21)           (0.49)            (0.44)
                     Current + All Lags 2.69***                2.17***         3.83***         2.16**         2.41          -1.74***            -0.56
                                         (0.64)                 (0.58)          (1.22)         (0.90)        (1.99)           (0.67)            (0.57)
                     N                         141794          141657           141567        137853         110259          141770            141652
                     First-stage F              26.96           27.02            26.95         26.88          29.34           26.79             26.93

     Notes: The dependent variable is log(number of transactions). The effect of current and past air pollution is estimated using Flexible Distributed-Lag Model with
     90 lags. The IVs are various functions (both current and lagged) of wind patterns, weather conditions, and the average (time-invariant) level of PM2.5 in cities more
     than 150 km away. Same controls as in Table 2. Each row reports the cumulative percentage change in the dependent variable in response to a 10 µg/m3 increase
     in PM2.5 for the corresponding period. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the city level. Significance levels are indicated by *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05,
     and * p < 0.10. Cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistics are reported in the last row and are cluster-robust at the city level.
                                                   Table 11: IV Cumulative Effects of Pollution: Drop Major Cities

                                                                Health-Related Consumption                                     Control Groups
                                                Health     All Hospital      Pharmacy       People’s Children’s          Necessities     Supermarket
                    Current Day        0.12***                0.12***           0.06        0.14***         0.18**        -0.15***          -0.06***
                                        (0.02)                 (0.03)          (0.04)        (0.04)         (0.08)          (0.03)            (0.02)
                    Current + Past 3d  0.39***                0.39***          0.22*        0.46***         0.60**        -0.46***          -0.22***
                                        (0.07)                 (0.08)          (0.13)        (0.13)         (0.24)          (0.09)            (0.07)
                    Current + Past 7d  0.59***                0.60***          0.37**       0.74***         0.93**        -0.65***          -0.35***
                                        (0.11)                 (0.12)          (0.19)        (0.19)         (0.37)          (0.14)            (0.10)
                    Current + Past 14d 0.70***                0.70***          0.56**       0.98***        1.20***        -0.62***          -0.45***
                                        (0.12)                 (0.14)          (0.22)        (0.23)         (0.46)          (0.16)            (0.13)
                    Current + Past 28d 0.80***                0.77***         0.99***       1.28***        1.79***          -0.41*           -0.40*
                                        (0.17)                 (0.18)          (0.31)        (0.27)         (0.65)          (0.23)            (0.21)
                    Current + Past 56d 1.72***                1.42***         2.27***       2.09***        4.05***         -0.82**            -0.20
54




                                        (0.33)                 (0.32)          (0.56)        (0.46)         (1.26)          (0.42)            (0.37)
                    Current + All Lags 2.25***                1.75***         2.75***       2.21***        5.50***           -0.48            -0.51
                                        (0.55)                 (0.51)          (0.92)        (0.76)         (2.03)          (0.60)            (0.48)
                    N                          136067         135930          135840        132126         104532          136043           135925
                    First-stage F               37.00          37.03           37.06         38.16          47.25           36.98            36.93

     Notes: The dependent variable is log(number of transactions). The effect of current and past air pollution is estimated using Flexible Distributed-Lag Model
     with 90 lags. Same IVs and controls as in Table 5. The following large cities are dropped from the analysis: Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Wuhan,
     Chongqing, Chengdu, and Nanjing. Each row reports the cumulative percentage change in the dependent variable in response to a 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5
     for the corresponding period. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the city level. Significance levels are indicated by *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and *
     p < 0.10. Cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistics are reported in the last row and are cluster-robust at the city level.
                                                  Table 12: IV Cumulative Effects of Pollution: Avoidance Behavior

                                                                 Health-Related Consumption                                  Comparison Groups
                                               Health      All Hospital      Pharmacy       People’s Children’s          Necessities      Supermarket
                                                  (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)               (7)
                    1{P+1 > P0 }              0.41*** -0.15                  0.95***        -0.11         0.29           0.36**           0.95***
                                              (0.11)  (0.13)                 (0.19)         (0.20)        (0.32)         (0.15)           (0.14)
                    Current Day        0.13***             0.13***           0.07*          0.15***       0.20***        -0.14***         -0.05***
                                       (0.02)              (0.03)            (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.07)         (0.03)           (0.02)
                    Current + Past 3d  0.41***             0.41***           0.25**         0.49***       0.68***        -0.44***         -0.18***
                                       (0.07)              (0.08)            (0.12)         (0.13)        (0.24)         (0.09)           (0.07)
                    Current + Past 7d  0.63***             0.63***           0.42**         0.78***       1.09***        -0.63***         -0.31***
                                       (0.11)              (0.12)            (0.18)         (0.19)        (0.37)         (0.13)           (0.10)
55




                    Current + Past 14d 0.77***             0.77***           0.60***        1.01***       1.48***        -0.63***         -0.43***
                                       (0.14)              (0.16)            (0.22)         (0.23)        (0.51)         (0.16)           (0.13)
                    Current + Past 28d 0.95***             0.94***           1.03***        1.29***       2.25***        -0.45*           -0.41*
                                       (0.22)              (0.25)            (0.31)         (0.27)        (0.80)         (0.23)           (0.21)
                    Current + Past 56d 2.02***             1.77***           2.34***        2.07***       4.82***        -0.88**          -0.24
                                       (0.43)              (0.47)            (0.54)         (0.46)        (1.59)         (0.42)           (0.37)
                    Current + All Lags 2.71***             2.27***           2.83***        2.22***       6.57***        -0.60            -0.60
                                       (0.69)              (0.72)            (0.90)         (0.75)        (2.38)         (0.59)           (0.48)
                    N                         141,272 141,136                141,046        137,347       109,862        141,248          141,132
                    First-stage F             37.76   37.79                  37.77          38.88         45.27          37.72            37.70

     Notes: The dependent variable is log(number of transactions). Same IVs as in Table 5. Besides controls used in Table 5, a flag of whether pollution level the next
     day is worse than current day is included to control for avoidance behavior. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the city level. Significance levels are
     indicated by *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and * p < 0.10. Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistics are reported in the last row and are cluster-robust at the city level.
                                   Table 13: Summary of the Dose-Response Relationship from Literature

     Source                        Dose, additional                     Response
     Mu and Zhang (2016)           100-point AQI                        54.5% increase in mask purchases,
                                                                        70.6% increase in anti-PM2.5 mask purchases
     Williams and Phaneuf (2016)   1 std. dev. of PM2.5 (3.78 µg/m3 )   8.3% more spending on asthma and COPD
     Schlenker and Walker (2015)   1 std. dev. of pollution             17% more asthma and other respiratory incidences,
                                                                        9% more heart incidences
     Arceo et al. (2015)           1 µg/m3 PM10                         0.23 per 100,000 increase in infant mortality
                                   1 ppb CO                             0.0046 per 100,000 increase in infant mortality
     He et al. (2016)              10 µg/m3 PM10 (roughly 10%)          8.36% increase in all-cause mortality rate
                                                                        285,000 more premature deaths each year
     Chay and Greenstone (2003)    1% TSP                               0.35% increase in infant mortality rate nationwide
     Chay and Greenstone (2005)    1 µg/m3 TSP                          WTP: $450 - $1,050 in housing price
56




     Bayer et al. (2009)           1   µg/m3   PM10                     WTP: $149 - $185 in housing price
     Ito and Zhang (2016)          1 µg/m3 PM10                         WTP: $1.1 per household per year
     Our estimation
      IV                           10 µg/m3 PM2.5                       2.6% increase in hospital visits and pharmacy purchases,
                                                                        1.5% increase in total health expenditure
                                                                        WTP: $11.3 per household per year from morbidity reduction
Appendices
A       Derivation of Marginal Willingness-to-Pay for Clean Air
In this section, we show how to derive the expressions for the marginal willingness to pay for
pollution reductions described in Section 3. Recall that individual i’s maximization problem can be
written as:

                                   max U[hi , ci , oi , e(a, mi + ci )],
                                 {mi ,ci ,oi }

                                       s.t. y(hi ) ≡ y0 + w(hi ) = π + pmi + ci + oi ,
                                      and hi = h0 + mi − gi (e(a, mi + ci )),

    The Lagrangian can be written as:

                       Li = U[hi , ci , oi , e(a, mi + ci )] + λi [y(hi ) − π − pmi − ci − oi ],

    The first-order conditions are:
                     ∂ Li∗
                             = Uh (1 − g0i (ei )em ) +Ue em + λi (yh (1 − g0i (ei )em ) − p) = 0,
                     ∂ mi
                     ∂ Li∗
                             = −Uh g0i (ei )ec +Uc +Ue ec − λi (yh g0i (ei )ec + 1) = 0,
                     ∂ ci
                     ∂ Li∗
                             = Uo − λi = 0,
                     ∂ oi
                     ∂ Li∗
                             = y(h∗i ) − π − pm∗i − c∗i − o∗i = 0.
                     ∂ λi
where Uh ,Uc ,Uo are the derivatives of the utility function with respect to each component of the
utility function, and yh = ∂∂ hyii is the marginal effect of health stock on income.
    How does an increase in air pollution a affect the consumer’s health and non-healthcare spend-
ing decisions? Because air pollution a affects a consumer’s wage income, a effectively governs the
relative prices of non-healthcare consumption ci and health consumption mi with respect to online
spending o. The intuition is that when air pollution is high, the effective price of consuming one
unit of c is not just the amount spent on the good, but also the additional income lost from the
increased exposure to air pollution.43 An increase in a therefore corresponds to an increase in the
relative price of ci and a decrease in the relative price of mi . The "price" effect causes ci to decrease
43 Tosee this more formally, notice that the consumer’s net income left over after purchasing ci is equal to y(hi ) − ci .
  Differentiating that with respect to ci , we see that a 1-unit increase in consumption reduces the consumer’s net income
  available for spending on other goods by yh g0i (e)ec + 1, which is therefore the effective price of consumption with
  respect to online spending. Since ec is increasing in a, it follows that the price of consumption is increasing in a.


                                                            1
and mi to increase.
    There is also an income effect: the reduction in income causes both ci and mi to decrease. Fi-
nally, a directly lowers the consumer’s utility by increasing exposure ei and decreasing the health
stock hi . Assuming that consumption and health are complements, the marginal utility of consump-
tion is non-decreasing in hi and non-increasing in ei . Thus a decrease in hi and an increase in ei
caused by an increase in a lead to a further decrease in ci . Taking into account of all these effects,
an increase in air pollution unambiguously causes ci to decrease.
    The effect of an increase in a on mi is theoretically ambiguous, because the income and price
effects work in opposite directions, and because the consumer is trading off improvements in health
stock hi (which increases utility) against increased exposure to pollution ei (which lowers utility).
As long as income effects are not too large and the effect of medical spending on health stock hi
dominates the increased exposure ei from going out to visit the doctor, mi should be increasing in
a.
    We now derive the marginal willingness to pay for pollution reduction. Denote Vi (a, h0 , y0 ) as
the indirect utility function and Li∗ (a, h0 , y0 ) as the optimal value of the Lagrangian. The marginal
WTP for reduction in air pollution can be obtained as:
                                                   ∂Vi          ∂ Li∗
                                                   ∂a
                                       MW T Pi = − ∂V       = − ∂∂La∗
                                                      i             i
                                                   ∂ y0         ∂ y0

   By the Envelope Theorem,

                        ∂ Li∗
                              = −Uh g0i (ei )ea +Ue ea − λi yh g0i (ei )ea − λi π 0 (a)
                        ∂a
                              = Ue ea − g0i (ei )ea (Uh + λi yh ) − λi π 0 (a)                      (1)
                        ∂ Li∗
                              = λi
                        ∂ y0
   Taking the total derivatives of both the health stock hi and exposure ei with respect to a, we
obtain the following equations:

                           dh∗i   ∂ m∗i                              ∂ m∗ ∂ c∗
                                =       − g0i (ei )ea − g0i (ei )ec ( i + i )                       (2)
                           da      ∂a                                 ∂a  ∂a
                           dei∗            ∂m   ∗     ∂c∗
                                = ea + ec ( i + i )                                                 (3)
                           da               ∂a        ∂a
   Rearranging terms, we obtain the following relations:

                                 λi p = Ue ecc + (Uh + λi yh )(1 − g0i (ei )ec )                    (4)
                            Uc −Uo = −Ue ec + (Uh + λi yh )g0i (ei )ec                              (5)


                                                      2
        Plugging these equations into equation (1), we obtain44 :

 ∂ Li∗        de∗i        ∂ m∗ ∂ c∗          dh∗i ∂ m∗i                    ∂ m∗ ∂ c∗ 
                    − ec ( i + i ) +                         + g0i (ei )ec ( i + i ) Uh + λi yh − λi π 0 (a)
                                                                                               
       = Ue                                         −
 ∂a            da          ∂a   ∂a             da     ∂a                     ∂a   ∂a
            de  ∗              dh ∗     ∂ mi ∗
       = Ue i + (Uh + λi yh ) i −                 −Ue ec + (Uh + λi yh )(1 − g0i (ei )ec ) +
                                                                                         
             da                da         ∂a
         ∂ c∗i 
                 −Ue ec + (Uh + λi yh )g0i (ei )ec − λi π 0 (a)
                                                  
          ∂a
                 ∂ m∗ dh∗                         de∗                   ∂ c∗
       = −λi p i + i Uh + λi yh +Ue i + (Uc −Uo ) i − λi π 0 (a)
                                        
                  ∂a      da                      da                    ∂a
        The marginal WTP for individual i is then equal to:
                        ∂ Li∗
            MW T Pi = − ∂∂La∗
                            i
                        ∂ y0
                      Ue ea − g0i (a)(Uh + λi yh ) − λi π 0 (a)
                    =−
                                         λi
                      ∂m ∗   dπ             dh∗     Uh dh∗       Ue de∗ Uc −Uo ∂ c∗i
                    =p i +         + yh (− i ) + (− i ) + (− ) i +            (−     )
                       ∂a     da            da       λi       da λi da     λi    ∂a

    We assume that premiums cannot adjust in response to pollution: dπ
                                                                    da = 0. This seems reasonable
in the context of China, where the insurance reimbursement rates for the 3 major public insurance
programs are fixed by the government and don’t depend on individuals’ pollution exposure. The
MWTP for individual i can be simplified as:

                             ∂ m∗i        dh∗   Uh dh∗      Ue de∗ Uc −Uo ∂ c∗i
               MW T Pi = p         + yh (− i ) + (− i ) + (− ) i +       (−     )
                              ∂a          da    λi da       λi da     λi    ∂a




44 In
    the first line, we plug in (2) and (3). In the second line, we re-arrange and collect terms. To get to the third line,
  we plug in (4) and (5).


                                                            3
B     B-Spline Construction
Let βi denote the impact of pollution exposure i days in the past on today’s spending. We assume
that βi can be approximated by a set of basis functions B j in i:

                                              βi = ∑ γ j B j (i)
                                                         j

    Section 4.1 discusses the case where the basis function B j (i) is a polynomial function of i up to
the 3rd order: βi = γ0 + γ1 i + γ2 i2 + γ3 i3 . We now describe how to extend this to the more general
case where B j (i) is an r-th order B-spline in i with z segments.
    To do so we introduce some new notation. Let the support of i be [0, s]. We divide the support
into z sub-intervals by a vector of z+1 knots t = [t0 ,t1 · · · ,tz ], where t0 = 0 and tz = s. The r-th order
B-spline, which is equivalent to a piecewise polynomial of order r − 1 (enforcing Cr−2 continuity),
can be constructed from a set of basis functions:
                                               r                         −1
                  B j,r (i|t) = (t j+r − t j ) ∑    ∏ (t j+h − t j+k ) (i − t j+k )r−1   +
                                          k=0 0≤h≤r,h6=k

where

                                            + = 1(i > t j+k ) · (i − t j+k )
                                (i − t j+k )r−1                             r−1


    Since there are z subintervals and the order of the spline is r, there will be z + r − 1 such B-
splines. We can now define βi as a linear combination of these B-splines, where γ j are unknown
parameters to be estimated:
                                             z−1
                                      βi =    ∑      γ j B j,r (i|t j , ...,t j+r )
                                             j=1−r

    To implement this, the econometrician has to determine both the order of the spline, r − 1, and
the number of segments, z. In our benchmark estimates, we set z = 3 and r = 4. By choosing
r = 4, we approximate βi with a linear combination of cubic B-splines. The cubic B-spline is
equivalent to a piecewise cubic polynomial with smoothness constraints at each knot up to the 2nd
order derivative, which makes the spline twice continuously differentiable.




                                                             4
C      Additional Results




                                Table C1: Coverage of UnionPay Cards in 2015

                                                          Log(No. of cards per capita)
                                                               (1)               (2)
                          log(household income)           1.556***       1.362***
                                                          (0.093)        (0.126)
                          Years of education              0.156***       0.327***
                                                          (0.041)        (0.055)
                          Average age                     -0.040***      0.005
                                                          (0.012)        (0.014)
                          Constant                        -13.00***      -13.82***
                                                          (0.662)        (0.983)
                          Province fixed effects          No             Yes
                          No. of obs.                     287            287
                          R2                              0.682          0.831

Notes: The unit of observation is a city. The dependent variable is the log of number of active bank cards per capita in
2015 as shown in Figure 3. The city-level demographics (income, education, and age) are from the 2005 Census.




                                                           5
                                        Table C2: IV Estimates of Pollution Impacts on Value of Transactions with 90 Lags

                                                                Health-Related Consumption                                    Comparison Groups
                                               Health      All Hospital      Pharmacy        People’s Children’s          Necessities      Supermarket
                                                 (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)               (7)
                    Current Day        0.07***             0.07**            0.01            0.10**       0.01            -0.12**          -0.04
                                       (0.02)              (0.03)            (0.05)          (0.05)       (0.09)          (0.05)           (0.05)
                    Current + Past 3d  0.23***             0.25***           0.04            0.34**       0.05            -0.38**          -0.16
                                       (0.08)              (0.08)            (0.15)          (0.15)       (0.30)          (0.17)           (0.17)
                    Current + Past 7d  0.36***             0.38***           0.04            0.54**       0.13            -0.55**          -0.36
                                       (0.11)              (0.13)            (0.21)          (0.23)       (0.45)          (0.24)           (0.25)
                    Current + Past 14d 0.42***             0.46***           0.03            0.69**       0.33            -0.56**          -0.68**
                                       (0.15)              (0.17)            (0.24)          (0.27)       (0.59)          (0.27)           (0.31)
                    Current + Past 28d 0.43*               0.44              0.29            0.79***      1.09            -0.34            -0.99**
                                       (0.25)              (0.29)            (0.34)          (0.30)       (0.88)          (0.34)           (0.43)
6




                    Current + Past 56d 1.04**              0.83              1.64***         1.15**       4.07**          -0.32            -0.95
                                       (0.47)              (0.54)            (0.61)          (0.47)       (1.72)          (0.58)           (0.75)
                    Current + All Lags 1.47**              1.08              1.96**          1.20         6.12**          0.54             -0.66
                                       (0.70)              (0.78)            (0.96)          (0.83)       (2.61)          (0.87)           (1.04)
                    N                         141,794 141,656                141,566         137,854      110,257         141,757          141,641
                    First-stage F             38.35   38.38                  38.37           39.68        47.79           38.26            38.30

    Notes: The dependent variable is log(value of transactions). Same IVs and controls as in Table 5. Each row reports the cumulative percentage change in the dependent
    variable in response to a 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 for the corresponding period. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the city level. Significance levels
    are indicated by *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and * p < 0.10. Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistics are reported in the last row and are cluster-robust at the city level.
                                                                Table C3: Mortality Cost Calculation

     Age group          Urban population        Rural Population       Urban mortality rate       Rural mortality rate        VSL                     Mortality impact
                                                                          (per 100,000)             (per 100,000)      in million (2015$)              in percentage
     20-24                  73,195,616             58,048,857                   4.31                      3.81                      0.2106                    10
     25-29                  59,414,692             44,637,171                   5.47                      5.54                      0.2106                    11
     30-34                  57,695,497             42,364,156                   8.07                      7.07                      0.2106                    14
     35-39                  66,981,015             54,594,597                   13.71                     12.48                     0.2106                    10
     40-44                  65,704,887             62,801,076                   26.02                     23.90                     0.1895                    12
     45-49                  55,242,460             53,527,870                   42.25                     46.27                     0.1684                    13
     50-54                  40,364,926             40,756,761                   65.87                     71.27                     0.1474                    13
     55-59                  38,563,476             45,194,486                  105.52                    125.79                     0.1263                    12
     60-64                  26,819,982             33,611,729                  209.62                    255.81                     0.1053                    12
     65-69                  18,448,986             23,900,786                  402.25                    459.16                     0.0842                    11
     70-74                  15,221,689             18,742,359                  880.11                   1092.46                     0.0632                     9
     75-79                  10,848,240             13,721,250                 1744.92                    1998.33                    0.0421                     7
7




     80-84                  5,936,146              7,839,253                  3632.06                   4316.95                     0.0316                     5
     85 and above           3,370,721              4,474,484                  9685.26                   13128.58                    0.0211                     3

    Notes: The population data are for 2015. The mortality rates per 100,000 are only for cardiorespiratory diseases and are from the 2015 National Health Statistics.
    The VSL is calculated using the transfer elasticity of 1.2 based on the VSL of 2.27 million (in 2015$) estimated for the U.S. population from Ashenfelter and
    Greenstone (2004). The estimated VSL for the Chinese population is $0.2106 million for a prime age person. The age adjustment for VSL is based on Murphy and
    Topel (2006). The mortality calculation follows closely with Deschenes et al. (2017). The mortality impact (in percentage) is the estimated impact of a 10 µg/m3
    increase in PM10 on cardiorespiratory mortality during life cycle from Table S6 in Ebenstein et al. (2017).
