                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE POLITICS OF AMBIGUITY




                                 Alberto Alesina

                                  Alex Cukierman




                              Working Paper No. 2468




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 1987




We would like to thank participants of the workshop in Political Economy at
Carnegie-Mellon University and the University of Rochester for many useful comments.
The r?search reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Support from the Lynde
and Harry Bradley Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2468
                                                  December 1987




                          The Politics of Ambiguity




                                   ABSTRACT



      Politicians have generally two motives: they wish to hold office as long
as possible and wish to implement their preferred policies. Thus they face a
trade-off between the policies which maximize their choices of reelection and
their most preferred policies (or the policies most preferred by the
constituency which they represent). This paper analyzes this trade-off in a
dynamic electoral model in which the voters are not fully informed about the
preferences of the incumbent. First, we show that in general there is
incomplete policy convergence: the incumbent follows a policy which is
intermediate between the other party ideal policy and his own ideal policy.
Second, we show that under some circumstances, the incumbent has an incentive
to choose procedures which make it more difficult for voters to pinpoint his
preferences with absolute precision. Thus, politicians may prefer to be
ambiguous and "hide", at least up to a certain extent, their true
preferences. This result holds for a wide range of parameter values and, in
some range, even if voters are risk averse.




Alberto Alesina                                       Alex Cukierman
Graduate School of Industrial Administration          Department of Economics

Carnegie Mellon University                            Tel-Aviv University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                  Tel-Aviv, Israel
and
National Bureau of Economic Research
Cambridge, MA 02138
1. Introduction


     Politicians are generally motivated by two desires: they want to hold
office as long as possible and have preferences over policy issues. On one
hand they are selfish, in the sense that they care about their appointment
 per se , on the other hand they represent the interest of their own
constituencies and, generally, different constituencies have different
preferences over policy issues. Thus, politicians face a trade off between
the policies which maximize their chances of reelection and the policies which
are most preferred by the constituency supporting their party.
     Most of the literature based upon the contribution of Downs (1957)
emphasizes only the first motive. In this case when politicians are only
"office motivated", one should observe complete policy convergence in a two—
party system.' Instead, if one considers the interplay of the two motives,
complete policy convergence may not be the electoral equilibrium. (Wittman
(1977), (1983), Calvert (1985), Bernhard—Ingberman (1985)).
     This paper analyzes the trade-off between the preferences of the party
(or candidate) and its popularity in a two periods model in which voters are
not fully informed about the preferences of the incumbent. Voters observe the
consequences of the policy actions taken by the party in office but not the
actual actions. Since policy outcomes and policy actions are positively,
albeit imperfectly, correlated policy outcomes convey some information to
voters about the incumbent's preferences. This asymmetry of information
between voters and the policymaker allows him to strategically influence
future electoral outcomes, even if voters are generally aware of his motives.
    Our analysis builds upon work by Alesina (1987a, b) and Cukierniari—Meltzer
(1986b). Alesina (1987a) emphasizes the difference between announcements and
actual policies in a finitely repeated electoral game with rational and
informed voters. If voters are perfectly informed about the objectives of the
two—parties, they will not believe any pre electoral policy announcements
other than those which reflect the "true" preferences of the parties. Thus,
the parties are locked into their "ideological position" (i.e. their most
preferred policy). In this case, the unique time-consistent equilibrium
implies no policy convergence: the two parties follow their most preferred
policies even if they attribute an extremely low (but positive) weight to
their "ideology" relatively to their "love for office". In an infinitely
repeated game even ideological parties can achieve some degree of policy
convergence by virtue of reputational mechanisms. (Alesina (1987b) presents
an application of this model of political competition to macroeconomic

policy).
     In this paper we consider a more realistic situation in which the voters
are not perfectly informed about the preferences of politicians. We present a
two-period model. In the first period the party in office can choose between
its own most preferred policy or how much to converge towards the other
party's bliss point to increase its chances of reappointment. At the end of
the period there are elections and in the second period the elected party
follows its own most preferred policies, since there is no future.
     Two sets of results are shown. First we characterize the equilibrium
policy in the first period as a function of several parameters. We show that
the party in office in the first period never follows its most preferred
policy: it moves away from this ideological position towards the other
party's ideal policy, in order to increase its chances of reappointment.     In

general there is incomplete convergence: the party in office in the first
period, follows a policy which is intermediate between the other party's ideal
policy and its own ideal policy. The distance between the incumbent bliss
point and the policy which is followed in the first period is positively
correlated with the weight attributed to the utility of being reappointed
relatively to the weight attributed to the "ideology"; to the discount factor
of the party in office (subject to some restrictions) and to the degree of
"persistence" of the party's preferences, defined as the correlation of future
preferences of the incumbent with current preferences.2
     Second, we consider the choice of the level of "ambiguity" as
endogenous. "Ambiguity" is defined as the "noise" between the policy outcome
observed by voters and the policy instrument chosen by the policymaker. We
show that, under a wide variety of circumstances, the incumbent has an
incentive to choose procedures which make it more difficult for voters to
pinpoint the party's preferences with absolute precision. In such cases the
incumbent chooses procedures which imply some ambiguity, even if ambiguity
could be completely eliminated. The reason is simple: some ambiguity enables
the policymaker to exploit the trade-off. between "ideology" and likelihood of
reappointment. By contrast with no ambiguity, the policymaker is "locked" at
his ideological position, because voters "see through" his intentions. As a



                                       2
 result, if the policymaker can choose the degree of ambiguity, he may not
 choose zero ambiguity. For some parameter values, this result holds even if
 voters are risk averse. This leads to an interesting comparison with the
 results of Shepsle (1972) and McKelvey (1980).
        The basic model is presented in Section 2. The optimization problem of
the incumbent is solved in Section 3. Section 4 characterizes the equilibrium
as a function of several variables. Section 5 considers the endogenous
determination of the level of ambiguity. The last section summarizes the main
results of the paper and suggests several extensions.


'..
)     TL.. UJ..1
      II,c ,Iuuc,

        Consider    a two—party system and denote the parties "x" and "y". The two
parties are both "politically motivated" and "office motivated." They are
"politically motivated" because they represent the interest of different
constituencies, and the two parties adopt the objectives of those
constituencies as their own. The parties are also "office motivated": they
benefit from being in office, regardless of the policy implemented. The cases
in which the incumbent is only "office motivated" or only "politically
motivated" emerge as particular cases of the general model.

        When the two parties are only "politically motivated" their objective
functions are given by equation (1) and (2) respectively.

                            1
            U(z)      -
                          - t=o
                            z qt(z_c)2   for party x;                         (1)


where       0<q1;
                            1
            V(z) =    —
                                 qt2 for party y.                             (2)
                           t=0

We will sometime refer to (1) and (2) as to the "ideology" of the two
parties. The policy issue is represented by z; the discount factor, q, is
identical for the two parties. The quadratic specification is adopted for
simplicity. The two parties have different bliss points: the bliss point of
party y is assumed constant over time and it is normalized to zero, with no
loss of generality. The bliss point of party x, instead, is allowed to change
over time to capture changes in preferences. The stochastic behavior of this
bliss point is given by:
                                            3
                                                                                    (3)



where: >O; nt=t—i÷et;O<Pl.                                                          (4)



The random variable          is distributed uniformly between   and b and has
therefore zero mean. Also be is such that the realization of Ct for any t is
bounded to be positive. In other words, the bliss point of party x is bounded
to be always to the right of party's y bliss point.3 This assumption is made
for both simplicity and realism. The "persistence" in tastes (i.e. a positive
p) is crucial in the solution of the model because it implies that the current
p01 icy of party x contains information about the future objectives of this
party. Note that the case in which a taste shock occurs only in the first

period, (i.e. 2 =      0),   can be handled as a special case of this model.

     In addition to (1) and (2), the two parties may also attribute a positive
utility to being in office, per Se, irrespectively of the policies followed.
We denote by h the utility of being in office per Se. Also, let         be the

weight given to the ideology and (1—a) the weight given to the utility of
being in office (i.e. h).
    When a party is in office it chooses a policy instrument to affect the
policy outcome z. The policy instrument and the policy objective are linked
by the following linear stochastic relations.


         zt =   xt   + ut      if party x is in office                              (5)


         zt =   t    ÷ Ut     if party y is in office                               (6)


         Ut -   (°°)                                                                (7)



where "x" and "y" are the choices of policy instruments of the two parties
when in office and Ut IS distributed independently of Ct. There is imperfect
control of the policy outcome. For instance, in the case of economic policy,
the economic relationship between instrument and target is generally
stochastic, because the economy is subject to unexpected shocks. Since the
relation between instrument and target is identical, irrespectively of which
party is in office, we are implicitly assuming the same degree of 'competence"
for the two parties.4 In the first part of the paper we assume that            is



                                             4
given exogenously. In Section 5 we consider the case in which            can be
chosen by the party in office.
         Elections are held at the end of period "zero" so that a "period" is
defined by a term in office. There is a large number of voters with different
single—peaked preferences on z.      In particular, each voter has a different
bliss point and votes for the party which is expected to follow the policy
closest to his bliss point. Voters are assumed rational and forward—looking;
thus, they form rational expectations about the policies which the two parties
would follow if elected. These expectations are:


            4   = E(xt/It_1)   and y =   E"(yt/It)                                (8)


where E"(÷) represents the expectation operator based upon the information set
of voters. Thus 4 and y are the rational expectations of the policy that
party x and y would follow if elected at time t, formed on the basis of the
information available to voters at the end of period (t-1) i.e.,              The
information set of voters,           includes: the functional form of the
objective functions of the two parties, including q, , h, and the bliss point
of party y (zero);       current and past values of z (i.e., from (t-1)
backward); and the distribution of the random variables u, e, and n,. Thus,
the source of asymmetric information in the model is that party x can observe
directly past and current values of ,       while   the public cannot.
     The "true" distribution of voters' bliss points is unknown. In
particular, the position of the bliss point of the median voter is not known
with certainty. This uncertainty about the distribution of voters' tastes is
captured by the following function:


            Pt =   t(4' y)                                                        (9)


Pt is the probability of electing party x at time t as a function of the
expectations of voters. Since we consider only one election, the time
subscript can be dropped from the function P(.) with no possibility of
confusion. The following restrictions are imposed on this function:


    1)       P(.) is "common knowledge".




                                           5
  ii)      0       P(4, y)   1;    4,   y      R



  iii)     P(4, y) is continuous and differentiable everywhere, except
          possibly along the diagonal (i.e. for 4      = y).

   iv) jEP<O ifandonlyif4>Y
           Xt        X.

               e          e>° ifandonlyif4>Y.

Assumption iv) underscores the idea that if one party converges toward the
other it increases its chances of election because it captures
(probabilistically) "middle voters." This assumption implies that there is a
prohibitive barrier to the entry of a third party, for any policies followed

by the two existing parties.
     Additional reasons which create the uncertainty about electoral outcomes
may have to do with costs of voting and abstentions.        If there is uncertainty

about the costs of voting as perceived by different voters there is
uncertainty about the number of abstentions and thus about electoral
outcomes. From this source of uncertainty Ledyard (1984) derives a function
similar to (10).
     A particular form of the function (9) is derived from the underlying
preferences of voters in the next section.


3. The Parties' Optimization Problem


     In period zero, party x faces the following problem:


   Max EGE —
               .(x0+u0—E—n0)2+q{P(x, y)[- (x1+u1—c1)21



     +
         (1-P(x,    y))[- (y1÷u1-c1)21 +    P(x,   y)(1-cz)h}1
                                                                                (10)




   h>O; Oc            1




                                           6
 In (10) EG is the mathematical expectation operator conditional on the
 information set available to the party in office. The parameter a represents
the weight attributed to the "ideology" versus the benefit of reappointment
per se, h. Note that if a = 0 we are in the case of a purely Downsian party
that maximizes popularity; a =                 1   implies a purely "ideological" party. The
model can thus account for the two extremes and all the intermediate cases.
     In order to obtain a time consistent solution we solve this problem by
backward induction. Suppose that party y is elected for period 1. After the
elections this party solves the following problem (assuming a strictly
positive):


             Max -        EG (y1 +                                                        (11)
                                       u1)2
            yl
The solution of (11) is:



           y1=0                                                                           (12)


If party x is elected in period 1, the problem that this party solves in
period 1 is:


            Max -                 +        -                                              (13)
                          EG(x1       u1       c1)2
            xl
The solution of (13) is:


                 =                                                                        (14)
                     c1


By rationality of expectations, the following holds:


           y=0                                                                            (15)



           x = E"(x1/I0)          =
                                      E"(c1/10)                                           (16)



     Thus, in the last period of the game, there is no policy convergence.
Since the two parties have no future, when in office they follow their most
preferred policies.5 Using (12), (14), (15), and (16), we can rewrite (10) as
follows:



                                                       7
                                                                                 +
                   Max EG[_ '.(x0÷u0—E--n0)2 +          q[P(x,O)   [—
                                                                        .(u)2]
                   xo

                        +
                            (1P(4,O))          [-             + P(x,O)(1-)hJ]                    (17)



       The first order condition of this problem implies, after rearrangements:



                   x0= C0 + qP e
                                                          +        .                             (18)
                                              0
                                      xl



Equation (18) is rather instructive. c0 is the "myopic ideological
position": it is the policy which a completely myopic party would follow.
Equation (18) shows that as long as the future is not completely discounted
(q>O), the probability distribution of electoral outcomes is non degenerate

 (P       *   0)     and today's policy affects voters expectations of future policy
      x
 (- * 0),               the myopic ideological position is not chosen by party x.



Instead,       if       3X   =   0,        i.e. there is no influence of the current policy on

voters' expectations about future policy, the "myopic ideological position" is
chosen regardless of the value of all the other parameters. In this
particular case, each party follows its own current most preferred policy
since future electoral outcomes cannot be affected by today's policy as in
Alesina (1987a). However, in general x0 is different than the myopic one
period solution. In particular, if the effect of the current policy choice on
voters' expectations is positive (ax/3x0>0), x0 is smaller than the myopic
one period solution. The intuition is straightforward. By choosing more
"moderate" policies than those it prefers the most, the right wing party
appears to voters as being less extreme than it really is, increasing its
chances of reelection in the next period. Essentially, the party currently in
office sacrifices some of its ideology in order to obtain the benefits of
better reelection prospects in the future. This is by far the most likely
                                                        a x
case. In fact, suppose that the opposite held, namely T <          This would
                                                         xO
imply that by being very extreme in the first period, party x can convince the



                                                          8
voters that it is going to be moderate in the future and thus increase its
likelihood of reappointment. This is a quite unlikely case both theoretically
and empirically.
     In order to obtain an explicit solution for the first order condition
(18) we postulate a specific functional form for P(x, 0).         It is shown in
part 1 of the appendix that if:


   (i)      voters have single peaked symmetric preferences;
  (ii)      voters are risk neutral;

 (iii)      the probability distribution of the position of the ideal point of
            the decisive median voter is uniform between the points a < 0 and b >
            0;
then the function P(x, 0) can be written as:



                                                  K
                                        e           u e
                              K —kx
                                  u     1
                                                  —x
                                                  k
                                                      >0
                                                      1
                                                              K
                                        e              e
                 e
                     0) =
                              K +kx
                                  z     1
                                                  0>x1 ——k
                                                                                (19)
             P(x1,
                              1/2                 xe=O
                              0                   elsewhere


where 0 <   K,   K9. <   1,   k > 0 and are known functions of a and b (see part 1
of the Appendix). Needless to say, (19) satisfies the assumptions on the
function P($, y) given after equation (9) and can be represented as in
Figure 1.




                                      Figure 1 about here




                                              9
        FIgure       1


                     e
                 P (x ,O)
                     1




        (1/2)




                                Xe
                                 1
1
    k           0.          k
        Thus, the uncertainty about the distribution of voters' preferences, and
in particular about the position of the median voter's bliss point, generates
the uncertainty about electoral outcomes. This uncertainty disappears if and
only if the expected policy of party x is so extreme that for no realization

of voters' preferences party x would be elected. This is the case if
      K              K
  e
 x1 >        (or    4   <
                             -< ).        Also, note the discontinuity at 4 = 0.    At this

point the expected policy of the two parties are identical, and thus

 P =
       -.   The discontinuity arises from the fact that when party x crosses
zero it becomes the left wing party, captures the left wing electorate and
loses the right wing voters. However, we have restricted the realization of
party x preferences to be on the right side of zero; namely, we imposed
x1 >   0.   Since voters know this information, it follows, by rationality, that
      >0    for any x0. Thus the relevant part of equation (19) and of Figure 1,
 4
is that on the right side of zero, namely for 4                        > o.6
       We now turn to expectation formation. Voters behave rationally and
compute the optimal predictor of 4, based on their observation at time
zero. We restrict our attention to linear predictors, thus we consider the
following predictor:


            4 = E(x1z0)        =     f   + dz0                                         (20)



where f and d are constants which are determined by the requirement that $ is
a minimum variance unbiased estimate of x1 given the observation which the
public has on the actual policy outcome of period zero, namely z0. It is
shown in part 2 of the appendix that the constants d and f are given by:



                                            pb2
                                              e
            d=          222 2                         22          22            2      (21)
                   (qkp be) d + (1-.qkpca)             be+ qkp be E +          3s
                        15

            f =                            +                +   --- hid2               (22)
                   (1—d)E÷qk[(3ë2                (1+p2)b)                  .




Since d is the solution to a third degree polynomial and since f depends on d
there is, in general, a multiplicity of solutions for f and d. But under a


                                                      10
weak sufficient condition which is derived in part 2 of the appendix there is
a unique real pair of solutions for d and f. Since the focus of the paper is
not on the issue of multiplicity of equilibria we assume that this condition
(equation (A15) of the appendix) is satisfied.


4. The Equilibrium


     By substituting (19) and (20) into (18), the policy chosen in equilibrium
by the incumbent party can be rewritten as;


          x0 =                        +   h]qkd                            (23)
                    C0 - [- EG(c1)2

Equation (23), (22) and (21), have the following intuitively plausible
implications:
1) Since d is positive, it follows (from (23)) that x0 < ÷ n0. This
verifies that party x follows a policy that is more moderate than its bliss
point in order to increase its chances of reelection. Two cases are possible:


                                                                          (24a)


         x0     0                                                         (24b)


Case (24a) is, in some sense, the most natural: it implies partial convergence
from the bliss point of party x to zero (the bliss point of party y). Party x
would trade off some ideology° in the first period to increase the
probability of reelection. However, case (24b) cannot be ruled out. Even
though it is common knowledge that the bliss point of party x is always
positive, the optimal policy in the first period may involve a negative x0.
By choosing a negative x0, party x attempts to convince voters that x1 (and
c1) will be very low next period. Thus, for instance, a "left wing"
government may be even more conservative than its opponent to influence the
electorate!
2) An increase in h unambiguously reduces x0, since (from (23)):


                =   -     qdk   .                                          (25)



                                           11
 A higher h implies that party x is relatively more concerned with being
 elected per Se, rather than with its "ideology." Thus, the party has an
 incentive to move away from its bliss point, trading off "ideology" for
 chances of reelection. However, note that voters will take account of this
 effect in computing 4        if    they know that h has increased. Using (22) and (25)
 one obtains:


             dx1              ax0
               —=---+d----=0.                                                     (26)


Equation (26) shows an interesting result. Rational voters are not "fooled"
by a party that becomes more eager to be reelected. If the voters know h, they
takeaccount of its effect on the party's behavior and vote accordingly. Thus
party x trades—off some of its "ideology" in the first period but it does not
increase its reelection, prospects since 4                is   unaffected.7
3) When p tends to zero the weight given by the public to the policy outcome
in the first period also goes to zero. That is, d tends to zero as well.
Intuitively, when there is very low persistence in the incumbent's ideological
position voters put a low weight on their observation of z0 since this
observation contains little information about the ideology of the incumbent in
the future. As a result the incumbent has almost no incentive to deviate from
his current ideological position as can be seen from (23).
4) The effects of changes in the discount factor (q), the variance of the
noise (as) and the variance in the innovation in party x's preferences (be) on
x0 is ambiguous in general. Consider for instance a change in the discount
factor:



               0 =   -     EG(c) +         h]k Ed + q--]                          (27)




which implies that


            sign (0) =       - sign    (d + q                                     (28)




                                                12
Two effects determine the sign of               On one hand party x has an incentive

to converge more in period zero if q increases because it cares more about the
                                                          --- h]k   in (27)).
future. (This is captured by the term -d[ EG(c)+

However, party x also accounts for the indirect effects of q on voters'

expectations, namely through d.      (This effect is captured by the term

               --- h]q       in
 —k[- EG(c)+             -        (27)). Due to the non linearity of d, it is

impossible to sign this expression unambiguously in general. However, for

sufficiently low q, the second term in (28) becomes small relatively to the

first. Thus for q low -- < 0,           namely an increase in q implies that party

x moves away from its "myopic ideological position" in period zero.         This is

the more intuitive and likely case; however we could not establish that
 3x0/aq is negative for all values of the parameters.
     Analogous considerations hold for the effects of changes in k and           on

x0. The direct effect of an increase in k is to move x0 away from party X
bliss point. In fact if k increases, the trade off between "ideology and
popularity" changes in such a way that it becomes more convenient to sacrifice
"ideology" today in exchange for an increase in chances of reelection. The
indirect and generally ambiguous effect, works through the effect of a change
in k on the parameter d of the optimal voter's forecast.


5. The Optimal Degree of Ambiguity


     We now turn to the endogenous determination of the degree of ambiguity.
Suppose that at the beginning of the game, before it learns the realization of
its "taste shock" (so) in period zero, party x can choose between alternative
policy procedures which imply different levels of precision in the
implementation of policy. In other words, at the beginning of its term in
office, before it observes , the incumbent party can set the value of              at

any non-negative level that it sees fit. In choosing ,          party   x obviously

takes account of the fact that voters' expectations depend on
     If party x chooses    = 0, it removes the asymmetry in information. In

this case the optimal policy for party x is to follow its first period ideal
policy, i.e. x0=c0. In fact, party x cannot affect voters' expectations since



                                           13
 it has no superior information. On the other hand, if a positive J                       is
 chosen, party x can take advantage of the trade off between "ideology and
 likelihood of reelection.
       In order to determine whether a positive value of                    may be chosen in
equilibrium, we focus on the maximum utility of party x when a=O and its
maximum utility at a given positive cy. Those two indirect objective
functions are denoted by 3na (where "nafl stands for "non ambiguous') and by a
 (where "a" stands for ambiguous) respectively. Using (23), (3) and (4) in
 (10) and rearranging9


           na = q{[K_k[E-i-c0J(c          + 2            h)— c}                                (29)




              =   - (x0-c0)2     +
                                     qf[K_k[f+d      x0÷du0J(c + 2 ---h) -       c}   +        (30)

                  -
                      [u   +
                               2u0 (x0-c0)J


A comparison of (29) and (30) provides the basic intuition of our argument.
The first and third terms in (30) represent the "costs of ambiguity". The
first term captures the fact that in the ambiguous case party x does not
choose its bliss point in period zero, i.e.
                                            x0   c0. The third term in (30)
represents the costs of imperfect control of the policy outcome in period
zero. The second term represents the potential advantage of ambiguity due to
the better reelection prospects it may provide. This advantage is given by
the difference between the second term in (30) and na With some ambiguity
the probability of reelection is given by Ku —               k[f   +
                                                                       dx0 + du0]; with no
ambiguity this probability is given by [K —                k[+p€0J].       If the former
probability is sufficiently larger than the latter, some ambiguity is
preferred to no ambiguity.
      We now show that this is the case for a non empty set of parameter
values. It is shown in Part 3 of the appendix that the difference in the
expected utility of party x with and without ambiguity (before it observes o)
is:

                      -2             b2
E(Ja_Jna) = qkd2 f—+(1+p2) --           + --h}       F




                                                14
     (qkpb d)2    2       1        (pb )2 2      2             2                             2
 +
        6
                      +       +         ]b} + qkEb {p+d[1_qkpd1} —                      (l+q)a     (31)



                              —2                          b2
                                                               + (qk-1)   -- h}
                2f(qk-1) — + (qk
                                        -
where       F                               2(1+p2))                              -qk




Using (31) the following result can be shown:


Proposition 1: There exists a non empty set of parameter values for which
party x chooses a positive degree of ambiguity (i.e. a >                      0).

Proof: It is enough to show that there exists a set of parameter values for
which E(JaJna)>O. The following parameter values, among many others, are in
this set.


                                    b=1;

                                   p= .4;            .0766


      These parameter values also imply a unique real solution for d, since
they satisfy condition (A15) in the appendix. This solution is d=0.4.
                                                                                                 Q.E.D.
        It is also fairly apparent from equations (30) and (31) which parameters
values make ambiguity more or less attractive. For example, a low level of q
is likely to imply that the optimal level of ambiguity is very small or even
zero. In fact if q = 0 it follows that E(Ja_Jna) < 0 for any positive value
of cr. In this case party x does not care at all about the future benefits of
ambiguity, but it suffers today because of imprecise control of the policy
instrument. In addition, under mild sufficient conditions1° the higher is h
the greater are the gains from ambiguity. Again, the intuition is clear: the
more the party cares about winning the elections per se the more it is willing
to bear the costs of ambiguity in exchange for an increase in its likelihood
of reappointment. Equation (31) and this discussion suggest that there is a
large set of parameters for which it pays the incumbent to choose imprecise

policy procedures.


                                                     15
      If the configuration of parameters is such that some ambiguity
 sufficiently increases the reelection prospects of the incumbent he may choose
 imprecise control procedures even if the median voter is risk averse. In
order to demonstrate that such a case is possible we consider the case in
which the expected utility of the median voter from the expected policy of
party x is given by:


          u' =    - [Ix - i       I
                                      +    VI.                                           (32)


     i is the ideal point of the median voter and (as before) is a stochastic
variable with a uniform distribution between a<O and b>O. V is the variance
of the policy of party x as perceived by the voter and is equal to the
variance of z1, given z0; thus it is positively correlated with a.                Note that
the case =O implies risk neutrality which is the case considered so far.                   If
s > 0 the voter is risk averse.

     Let 1c be the critical value of the ideal point of the median voter which
makes both parties equally likely to be elected and assume for simplicity and
no loss of generality that 4              > i.   It is shown in part 4 of the appendix
that in this case the first line of (19) which defines P(x,0) has to be
replaced by:


         P(4, 0) =       K   —
                                 k(4 + V).                                               (33)


Note that for =0 equation (33) reduces to the first line of (19).
Proposition 1 and equation (33) lead to the following result:


Proposition 2: There exists a non empty set of parameter values for which
the median voter is risk averse, >0, and for which party x chooses a positive
level of ambiguity, i.e. c>O.


Proof: The proof is based on a continuity argument. Consider the case =O in
which the policymaker chooses a positive a.              Proposition   1 establishes the
existence of such a possibility. This implies that the probability of
reelection with      >   0 is in such a case, sufficiently larger than the same
probability for =0 to compensate party x for the 'costs of ambiguity". By
continuity, this is also true for a sufficiently small value of .



                                                 16
                                                                          Q.E.D.
     The intuition of this result is straightforward. If voters are risk
averse, the benefit of ambiguity are reduced, but not eliminated, provided the
degree of risk aversion is not too high. Thus, we have provided an example in
which a rational incumbent facing risk averse voters chooses to increase the
degree of ambiguity above the minimum possible.11
     Shepsle (1972) shows that a rational incumbent would never choose to be
ambiguous if voters are risk averse. His result is due to the assumption that
candidates care only about being reappointed, and have no preferences over
policy issues. In the context of our model this implies that, party x
maximizes the probability of reappointment. In this case there is no trade
off between "ideology" and "likelihood of reelection" and there are no
benefits from ambiguity. This can be easily seen by imposing ct=0 in (10):
thus party x' problem reduces to


          Max P(x,O) .                                                       (34)
          xO
If party x faces problem (34) and voters are risk averse, the optimal degree
of ambiguity is in fact zero.
     Finally, we note that our model can easily account for a different
specification of "ambiguity". Thus far, we have modeled "ambiguity" as the
variance of the relationship between policy instrument and policy target.
Alternatively, one can define ambiguity as the variance of the information
provided by the policymaker to voters regarding the realization of his
ideological position. By increasing this type of ambiguity the policymaker
increases voters' uncertainty without reducing the accuracy of the policy
instrument in achieving the target. It can be shown that in this case the
policymaker has an even stronger incentive to introduce ambiguity in the
system. In fact, one of the costs of ambiguity (i.e. the reduction. in the
accuracy of the policy instrument) is avoided, while all the benefits of
ambiguity survive.'2


6. Conclusions


     This paper analyzes the choice of an incumbent who faces rational but
imperfectly informed voters. The incumbent has "ideological' preferences but



                                      17
is also "office motivated" because he attributes utility to being in office
per Se. Even though voters are fully aware of the policyniakers' motivations,
they are imperfectly informed about the preferences of the incumbent. Thus,
the incumbent can trade off "ideology" today to increase his likelihood of
being reappointed. Namely, he chooses a policy today which is more moderate
than his own "true" preferences in order to influence voters' beliefs and
behavior. This mechanism implies some degree of policy convergence which
would not be achievable had voters been fully informed.
     We show that if the incumbent can pick the level of "ambiguity", he does
not always choose to eliminate it completely. In fact by choosing to be
somewhat ambiguous the incumbent can improve his trade—off between ideology
and likelihood of reappointment. For some parameter values this result holds
even when voters are risk averse.
     These results have been established in a particular model with many
simplifying assumptions. These assumptions were necessary to obtain closed
form and analytically tractable solutions. We believe, however, that the main
qualitative results of this paper, are robust to many possible alterations of
the basic structure. In particular the tendency towards political moderation
when in office, and the result that it may pay the policymaker to choose
imprecise policy procedures are likely to obtain with more general objective
functions and a longer time horizon.

     Before closing it may be instructive to compare the reason for a
preference for imprecise control procedures here and in Cukierman and Meltzer
(1986b). They show that it may pay central bankers to make the procedures
governing the money supply process not as precise as technically feasible.
The reason is that some ambiguity about their objectives enables central banks
to utilize the macroeconomic short run inflation unemployment trade off to
create temporary gains in employment in periods in which they care a lot about
employment relatively to price stability and absorb the increases in
unemployment in periods in which they are mostly concerned about price
stability. In the present paper ambiguity enables the policyniaker to pick the
most beneficial (from his point of view) trade off between serving the
interests of his constituency while in office and maintaining his chances of
reelection in the face of voters with diverse preferences.




                                       18
                                      Footnotes


1.   The most famous result of policy convergence in a two party system is
     the "median voter theorem". (Downs (1957), Black (1958)). For
     discussions of convergence results not at the median see Ledyard (1984),
     Coughlin—Nitzan (1981), Hinich (1977). For earlier work on spatial
     competition see McKelvey (1975), Hinich, Ledyard, Ordeshook (1972)
     (1973) and the references quoted there in. The present paper focuses on
     the result of convergence rather than on the "median voter theorem" per
     Se.

2.   Lott—Reed (1987) consider an insightful model of electoral competition
     with finite horizon and asymmetric information. However, unlike in the
     present paper, they assume that all the voters have the same preferences
     and that the politicians have an incentive to deviate from this
     "consensus". In addition they consider a "reasonable" mechanism of
     voters' expectation formation which is not necessarily "rational" in the
     usual sense. By contrast this paper embodies rational expectations. In
     addition, Lott-Reed (1987) consider the amount of information available
     to voters as being exogenous, whereas this information is determined
     endogenously in the present paper.
3.   Assuming with no loss of generality that c_1 =       ,a     sufficient condition

     for c1 to be positive is     >
                                      b(1-4-p).
4.   More generally, one party may have better control of the policy
     instrument than the other party. Cukierman (1985), Cukierman and
     Meltzer (1986a), Rogoff-Sibert (1986) and Rogoff (1987) present models
     in which policymakers differ in their degree of competence.
5.   This result may capture the effects of "finite political lives" of
     individual candidates, for example an American President in his second
     term of office. Alesina—Spear (1987) investigates the relationship
     between individual candidates with finite lives and the party as an

     infinitely lived organization.
6.   Note that in Figure 1 we have that:          urn P(x,O) >   - and
                                                  x-*O
      lim P(4,O) <          We could have the opposite situation with no change
                     -k..
      x-+O
     of the results. Which of the two cases apply is a function of the
     distribution of voters' preferences, as shown in part 1 of the Appendix.
7.   This result may rationalize why politicians always deny that they are
                                         19
      eager to be elected for selfish reasons. If they could convince the
      voter that their h is lower than it actually is, they might be able to
      influence more their expectations, without having to trade off much
      ideology in the current term of office.
8.    If party x could choose       after the realization of the shock, in
      doing so it would reveal information to the voters. In this
      specification of the model, this would eliminate any asymmetry of
      information. However, in a more general setting in which additional
      sources of asymmetric information existed, the choice of        after the
      realization of     would not completely reveal everthing about party x.
      na and      are the indirect objective functions after multiplication by
      2/cz.   We also use the simplifying and innocuous assumption c_1=.
10.   (31) implies that if F>0 an increase in h increases the value of the
      difference E(Ja_Jna).
11.   Needless to say, if voters are risk lovers (<0) the benefits of
      ambiguity are higher relative to the case of risk neutrality.
12.   It can be shown (see part 3 of the appendix) that in this case the
      difference E(Ja_Jna) is identical to equation (31) except for the term
      (—(1÷q)o) which now does not appear.




                                      20
                                  References


Alesina, Alberto (1987a) "Macroeconomic Policy in a Two—Party System as a
      Repeated Game" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102, 651—78 (August).

__________ (1987b)   "Credibility and Policy Convergence in a Two—Party System

      with Rational Voters," unpublished, (revised August).

__________ and Stephen Spear (1987) "An Overlapping Generations Model of
      Political Competition" NBER working paper no. 2354.
Bernhardt, Daniel and Daniel Ingberman (1985) "Candidate Reputation and
      Incumbency Effect," Journal of Public Economics, 27, 47-67, (June).
Black, 0. (1958) "Theory of Committees and Elections," Cambridge University
      Press, New York.
Calvert, Randall (1985) "Robustness of the Multidimensional Voting Model;
      Candidates' Motivations, Uncertainty and Convergence," American Journal
      of Political Science, 1056-1070, (February).
Coughlin, Peter and Shmuel Nitzan (1981) "Directional and Local Equilibria
      with Probabilistic Voting," Journal of Economic Theory, 24, 226-239.
Cukierman, Alex (1985): "Asymmetric Information and the Electoral Momentum of
      Public Opinion Polls" Unpublished Manuscript, Tel-Aviv University.
Cukierman, Alex and Allan Meltzer (1986a) "A Positive Theory of Discretionary
      Policy the Cost of a Democratic Government and the Benefits of a
      Constitution" Economic Inquiry, 26, 367-88 (July)
Cukierman, Alex and Allan Meltzer (1986b) "A Theory of Ambiguity, Credibility
      and Inflation Under Discretion and Asymmetric Information,"
      Econometrica, 51, 1099-1128 (September).
Downs, Anthony (1957) An Economic Theory of Democracy, Harper and Row, New
      York.
Flinich, Melvin, (1977) "Equilibrium in Spatial Voting: The Median Voter
      Result is an Artifact", Journal of Economic Theory, 16, 208-219.

___________ John Ledyard and Peter Ordeshook, (1973) "A Theory of Electoral
      Equilibrium: A Spatial Analysis Based on the Theory of Games," Journal
      of Politics, 35, 134—193.
__________ __________ and __________ (1972) "Non—voting and the Existence of
      Equilibrium Under Majority Rule", Journal of Economic Theory, 14, 144—
      153.




                                      21
Ledyard, John (1984) "The Pure Theory of Large Two-Candidate Elections,"
      Public Choice, 473-490, (August).
Lott, John and Robert Reed (1987) "Shirking and Sorting in a Political Market
      with Finite Lived Politicians", unpublished.
McKelvey, Richard (1975) "Policy Related Voting and Electoral Equilibrium",
      Econometrica, 43, 815—863.
__________ (1980)   "Ambiguity in Spatial Models of Policy Formation" Public
      Choice, 35, 384-402.
Rogoff, Kenneth (1987) "Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles", unpublished,
      August.
__________ and Anne Sibert (1986) "Equilibrium Political Business Cycles"
      NBER working paper no. 1838, (March).
Shepsle, Kenneth (1972) "The Strategy of Ambiguity: Uncertainty and Electoral
      Competition," The American Political Science Review, 66, 555—568 (June).
Wittman, Donald (1977) "Candidates with Policy Preferences: A Dynamic Model",
     Journal of Economic Theory, 86—103, (January).
_________ (1983) "Candidate Motivation: A Synthesis of Alternatives,"
     American Political Science Review, 142—157, (March).




                                     22
                                                     Appendix


1. Derivation of the Probability Function, P(x,O), from Voter's Preferences


     We make the following assumptions:
1. All voters have single peaked symmetric preferences
2. All voters are risk neutral so that only the distance between the ideal
point of a voter and the expected position of the candidates matters for his
voting decision.
    Assumptions 1 and 2 imply that the median voter decides the outcome of the
elections.
3. The position of the ideal point of the median voter is stochastic and has
the following distribution:


       I -   U(a,b)       a <     0,       b > 0                                                (Al)



where i is the position of the median voter in the issue space and U stands
for the uniform distribution.
     By choosing x0 as in (23), the incubent determines x. If the median

voter has an ideal point greater than                            he votes for party x and party x is

reappointed, otherwise the challenger is elected. Thus, from (Al) it follows
that if 4 > 0 we obtain:



       P(4,0) =
                      b       -
                                  x/2            =        -
                                                               2(b-a)'   4   > 0.               (A2)




which is the first part of equation (19) with Ku = b/(b—a) and k =                       l/2(b—a).
     If 4    is   to the left of zero the probability that the incumbent is
reelected is equal to the probability mass of voters with ideal points to the
left of 4/2. Hence



                  =   4/2              =
                                             4        -            4<0                          (A3)
       P(4,0)             a                 2(b—a)




                                                          23
 which is the second part of equation (19) with K = —a/(b—a) and k =             1/2(b—a).
        If 4 = 0 the two candidates are equally likely to be elected so
 P(4,O) = 1/2.        Finally it is easy to check from (A2) and (A3) that for 4
 2a   or 4       2b (or 4 < Ku/k and 4 <         - K/k)   the probability or reelection of
 the incumbent is zero.

                                                                                       Q.E.D.


2. Derivation of the Optimal Predictor in Equations (20) through (22).


Let us define


         V       E[(x1 -   (f+dz0))1z0}2.                                                (A4)


The parameters f and d are chosen so as to minimize V. Since             c1 =    it
follows that:


             =               =     + 1.                                                  (A5)


        in conjunction with (3), (4), (A5) and the fact that t is uniform imply
that:



        EG(c1)2 =    E[(+p€0--1)2(e0J       =   2 + b/3 ÷     p2+2p0.                    (A6)


Using (5), (23), (A5) and (A6) in (A4), d and f are determined by the
following minimization problem


        Mm E[(E+pe +E -f-d[A÷B€                 +   u ])21z                             (A7)


where

        A -qk[ (32-f-b2)÷ -- hid                                                 (a)


        B    1—qkpEd                                                             (b) (A8)


        D qkp2d.                                                                 (c)




                                                 24
The first order necessary conditions for the minimum problem in (A7) (noting
that x1 =          +        + i)   are:
                                                             0                     (a)
         E[(—f+E+qs0+1—d[A+Be0—De+u0]) 1z0] =

                                                                                           (A9)
                                  b2 +                                              (b)
         E[{ps0+e1— [                        B50—O+u0]d}(A+Bc0—D+U0)1Z0]=O.



Since St      is   distributed uniformly with upper and lower bounds of b5 and
respectively it follows that:


         Ee = b2/2;           Ec = 0;          Ee = b4/5.                                 (AlO)


Equations (21) and (22) in the text are obtained by using (A8) and (AlO) in
(A9) and by rearranging.
       Since d appears on both the right hand and the left hand sides of
equation (21) this equation does not provide an explicit solution for d.
Rearranging (21) we obtain


        d3-4-a2d2÷a1d+a0=O                                                                (All)
where


                        2             b2(l-i-qk(pb )2) + 3a2
                   -                                         u; a0   -                    (A12)
         a2            qkpH' a1                   (qkpb)2H               (qk)2pH


         H
               --       (b)2 + 2                                                          (A13)


Since (All) is a cubic equation in d there are, in general, three solutions
for d and three corresponding solutions (through (22)) for f. Let



                                             a3
         r             (a1a2 - 3a0)      —                                         (a)

and                                                                                       (A14)


  NI    [3qk(pb)2 +           9/b2—l]          E÷ qk(pb)4.                          (b)



                                                        25
 If the following conditions holds



              2       /5p   (b         +    M 3
          r
                                      2      }    >0                           (A15)
                            9(qkpH)



two of the roots of (All) are complex and only one is real. Since we require
the optimal predictor in (20) to be real only the real solution for d (and the
corresponding real solution for f from (22)) is relevant. We assume that the
condition in (A15) is satisfied. A sufficient but not necessary condition for
(A15) is M >        0.


3. Derivation of the Expected Difference Between the Incumbent's Objective
          Function with Ambiguous and Unambiguous Implementation of Policy


        Subtracting (29) from (30) and simplifying we obtain:


  ana = - [(x0-c0)2÷u             +
                                          2(x0—c0)u0+q(u+2u1c1)

  + kdq(c÷2         --                                      -- h).
                         h)u0J+qk[+p€0.-f-dx0J(c+2                             (A16)


Taking the unconditional expected value of (A16) we obtain:


  E(Ja_Jna) =        — [E(x0_c0)2+(l+q)a]+qkE+pCQ_f_dx0](c+2 --- h).           (All)


Using (22) and (23) it follows that:


        C+pC0—f—dx0 =        (d2/2)(F+qk)+½qk(pd)2C_d(l_pqkdc)e0               (A18)


where

                            -2                         b2
         F        2[(qk—l) i— + (qk—2(l+p2))       - + (qk—l)        hl—qk.    (A19)




Using (3) and (4) and the assumption c_1 =                  it follows that:




                                                   26
                                                                                                                (A20)


Using (23) and the fact that c0 =                          +            one obtains:


                                         -2       b2                         2
            (x0-c0)2 =      (qkd)2[           +        +            h    +            + pc0].                   (A21)




Here use has been made of the fact that since                                        is uniform and symmetric
around zero its variance is b/3. Substituting (A18), (A20) and (A21) into
(All), rearranging, and noting that the third and fourth moments of                                       are zero

       b4
and -- respectively, we obtain:

                                                           b2
            E(Ja_Jna) = qkd2 f— +(l+p2)
                                        —2
                                                                +   --- h}F

                (qkpb d)2     2               (pb )2       2     2               2                        2
            +               fE +
                                   i.
                                        +              b}+ -             qkpEb fp÷d[l—qkpEd]}— (l+)o            (A22)


which is equation (31) in the text.
       In the case in which policy implementation is precise but the policymaker
does not precisely reveal the policies that he follows the terms u and u in
(A16) are identically zero. As a consequence the term —(l+q)a in (A22)
vanishes. Obviously the preference for ambiguity is stronger in this case
since E(Ja_Jna) in (A22) is more likely to be positive when   = 0 than when
   >   0.


4. The Case of Risk Averse Voters


       We show, with an example, that even in the case of risk averse voters,
the incumbent may choose a positive degree of ambiguity.
       Assume that the expected utility which the median voter (with ideal point
i) obtains if party x is reappointed is


        u = — [14        -   i     +     oVj.                                                                   (A23)




                                                               27
 In (A23) V is the variance of the policy action of party x in period 1,
conditional on the observation of z0. Clearly V = 0 if                      =   0 and V is
 increasing in              If s = 0 the median voter is risk neutral: this is the case
developed in Appendix 1 and used in the text. If                   >   0 (s < 0) the median
voter is risk averse (risk lover). Note that, since there is no uncertainty
about the position of the challenger, the expected utility for the median
voter, if this challenger is elected is —lii.               Thus the median voter votes for
the incumbent if


      Iii       - [14 - ii + V]      >   0.                                                  (A24)


Let    be a value of i such that



      lit:1
                — [14 -          + oVI   =   0                                               (A25)


Let us also assume that 4            > i;     then (A25) implies


            =
                1/2(4   +   V)                                                               (A26)


Thus, for any realization of i above i party x is elected, otherwise, party y
is elected. From equation (Al) (part 1 of the appendix) it follows that:


      P(4, 0) =                  .                                                           (A27)

Using (A26) in (A27) and noting the definitions of Ku and K that follow
equation (A2) we obtain:


      P(4, 0) = Ku_k(x+6V).                                                                  (A28)




                                                  28
