NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A THEORY OF EQUALITY BEFORE THE LAW
Daron Acemoglu
Alexander Wolitzky
Working Paper 24681
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24681

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018

We thank Bob Gibbons, Suresh Naidu, Jean Tirole, John Wallis, and seminar participants at
Northwestern for useful discussions and comments. We gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the Carnegie Foundation and the NSF. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Daron Acemoglu and Alexander Wolitzky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Theory of Equality Before the Law
Daron Acemoglu and Alexander Wolitzky
NBER Working Paper No. 24681
June 2018
JEL No. C73,K10,P16,P51
ABSTRACT
We propose a model of the emergence of equality before the law. A society can support
“effort” (“cooperation”, “pro-social behavior”) using the “carrot” of future cooperation or the
“stick” of coercive punishment. Community enforcement relies only on the carrot and involves
low coercion, low inequality, and low effort. A society in which the elite control the means of
violence supplements the carrot with the stick, and involves high coercion, high inequality, and
high effort. In this regime, elites are privileged: they are not subject to the same coercive
punishments as non-elites. We show that it may be optimal—even from the viewpoint of the elite
—to establish equality before the law, where all agents are subject to the same coercive
punishments. The central mechanism is that equality before the law increases elites’ effort, which
in turn encourages even higher effort from non-elites. Equality before the law combines high
coercion and low inequality—in our baseline model, elites exert the same level of effort as nonelites. Factors that make the emergence of equality before the law more likely include limits on
the extent of coercion, greater marginal returns to effort, increases in the size of the elite group,
greater political power for non-elites, and under some additional conditions, lower economic
inequality.

Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu
Alexander Wolitzky
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
wolitzky@mit.edu

1

Introduction

The notion of equality before the law maintains that laws should apply equally to all citizens: simply
put, no one is above the law. This idea— which is also one of the meanings of the amorphous term
“rule of law”— is a mainstay of many current constitutions and is widely viewed as a central tenet
of a fair and just legal system. Friedrich Hayek saw it as the most critical element of liberal
society, stating that “The great aim of the struggle for liberty has been equality before the law”
(1960, p. 127). But how and why equality before the law has emerged remains elusive. While
some stateless, small-scale societies have egalitarian norms and customs (Bohannan and Bohannan,
1953, Boehm, 1999, Flannery and Marcus, 2014), almost all known historical societies with political
hierarchies feature well-de…ned elites with disproportionate political power— chiefs, kings, barons,
lords, military leaders, etc.— as well as laws that privilege these elites. Some scholars, such as
Berman (1983), Hayek (1960), Jones (1981), and Kern (1956), emphasize the historical roots of
equality before the law in Europe, dating back to Greek or Roman legal traditions, the customary
laws of Germanic tribes, the English common law tradition, or various turning points in the Middle
Ages. More recently, North, Wallis and Weingast (2009) have suggested that the broader notion
of equality before the law evolved out of “rule of law among the elites”, meaning a set of practices
making all elites subject to the same laws. In none of these cases is it clear, however, why elites with
disproportionate political and coercive power …nd it acceptable— much less in their own interests—
to be bound by the same laws as common citizens.1
This paper provides a simple framework for addressing this question. Our starting point is that
society can be organized without a state, or it can be organized under the auspices of a state with
the power to “enforce laws” coercively: that is, to punish individuals who deviate from prescribed
behavior.2 In the former case, “pro-social”behavior is supported only by community enforcement,
in particular by the threat of withdrawal of future cooperation; in the latter, incentives are provided
by both community enforcement and the threat of coercive punishment.3 In turn, coercive state
1

A separate literature (e.g., Rueschemeyer, Stephens and Stephens, 1992, Acemoglu and Robinson, 2000, 2006,
Lizzeri and Persico, 2004, Fearon, 2011, Bidner and François, 2013) studies democratization— how political power
shifts from elites toward regular citizens— but does not focus on whether this is accompanied by equality before the
law. We return to our relationship with this literature below.
2
We thus associate the threat of coercion with “legal enforcement”. This may suggest a distinction between “social
norms” enforced by the threat of withdrawal of cooperation by the community and “laws” enforced by the threat of
coercion. Our favored interpretation is di¤erent, however: we view prescribed, on-path behavior as a combination
of norms and laws, and put the emphasis on whether there is legal enforcement (threat of coercion) by the state or
agents specialized in violence. This is for two reasons. First, as we will see, deviators su¤er from both withdrawal
of cooperation by the community and coercive punishment, so these two types of incentives are intertwined in our
model. Second, as emphasized by Hart (1961) and Tyler (2006), among others, laws that are obeyed are typically
embedded in a society’s norms, which militates against a sharp distinction between laws and norms in practice.
3
As emphasized in the context of organizations by Macaulay (1963), Williamson (1985), and Baker, Gibbons and
Murphy (1994, 2002), and in the broader context of governance by Granovetter (1985), Ostrom (1990), Milgrom,
North, and Weingast (1990), Greif (1993), and Dixit (2003), reputation and the threat of withdrawal of cooperation
continue to matter greatly even when legal enforcement becomes commonplace. This feature is a crucial ingredient
of our model as well, as we explain below.

1

enforcement can exist under “elite domination”— where a subset of agents control the means of
violence, enforce laws from which they disproportionately bene…t, and are themselves above the
law— or under “equality before the law”, where laws apply equally to all citizens. Our main focus
is understanding the transition from elite domination to equality before the law.
In our model, a large number of agents repeatedly take costly actions that generate social bene…ts. These actions stand for productive e¤ort and other pro-social behavior, such as contributions
to public goods or collective defense, and are perfectly observed. In a society without a state,
productive e¤ort can be enforced only by the “carrot” of continued societal cooperation. This can
be achieved by norms supported by standard community enforcement mechanisms: for example,
a deviator can be ostracized and excluded from cooperation until she exerts e¤ort to “repent” for
her misdeed. Though community enforcement can support some positive level of equilibrium e¤ort,
this level is typically low, owing to the weak nature of this type of enforcement.
The alternative is an organization of society where there is state enforcement of laws, so the
carrot of future cooperation is supplemented with the “stick” of coercive punishment. Speci…cally,
we suppose that “the state”acquires the means of violence, which can be used to in‡ict additional
punishments on agents who deviate (“break the law”). To model an elite-dominated society where
some fraction of agents— the elite— are “above the law”, we assume that elites themselves are not
subject to coercion, and we focus on the best equilibrium from their viewpoint.4 Thus, in this
elite-dominated equilibrium (which we refer to as “elite enforcement”), all agents face the carrot
of future cooperation, while normal agents are additionally confronted with the stick of coercive
punishment. Whereas under community enforcement there is relative equality across all agents
(in the model, perfect equality), under elite enforcement the threat of punishment makes normal
agents work harder than elites, creating inequality. This implies that elites are always better o¤
under elite enforcement, while normal agents may (or may not) also be better o¤ due of the greater
level of productive e¤ort induced in this equilibrium.
The most important part of our analysis turns to the question of why the elite would want to
give up the privileges of reduced e¤ort and immunity from coercion that they enjoy under elite
domination. To do this in the sharpest possible way, we continue to focus on the best equilibrium
from the viewpoint of the elite, but we now also let them choose to what extent they themselves
should be subject to “the law”, and thus to coercive punishments, when they deviate. We establish
several key results.
Most importantly, under equality before the law, because the stick of coercive punishment is
used against all agents, the carrot of future cooperation itself becomes more powerful: when elites
exert greater e¤ort due to the threat of punishment, the bene…ts of future cooperation increase, and
as a result normal agents are encouraged to work harder as well. This complementarity between
4

To be clear, the elite are above the law but are not “above social norms”: when they deviate from equilibrium
behavior, they still su¤er withdrawal of cooperation.

2

elite and normal agent e¤ort is the central mechanism that may make the elite favor equality before
the law.
Table 1 provides a schematic representation of the di¤erent enforcement regimes. Community
enforcement corresponds to low coercion and low inequality (but also low e¤ort). Elite enforcement
involves high coercion and higher e¤ort, but also high inequality favoring the elites. Finally, equality
before the law relies on a high level of coercion too, but it removes the privileges of the elite and
thus involves low inequality (and the highest level of e¤ort from all agents).5

low inequality

low coercion

high coercion

community enforcement

equality before the law

high inequality
?
elite enforcement
Table 1: Relationship between enforcement regimes, inequality, and coercion
We also consider implications for social welfare. Greater equality before the law increases both
elite and normal agent e¤ort. Under full equality before the law, normal agents are always better
o¤ than under elite domination. The utility of the elite themselves may increase (because normal
agents exert greater e¤ort) or decrease (because the elite lose their privileged position and are forced
to exert greater e¤ort).6 Finally, under full equality before the law, even from the perspective of
the elite themselves, it becomes optimal to have complete equality— the elite give up all of their
privileges and exert the same level of e¤ort as normal citizens.
What triggers the transition from elite domination to equality before the law? While our model
highlights a number of factors a¤ecting this trade-o¤, we believe the most important one is the
role of violence in society. We show that as the extent of punishments that can be imposed on
deviators decreases— for technological, political or social reasons— it becomes more attractive for
the elites to give up their privileges and transition to equality before the law. This is because of
the two levers a¤ecting normal agents’ incentives, the stick (coercive punishment) becomes less
important and the carrot (the promise of future bene…ts) becomes more important.7 This changes
the trade-o¤ facing the elite and encourages them to increase their own e¤ort. The elite then …nd
it bene…cial subject themselves to coercive punishments in order to achieve this increase in own
e¤ort. This comparative static thus links our explanation for the emergence of equality before
the law to political and social changes, such as the rise of democratic politics (cfr. footnote 1),
which increase the standing and power of non-elites and put natural limits on how harshly they
5

Table 1 raises the question of whether low coercion and high inequality can be combined. We will return to this
question in the context of our model and suggest that the extent of inequality is limited without coercion. Indeed,
we are not aware of many historical societies that have combined extreme inequality and low coercion.
6
Of course, when the elite themselves choose to transition to equality before the law, their utility must be greater
in this regime than under elite enforcement.
7
In other words, the carrot and the stick are substitutes. This is because of diminishing marginal returns to
e¤ort— the more e¤ort is obtained by the threat of withdrawal of cooperation, the less valuable is the marginal e¤ort
obtained by additional coercive punishments.

3

can be treated by the state or the elite, as well as to social forces limiting the acceptability of such
punishments (e.g., Elias, 1994, Pinker, 2011). In this light, our theory gives a novel explanation
for why moves towards greater mass participation and limits on elite power in politics have often
been accompanied by the rise of equality before the law. A complementary comparative static is
that if the extent of coercive punishments remains unchanged but the political power of the elite
declines (which may again result from the rise of democratic politics), society again moves towards
equality before the law.
Several instances of the gradual evolution of equality before the law around the world can
be interpreted through the lens of this comparative static. The British case is often emphasized
in discussions of the rule of law, with many scholars tracing the roots of these notions to the
Middle Ages or even earlier. These important legal and political traditions notwithstanding, Britain
remained far from equality before the law as late as the mid-19th century. An emblematic example
is provided by a set of laws creating onerous obligations for manual workers and privileges for
employers, who could ban workers from quitting their jobs, or even from turning down unattractive
o¤ers (Steinfeld, 2001, Naidu and Yuchtman, 2013). The Statute of Laborers, enacted in the 14th
century, empowered landowners to compel workers to work at set wages. In Steinfeld’s words, “The
English laboring poor of this period. . . were subject to an oppressive regime of legal regulation”
(2001, p. 8). This statute was recon…rmed by later, 16th-century statutes, and was extended
to a handful of artisanal occupations in the 18th century (it was also imported by the American
colonies and formed the backbone of their labor law). The 1823 Master and Servant Act applied
similar provisions to all manual workers, enabling employers to prosecute their workers for contract
breach if they quit their jobs or did not accept the pro¤ered contract terms. Prosecutions under the
act were very common, and while …nes were the standard penalty, whippings and imprisonments
were also frequent. Social and political changes during the 19th century, in part spearheaded
by democratization, made this coercive institution less and less tenable, however. A …rst step
was the 1867 Master and Servant Act, which prohibited whippings and imprisonment, even as it
simultaneously increased the ability of magistrate courts to compel workers to work at the terms
o¤ered by their employers. In a second, critical, step towards equality before the law, this act itself
was …nally repealed in 1875.
Limits on punishments also played a role in what was arguably the …rst society approaching
equality before the law: Athens between the 6th and 4th centuries BC. Starting with Solon, and
continuing with Cleisthenes’s reforms, the ability of elite Athenians to command a privileged position towards regular Athenian citizens (and even slaves) was curtailed (Snodgrass, 1980, Ober,
2015). Though many factors likely played a role in the rise of Athenian institutions, an important
element was a change in military technology that empowered regular citizens of Athens, now armed
with iron weapons as hoplites (citizen infantry). This contrasts with the “palace economies” of

4

Bronze Age Greece, circa 16th–11th centuries BC, where weapons were more expensive and were
thus monopolized by the elite. In the famous words of Gordon Childe (1942), “Iron democratized
agriculture and industry and warfare too.”This democratization of warfare implies, in the context
of our model, a more limited ability of elites to punish the (now more heavily armed) citizens, and
hence shifts society towards equality before the law.
Equality before the law can also emerge due to factors other than the diminished power of the
elite and limits on their ability to impose punishments. A notable possibility is that a change in the
nature of production can alter the trade-o¤ facing the elite, for example, because e¤ort becomes
more important for production or for the provision of vital public goods, such as national defense.
However, as we will see, an overall increase in productivity does not necessarily favor equality
before the law because, in addition to increasing the marginal returns to e¤ort, it also increases
average returns, and higher average returns encourage elites to maintain their privileges. This
comparative static therefore runs counter to simple “modernization” ideas and instead predicts
that it is not general increases in prosperity but rather the changing nature of productive activities
or national defense— when these correspond to greater marginal product of e¤ort— that contribute
to the development of equality before the law.
This comparative static can be illustrated by several well-known cases of “defensive modernization” in the 19th century. The abolition of (some of) the privileges of the Japanese military
elite following the Meiji Restoration is instructive. Tokugawa Japan had an explicit social class
system, where the armed samurai approximate the above-the-law elites in our model. Though this
rigid system created obvious advantages for the samurai and the landowning elite, it also kept
Japan technologically and economically backward, a problem that was laid bare when Commodore
Matthew C. Perry sailed into the Bay of Tokyo in 1853–54 and forced Japan to open up to foreign (especially American) trade. These events convinced some key Japanese elites that a major
reform process was vital to strengthen their economy and national defense. It is in this context of
a perceived existential threat that the Meiji Restoration of 1866 took place, disbanding the Tokugawa shogunate and restoring the monarchy (Jansen, 2002, Buruma, 2003, Ravina, 2017). The
Meiji government removed the de jure unequal treatment of di¤erent social classes and disarmed
the samurai (some of whom remained specialists in coercion, but now as police o¢ cers under the
control of the central state). The Meiji Constitution, drafted in the 1880s and …nally promulgated
in 1890, introduced such notions as due process before the law, freedom of movement, freedom of
speech, and private property for all Japanese. While 19th-century Japan remained an oligarchic
society, these changes created a much greater degree of equality before the law. An important
question in this context is why the Meiji reforms did not just attempt to modernize the military
and the …scal system, but also took steps towards greater equality before the law. Our model
suggests a potential answer— greater equality before the law may have improved elite behavior and

5

consequently induced greater societal e¤ort towards modernization at a time when the need for
(i.e. the marginal returns from) such e¤ort was very high. Similarly, the process of legal reforms
in 19th-century Prussia— which abolished various vestiges of serfdom and can thus be viewed as
an important step towards equality before the law (Fisher, 1903, Blanning, 1989, Acemoglu et al.,
2011)— and the Tanzimat reforms in the Ottoman Empire promulgated in the Rose Garden Edict
in 1839— which introduced some degree of equality before the law, including for various non-Muslim
minorities (Zürcher, 2004, Owen, 2004)— were responses to foreign threats as well.
Several other comparative statics are worth noting. First, we show that greater economic
inequality, resulting from an increase in elites’ endowments, works against equality before the
law, because greater endowments discourage elite e¤ort. Second, an expansion of the elite (the
fraction of agents who control the means of violence and are above the law) favors equality before
the law, because elite privileges start becoming more costly in terms of both foregone production
opportunities and negative indirect e¤ects on the e¤ort level of normal citizens. Third, we consider
a setting where there are two kinds of elites, one of which— say the barons— can be punished by
the other— say the dukes— while the latter group cannot be punished at all. We show that if
the political power of the …rst group increases, this favors the emergence of equality before the
law. The last two comparative statics provide ways in which the expansion of rule of law among
the elite subsequently encourages the broader expansion of equality before the law, as argued
by North, Wallis and Weingast (2009). Finally, in another extension, we establish that a shift
of political power from low-productivity to high-productivity elites (perhaps approximating the
increased political power of commercial interests at the expense of traditional landowners) also
favors equality before the law. This comparative static is in line with the historical role of the
strengthening of commercial interests in eroding the privileges of the landowning classes in Europe
(e.g., Moore, 1966, Aston and Philpin, 1987).
In addition to the literatures on the historical origins of rule of law and democratization mentioned above, three others need to be highlighted. The …rst is the literature pioneered by North
and Weingast (1989), which interprets constitutions and other institutional features as commitment
devices for respecting other groups’property rights, and thus encouraging greater investment and
economic participation.8 This insight is closely related to the incomplete contracts approach to
organizations (e.g., Williamson, 1975, Grossman and Hart, 1986, Hart and Moore, 1990), where
manipulating property rights and residual control rights within an organization strengthens some
agents’investment incentives by reducing holdup. The result that equality before the law encourages normal citizens to exert e¤ort by removing elite privileges and increasing elite e¤ort bears
some similarity to these insights, but with several important di¤erences. First, equality before the
law is not a commitment to a constitutional provision but an alternative organization of society
8

Other contributions in the same vein include Levi (1989), Weingast (1997), Acemoglu and Robinson (2000),
Myerson (2008), Besley and Persson (2011), and Gehlbach and Keefer (2011).

6

leading to a di¤erent repeated game equilibrium. Second, equality before the law impacts incentives
not by preventing ex post expropriation but by encouraging greater elite e¤ort, which increases the
value of future cooperation for normal citizens. Equally important, the two models predict di¤erent
comparative statics: in the simplest interpretation of North and Weingast, an increase in the elites’
ability to expropriate normal citizens should lead to a greater commitment to property rights (to
counteract a stronger temptation to expropriate), while our central result is that an increase in the
elites’ability to punish deviators leads to less equality before the law (as the threat of punishment
and the promise of cooperation are substitutes in providing incentives).
The second literature is that on repeated games and community enforcement. Most of this
literature focuses on the threat of withdrawal of cooperation and does not consider costly punishments (Kandori, 1992, Ellison, 1994, Wolitzky, 2013, Ali and Miller, 2014). A few papers do allow
costly punishment, mostly focusing on enforcers’incentives to carry out punishments (Dixit, 2007,
Masten and Prüfer, 2014, Levine and Modica 2016, Aldashev and Zanarone, 2017, Acemoglu and
Wolitzky, 2018). These papers investigate neither enforcers’ willingness to subject themselves to
punishment nor equality before the law.
Finally, our paper is also related to a number of works emphasizing the dual role of violence
in enforcing property rights and predation (Moselle and Polak, 2001, Bates, Greif, and Singh,
2002, Grossman, 2002, Konrad and Skaperdas, 2012). As in this literature, in our model violence
incentivizes production, but the elites control the means of violence and are privileged. The key
mechanism that equality before the law enhances community enforcement does not arise in this
literature.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces our baseline environment.
Section 3 characterizes the best equilibrium under community enforcement (without the state).
Section 4 analyzes the same environment under elite domination, while Section 5 studies the optimal
degree of equality before the law from the viewpoint of the elite. Section 6 presents our main
comparative static results, which delineate factors that encourage the emergence of equality before
the law. Section 7 generalizes the baseline environment to a matching model in which, in addition
to bene…tting society at large, e¤ort generates private bene…ts for one’s partner. While in the
baseline model elites are privileged only because they exert lower e¤ort than others, in this extended
environment the best equilibrium from the viewpoint of elites also involves normal agents working
harder when they match with elites. Section 8 extends the model to study within-elite heterogeneity
in terms of productivity and the implications of a hierarchical structure within the elite. Section 9
concludes. All proofs are presented in the Appendix.

7

2

Environment

We consider a simple repeated game model of cooperation in which pro-social behavior can be
enforced by both withdrawal of cooperation and coercive punishment.

2.1

The Baseline Environment

There is a continuum of in…nitely-lived agents that discount the future with discount factor
(0; 1). Fraction

of the population are elites, and fraction 1

2

are normal. At the beginning of

every period, each player i chooses a level of cooperation (“e¤ort”) xi 2 R+ .9 When the distribution

of e¤ort levels among normal agents is given by FN , the distribution of e¤ort levels among elites is
given by FE , and player i exerts e¤ort xi , player i’s payo¤ is
(1

) EFN [fN (x)] + EFE [fE (x)]

xi :

Here, fN and fE are the “bene…t production functions” that map units of disutility of e¤ort to
units of bene…ts for society. They are strictly increasing, strictly concave, and bounded, and satisfy
0 (0) ; f 0 (0) > 1= . The assumption that f 0 (0) ; f 0 (0) > 1= (and hence
fN (0) = fE (0) = 0 and fN
E
N
E
0 (0) ; f 0 (0) > 1) implies that the stage game is a continuous-action version of the prisoners’
fN
E

dilemma. We allow the functions fN and fE to di¤er for normal and elite agents as these agents
may have di¤erent roles in production— for example, “e¤ort” by elites could simply correspond
to “not expropriating others” (see footnote 14 below), or it could represent business investment
while normal agents’e¤ort corresponds to supplying labor. None of our results require these two
functions to di¤er— the key di¤erence between normal and elite agents is their vulnerability to
coercion, not their production technologies.
We also assume that e¤ort levels are observed by all agents. This perfect monitoring assumption
simpli…es the analysis and makes the intuition for our results more transparent.10
At the end of every period, coercive punishments can be in‡icted by a “centralized state” on
any subset of agents. The state is not a player in the game and has no preferences— its punishment
strategy can be speci…ed freely as part of the description of an equilibrium. The key di¤erence
between normal and elite agents is that they di¤er in their vulnerability to state punishment. If a
normal agent is punished by the state, she su¤ers a disutility of g

0. On the other hand, if an

9
E¤ort xi can be interpreted as general cooperative behavior, contributions to collective action or public goods
(including collective defense), or e¤ort directed at production that indirectly bene…ts other agents.
10
Combining a continuum population and perfect monitoring/observability raises measurability issues that make
formally de…ning strategies complicated. Rather than addressing these issues formally, we simply assert that our
model is obviously the limit of a large …nite population. Indeed, the only reason we assume a continuum rather than
a …nite population is to ensure that, for both a normal agent and an elite agent, the fraction of other agents with
elite status is . Assuming a large …nite population and allowing this fraction to di¤er for normal and elite agents
leads to more cumbersome notation without yielding any substantive implications.

8

elite agent is punished by the state, she su¤ers a disutility of only g, where
measuring the vulnerability of elites to coercive punishment.

2 [0; 1] is a parameter

In this formulation, therefore, g is a measure of the e¤ective coercive capacity of the state.
This coercive capacity depends on technological factors (does the state have the infrastructural
power to detect deviators and in‡ict punishments on them once they are caught?), on the elite’s
and the state’s political power (will normal agents accept such punishments?), and on a society’s
values (is it socially acceptable to impose harsh punishments on law-breakers?). The parameter ,
on the other hand, is an inverse measure of the extent to which elites are above the law. When
= 0, elites are completely above the law and immune to coercive punishment, and as a result
they can be incentivized only by the threat of withdrawal of cooperation. When

= 1, elites

are subject to the full force of the law, and like normal agents they can be incentivized by the
threat of coercive punishment as well as withdrawal of cooperation. Intermediate values of , in
turn, represent imperfect levels of equality before the law. Such intermediate values may result
in practice either because the elite’s privileges protect them from the full force of the law and its
punishments, or because they are subject to punishment in some domains but not in others (e.g.,
they can be punished for murder, but not for mistreating their servants).
Throughout, we focus on stationary, symmetric, subgame perfect equilibrium (equilibrium
henceforth) as the solution concept. By “symmetry”, we mean that all normal agents and all
elite agents use the same strategies. By “stationarity”, we mean that there is a single pair of e¤ort
levels (x; y) such that, along the equilibrium path, normal agents exert e¤ort x and elite agents
exert e¤ort y in every period.11

2.2

A Random Matching Interpretation

The economy described so far is “centralized”in two ways: each individual’s e¤ort directly bene…ts
everyone in society, and a centralized state directly allocates punishments. We remark that it
is straightforward to give a mathematically equivalent decentralized interpretation (or a hybrid
interpretation where only one of these dimensions is decentralized).
Suppose …rst that e¤ort is still a pure public good, but the means of coercion are controlled by
the elite. Players randomly match in pairs, and an elite agent can punish her partner in the match.
Suppose also that punishing one’s partner is costless (so a player is indi¤erent as to whether or not
to punish her partner), and that punishment in‡icts disutility g= on a normal agent and g= on
an elite (this scaling by 1= keeps the expected disutility of punishment …xed at g, as there are
11

Non-stationary equilibria can potentially improve on stationary equilibria in discounted repeated games with
perfect monitoring (e.g., Abreu, 1986). Our objective here, however, is to compare optimal stable social arrangements
under di¤erent enforcement regimes, which makes non-stationary equilibria di¢ cult to interpret. Another way of
motivating stationarity is to note that, due to the concavity of the bene…t functions fN and fE , the ergodic distribution
of any non-stationary equilibrium is Pareto-dominated by a stationary equilibrium, so stationarity is without loss
from the perspective of “long-run welfare”.

9

elites in the population). This variant of the model where punishments are carried out by elites is
completely equivalent to the baseline model.
Next, suppose that bene…ts are also generated within matches, and a player only bene…ts from
the e¤ort of her partner. Then, provided that e¤ort levels are chosen before players observe their
partners’status as normal or elite (while status is subsequently observed at the punishment stage),
each agent must choose the same level of e¤ort regardless of her partner’s status, and therefore her
e¤ort generates the same expected bene…t for everyone. This “anonymous” matching model thus
endogenously generates the pure public good feature that was assumed in the centralized model.
This version of the model— where all economic interactions take place within matches— remains
mathematically equivalent to the baseline model. In Section 7, we study a variant of this model
where matching is non-anonymous, so players know their partners’status when choosing e¤ort. In
this case, e¤ort is no longer a pure public good, but we will see that our most important results
continue to apply.

3

Community Enforcement

We …rst consider the model with

= g = 0, where all agents are identical and no coercive

punishments are available. This gives a model of community enforcement of cooperation. The
following result is standard: for this result, and throughout the paper, we denote the …rst-best
(surplus-maximizing) normal agent e¤ort level by
0
xF B = fN

1

(1) :

Proposition 1 Under community enforcement, the e¤ ort level in every Pareto optimal equilibrium
is given by xCE = min xCE ; xF B , where xCE is the unique positive solution to the equation
x = fN (x) :

(1)

The intuition is that a player who deviates can save an e¤ort cost of x, but loses a bene…t
of fN (x) in the next period. This loss could be supported by “grim trigger” strategies, in which
cooperation completely breaks down following a deviation. With these strategies, a player’s (perperiod) equilibrium payo¤ is fN (x)

x, while her best payo¤ from deviating is (1

) fN (x).

Equating the two yields (1).
Grim trigger strategies are one way of supporting the unique optimal equilibrium e¤ort level
characterized in Proposition 1, but not the only one. In a di¤erent optimal equilibrium, a player’s
punishment for deviating in period t is that in period t + 1 she must play xi = x while her
opponents all play xj = 0, and all players restart the original equilibrium in period t + 2 if this
10

punishment is successfully carried out. Relative to grim trigger, this “repentance” equilibrium
has the advantage that it is renegotiation proof (Farrell and Maskin, 1989, Van Damme, 1989).
Whether the withdrawal of cooperation that supports e¤ort level xCE is carried out via grim trigger
strategies, repentance, or some combination of the two is irrelevant for our results— in particular,
our results do not require “extreme” community-wide punishments for individual deviations. The
same comment will apply in later sections where cooperation is supported by the threat of both
the withdrawal of cooperation and coercive punishment.
In practice, the most common way in which cooperation is withdrawn from deviators is ostracism— the exclusion of deviators from the bene…ts of cooperation, while the rest of the group
continues to cooperate. Introducing ostracism into our model would have no e¤ect on our results or
their interpretation. In particular, suppose each player makes an additional choice

i

at the same

time as her e¤ort decision, which designates which other agents (if any) player i ostracizes and thus
excludes from the bene…ts of her e¤ort. (Alternatively, the whole group can ostracize individual
k if

i

=

j

= k for all i; j 6= k, i.e., if everyone agrees on whom to ostracize). In an e¢ cient

equilibrium, there is no ostracism on path, but deviators may be either permanently ostracized or
ostracized until they repent by exerting e¤ort without receiving any bene…ts as described in the
previous paragraph. It is straightforward to verify that introducing ostracism in this way does
not a¤ect our equilibrium conditions, and hence does not a¤ect any of our results, except that the
community can now discourage deviations with the threat of ostracism.12
Proposition 1, especially with the repentance or ostracism interpretation, provides a stylized
representation of social order in stateless (small-scale) societies. First, the equilibrium involves low
levels of inequality across agents (in our simple model, no inequality at all). This is consistent with
the evidence from the anthropological and archaeological literatures on the strong emphasis on and
practice of egalitarianism in most stateless societies (Bohannan and Bohannan, 1953, Boehm, 1999,
2012, Flannery and Marcus, 2014). Second, little coercion is used to support pro-social behavior (in
our model, no coercion). Although there is continuous in…ghting, blood feuds, and endemic violence
in many stateless societies (Chagnon, 1968, Boehm, 1986, LeBlanc and Register, 2004), there is
limited use of coercion to support cooperation. Indeed, much violence in stateless societies appears
to result from inter-group con‡ict (LeBlanc and Register, 2004), from various types of competition
between males (Chagnon, 1968, Knauft, 1987, Marlowe, 2010), or from feuding between individuals
or subclans that cannot be mediated in the absence of dispute resolution mechanisms (Boehm,
1986, Ember, 1978, Acemoglu and Robinson, 2018). In contrast, detailed ethnographic studies
dating back to Radcli¤e-Brown’s (1922) work on the Andamans in India do not …nd much evidence
of coercive punishments to support cooperation in such societies (see, e.g., Briggs, 1970, on the
12

In a …nite population, ostracizing one individual slightly reduces the maximum level of cooperation that can
be sustained among the remaining players. This change does not a¤ect equilibrium conditions or payo¤s. For a
discussion of various forms of ostracism in a model with imperfect private monitoring, see Ali and Miller (2016).

11

Inuit, Woodburn, 1982, on the Hadza, or Wiessner, 2005, on the !Kung Bushmen; see Baumard,
2010, for a general discussion). Rather, in all of these cases, cooperation appears to be supported
by a combination of low social regard directed at non-cooperators and the threat of withdrawal of
future cooperation, for example via social isolation. The same appears to be true in societies with
nascent but still weak state institutions, such as Germanic tribes and subsequently Frankish states
shortly after the fall of the Western Roman Empire, as well as early Anglo-Saxon England: in these
cases, most infractions were punished by payments from perpetrators to victims or their families,
for example via the “wergeld” as speci…ed by the Salic Law of the Franks or King Alfred’s Law
Code (Drew, 1991, Acemoglu and Robinson, 2018). This arrangement closely resembles community
enforcement supported by repentance and/or ostracism, as described above.13

4

Elite Enforcement

We now consider the case with

> 0 (there are some elite agents in the population), g

punishments are possible), and

0 (coercive

= 0 (elite agents are themselves immune to coercion). In this

game, the best equilibrium for normal agents and the best equilibrium for elite agents typically
di¤er. As we are mainly interested in conditions under which elites themselves bene…t from equality
before the law, we focus for the moment on the best equilibrium for the elite.
Proposition 2 Under elite enforcement,
1. E¤ ort levels in every elite-optimal equilibrium are given by the solution to the problem
max (1

x 0;y 0

) fN (x) + fE (y)

y

(2)

subject to
x

[(1

) fN (x) + fE (y)] + g;

(3)

y

[(1

) fN (x) + fE (y)] :

(4)

2. Constraint (3) binds at the optimum.
3. Let us denote the unique pair (x; y) > (0; 0) such that both (3) and (4) bind by xEE ; y EE ,
13

The example of wergeld raises the question of whether introducing monetary transfers would matter for the
0
model. The answer is essentially no: as long as fN
(x) > 1 and fE0 (y) > 1 for e¤ort levels that arise in equilibrium,
it is more e¢ cient to demand e¤ort rather than on-path transfers, and replacing o¤-path “repentance e¤ort” with
“repentance transfers” would not a¤ect any of our results.

12

and denote the solution to (2) subject to (3) and (4) by xEE ; y EE . Then we have
fE0 y EE + (1

0
) fN
xEE

1 if y EE = 0;

fE0 y EE + (1

0
) fN
xEE

= 1 if y EE 2 0; y EE ;

(6)

fE0 y EE + (1

0
) fN
xEE

1 if y EE = y EE :

(7)

(5)

Note that (2) is elite welfare, since elites receive per-period bene…ts of cooperation (1

) fN (x)+

fE (y) and exert e¤ort y. In this maximization problem, (3) is the incentive constraint for a normal agent, and (4) is the incentive constraint for an elite agent.14 These constraints are intuitive:
any player who deviates loses an expected bene…t of (1

) fN (x) + fE (y) in the next period.

Moreover, normal agents that deviate face an additional coercive punishment of g.15 There is no
such punishment for elite agents (as elites are “above the law”), so this second term is not present
in (4).16 Furthermore, in the best equilibrium for elites, normal agents are always required to work
as hard as possible, so (3) binds.
For the last part of the result, (6) is the …rst-order condition with respect to y, once x has
been substituted out of the objective function using (3). This expression captures the fact that
elites bene…t in two ways from working harder. First, there is a direct marginal bene…t of elites’
e¤ort on other elites’utility (the fE0 (y) term). Second there is an indirect marginal bene…t (the
(1

0 (x) term): when elites work harder, future cooperation becomes more valuable and thus
) fN

normal agents are also incentivized to work harder (for fear of being excluded from the resulting
increased bene…ts of cooperation). This indirect e¤ect— and the complementarity between elite and
normal agent e¤ort it captures— is the crux of our theory and is responsible for our comparative
static results below. It is also this indirect e¤ect that captures the repeated game aspect of the
equilibrium, as can be seen by noting that this e¤ect disappears when

= 0.

To better understand the indirect e¤ect and gain an intuition for the …rst-order condition for elite
e¤ort, note that each unit of marginal bene…t created by the elites’e¤ort increases normal agents’
e¤ort by

units, which in turn provides (1

0 (x) units of bene…t to both normal agents and
) fN

elites. These units of bene…t in turn increase normal agents’ e¤ort by another
units, which provide

2

(1

2

(1

0 (x)
) fN

0 (x)2 units of bene…t, and so on. The total marginal bene…t to
)2 fN

14
If, as mentioned above, we interpret y as the elite refraining from stealing and fE (y) as the damage that their
extraction creates on normal agents, then (2) would need to be modi…ed slightly by removing the fE (y) term from
the objective function and the right-hand side of (4). This has no major impact on our main results.
15
This role of coercive punishment g in deterring deviations is somewhat similar to that in Acemoglu and Wolitzky
(2011), where we assumed that employers/principals could use coercion in order to reduce the outside option of their
employees/agents, thus forcing them to accept contracts that they would otherwise reject.
16
However, there are still “norms” that trigger withdrawal of cooperation if elite agents deviate from equilibrium
behavior. It is these norms that incentivize y > 0.

13

elites of increasing y is thus given by the geometric series
h
fE0 (y) 1 + (1

0
) fN
(x) +

2

i
0
)2 fN
(x)2 + : : : =

(1

1

fE0 (y)
0 (x) :
(1
) fN

Equating this marginal bene…t to the marginal cost of e¤ort for the elite, which is 1, yields (6).17
There are once again multiple ways of supporting the unique optimal equilibrium path: for
example, we can specify either that cooperation breaks down forever once an agent deviates (“grim
trigger”), or that cooperation breaks down for only a single period while the deviator continues to
cooperate (“repentance”). Again, repentance has the advantage of being renegotiation-proof.18
We next compare the welfare of normal and elite agents under community enforcement and elite
enforcement. Let
uCE = fN xCE

xCE ;

uEE
= (1
N

) fN xEE + fE y EE

xEE ; and

uEE
= (1
E

) fN xEE + fE y EE

y EE

denote (elite-)optimal payo¤s under community enforcement and elite enforcement, for (N)ormal
and (E)lite agents. It is clear that elites prefer elite enforcement to community enforcement: uEE
E
uCE . However, normal agents may or may not prefer elite enforcement to community enforcement.
The tradeo¤ is that under elite enforcement normal agents work harder than elites (i.e., xEE > y EE )
and therefore receive a smaller share of the total social surplus (1

) (fN (x)

x) + (fE (y)

y)

than under community enforcement, but total social surplus can be higher under elite enforcement than under community enforcement because the threat of coercive punishment increases the
maximum sustainable e¤ort level (i.e., min xEE ; y EE > xCE ).19
17

Another way of interpreting the cost to elites of increasing y is that the resulting e¤ort cost is borne only by
elites, while the resulting bene…ts accrue to both elite and normal agents. This cost can be better understood by
rewriting the …rst-order condition as
fE0 (y)

1 + (1

0
) fN
(x) = 1

;

where the (fE0 (y) 1) terms is the net direct bene…t to the elite as a group from increasing all elites’ e¤ort,
0
(1
) fN
(x) is again the indirect bene…t due to higher e¤ort from normal agents, and 1
is the share of bene…ts
that are “wasted” on normal agents. This last term underscores the fact that the elites are unable to appropriate
the full bene…t of their increased e¤ort because cooperation is a pure public good. However, this pure public good
feature is not essential for our key qualitative results: in Section 7, we show similar results obtain when e¤ort creates
a mix of public bene…ts and private returns for one’s partner.
18
In addition, in Acemoglu and Wolitzky (2018), we show that if punishments are costly to carry out, then another
advantage of repentance over grim trigger is that it improves incentives for punishment. The implications of our
analysis here are very di¤erent from that paper, not only because punishments are costless, but also because the elite
take productive actions and there is a choice of how much punishment the punishers/elite should be subject to.
19
To see that y EE > xCE , note that xCE is the positive root of the concave function f (x) x, while y EE is the
positive root of the concave function [(1
) f (y + g) + f (y)] y. The latter function is everywhere greater
than the former, so it has the greater root.

14

Several takeaways are worth emphasizing. First, in contrast to community enforcement, elite
enforcement involves high inequality and high coercion. Both of these are characteristics of early
societies that developed state institutions (either in the form of chieftaincies, proto-states or what
anthropologists label “states”; Johnson and Earle, 2000, Flannery and Marcus, 2014). These
characteristics are also the hallmarks of what North, Wallis and Weingast (2009) call “limited
access orders”, where a well-de…ned elite monopolizes the means of violence and enjoys rents, as
well as of “extractive economic institutions”(Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012), which empower elites
to enjoy unfair advantages in economic relations.
Second, an important debate concerns whether the transition from stateless societies to those
with more organized institutions and coercion was welfare-improving for the population at large
because it encouraged better cooperation or dispute resolution (as maintained by various social
contract theories going back to Thomas Hobbes and John Locke; see also Huntington, 1968, Bates,
2001, Fukuyama, 2011), or welfare-reducing for most because it led to exploitation by the elite (as
maintained by Scott, 2017, and suggested by evidence of a- uence and relatively good health among
some stateless societies, e.g., Sahlins, 1974, Suzman, 2017). Our analysis shows either outcome is
possible. Under elite enforcement (relative to community enforcement), there is greater inequality
favoring the elite, which tends to make normal agents worse o¤. At the same time, because higher
e¤ort bene…ts everyone, normal agents may become better o¤ as well. Elite agents are always better
o¤ under elite enforcement, because they bene…t both from the higher e¤ort of normal agents and
from their privileged position resulting from their monopoly on coercion and their above-the-law
status. This feature is also consistent with the existing archaeological and historical evidence (e.g.,
Flannery and Marcus, 2014).
We end this section by discussing how the comparison between uCE and uEE
N depend on g. This
dependence is ambiguous in general, but it can be characterized when the fraction of elite agents,
, is small.
Proposition 3 Assume fE0 (0) < 1. There exists

> 0 such that if

< , then uEE
N is single-

peaked in g.

The proof shows that when

is su¢ ciently small so that elites do not …nd it in their interest

to exert e¤ort under elite enforcement, normal agent welfare under elite enforcement is maximized
at an intermediate level of g (or is monotonically decreasing in g): a very low g implies insu¢ cient
production, while a very high g implies excessive coercion (from the viewpoint of normal agents).
This proposition thus highlights some of the forces that determine whether normal agents will
bene…t from a transition to elite enforcement. If the extent of coercion is very high (for example,
as in ancient empires relying on large-scale labor coercion, such as Egypt or Sparta), the inequality
e¤ect dominates and normal agents are worse o¤. In contrast, if there is very little coercion, then

15

elite enforcement does not lead to a signi…cant increase in e¤ort, and normal agents cannot bene…t
much from this transition.
Finally, it is useful to note that the elite enforcement model includes the special case g = 0 where
there is no coercive technology but elites and normal agents may still be treated asymmetrically.
In other words, if

> 0 while g = 0, the model allows political hierarchy— and potentially some

degree of inequality— even in the absence of coercion. Note, however, that when g = 0, we have
xEE = y EE : that is, if it is optimal for elites to work at the maximum sustainable level when g = 0,
then egalitarianism is their most preferred option. While it is not always optimal for elites to exert
maximal e¤ort, we have that xEE and y EE are increasing in g, so (7) is easiest to satisfy— and thus
equal levels of e¤ort are most likely— when g is small. This result that egalitarianism is most likely
to arise when g is small establishes our earlier claim that low coercion and equality go hand-in-hand:
when the elite cannot use coercion e¤ectively, it is optimal from their viewpoint for them to exert
the same level of e¤ort as normal agents. This is also the reason why we believe the low coercion,
high inequality cell in Table 1 is not well-populated.

5

Equality Before the Law

We now allow for the possibility that
of coercive punishment. We take

0, so that elites may also be subject to some degree

2 [0; 1] to be a choice variable for the elite, and continue to

focus on the elite-optimal equilibrium.20 The interpretation is that we view the elite as holding the
political power to choose both the institutional environment ( ) and the equilibrium. The resulting
problem for the elites is
max

x 0;y 0; 2[0;1]

(1

) fN (x) + fE (y)

y

(8)

subject to
x

[(1

) fN (x) + fE (y)] + g

y

[(1

) fN (x) + fE (y)] + g;

(9)
(10)

where (10) is the incentive compatibility constraint for elites. Here (9) is identical to (3), while (10)
di¤ers from these constraints only in that an elite agent’s minmax payo¤ is
Since increasing

g rather than

g.

relaxes the incentive constraint of the elite and we focus on the elite-optimal

equilibrium, the elite are always willing to choose

= 1 (full equality before the law) and not punish

themselves: intuitively, the elite are happy to allow themselves to be subject to coercion, provided
the equilibrium speci…es they are never actually coerced. To rule out this rather arti…cial possibility,
we assume the elites always choose the smallest level of
20

when indi¤erent— this corresponds to

In doing so, we also implicitly characterize the best equilibrium for the elite for any …xed value of .

16

imposing a small cost of increasing

and then considering the limit where this cost vanishes.

Denote the unique solution to the elites’problem— corresponding to the optimal equilibrium under
endogenous equality before the law with minimal — by xEL ; y EL ;

. Here uniqueness follows

from concavity, and the superscript EL stands for “Equality before the Law”.
To characterize the solution, …rst note that it is always optimal for (9) to bind, as increasing x
increases the objective and relaxes (10): hence, xEL = x

y EL , where again x (y) is the value of

x that makes (9) hold with equality. Let xEL ; y EL be the unique pair (x; y) such that (10) binds
with

= 1. That is, xEL ; y EL are the greatest sustainable e¤ort levels under equality before the

law. Note that xEL = y EL , which implies that the maximum sustainable e¤ort level for normal
and elite agents is the same under full equality before the law.
The following is our main result. It characterizes the elite-optimal level of equality before the
law and the resulting equilibrium e¤ort levels.
Proposition 4 Every elite-optimal equilibrium takes one of the following three forms:
1. Elite enforcement:

= 0, xEL ; y EL = xEE ; y EE , and
fE0 y EE + (1

2. Partial equality before the law:
(10) binds, and

1:

2 (0; 1), y EL 2 y EE ; y EL , xEL = x

fE0 y EL + (1
3. Full equality before the law:

0
) fN
xEE

y EL 2 xEE ; xEL ,

0
) fN
xEL = 1:

(11)

= 1, xEL ; y EL = xEL ; y EL (in particular, xEL = y EL ),

and
fE0 y EL + (1

0
) fN
xEL

The maximization problem (8) di¤ers from (2) only in that

1:
is now a choice variable, rather

than being …xed exogenously at 0. As in the earlier problem, the incentive compatibility constraint
of normal agents, (9), always binds, and that of elite agents, (10), binds only if the best equilibrium
for the elite involves maximum elite agent e¤ort. Hence, if (10) with

= 0— or if equivalently

the corresponding constraint (4) under elite enforcement— is slack, then elites have no interest
in committing themselves to a higher level of e¤ort, and instead prefer to remain in the elite
enforcement regime with

= 0. In contrast, if (4) binds under elite enforcement (or equivalently,

if (7) holds with strict inequality), then the elites opt for at least partial equality before the law,
where the optimal level of equality before the law is just su¢ cient to commit themselves to the
e¤ort level y EL satisfying the …rst-order condition (11).21 Finally, in the case where fE0 y EL +
21

The intuition for this …rst-order condition with endogenous

17

is the same as for the one with

= 0 given in (6):

Figure 1: The black curve represents an indi¤erence curve for the elite, while the red curve represents
the boundary of the incentive compatibility constraint (9). The point xEL ; y EL corresponds to
full equality before the law ( = 1) and the point xEE ; y EE corresponds to elite enforcement
( = 0).
0 xEL
) fN

(1

1, elites prefer full equality before the law. Interestingly, when this is the

case, the best equilibrium from the viewpoint of the elites involves x = y: that is, we obtain not
only equality before the law but also completely equal allocations.22 This then yields another way
of viewing the last part of the proposition: the elite prefer to establish full equality before the law
only when they are willing to work as hard as normal agents.
We can also provide a diagrammatic representation and intuition for Proposition 4. Recall …rst
that

is either 0 or the value of

that binds (10). We can thus omit (10) and rewrite the elites’

problem, (8), as
max

x 0;y2[0;y]

(1

) fN (x) + fE (y)

y

(12)

subject to (9), where y = y EE under elite enforcement and y = y EL under endogenous choice of .
We illustrate this problem diagrammatically in Figure 1. The thick curve represents combinations
of normal agent and elite e¤ort that satisfy the normal agents’incentive compatibility constraint,
the direct marginal bene…t to elites of increasing their e¤ort is fE0 (y), and the indirect marginal bene…t— coming
0
through the induced increase in the maximum incentive compatible level of normal agent e¤ort— is (1
) fN
(x).
0
0
The …rst-order condition sets the total marginal bene…t of fE (y) + (1
) fN (x) equal to the total marginal cost
of 1.
22
Normal and elite agents exert the same e¤ort even though fN and fE may di¤er. This is because e¤ort levels
of the two types of agents under equality before the law are determined by their binding incentive compatibility
constraints, which are identical and thus imply the same level of e¤ort. This is no longer the case in Section 7, where
elites may receive greater bene…ts from cooperation.

18

(9), as an equality. This curve intersects the 45 line at the point xEL ; y EL , which corresponds
to fully equality before the law,
xEE ; y EE

= 1 (and equal e¤ort from normal and elite agents). The point

, corresponding to elite enforcement with

= 0, is plotted as well. The …gure also

superimposes the indi¤erence curves of (12), which are convex (since (12) is concave). The point of
tangency, if any, between these indi¤erence curves and the boundary of (9) gives the combination
of (x; y) that is optimal from the viewpoint of the elite; such a point of tangency corresponds to
an intermediate value of

2 (0; 1). When there is no tangency, the highest indi¤erence curve is

reached either at the corner where (x; y) = xEL ; y EL with full equality before the law (
or at the point where (x; y) =

xEE ; y EE

with elite enforcement (

= 1),

= 0).

We next consider the implications of equality before the law for the welfare of normal and
EL
elite agents. Let uEL
N and uE be normal and elite agents’ utility under the endogenous (elite-

optimal) choice of equality before the law. Clearly, uEL
E

uEE
E , with strict equality if

> 0: this

follows because elites have an extra choice variable under endogenous equality before the law. More
interestingly, we have:
Proposition 5 uEL
N

uEE
N , with strict equality if

> 0. In addition, if

CE .
= 1 then uEL
N >u

That is, under the elite-optimal equilibrium with endogenous equality before the law, normal
agents are always better-o¤ than under elite enforcement. This follows because inequality is reduced
and productive e¤ort among all individuals is increased. When full equality before the law is optimal
for elites, normal agents are also better-o¤ than under community enforcement.
Several points are worth noting here. Equality before the law, just like elite enforcement, makes
heavy use of the threat of coercive punishment in order to encourage pro-social behavior. However,
in contrast to elite enforcement, it features a low degree of inequality: elite agents are not treated
in a privileged manner. As already anticipated in the Introduction, this feature of equality before
the law in our model has much in common with the ideal of “rule of law” of Hayek (1960), who
in particular emphasized the de…ning role of equal application of laws and equal protection from
coercion. This type of equality before the law is also a critical component of the concept of “open
access order”proposed by North, Wallis and Weingast (2009), where society is governed according
to the rule of law, and access to the means of violence is separated from access to rents. It is also a
key aspect of inclusive economic institutions in Acemoglu and Robinson (2012), which depend on a
level economic playing …eld among all individuals and thus the removal of various privileges before
the law. Indeed, the evolution of many Western societies towards more democratic and inclusive
institutions can be viewed precisely as such a process of stripping away the privileges of elites.
Finally, we have so far assumed that if the best equilibrium for the elite involves some degree of
equality before the law—

> 0— then the elite can freely choose and commit to such an arrangement.

An important question is how this can be secured in practice. For example, in the matching

19

environment outlined in Section 2.2 where the elite control the means of coercion, they may be
unable to commit to subjecting themselves to punishments. One obvious and historically common
solution is to separate coercive functions from elite status. The vital aspect of this solution is to
transfer the means of coercion from elites to agents specialized in law enforcement, similar to what
the Meiji government did by disarming the samurai and creating a professional police force. A
related solution is to create a (su¢ ciently independent) government bureaucracy and judiciary to
resolve con‡icts and decide whom should be subject to punishment. In both cases, the practical
challenge is to ensure the independence and impartiality of the agents charged with law enforcement
or judiciary functions.

6

Comparative Statics: Towards Equality Before the Law

We now turn to our key comparative statics results on how the elite-optimal levels of production
and equality before the law vary with parameters.

6.1

Comparative Statics for Coercive Capacity

Our most important comparative static says that an increase in coercion increases economic inequality and decreases equality before the law.
Proposition 6 An increase in coercive capacity g leads to an increase in normal agent e¤ ort, a
decrease in elite agent e¤ ort, and a decrease in equality before the law.
Formally, xEE and xEL are strictly increasing in g, y EE and y EL are nonincreasing in g, and
is nonincreasing in g. In addition, if
statics on

y EE ,

y EL ,

and

> 0 and the solutions are interior, then the comparative

are strict.

Figure 2 provides a diagrammatic intuition for Proposition 6. An increase in g has no impact
on the indi¤erence curves of the elite, but shifts the boundary of (9) to the right. The …gure also
shows that the indi¤erence curves of the elite become less steep as we move to the right along a
horizontal line.23 Consequently, the shift out of (9) leads to a new tangency point with not only
greater x, but also lower y. Lower elite e¤ort then translates into a lower level of equality before
the law.
A complementary intuition is that coercive punishments and incentives provided by norms/threat
of withdrawal of future cooperation are substitutes at the margin. The greater is g, the less need
there is for additional incentives coming from norms, and this allows the elite reduce y. More
precisely, recall that part of the elites’ incentive to choose greater e¤ort y is that this indirectly
23

This follows because the slope of the indi¤erence curve is
concave).

20

0
fN
(x)
0 (y) ,
1 fE

which gets ‡atter as x increases (since fN is

Figure 2: The indi¤erence curves of the elite become ‡atter as we move to the right along a
horizontal line. An increase in g shifts out the red curve representing the boundary of the incentive
compatibility constraint (9) to the right, and thus leads to a new point of tangency with greater x
and lower y, and thus lower .
increase normal agent e¤ort x. An increase in g raises x for a …xed level of y. Because fN is concave
(i.e., there are diminishing returns to e¤ort), the term

(1

0 (x) in (6), which captures this
) fN

indirect e¤ect, declines when x increases. This encourages the elite to choose a lower y. Since
increasing

is a way to raise y (by making the elite subject to greater coercive punishments), an

increase in g also leads to a reduction in .24 The fact that this comparative static ceases to be strict
when

= 0 con…rms this intuition, since in this case there are no repeated game considerations

and hence no indirect e¤ect.25
This comparative static sheds light on one set of powerful forces leading to the emergence
of equality before the law. As already mentioned above, there are at least three distinct but
related reasons for why e¤ective coercive capacity g may decline. First, technological changes
may reduce the ability of the state and elites to impose punishments on normal agents or increase
the ability of normal agents to resist such punishments. This may be relevant for understanding
the social and political changes that Athens underwent between the 6th and 4th centuries BC.
Providing greater legal equality to non-elites was one of the major objectives of the political reforms
initiated by Solon in 594 BC and continued by Cleisthenes at the end of the 6th century BC. For
24

The direct, positive e¤ect of an increase in g on x always outweighs the indirect, negative e¤ect coming through
the decrease in y, so x is indeed increasing in g.
25
There is an exception to this: it is possible that d =dg is strictly negative even when = 0, as the value of
that binds (3) is decreasing in g even when = 0.

21

example, Solon promulgated a hubris law, which made it illegal— in fact, a capital o¤ense— to
act “hubristically” toward (violently intimidate or humiliate) any Athenian, even a slave. The
hubris law may be viewed as a nascent form of equality before the law. Cleisthenes’s subsequent
ostracism law, which enabled Athenians to ostracize and exile powerful politicians and elites, further
curtailed the political privileges of the elite, and can thus be viewed as another step in this direction.
An important factor paving the way for this institutional revolution was the change in military
technology from the Bronze Age to the Iron Age. When weapons were made of bronze, they were
expensive and were consequently monopolized by the elite. The Iron Age, as emphasized by Childe
(1942) “democratized warfare”, and led to more active involvement of free Athenian citizens in war,
as hoplites armed with iron weapons (Snodgrass, 1980). Consistent with our comparative static
result, this greater equality of access to the means of violence within Athenian society appears
to have been an important factor in increasing the demand for institutional change and creating
the conditions for the development of laws that applied equally to all Athenian citizens and even
provided some degree of protection to slaves (see, e.g., Ober, 2015).
Second, the extent of punishments may also be curtailed because of political changes empowering
normal agents. For example, as discussed in the Introduction, mass enfranchisement may have been
important in the repeal of the Master and Servant Acts in mid-19th-century Britain.
Third, changing values and social conventions may also limit the extent to which harsh punishments are viewed as socially acceptable (see, e.g., Elias, 1994, Pinker, 2011). This too will
correspond to a decline in g in our model and potentially trigger greater equality before the law.
This may have been another factor contributing to the repeal of the harshest punishments on
workers for contract breach as well as to the removal of other privileges of 19th-century British
elites.
Finally worth noting are historical examples where, rather than advancing, equality before the
law retrenches. One well-known case from European history is the establishment of the medieval
feudal hierarchy, where the well-armed nobility monopolized the means of coercion and signi…cantly
increased its privileges. A famous theory about the origins of this feudal order, advanced by Lynn
White (1962), links it to the invention and spread of the iron stirrup in Europe starting in the 8th
century. According to White, the iron stirrup increased the e¤ectiveness of heavily-armored cavalry
in combat and thus intensi…ed the coercive capability of those who could a¤ord horses, armor, and
weapons. Several aspects of this thesis, especially concerning the timing of the introduction of the
stirrup and the rise of the feudal order, are controversial, however. Our key comparative static
here provides an alternative channel through which the spread of the stirrup may have over time
contributed to social changes favoring the elite— by improving the technology of coercion and thus
creating a force against equality before the law.

22

6.2

Comparative Statics for Political Power

Our previous comparative static focused on restrictions on the extent of coercion that the elite can
exert while still maintaining their political power. Many of the social changes emphasized in that
context, most notably the emergence of mass democratic politics, not only put restrictions on the
use of coercion but reallocated political power away from the elite towards normal agents (see the
discussion and references in Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006). In this subsection, we show that a
decline in the relative political power of the elite will also contribute to the emergence of equality
before the law. We now establish this result in the simplest possible fashion (without introducing a
micro-founded model of the political power of the elite) by simply focusing on the set of equilibria
that maximize a weighted average of the utilities of the elite and normal agents, and then reducing
the weight of the elite in this social welfare function. In the process, we also con…rm that none of
our results so far depend on focusing on the best equilibrium from the viewpoint of the elite.
Our …rst result establishes that under elite enforcement (more generally, for any …xed level of
equality before the law ), a more equal distribution of political power typically leads to higher e¤ort
for both normal agents and elites, and hence higher output. In particular, this is true whenever
normal agents’incentive constraints bind (for example, whenever e¤ort is below the …rst-best level).
The intuition is that elite agents work more at the optimum under more equal Pareto weights, and
this in turn induces higher e¤ort from normal agents. Thus, inequality of political power reduces
production.
Proposition 7 Under elite enforcement, let xEE ( ) ; y EE ( ) denote the optimal equilibrium
e¤ ort levels with Pareto weight

on the elite, given by the solution to

max (1

x 0;y 0

) fN (x) + fE (y)

subject to (3) and (4). For all Pareto weights
and y EE ( )

>

0

(1

)x

y

, if xEE ( ) < xF B then xEE ( )

xEE ( 0 )

y EE ( 0 ).

Note that the assumption ;

0

says that the Pareto weights favor the elite.

In terms of Figure 1, an increase in the Pareto weight of the elite has no impact on the constraint
set and rotates the indi¤erence curves clockwise, thus shifting the equilibrium to a point with lower
x and y along (9). The resulting decline in elite e¤ort— combined with an increase in elite utility,
which makes the carrot of future cooperation more e¤ective for the elite and thus reduces the need
for the elite to face coercive punishment— then leads to a reduction in equality before the law.
Proposition 8 Let xEL ( ) ; y EL ( ) ;

( ) denote the optimal equilibrium levels of e¤ ort and

23

equality before the law with Pareto weight
max

x 0;y 0; 2[0;1]

(1

on the elite, given by the solution to
) fN (x) + fE (y)

subject to (9) and (10). For all Pareto weights
xEL ( 0 ), y EL ( )

6.3

y EL ( 0 ), and

>

(1

)x

y

, if xEL ( ) < xF B , then xEL ( )

0

( 0 ).

( )

Comparative Statics for the Returns to E¤ort

Our next comparative static analyzes how changes in the nature of the production function affect the transition to equality before the law. As discussed in the Introduction, several historical
examples— most notably the episodes of “defensive modernization”in 19th-century Prussia, Japan,
and the Ottoman Empire— suggest that reforms leading to greater equality before the law take place
when a society is faced with external threats that necessitate intensi…cation of industrialization or
armament. In terms of our model, this corresponds to an increase in the slope of the functions fN
and fE , that is, an increase in marginal returns to e¤ort (the need to increase production), but not
average returns (the economy’s productivity).
The distinction between marginal and average returns is important for this comparative static,
because increasing marginal returns encourages greater e¤ort from both normal and elite agents
(and hence greater equality before the law), while increasing average returns makes retaining their
privileged position more attractive for the elite. In this subsection, we therefore focus on rotations
of the fN and fE functions that isolate the …rst e¤ect, and show that such changes in the bene…t
production functions lead to greater equality before the law.
Suppose the production functions fN and fE are parameterized by
denote the elite-optimal equilibrium given

0

2 [0; 1]. Let (x0 ; y0 ;

2 (0; 1), and let (x ( ) ; y ( ) ;

0)

( )) denote the elite-

optimal equilibrium as a function of . Assume fN and fE are twice continuously di¤erentiable in
(x; ).
Proposition 9 Suppose that increasing

raises marginal returns to e¤ ort at x0 and y0 while

decreasing average returns to e¤ ort at x0 and y0 : that is,
@2
fN (x0 ;
@x@
Assume y ( ) and

0)

0;

@2
fE (y0 ;
@y@

0)

( ) are di¤ erentiable in

0;
at

@
fN (x0 ;
@
=

0.

0)

0;

@
fE (y0 ;
@

0)

0:

Then these derivatives are both non-

negative: that is, as marginal returns to e¤ ort increase, elite agents exert more e¤ ort, and equality
before the law increases.
The comparative static on x is ambiguous, because the positive incentive e¤ect of an increase
24

in y is o¤set by the negative incentive e¤ect of a reduction in average returns for …xed x and y .
The result that

d
d

is non-negative is somewhat subtle. Suppose increasing

raises marginal

returns while leaving average returns unchanged (a case allowed by the proposition). It is quite
intuitive that this leads to an increase in x and y . But why does this encourage greater equality
before the law? In other words, why is the increased carrot of future cooperation not enough to
justify the resulting higher level of elite e¤ort? Intuitively, increasing

raises both the level of elite

e¤ort collectively preferred by the elite group (y ) and the level of e¤ort that each elite agent …nds
it individually optimal to exert. But the latter increase will always fall short of the former, because
it is incentivized only by the increased bene…ts that elite agents enjoy in equilibrium, and since
the initial allocation was chosen to maximize net bene…ts to the elite, the implied increase in elite
e¤ort from these greater bene…ts will be small. Hence to achieve the desired increase in y , the
elite collectively need to make themselves subject to greater coercive punishments.26
Overall, the substantive conclusion of this subsection is that an increase in the marginal returns
to e¤ort, which may result from a change in technology or a situation of national emergency,
encourages greater equality before the law. This result sheds light on the question we posed in the
Introduction— why defensive modernization e¤orts, such as those in 19th-century Prussia, Japan,
and the Ottoman Empire, not only modernize the military and the …scal system but also attempt
to expand equality before the law. The answer that follows from our analysis is that equality before
the law is a way of improving the behavior of the elite, and thus indirectly increasing e¤ort on the
part of all agents in society.

6.4

Comparative Statics for Inequality

In this subsection, we slightly modify our baseline setup to discuss the e¤ects of economic inequality
between elite and normal agents on the emergence of equality before the law. Recent increases in
wealth and income inequality around the world (e.g., Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez, 2011) have
raised concerns about whether a system based on equal opportunity— and in our setting, equality
before the law— can survive in a highly unequal society. Scheidel (2017) argues this has not been
possible historically, and only war and revolution have tended to limit inequality and bring some
26

(1

To see this in a little more detail, denote total bene…ts from cooperation (gross of costs) by B =
) fN (x ( ) ; ) + fE (y ( ) ; ). Since (10) binds at , we have
g

At the elite-optimal equilibrium, we have

@B
@y

d
d

=

dy
d

= 1. Thus

dB
@B
@B dy
=
+
d
@
@y d
Hence, g dd
(1
) dy
. As
d
argument out in greater detail.

dy
d

0 and

dB
:
d

@B dy
dy
=
:
@y d
d

< 1, this implies

25

d
d

0. The proof of the proposition spells this

type of equal opportunity. There are indeed several historical cases where early steps towards
equality before the law have been reversed following increases in economic and political inequality,
for example, in the Roman Republic and medieval Venice (see, e.g., Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012,
and Puga and Tre‡er, 2014). We now show that one type of increase in inequality— where the elite
get richer while normal agents do not— makes equality before the law less likely to emerge (and
perhaps harder to maintain) in our model.
For this exercise, we return to the random matching version of our model in Section 2.2
where each agent’s e¤ort generates bene…ts for their partner and e¤ort decisions are made under anonymity. We then modify this setup by introducing heterogeneous endowments for elite and
normal agents, and then investigate the implications of an increase in the endowment of the elite
holding those of normal agents constant (and other combinations).
Let us now interpret e¤ort xi by agent i as producing fi (xi ) units of a non-storable consumption
good for her partner (where fi = fN or fE depending on one’s type). In addition, each agent has a
per-period endowment of consumption goods, which equals eN for normal agents and eE for elites.
Agents have utility function over consumption ui ( ) satisfying u0i > 0; u00i < 0 (where again ui = uN
or uE depending on the agent’s type). Consequently, if agent i has endowment ei and exerts e¤ort
xi while her partner exerts e¤ort xj , agent i’s payo¤ is
ui (ei + f (xj ))

xi :

The next result shows that an increase in elites’endowments decreases production. The intuition
is that increasing eE decreases elites’marginal utility of consumption, thus reducing both the direct
and indirect bene…ts of increasing y.
Proposition 10 An increase in elites’endowments eE leads to lower normal and elite agent e¤ ort.
Formally, xEE , xEL , y EE , and y EL are nonincreasing in eE .
The intuition for this result can be seen from Figure 1. The modi…ed problem here again
generates a set of convex indi¤erence curves, and an increase in elites’endowments has no e¤ect on
the constraint set but rotates the indi¤erence curves clockwise, decreasing both elite and normal
agent e¤ort, and consequently reducing equality before the law
Proposition 10 focuses on a rise in “inequality”driven by an increase in elite endowment with the
endowment of normal agents remaining constant. What happens if simultaneously the endowment
of normal agents, eN , declines? It turns out that the implications of this change are ambiguous:
on the one hand, with a lower endowment, normal agents work harder and the greater returns that
this creates for the elite discourages them from exerting e¤ort, reinforcing the result in Proposition
10. On the other hand, with a lower endowment, the sensitivity of normal agents’ e¤ort to elite
e¤ort increases and this might encourage the elites to increase their e¤ort. Nevertheless, it can be
26

shown that if uN is not very concave, this second e¤ect is dominated and thus the same result as in
Proposition 10 applies when we consider a simultaneous increase in elite endowment and decrease
in normal agent endowment.
What about the e¤ect of increasing elites’endowments on equality before the law? Recall that
is de…ned so that the elite incentive compatibility constraint, now given by
y

[(1

) uE (eE + fN (x)) + uE (eE + fE (y))

u (eE )] + g;

binds. An increase in eE , which from Proposition 10 reduces y, creates two opposing e¤ects on
this constraint. On the one hand, via the …rst two terms on the right-hand side, it relaxes the
constraint and thus pushes for a lower value of . On the other hand, via the

u (eE ) term, it

tightens the constraint. This o¤setting e¤ect comes from the fact that a higher endowment for the
elites improves their payo¤s under autarky, making deviation more tempting for them. Greater
equality before the law may now be useful to counteract this heightened temptation to deviate.
However, if we interpret the allocation of endowments as being socially determined as well— so
that deviators can be ostracized and excluded from having access to or enjoying the bene…ts from
their endowments— then this second e¤ect disappears. In this case, greater elite endowments (and
greater inequality) unambiguously reduce equality before the law.

6.5

Comparative Statics for the Size of the Elite

Our next comparative static says that a larger elite prefers a higher level of equality before the
law, i.e., higher . This is consistent with the argument of North, Wallis and Weingast (2009) that
…rst establishing some level of equality before the law among a larger segment of the elite (which
we interpret here as increasing the size of the elite) is a key doorstep condition for subsequently
extending equality before the law to the broader population.
Proposition 11 Assume fN = fE = f . Then an increase in the size of the elite,
increase in elite agent e¤ ort and an increase in equality before the law. Formally,
are nondecreasing in

, leads to an
y EE ,

y EL , and

. If the solutions are interior, then the comparative statics are strict.

To see the intuition for this result, note that an increase in

reduces x for a …xed level of y,

while also raising the marginal bene…t to elites of higher y for a …xed level of x and y. As f is
concave, the net e¤ect is to raise the marginal bene…t to elites of increasing y.27 The comparative
static with respect to

is strict even if

= 0, as changing

in‡uences the direct e¤ect term

f 0 y EL in (6) in addition to the indirect e¤ect. Finally, note that the overall e¤ect of an increase
The reason why this proposition, uniquely among our results, requires fN = fE is that if fE0 (y) is much smaller
0
than fN
(x) even when y
x, then increasing can decrease the net marginal bene…t to elites of increasing y and
reverse the comparative static.
27

27

in

on x is ambiguous, because the direct, negative e¤ect on x may be o¤set by the indirect,

positive e¤ect coming through the increase in y.

7

Private Bene…ts of Cooperation

We have assumed thus far that e¤ort is a pure public good— it creates equal bene…ts for everyone
in society. Though this assumption is a natural starting point and substantially simpli…es our
analysis, it is also useful to go beyond it for at least two reasons. First, while many forms of prosocial behavior generate bene…ts for everybody in society, these bene…ts are not necessarily equally
distributed. For example, e¤ort directed at production may bene…t everyone who consumes the
relevant good or uses it as an input (especially when markets are not perfectly competitive), but
may generate even greater bene…ts for one’s business partners or associates. Second, the pure
public good nature of cooperation implies that elites can be favored only by having to exert less
e¤ort than normal agents. In practice, elites may also receive special treatment from the non-elites
who interact with them more closely (as their employees, servants, serfs, etc.). In this section, we
generalize our baseline environment to address these issues.
Speci…cally, we analyze the random matching model described at the end of Section 2, where
e¤ort decisions are taken non-anonymously. In every period, agents …rst randomly match in pairs
and observe their partner’s status (normal or elite) and then exert e¤ort (which disproportionately
bene…ts one’s partner), and then each elite agent has the option of punishing her partner. Note
that any equilibrium of this non-anonymous random matching model in which players do not
condition their e¤ort choices on their partners’status reduces to an equilibrium of the anonymous
random matching model— and thus an equilibrium of our baseline, centralized model— so the nonanonymous random matching model is e¤ectively a generalization of the baseline model. In this
section, we show how this generalization a¤ects the structure of incentives, and we establish that our
most important comparative static result generalizes to this environment: a reduction in coercive
capacity g encourages greater equality before the law.28
To model the fact that cooperation imposes positive externalities on society without being a
pure public good, we assume that a fraction 1

2 [0; 1] of the bene…ts of cooperation accrue only

to one’s partner rather than to society at large. Thus,

(i.e., cooperation generates no positive externalities), and

= 0 corresponds to pure private goods
= 1 corresponds to pure public goods

(and is thus identical to our baseline environment). Formally, when player i chooses e¤ort xi , her
28

Our other comparative static results do not generalize without further conditions. These results are all robust
to introducing a small private goods component to cooperation, but when the private goods component is large the
results become more nuanced. The issue is that each type of agent chooses di¤erent e¤ort levels when matched with
normal and elite agents, and it is di¢ cult to rule out these two e¤ort levels moving in opposite directions with respect
to certain changes in the environment. As a result, to be able to unambiguously sign these comparative statics, we
would require additional assumptions, in particular conditions on third derivatives.

28

partner chooses e¤ort xj , and the distributions of e¤ort levels among normal agents and the elite
are, respectively, FN and FE , player i’s stage payo¤ is
(1

) fN (xj ) + ((1

) EFN [fN (x)] + EFE [fE (x)])

xi

) EFN [fN (x)] + EFE [fE (x)])

xi

if her partner is normal, and
(1

) fE (xj ) + ((1

if her partner is elite. A (symmetric, stationary, subgame perfect) equilibrium is now parameterized
by four variables, (w; x; y; z), where w is a normal agent’s equilibrium e¤ort when matched with
another normal agent, x is a normal agent’s e¤ort when matched with an elite, y is an elite’s e¤ort
when matched with a normal agent, and z is an elite’s e¤ort when matched with another elite.
Our main result in the private goods model is that increasing coercive capacity decreases equality
before the law, which again implies that limits on the extent of coercion are one major factor leading
to the emergence of equality before the law.
Proposition 12 Under endogenous equality before the law, suppose the elite-optimal level of equality before the law

is strictly less than 1. Then the solution to the elites’problem is di¤ erentiable

in g, and dw =dg

0, dx =dg

0, dy =dg

0, dz =dg

0, and d =dg

0.

The basic intuition for this result is similar to that in our baseline model, in particular Proposition 6, though the proof is more complicated as there are now four on-path e¤ort levels, rather
than two as in the baseline model. Nevertheless, as in our baseline environment, an increase in g
relaxes normal agents’incentive compatibility constraints and allows elites to demand greater e¤ort
from normal agents both when normal agents match with each other and when they match with
elites. As there are diminishing returns to e¤ort in each match, this reduces elites’ returns from
raising their own e¤ort in order to encourage yet greater e¤ort from normal agents. Hence, elites
work less in the elite-optimal equilibrium when g is higher, and therefore have less need to subject
themselves to the law.

8

Heterogeneous Elites

Finally, we consider two extensions of our framework that allow for heterogeneity— in terms of
productivity and political power— within the elite. We investigate what types of changes in the
composition of the elite encourage greater equality before the law.

29

8.1

Heterogeneous Productivity within the Elite

Several historical cases of the expansion of equality before the law have been attributed to shifts in
political power among subsets of the elite with heterogeneous economic interests. Most notably, it
is often argued that several aspects of economic and social modernization in late-medieval Western
Europe resulted from the changing political balance between di¤erent segments of the elite, in particular between commercial and landed interests (Moore, 1966, Aston and Philpin, 1987). We now
show that in a simple extensions of our model, a shift of political power away from landed interests
(here interpreted as the less productive part of the elite) to (the more productive) commercial
interests can support the emergence of equality before the law.
Formally, we assume there are two elite types that di¤er according to a productivity parameter
b: an elite agent with productivity b who exerts e¤ort y generates output fE (by). Fraction

H

of the population are (high-productivity, commercial) elites with productivity bH , and fraction

L

of the population are (low-productivity, landed) elites with productivity bL

bH . We assume

that an individual’s elite status and output are observable, but her productivity is unobservable.
Thus, members of the two elite subgroups cannot be asked to produce di¤erent output levels, since
otherwise each would pretend to be a member of the group that produces less output.29 If the
equilibrium e¤ort level of high-productivity elites is yH , then the equilibrium e¤ort level of lowproductivity elites is (bH =bL ) yH . Noting that all elites produce output fE (bH yH ), the resulting
incentive constraints are
x

[(1

H

L ) fN

(x) + (

H

+

L ) fE

(bH yH )] + g

yH
bH
yH
bL

[(1

H

L ) fN

(x) + (

H

+

L ) fE

(bH yH )] + g

[(1

H

L ) fN

(x) + (

H

+

L ) fE

(bH yH )] + g:

(13)

As bH > bL , the second constraint is slack and can be dropped. We are thus back to a problem
with two constraints, and now the elites’incentive constraint can be assumed to bind and is used
to de…ne the elite-optimal level of equality before the law.
Our main goal in this subsection is to investigate the implications of a shift in political power
from less productive to more productive elites. To model this in the simplest possible way, we
assume that negotiations within the elite lead to the maximization of a weighted average utility
of the two elite groups, with (Pareto) weight

on high-productivity elites and 1

on low-

productivity elites. The e¤ort level of the elite is then determined as a solution to the following
29

This is one part of our analysis that does depend on the continuum population assumption: the claim in the text
is clearly true with a continuum, but would require more careful justi…cation with a …nite population.

30

maximization problem:
max (1

H

yH 0

L ) fN

(x (yH )) + (

H

+

L ) fE

(bH yH )

+ (1

)

bH
bL

yH ;

where x (yH ) is implicitly de…ned as the level of x that binds the normal agents’ incentive constraint. Implicitly di¤erentiating x (yH ), we obtain
(
dx
=
dyH
1

0
L ) bH fE

+
(1

H

H

(bH yH )
:
0
L ) fN (x)

Using this expression, the …rst-order condition with respect to yH can be written as
(
1

H

+
(1

0
L ) bH fE
H

The right-hand side is decreasing in

(bH yH )
bH
=
0
bL
L ) fN (x)

bH

bL
bL

:

. Moreover, as fN and fE are concave and x is increasing

in yH , the left-hand side is decreasing in yH . Hence, x and yH are increasing in . Finally,

is

de…ned to satisfy (13) with equality, and therefore
d
g =
d
=

bH
bL
bH
bL

dyH
d
dyH
d

d
[(1
d
+ (1

L ) fN

H

)

bH
bL

dyH
d

(x (yH )) + (

H

+

L ) fE

(bH yH )]

0;

where the second equality follows by the …rst-order condition with respect to yH .
In sum, an increase in the political power of the more productive elite group (loosely approximating commercial interests in late middle-age Europe) is likely to lead to an increase in equality
before the law. The intuition is that an increase in equality before the law raises the level of output
required of all elite agents, and generating this increased output is less costly for more productive
elites. Since the marginal bene…t of an increase in equality before the law is the same for all elites
while the marginal cost of an increase in equality before the law is less for more productive elites,
an increase in e¤ort level is relatively more bene…cial for more productive elites. Hence, the more
politically powerful are the more productive elites, the greater is the equilibrium elite e¤ort and
this translates into a greater level of equality before the law.

8.2

Enforcement Hierarchy

Suppose again that there are two elite groups, now corresponding to “minor elites”(say barons) and
more powerful, “major elites”(say dukes). These two groups are now equally productive but di¤er
in their vulnerability to coercion. Speci…cally, suppose that— in the absence of equality before the
law— normal agents are vulnerable to coercion from both types of elites, while minor elites (type 1
31

elites) can be coerced by more powerful elites (type 2 elites), and the latter are initially completely
immune to coercion. The level of equality before the law

2 [0; 1] now parameterizes both the

vulnerability of minor elites to coercion from other minor elites and the vulnerability of major elites
to coercion from both minor and major elites. The resulting incentive constraints are
x

[(1

1

2 ) fN

(x) +

1 fE

(y1 ) +

2 fE

(y2 )] + (

y1

[(1

1

2 ) fN

(x) +

1 fE

(y1 ) +

2 fE

(y2 )] + (

1

+

2) g

y2

[(1

1

2 ) fN

(x) +

1 fE

(y1 ) +

2 fE

(y2 )] + (

1

+

2 ) g:

Intuitively, as

1

+

2) g

increases, this closes both the gap in privilege between normal agents and elites as

a whole and the gap between the minor and major elites
With two di¤erent elite incentive constraints, the issue of what level of equality before the law
is optimal for the elites is delicate. For example, if either minor elites or major elites could choose
both

and the resulting equilibrium, they would choose

= 1 while requiring more e¤ort from

the other elite group. These unintuitive possibilities disappear when all three incentive constraints
bind, and this is the case on which we focus in this subsection.30 This focus thus rules out equilibria
where one elite group sets a high level of equality before the law to coerce the other elite group
while exerting low e¤ort itself. Consequently, for any value of , the two elite groups di¤er in their
vulnerability to coercion, but the full force of the level of

that is chosen applies to both groups.

Under the assumption that all incentive constraints bind, consider again the problem of a
planner with Pareto weights ( ; 1

) on the two elite groups. When all incentive constraints

bind, this problem involves only the single choice variable . Letting x ( ), y1 ( ), and y2 ( ) be the
resulting e¤ort levels, we can obtain the endogenous level of equality before the law as a solution
to the following problem:

max

(1

) [(1

2[0;1]

=

max

2 ) fN

1

(
(1

) [(1

1

2[0;1]

1

+

(x ( )) +
2) g

2 ) fN

(

(1

(x ( )) +

1+

2) g

1 fE

(y1 ( )) +

) (
1 fE

1

+

(y2 ( ))]

2 fE

(y2 ( ))]

2) g

(y1 ( )) +

2g +

2 fE

:

2g

It is straightforward to see that this objective function is supermodular in ( ; ). Hence, the set
of optimal values of

is increasing in

in the strong set order. Thus, when minor elites have

more political power, the resulting level of equality before the law is higher. The intuition is that
since minor elites are already exposed to coercion by major elites, greater equality before the law
30
0
The assumptions that fN
(0) > 1 and fE0 (0) > 1 and that these functions are concave and bounded imply
that there exists a positive vector (x1 ; y1 ; y2 ) where all three constraints bind. The concavity of these functions also
implies that there is only one such vector.

32

increases the e¤ort of major elites by relatively more than it increases the e¤ort of minor elites.
This makes minor elites more inclined to favor equality before the law. Thus, an increase in minor
elites’political power leads to greater equality before the law.
This comparative static result, like the one with respect to

discussed above, is related to

North, Wallis and Weingast’s (2009) argument that rule of law among the elite is a precursor to
the emergence of equality before the law for all agents. Consistent with this comparative static
(and with North, Wallis and Weingast), several historical episodes support the notion that political
changes that strengthen minor elites encourage greater equality before the law. For example, the
Magna Carta was an agreement imposed by barons on King John in 1215, limiting his powers
and ability to act without the approval of the barons. But the …nal charter was formulated as a
concession from the king “to all the free men of our kingdom”, and went so far as to restrict the
ability of landowners to impose forced labor on their own serfs (see Holt, 2015, and the discussion
in Acemoglu and Robinson, 2018). Our extension in this subsection is a simple formalization of
these ideas: as the political power of “minor elites” increases relative to that of more powerful
elites, this encourages an extension of equality before the law for all agents in society.

9

Conclusion

This paper is a …rst step towards developing a theory of the rule of law, and it focuses in particular on the emergence of a vital component of the rule of law— equality before the law. Our
approach is to model the organization of society via a repeated game in which cooperation and
public good provision need to be encouraged. One way of doing this— reminiscent of the organization of stateless societies— is by “community enforcement”, relying only on the “carrot” of future
cooperation: agents that exert the requisite amount of e¤ort bene…t from future cooperation, and
those that deviate are excluded from these bene…ts. Another way of organizing society is to combine this carrot with the “stick” of coercion, which directly imposes costly punishments on those
who deviate from laws or social norms. We assume that, as has almost always been the case in
history, centralized states are initially under the control of a subset of privileged agents, in which
case coercive punishments favor this group of agents. We view these agents as the “elite”, and we
refer to this organization of society as “elite enforcement”. In contrast to the low levels of coercion
and inequality that prevail under community enforcement, under elite enforcement there is high
coercion and high inequality, both of which bene…t the elite. Moreover, in our model, the elite are
“above the law” in a very precise sense: they are not subject to coercion themselves, which makes
them privileged and better-o¤ than normal agents. Potentially shedding light on some important
debates in anthropology, we show that the transition from community enforcement to elite enforcement can increase or decrease the welfare of normal agents: on the one hand, it encourages greater

33

productive e¤ort; on the other, it privileges elites at the expense of normal agents.
The most important part of our analysis concerns situations where the elite can choose between
elite enforcement and various degrees of “equality before the law”, which in our model is interpreted
as the elite also being subject to coercive punishments for breaking the law. We show that it may
be optimal— even from the viewpoint of the elite— to introduce full equality before the law, which
combines high coercion with low inequality. The key mechanism is that by stripping the elite of their
privileges, equality before the law enhances the carrot of future cooperation for normal agents. This
encourages normal agents to exert greater e¤ort, which can bene…t everyone in society, including
the elite. Interestingly, we show that equality before the law also leads to low inequality— in the
case of our baseline model with pure public goods, complete equality— in that elites exert the same
level of e¤ort and receive the same utility as normal agents.
What factors encourage the emergence of equality before the law? We …rst show that a decline
in the extent of coercive punishments that elites can impose on citizens favors equality before the
law. Such a change in the “technology of coercion” can arise for several reasons, ranging from
equalizing changes in military technology, to increased political power of the citizens resulting from
democratization, to social changes that make certain harsh punishments simply unacceptable (as
emphasized by Elias, 1994, and Pinker, 2011). The intuition for this central comparative static is
that when punishments are limited, the stick of coercion becomes less attractive compared to the
carrot of cooperation, which tilts society towards greater levels of e¤ort from the elite, and thus
towards greater equality before the law. We also show that a direct increase in the political power of
normal agents has a similar e¤ect. We then establish that an increase in marginal returns to e¤ort
(but not average returns) also leads to greater equality before the law. This can be interpreted as a
national emergency or a change in international circumstances necessitating greater cooperation and
investment in public goods— such as the defensive modernization in 19th-century Prussia, Japan,
or the Ottoman Empire— leading to equality before the law. We also explore the implications of
economic inequality for equality before the law, and show that when the elite become richer, this
may discourage them from exerting additional e¤ort and thus hinder the emergence of equality
before the law. When the elite are heterogeneous in terms of their economic investments and
productivity (e.g., divided between landowners and commercial interests), a strengthening of more
productive segments of the elite also favors greater equality before the law. Finally, consistent with
the emphasis of North, Wallis and Weingast (2009), we show that various changes encouraging “rule
of law among the elite”— resulting either from an increase in the size of the elite or a change in
the balance of power within a heterogeneous elite towards its weaker members— encourage greater
equality before the law as well.
Many interesting areas remain to be explored. First, several important extensions of our framework would be interesting to study. These include endogenizing the size of the elite (for example,

34

by introducing some amount of social mobility, which could itself be determined as part of the
equilibrium) and allowing the elite to choose their coercive capacity. Second, it could be fruitful
to apply similar ideas to the internal organization of …rms. A key aspect of organizations that
has received much less attention than others in the economics literature is the balance of power
between “management” and “workers”. Tilting this balance in a way that induces managers to
exert more or better e¤ort can then incentivize workers, either via repeated game incentives or
gift-exchange type considerations. The analogue of our comparative static with respect to coercive
capacity here might be studied by considering changes in societal values, social norms, and institutions that make it less acceptable for managers to ask for certain actions from their employees.
There are interesting issues to consider in this context. These include the e¤ect of exit options and
markets on the choice internal organization, as well as what aspects of …rm architecture a¤ect the
balance between management and workers. Yet another direction in this context might be to merge
a model of labor coercion as in Acemoglu and Wolitzky (2011) with repeated game considerations,
so that the carrot of future cooperation interacts with coercive behavior by employers.
Finally, several issues related to the emergence of the rule of law remain to be investigated
systematically. For example, the notion of the rule of law as emphasized by philosophers, social
scientists, and economists requires not only equality before the law, but also e¤ective legal constraints on executive power— the “sovereign”must also be bound by the law. Modeling this aspect
of the rule of law together with equality before the law is an important area for future theoretical
research. Yet another critical role of the law is con‡ict resolution, the study of which requires a
more comprehensive approach to heterogeneity and con‡icts of interest within society. A particularly interesting issue here is the emergence of equality before the law in the context of con‡ict
resolution. Finally, Hayek (1960) emphasizes the importance of the gradual evolution over time
of the rule of law, an idea which is echoed by many legal philosophers, including H. L. A. Hart
(1961). Another challenging but important area for future research is to systematically investigate
this issue (i.e., whether there are reasons for gradual, evolutionary changes to support the rule
of law, and more generally reasons for laws to be consistent with existing norms and customs).
Relatedly, our approach has abstracted from the fact that, to be e¤ective, laws need to be obeyed,
which may also require them to be consistent with norms (e.g., Acemoglu and Jackson, 2017) or to
have legitimacy in the eyes of the public (e.g., Tyler, 2006). It would be fruitful to investigate how
these issues interact with equality before the law. Last but not least, empirical research directed at
understanding the causes and implications of the emergence of equality before the law is another
important area for subsequent research.

35

Appendix: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1
If x is an equilibrium e¤ort level, then
fN (x)

x

(1

) fN (x) :

This follows as the left-hand side is the equilibrium payo¤, and the right-hand side is a player’s
payo¤ from deviating to xi = 0 and subsequently receiving her minmax payo¤ (under community
enforcement) of 0. Hence, x
fN (x) in every equilibrium, and therefore (as fN is concave) x
xCE . Conversely, grim trigger strategies can support any e¤ort level up to xCE as an equilibrium.

Proof of Proposition 2
If (x; y) are equilibrium e¤ort levels, then
(1

) fN (x) + fE (y)

x

(1

) [(1

) fN (x) + fE (y)]

g:

This follows as the left-hand side is a normal agent’s equilibrium payo¤, and the right-hand side
is a normal agent’s payo¤ from deviating to xi = 0 and then being minmaxed, noting that a
normal agent’s minmax payo¤ is g because of course of punishments. Rearranging this expression
yields (3). The argument for (4) is the same, except that an elite agent’s minmax payo¤ is 0
rather than g. Moreover, (3) and (4) are su¢ cient as well as necessary for (x; y) to be a pair
of equilibrium e¤ort levels, because under these conditions grim trigger strategies combined with
coercive punishment of any deviator support constant e¤ort at x and y for normal and elite agents,
respectively. Finally, it is clear that (3) binds at the optimum, as increasing x increases the objective
and also relaxes constraint (4).
For the last part of the result, let x (y) be the value of x that binds (3). By the implicit
function theorem,
fE0 (y)
dx (y)
31
=
(14)
0 (x (y)) :
dy
1
(1
) fN
The total derivative of the objective with respect to y is then equal to
(1

0
) fN
(x (y))

dx (y)
+ fE0 (y)
dy

1=

1

fE0 (y)
0 (x (y))
(1
) fN

1:

By complementary slackness, at the solution either (i) y = 0 and the derivative is non-positive; (ii)
y > 0, (4) is slack, and the derivative equals 0; or (iii) constraint (4) binds and the derivative is
non-negative. This argument yields (5)–(7).

Proof of Proposition 3
0 xEE <
As fN is concave and xEE = (1
) fN xEE + fE y EE +g, we have that (1
) fN
0
1 uniformly over . By (5)–(7) and fE (0) < 1, there exists
> 0 such that if
< , then
EE
EE
EE
y
= 0 for all g
0. Hence, for
< , dx =dg
0 (as x
is de…ned as the solution to
31
The denominator is non-zero because, by concavity of fN and inspection of (3), 1
strictly positive at x = x (y).

36

(1

0
) fN
(x) must be

x = (1

) fN (x) + g), and
duEE
N
= (1
dg

0
) fN
xEE

1

dxEE
:
dg

EE < x
So there exists x
^ such that duEE
^ and non-positive for xEE > x
^.
N =dg is non-negative for x
EE
EE
Again using the fact that dx =dg 0, we conclude that uN is single-peaked in g.

Proof of Proposition 4
If the solution to the elites’ problem involves
= 0, the problem reduces to that under elite
enforcement. If instead
> 0, then (10) binds by the assumption that
is minimal. As (9)
EL
EL
EL
EL
always binds, when
= 1 it immediately follows that x ; y
= x ;y
. When
2 (0; 1),
the elite-optimal equilibrium is an interior solution to (8), subject to y < y EL . Hence, y EL must
satisfy the …rst-order condition (11) derived in the proof of Proposition 2.

Proof of Proposition 5
First, note that xEL ; y EL
xEE ; y EE , with strict equality if
EE
x
is the positive root of the concave function
[(1
and when

) fN (x) + fE (x

g)] + g

> 0. To see this, note that

x;

> 0, xEL is the positive root of the concave function
[(1

) fN (x) + fE (x

(1

) g)] + g

x

(where we have used the fact that y EL = xEL (1
) g when
> 0). The latter function is
everywhere strictly greater than the former, so its positive root is strictly greater. The argument
for y EL y EE is similar.
Next, as normal agents’incentive constraint binds, we have
uEE
= (1
N
uEL
N

= (1

) (1
) (1

) fN xEE + fE y EE
) fN x

EL

+ fE y

EL

g;
g:

As xEL xEE , y EL y EE , and fN and fE are increasing, it follows that uEL
uEE
N
N .
EL
EL
EL
EL
Finally, we have seen that if
= 1 then x
= y , and hence uN = uE . Since uEL
E
CE .
uEE
uCE , with strict equality if
> 0, it follows that uEL
E
N >u

Proof of Proposition 6
Let uE (g) denote the value of (12) given coercive capacity g
0. We claim that uE (g) is a
strictly increasing and strictly concave function of g. Strict monotonicity is obvious, as one possible response to an increase in g is to increase x while leaving y unchanged. For strict concavity, suppose (x; y) is a solution given coercive capacity g and (x0 ; y 0 ) is a solution given coercive capacity g 0 > g. By strict monotonicity, (x; y) 6= (x0 ; y 0 ). Moreover, for all
2 (0; 1),
0
0
(x ; y ) = ( x + (1
) x ; y + (1
) y ) is feasible given coercive capacity g + (1
) g 0 (as fN
and fE are concave), and elite utility at (x ; y ) is strictly greater than the -weighted average of
elite utility at (x; y) and (x0 ; y 0 ).

37

Next, let

N

be the Lagrange multiplier on (3). Note that
duE (g)
=
dg

N:

Hence, N is strictly decreasing in g.
It is now straightforward to show that (elite-optimal) normal agent e¤ort is nondecreasing in g
and elite agent e¤ort is nonincreasing in g. In particular, the …rst-order conditions of the Lagrangian
with respect to x and y are
(1

0
) fN
(x) =

N

fE0 (y) =

N

1

1

(1

0
) fN
(x) ;

fE0 (y) :

0 (x) < 1 and f 0 (y) < 1. As f and f are concave, implicitly
At an interior optimum, (1
) fN
N
E
E
di¤erentiating the …rst-order conditions and using the fact that N is strictly decreasing implies
that the optimal value of x is strictly increasing, and the optimal value of y is nonincreasing and is
strictly decreasing when > 0.
Finally, to derive the comparative static on , recall that
is the value of that binds (10),
EE
EL
when y 2 y ; y
. In this case, implicitly di¤erentiating (10) yields

1
d
=
dg
g

fE0 (y)

1

dy
dg

0
) fN
(x)

(1

dx
dg

:

As dy=dg 0 and dx=dg 0, this implies d =dg < 0. Finally, as
= 0 when y
when y = y EL , this implies that
is everywhere nonincreasing in g.

y EE and

=1

Proof of Proposition 7
Note that, for all
and x xF B , -weighted social welfare is increasing in x, and increasing
x relaxes (4). Hence, at the optimum either xEE ( ) xF B or (3) binds. Let x (y) be the value
of x that binds (3), and recall that the formula for dx (y) =dy is given by (14). Therefore, when
x = x (y), the total derivative of social welfare with respect to y equals
(1

0
) fN
(x (y))

(1

)

dx (y)
+ fE0 (y)
dy

= fE0 (y)

1

1
(1

(1
)
0
) fN (x (y))

:

Setting the derivative equal to 0 and rearranging yields
fE0 (y)

+

1

+ (1

0
) fN
(x (y)) = 1:

As the left-hand side of this equation is decreasing in y, x (y), and , and x (y) is nondecreasing
in y, it follows that the solution y (and hence x (y)) is nonincreasing in .
Finally, since we have shown that xEE ( ) = x (y) whenever xEE ( ) < xF B , it follows that
EE
x (~ ) is nonincreasing in ~ in a neighborhood of any such that xEE ( ) < xF B . The fact
that xEE ( ) < xF B then implies that xEE (~ ) (and hence y EE (~ )) is nonincreasing on the entire
interval [ 0 ; ].

38

Proof of Proposition 8
The argument that x and y are nonincreasing in is the same as in Proposition 7. To show this
implies that
is also nonincreasing, rewrite (10) as
g = (1

)y

[(1
|

) fN (x) + fE (y)
{z

y]:
}

=uE

Note that uE is always nondecreasing in . Hence, as y is nonincreasing,

is also nonincreasing.

Proof of Proposition 9
We …rst show that dy
0. Suppose instead that dy
d
d < 0. We …rst show that this implies
dy
and
cannot
both
be
negative.
and then show that dx
d
d
As (3) binds at the optimum,
x ( ) = [(1

dx
d

0,

) fN (x ( ) ; ) + fE (y ( ) ; )] + g:

To simplify notation, let f N = fN (x ( ) ; ) and let f E = fE (y ( ) ; ). Totally di¤erentiating
with respect to yields
dx
d

1

(1

) fxN =

) f N + fyE

(1

dy
+ fE :
d

(15)

Recall that 1 > (1
) fxN (because (3) binds and fN is concave). Therefore, as f N and f E are
dy
non-positive, when d < 0, we also have dx
0.
d
Next, rewriting the …rst-order condition (11) using this notation, we have
fyE + (1
Totally di¤erentiating with respect to
E
fyy

) fxN = 1:

(16)

yields

dy
E
+ (1
+ fy;
d

N
) fxx

dx
+ (1
d

N
= 0:
) fx;

E and f N are negative and f E and f
As fyy
x; are non-negative, if
xx
y;

dy
d

< 0 and

dx
d

0 then we

dy
d

arrive at a contradiction. This establishes that
0.
d
It remains to show that d
0. To see this, note that either dd = 0 or
2 (0; 1). The former
case is trivial. In the latter case,
is de…ned so as to bind the elites’ incentive constraint (10).
That is,
1
[(1
) fN (x ( ) ; ) + fE (y ( ) ; )]] :
( ) = [y ( )
g
Hence,

d
d

has the same sign as
dy
d

(1

) fxN

dx
+ fN
d

39

+

fyE

dy
+ fE
d

:

(17)

Note that by (15),
dx =d
dy =d

=

fyE
1

) fxN

(1
fyE

1

) fxN

(1

(1
1

+

) fN + fE
(1
) fxN

:

Moreover, by (16),
fyE
1

) fxN

(1

= :

Hence, (17) equals

=

dy
1
d
dy
1
d
dy
[1
d

fN
dx =d
+
dy =d
dy =d

(1

) fxN

(1

) fxN + fyE

fyE +

+

fE
dy =d

];

where the last equation again follows by (16). Hence,

dy
d

0 and

< 1 imply

d
d

0.

Proof of Proposition 10
The elites’problem in this case becomes
max

x 0;y2[0;y]

(1

) uE (eE + fN (x)) + uE (eE + fE (y))

y

subject to
x

[(1

) uN (eN + fN (x)) + uN (eN + fE (y))

uN (eN )] + g:

Letting x (y) be the value of x that binds the constraint, we have
dx
=
dy
1

u0N (eN + fE (y)) fE0 (y)
0 (x) :
(1
) u0N (eN + fN (x)) fN

With this equation, the elites’…rst-order condition is
(1

0
) u0E (eE + fN (x (y))) fN
(x (y))

dx
+ u0E (eE + fE (y)) fE0 (y) = 1
dy

As x (y) is nondecreasing and uE , fN , and fE are concave, we see that the left-hand side of the
…rst-order condition is nonincreasing in both y and eE . Therefore, the optimal level of y (and hence
the optimal level of x) is nonincreasing in eE .

Proof of Proposition 11
Imposing fN = fE = f , we rewrite (12) as
max (1

y2[0;y]

) f (x (y; )) + f (y)

40

y;

(18)

where x (y; ) is the value of x that makes (3) hold as equality when the fraction of elite agents
is . We now show that the solution to (18) is nonincreasing in . Recall the relevant …rst-order
condition in this case,
f 0 (y) + (1
) f 0 (x (y; )) = 1:
Implicitly di¤erentiating yields
dy
=
d

f 0 (y)

) f 00 (x (y; )) @x @(y;

f 0 (x (y; )) + (1

(y;
) f 00 (x) @x @y

f 00 (y) + (1

)

)

:

Note that y x (y; ), and therefore f 0 (y) > f 0 (x (y; )). In addition, x (y; ) is nonincreasing
in (again because y
x (y; )). Hence, the numerator in the above expression is positive and
the denominator is negative, so the overall expression is positive. Hence, dy=d
0, with strict
inequality when y is interior.
Next, when y 2 y EE ; y EL , and hence (10) binds, we have
x (y; ) = y + (1

) g:

We may thus rewrite (10) as
y = [(1

) f (y + (1

) g) + f (y)] + g:

Implicitly di¤erentiating yields
[1
d
=
d

((1

) f 0 (x (y; )) + f 0 (y))] ddy + [f (x (y; ))
g [1
(1
) f 0 (x (y; ))]

f (y)]

:

In this expression, all three terms in brackets are positive. More speci…cally, the …rst is positive by
the …rst-order condition; the second is non-negative as y
x (y; ); and the third is positive by
de…nition of x (y; ). Hence, dy=d > 0 implies d =d > 0. As
= 0 when y y EE and
=1
EL
when y = y , this implies that
is everywhere nonincreasing in g.

Proof of Proposition 12
In an equilibrium with e¤ort levels (w; x; y; z), expected per-period bene…ts of cooperation for a
normal agent (gross of costs) are given by
BN (w; x; y; z) = (1

) [(1

) fN (w) + fE (y)] +

[(1

) fN (x) + fE (z)] ;

and expected per-period bene…ts for an elite agent are given by
BE (w; x; y; z) =

(1

) [(1

) fN (w) + fE (y)] + (1

(1

)) [(1

) fN (x) + fE (z)] :

The following lemma characterizes equilibria for a given level of equality before the law .
Lemma 1 Given a level of equality before the law , there exists an equilibrium with e¤ ort levels

41

(w; x; y; z) if and only if
(1
(1

(1

)w +

)) x + (1
(1

(1

(1

)y +

)) z + (1

x

BN (w; x; y; z) +

)w

g

BN (w; x; y; z) + (1

z

BE (w; x; y; z) +

)y

(19)
(1

)) g

(20)

g

BE (w; x; y; z) + (1

(21)
(1

)) g:

(22)

Proof. In an equilibrium with e¤ort levels (w; x; y; z), we have
(1

) EFN [fN (x)]+ EFE [fE (x)] = (1

) [(1

) fN (w) + fE (y)]+ [(1

) fN (x) + fE (z)] :

Hence, a normal agent’s equilibrium payo¤ is
(1

) [(1

= (1

) fN (w) + fE (y)] + [(1

) [(1

) fN (w) + fE (y)] +

) EFN [fN (x)] + EFE [fE (x)]]
[(1

) fN (x) + fE (z)]

(1

(1

)w

)w

x

x;

and elite agent’s equilibrium payo¤ is
(1
=

) [(1

(1

) fN (x) + fE (z)] + [(1

) [(1

) EFN [fN (x)] + EFE [fE (x)]]

) fN (w) + fE (y)] + (1

(1

)) [(1

(1

) fN (x) + fE (z)]

)y
(1

z
)y

z:

A normal agent’s incentive constraint when matched with another normal agent is thus
(1

) (fN (w)

+ [(1
(1

w)

) [(1

) fN (w) + fE (y)] +

) fN (w)

[(1

) fN (x) + fE (z)]

(1

)w

x]

g;

where the left-hand side is a normal agent’s equilibrium payo¤ when matched with another normal
agent and the right-hand side is a normal agent’s payo¤ from deviating to xi = 0 when matched with
a normal agent and subsequently receiving her minmax payo¤ of
g (noting that a normal agent
matched with another normal agent cannot be punished in the current period). This rearranges to
(19). Similarly, a normal agent’s incentive constraint when matched with an elite is
(1

) (fE (y)

+ [(1
(1

x)

) [(1

) fN (w) + fE (y)] +

) (fE (y)

g)

[(1

) fN (x) + fE (z)]

(1

)w

x]

g;

as in this case a normal agent can be punished in the current period. This rearranges to (20). The
argument for elite agents is similar, noting that an elite agent’s minmax payo¤ is
g rather than
g.
Turning to the proof of the proposition, the elites’problem is
max

w;x;y;z;

(1

) [(1

) fN (w) + fE (y)]+(1

subject to (19)–(22). If
problem is equivalent to
max

w;x;y;z

(1

) [(1

(1

)) [(1

) fN (x) + fE (z)] (1

)y

z

< 1, then the elite incentive constraints (21) and (22) are slack, so the

) fN (w) + fE (y)]+(1

(1

42

)) [(1

) fN (x) + fE (z)] (1

)y

z

subject to (19) and (20). We consider this less-constrained problem is what follows. In particular,
we will show dw =dg 0, dx =dg 0, dy =dg 0, dz =dg 0, and
fE0 (y )

1
1

(1

)) fE0

(1

(z )

0;

(23)

0:

(24)

We …rst note that these inequalities imply d =dg
0. To see this, recall that
is de…ned
as the smallest value of such that (21) or (22) binds. Implicitly di¤erentiate (21) and (22) with
respect to g to obtain

=

dy
1
dg
dw h
dg

) fE0 (y ) +

(1

i dx
0
)2 fN
(w ) +
dg

(1

dz
dg

(1

(1

(1

(1

) fE0 (y ) +

dz
1
dg

(1

(1

)) (1

)) fE0 (z )

0
) fN
(x ) +

)) (1

+

g

d
dg

and

=

dy
(1
dg
dw h
(1
dg

)

(1

i dx
0
)2 fN
(w ) +
dg

(1

)

(1

(1

0
) fN
(x ) +

)) fE0 (z )
+

g

d
:
dg

Note that (23) and (24) imply that all bracketed terms in both of these equations are non-negative.
Hence, if (23) and (24) hold, and in addition dw =dg 0, dx =dg 0, dy =dg 0, and dz =dg 0,
then, whichever of (21) and (22) is the e¤ective constraint, d =dg must be non-positive.
To derive the desired inequalities, let uEL
E (g) be the value of the elites’problem for parameter
EL
g. Note that uE (g) is a concave function of g. To see this, suppose (w; x) is a solution given
coercive capacity g and (w0 ; x0 ) is a solution given coercive capacity g 0 > g. Then, for all 2 (0; 1),
(w ; x ) = ( w + (1
) w0 ; x + (1
) x0 ) is feasible given coercive capacity g + (1
) g 0 (as
fN and fE are concave), and elite utility at (w ; x ) is greater than the -weighted average of elite
utility at (w; x) and (w0 ; x0 ).
Next, note that at least one of the normal agent incentive constraints (19) and (20) binds at the
optimum. Suppose …rst that exactly one of these constraints binds. Letting N N 0 and N E 0
be the multipliers on (19) and (20), respectively,
duEL
E
=
dg

NN

+ (1

(1

(1

))

))

NE:

As uEL
E (g) is concave, we also have
d

NN

dg

+ (1

d

NE

dg

0:

Since we have assumed that one of the two constraints binds, this implies that one of d N N =dg
and d N E =dg is non-positive and the other is zero. Now, note that the …rst-order conditions in the

43

less-constrained problem are given by

(1

(1

[1
+ N E [ (1

0
)2 fN
(w)

(1

0
) fN
(x)

)) (1
(1

+

) fE0 (y)
(1

)

NN
NE

[

[1

(1

(1

)+(

= 0

(1

0 (x)]
) fN
0 (x)]
(1
) fN

= 0

NE)

(1

) (1
) (1

)

NN

)) fE0 (z)

(1

0 (w)]
) fN
0 (w)]
) fN

(1
(1

NN

+

+(

NN

+

) fE0 (y) = 0;

NE)

2 0
fE

(z) = 0:

0 (w)
0 (x)
If (19) binds, then 1
(1
) (1
) fN
0 and
(1
) fN
0,
0
and if it is (20) that binds, then (1
)
(1
) (1
) fN (w)
0 and 1
(1
)
0 (x)
(1
) fN
0 (otherwise, increasing w or x would relax the binding constraint while increasing the objective). As d =dg
0 for the binding constraint, the left-hand sides of the …rst
two …rst-order conditions are nondecreasing in g for …xed w and z. Hence, implicitly di¤erentiating
these …rst-order conditions with respect to g implies that dw =dg and dx =dg are both non-negative.
Similarly, the left-hand sides of third and fourth …rst-order conditions are nonincreasing in g for
…xed y and z. Hence, implicitly di¤erentiating these …rst-order conditions with respect to g implies
that dy =dg and dz =dg are both non-positive. Finally, as the multipliers are non-negative, the
third and fourth …rst-order conditions also yield

1

) fE0 (y )

(1
(1

(1

fE0

))

0;

(z )

0:

These inequalities imply (23) and (24), completing the proof in the case where exactly one of the
normal agent incentive constraints bind.
Finally, suppose that both (19) and (20) bind. In this case, g = x w, so substituting
(x w)
for g in (19) and (20) lets us rewrite the elite’s problem as
max (1

) [(1

x;y;z

) fN (x

g) + fE (y)]+(1

(1

)) [(1

) fN (x) + fE (z)] (1

[(1

) fN (x) + fE (z)]] + g:

)y

subject to
x = [(1
Let

NE

) [(1

) fN (x

g) + fE (y)] +

0 be the multiplier on (25). Then
duEL
E
=
dg

so the fact that uEL
E (g) is concave implies d
rewritten problem are

+ (1

(25)

(1
(1

0 (x
)2 fN
)) (1

g)
0 (x)
) fN
(1

+

N E =dg

0. Finally the …rst-order conditions in the

1

(1
+

NE

) fE0 (y)
(1

NE;

(1

(1

0 (x
) (1
) fN
0
(1
) fN (x)

)+

)) fE0 (z)

NE

= 0

) fE0 (y) = 0;

(1
+

g)

NE

2 0
fE

(z) = 0:

By a similar argument as above, implicitly di¤erentiating the …rst-order conditions with respect to
g yields dx =dg 0 (and hence dw =dg 0), dy =dg 0, dz =dg 0, (23), and (24).
44

z

References
[1] Abreu, Dilip. “Extremal Equilibria of Oligopolistic Supergames”. Journal of Economic Theory
39 (1986): 191-225.
[2] Acemoglu, Daron, and Matthew O. Jackson. “Social Norms and the Enforcement of Laws”.
Journal of the European Economic Association. 15.2 (2017): 245-295.
[3] Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. “Why Did the West Extend the Franchise? Democracy, Inequality, and Growth in Historical Perspective”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 115.4
(2000): 1167-1199.
[4] Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy.
Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[5] Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty. Crown, 2012.
[6] Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. The Narrow Corridor to Liberty: The Red Queen
and the Struggle of State against Society. Book manuscript, 2018.
[7] Acemoglu, Daron, et al. “The Consequences of Radical Reform: The French Revolution”.
American Economic Review 101.7 (2011): 3286-3307.
[8] Acemoglu, Daron, and Alexander Wolitzky. “The Economics of Labor Coercion”. Econometrica
72.9 (2011): 555-600.
[9] Acemoglu, Daron, and Alexander Wolitzky. “Sustaining Cooperation: Community Enforcement vs. Specialized Enforcement”. Working paper, 2018.
[10] Aldashev, Gani, and Giorgio Zanarone. “Endogenous Enforcement Institutions”. Journal of
Development Economics 128 (2017): 49-64.
[11] Ali, S. Nageeb, and David A. Miller. “Enforcing Cooperation in Networked Societies”. Working
paper, 2014.
[12] Ali, S. Nageeb, and David A. Miller. “Ostracism and Forgiveness”. American Economic Review
106.8 (2016): 2329-48.
[13] Aston, Trevor Henry,and Charles HE Philpin, eds. The Brenner Debate: Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe. Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press,
1987.
[14] Atkinson, Anthony B., Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez. “Top Incomes in the Long Run
of History”. Journal of Economic Literature 49.1 (2011): 3-71.
[15] Baker, George, Robert Gibbons, and Kevin J. Murphy. “Subjective performance measures in
optimal incentive contracts”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109.4 (1994): 1125-1156.
[16] Baker, George, Robert Gibbons, and Kevin J. Murphy. “Relational Contracts and the Theory
of the Firm”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117.1 (2002): 39-84.
[17] Bates, Robert H. Prosperity and Violence: Political Economy of Development. WW Norton,
New York, 2001.
45

[18] Bates, Robert, Avner Greif, and Smita Singh. “Organizing violence”. Journal of Con‡ict
Resolution 46 (2002): 599-628.
[19] Baumard, Nicholas. “Has Punishment Played a Role in the Evolution of Cooperation? A
Critical Review”. Mind and Society, 9 (2010): 171-192.
[20] Berman, Harold J. Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal Tradition.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1983.
[21] Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson. Pillars of Prosperity: The Political Economics of Development Clusters. Princeton University Press, 2011.
[22] Bidner, Chris, and Patrick Francois. “The Emergence of Political Accountability”. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 128.3 (2013): 1397-1448.
[23] Blanning, Timothy C. W. “The French Revolution and the Modernization of Germany”. Central European History 22.2 (1989): 109-129.
[24] Boehm, Christopher. Blood Revenge: The Enactment and Management of Con‡ict in Montenegro and Other Tribal Societies. University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, 1986.
[25] Boehm, Christopher. Hierarchy in the Forest: Egalitarianism and the Evolution of Human
Altruism, Harvard University Press (1999).
[26] Boehm, Christopher. Moral Origins: The Evolution of Virtue, Altruism, and Shame. Basic
Books, 2012.
[27] Bohannan, Paul and Laura Bohannan. Tiv Economy. Northwestern University Press, 1968.
[28] Briggs, Jean L. Never in Anger: Portrait of an Eskimo Family. Harvard University Press,
1970.
[29] Brenner, Robert. “Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial
Europe”. Past & Present 70 (1976): 30-75.
[30] Buruma, Ian. Inventing Japan: 1853-1964. Modern Library, 2003.
[31] Chagnon, Napoleon, The Yanomamo. Nelson Education, 1968.
[32] Childe, Gordon. What Happened in History. Penguin Books, London, 1942.
[33] Dixit, Avinash K. Lawlessness and Economics: Alternative Modes of Governance. Princeton
University Press, 2007.
[34] Drew, Katherine Fischer. The Laws of the Salian Franks, University of Pennsylvania Press,
1991.
[35] Elias, Norbert. The Civilizing Process, Oxford: Blackwell 1994.
[36] Ellison, Glenn. “Cooperation in the Prisoner’s Dilemma with Anonymous Random Matching”.
Review of Economic Studies 61 (1994): 567-588.
[37] Ember, Carol. “Myths about Hunter-Gatherers”, Ethnology, 17, (1978): 439-448.
[38] Farrell, Joseph, and Eric Maskin. “Renegotiation in Repeated Games”. Games and Economic
Behavior 1.4 (1989): 327-360.
46

[39] Fearon, James D. “Self-Enforcing Democracy”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126.4 (2011):
1661-1708.
[40] Fisher, Herbert A. L. Studies in Napoleonic Statesmanship: Germany, Oxford; Clarendon
Press, 1903.
[41] Flannery, Kent, and Joyce Marcus. The Creation of Inequality: How our Prehistoric Ancestors
Set the Stage for Monarchy, Slavery, and Empire. Harvard University Press, 2014.
[42] Fukuyama, Francis. The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the French
Revolution. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011.
[43] Gehlbach, Scott, and Philip Keefer. “Investment without Democracy: Ruling-Party Institutionalization and Credible Commitment in Autocracies”. Journal of Comparative Economics
39.2 (2011): 123-139.
[44] Granovetter, Mark. “Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embeddedness”.
American Journal of Sociology 91.3 (1985): 481-510.
[45] Greif, Avner. “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The
Maghribi Traders’Coalition”. American Economic Review (1993): 525-548.
[46] Grossman, Herschel I. ““Make Us a King”: Anarchy, Predation, and the State”. European
Journal of Political Economy 18.1 (2002): 31-46.
[47] Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart. “The Costs and Bene…ts of Ownership: A Theory
of Vertical and Lateral Integration”. Journal of Political Economy 94.4 (1986): 691-719.
[48] Hart, H. L. A. The Concept of Law. Oxford (1961).
[49] Hart, Oliver, and John Moore. “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm”. Journal of
Political Economy 98.6 (1990): 1119-1158.
[50] Hayek, Freidrich. The Constitution of Liberty, University of Chicago Press (1960).
[51] Holt, James C. Magna Carta. Third Edition, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2015.
[52] Huntington, Samuel. Political Order in Changing Societies. Yale University Press, New Haven,
1968.
[53] Jansen, Marius B. The Making of Modern Japan. Harvard University Press, 2002.
[54] Johnson, Allen W. and Timothy Earle. The Evolution of Human Societies: From Foraging
Group to Agrarian State. Stanford University Press, 2000.
[55] Jones, Eric The European Miralce: Environments, Economies and Geographies in the History
of Europe and Asia. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
[56] Kandori, Michihiro. “Social Norms and Community Enforcement”. Review of Economic Studies
59 (1992): 63-80.
[57] Knauft, Bruce. “Reconsidering Violence in Simple Human Societies”, Current Anthropology,
28 (1987): 457-500.

47

[58] Konrad, Kai Andreas, and Stergios Skaperdas. ‘The Market for Protection and the Origin of
the State”. Economic Theory 50 (2012): 417-443 .
[59] Kern, Fritz. Kingship and Law in the Middle Ages. Translated by S. B. Chrimes, The Law
Book Exchange Ltd., New Jersey, 1956.
[60] LeBlanc, Steven A., and Katherine E. Register. Constant Battles: Why We Fight. Macmillan,
New York, 2004.
[61] Levi, Margaret. Of Rule and Revenue. University of California Press, 1989.
[62] Levine, David K., and Salvatore Modica. “Peer Discipline and Incentives Within Groups”.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 123 (2016): 19-30.
[63] Lizzeri, Alessandro, and Nicola Persico. “Why Did the Elites Extend the Su¤rage? Democracy
and the Scope of Government, with an Application to Britain’s “Age of Reform””. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119.2 (2004): 707-765.
[64] Macaulay, Stewart. “Non-Contractual Relations in Business: A Preliminary Study”. American
Sociological Review 28.1 (1963): 55-67.
[65] Marlowe, Frank. The Hadza: Hunter-Gatherers of Tanzania. University of California Press,
Berkeley 2010.
[66] Masten, Scott E., and Jens Prüfer. “On the Evolution of Collective Enforcement Institutions:
Communities and Courts”. Journal of Legal Studies 43 (2014): 359-400.
[67] Milgrom, Paul R., Douglass C. North, and Barry R. Weingast. “The Role of Institutions in the
Revival of Trade: The Law Merchant, Private Judges, and the Champagne Fairs”. Economics
& Politics 2.1 (1990): 1-23.
[68] Moore, Barrington. The Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and Peasant in
the Making of the Modern World. Beacon Press, Boston, 1966.
[69] Moselle, Boaz, and Benjamin Polak. “A Model of a Predatory State”. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 17.1 (2001): 1-33.
[70] Myerson, Roger B. “The Autocrat’s Credibility Problem and Foundations of the Constitutional
State”. American Political Science Review 102.1 (2008): 125-139.
[71] Naidu, Suresh, and Noam Yuchtman. “Coercive Contract Enforcement: Law and the Labor
Market in Nineteenth Century Industrial Britain”. American Economic Review 103.1 (2013):
107-44.
[72] North, Douglass C., John Joseph Wallis and Barry R. Weingast. Violence and Social Orders: A
Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History. Cambridge University Press,
2009.
[73] North, Douglass C., and Barry R. Weingast. “Constitutions and Commitment: the Evolution of
Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England”. Journal of Economic
History 49.4 (1989): 803-832.
[74] Ober, Josiah. The Rise and Fall of Classical Greece. Penguin, New York, 2015.

48

[75] Ostrom, Elinor. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action.
Cambridge University Press, 1990.
[76] Owen, Roger. State, Power and Politics in the Making of the Modern Middle East. 3rd Edition,
New York: Routledge, 2004.
[77] Pinker, Steven. The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined. Penguin, New
York, 2011.
[78] Puga, Diego, and Daniel Tre‡er. “International Trade and Institutional Change: Medieval
Venice’s Response to Globalization”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129.2 (2014): 753-821.
[79] Radcli¤e-Brown, Alfred R. The Andaman Islanders. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2013.
[80] Ravina, Mark. To Stand with the Nations of the World: Japan’s Meiji Restoration in World
History. Oxford University Press, 2017.
[81] Rueschemeyer, Dietrich, Evelyne Huber Stephens, and John D. Stephens. Capitalist Development and Democracy. Polity: Cambridge, 1992.
[82] Sahlins, Marshall. Stone Age Economics. Routledge, London, 1972.
[83] Scott, James. Against the Grain. Yale University Press, New Haven, 2017.
[84] Scheidel, Walter. The Great Leveler: Violence and the History of Inequality from the Stone
Age to the Twenty First Century. Princeton University Press, Princeton New Jersey, 2017.
[85] Snodgrass, Anthony M. Archaic Greece: the Age of Experiment. JM Dent, London, 1980.
[86] Steinfeld, Robert J. Coercion, Contract, and Free Labor in the Nineteenth Century. Cambridge
University Press, 2001.
[87] Suzman, James. A- uence Without Abundance: The Disappearing World of the Bushmen.
Bloomsbury Publishing USA, 2017.
[88] Tyler, Tom R. Why People Obey the Law. Princeton University Press, 2006.
[89] Van Damme, Eric. “Renegotiation-Proof Equilibria in Repeated Prisoners’Dilemma”. Journal
of Economic Theory 47.1 (1989): 206-217.
[90] Weingast, Barry R. “The Political Foundations of Democracy and the Rule of the Law”.
American Political Science Review 91.2 (1997): 245-263.
[91] White, Lynn. Medieval Technology and Social Change. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1962.
[92] Wiessner, Polly. “Norm Enforcement Among the Ju/’hoansi Bushmen”. Human Nature 16.2
(2005): 115-145.
[93] Williamson, Oliver E. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications. Free
Press, New York, 1975.
[94] Williamson, Oliver E. The Economic Intstitutions of Capitalism. Simon and Schuster, New
York, 1985.

49

[95] Wolitzky, Alexander. “Cooperation with Network Monitoring”. Review of Economic Studies
80 (2013): 395-427.
[96] Woodburn, James. “Egalitarian Societies”. Man (1982): 431-451.
[97] Zürcher, Erik J. Turkey: A Modern History. IB Tauris, 2004.

50

