                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE CAPITALIZATION OF CONSUMER FINANCING INTO DURABLE GOODS
                                PRICES

                                           Bronson Argyle
                                          Taylor D. Nadauld
                                          Christopher Palmer
                                            Ryan D. Pratt

                                         Working Paper 24699
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w24699


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2018


We thank the Editor (Amit Seru), the Associate Editor, and two anonymous referees. We also thank
our discussants Tom Chang, Marco Di Maggio, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Christopher Hansman, and
John Mondragon, and workshop and conference participants at BYU, Cornell, Federal Reserve Board,
Minnesota, MIT, Notre Dame, NYU, Philadelphia Fed, Princeton, Stanford SITE, UT Austin, University
of Washington, Wash-ington University in St. Louis, FIRS, SFS Cavalcade, and Natalie Bachas, E
Benmelech, Shai Bernstein, Giovanni Favara, Vincent Glode, Brad Larsen, Greg Leiserson, Brigitte
Madrian, Jonathan Parker, Antoinette Schoar, David Sraer, Jeremy Stein, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh,
and Emil Verner for helpful comments. We appreciate the research assistance of Lei Ma and Alex
Tuft. The data were provided by an anonymous information-technology rm. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24699.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Bronson Argyle, Taylor D. Nadauld, Christopher Palmer, and Ryan D. Pratt. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Capitalization of Consumer Financing into Durable Goods Prices
Bronson Argyle, Taylor D. Nadauld, Christopher Palmer, and Ryan D. Pratt
NBER Working Paper No. 24699
June 2018, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. E31,E43,E51,G21,H22,L11,L62

                                         ABSTRACT

Using loan-level data on millions of used-car transactions across hundreds of lenders, we study
the consumer response to exogenous variation in credit terms. Borrowers offered shorter maturity
decrease expenditures enough to o set 60-90% of the monthly payment increase. Most of this is
driven by shifting toward lower quality cars, but affected borrowers are able to o set 20-30% of a
monthly payment shock by negotiating lower prices for equivalent cars. Our results suggest that
durable goods prices adjust to reflect credit terms even at the individual level, with one year of
additional loan maturity increasing a given car’s price by 2.8%.


Bronson Argyle                                  Christopher Palmer
Department of Finance                           MIT Sloan School of Management
Brigham Young University                        100 Main Street, E62-639
Provo, UT 84602                                 Cambridge, MA 02142
bsa@byu.edu                                     and NBER
                                                cjpalmer@mit.edu
Taylor D. Nadauld
Department of Finance                           Ryan D. Pratt
Brigham Young University                        Department of Finance
Provo, Utah 84602                               Brigham Young University
taylor.nadauld@byu.edu                          Provo, Utah 84602
                                                ryan.pratt@byu.edu
The relationship between credit and asset prices has been an important area of study in post-

crisis finance. Recent work, focused largely on the housing market, has established a causal link

running from aggregate credit supply to average prices. However, studies of aggregate credit supply

necessarily obscure diﬀerences in access to credit in the cross-section of borrowers. In this paper,

we exploit disaggregated data on auto prices and loans to investigate how durable goods markets

capitalize credit terms at the individual borrower level. We document significant heterogeneity in

transaction prices across borrowers driven by diﬀerences in their access to credit, isolating credit

terms as a key channel through which credit impacts prices. Our results indicate that prices respond

to credit terms at a more granular level than has been documented previously.

    In a world with credit-constrained borrowers, we would expect a decrease in the aggregate supply

of credit to result in a decrease in aggregate demand for the final good, lowering both the good’s

unit price and quantity purchased. This conceptually corresponds to the standard interpretation

of papers like Favara and Imbs (2015) and Di Maggio and Kermani (2017), who quantify the eﬀect

of aggregate credit-supply shocks on average house prices. Zooming in to the individual borrower

in the auto market, a classical framework of supply and demand suggests that aﬀected borrowers

would respond to a decrease in their available credit by substituting toward lower quality cars, an

eﬀect which we find in the data. If enough borrowers are aﬀected to influence aggregate demand,

then prices would fall for everyone, but two people buying the same car would pay the same price

whether they had selected that car because of a credit shock or not. In contrast, we find borrowers

with decreased access to credit pay lower prices holding quality fixed.

    Methodologically, we isolate plausibly exogenous changes in the monthly cost of debt service

arising from lender maturity policies in the auto-loan market.1 While average maturity decreases

smoothly with car age, the policies in place at any given lender often feature discontinuous drops in

oﬀered maturity at particular car ages. For example, a given lender may oﬀer a 72-month loan to a

borrower to purchase a car up to three years old but may only be willing to oﬀer a 60-month loan to

the same borrower to purchase a four-year-old car. We combine this fact with the observation that

car age is measured based on manufacture year such that cars are eﬀectively treated as if they fully



   1
       As we discuss below, a large body of evidence documents the importance borrowers attach to payment size, for
which maturity has first-order importance.


                                                         1
age by one year on January 1.2 Importantly, we find step-function maturity schedules with breaks

at diﬀerent car ages for diﬀerent lenders in the data. Thus, on January 1 cars of a given manufacture

year may age across a discontinuity in a particular lender’s maturity schedule while experiencing

constant oﬀered maturity at another lender. From an empirical-design standpoint, such maturity

policies that feature discontinuities in allowable maturity around the new year map neatly into

“pre” and “post” event dates. Similarly, variation across lenders’ maturity policies—even for cars

of the same year, make, model, and trim—defines treatment and control samples. Taken together,

the pre- and post-event dates and treatment and control samples allow for causal inference in a

diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences framework. We emphasize that the variation we exploit in oﬀered maturity

arises from interacting the passage of time with predetermined lender maturity policies, as opposed

to any potentially endogenous decision taken by a lender to change its existing maturity schedule.

    Armed with plausibly exogenous variation in oﬀered maturity, we first estimate its eﬀect on

consumer expenditure. We find that aﬀected borrowers spend about 1.1% less on their car purchase

per month of decreased maturity. For a borrower receiving average loan terms, the decreased

expenditure is suﬃcient to oﬀset roughly 90% of the increase in monthly payment that would

otherwise result from shorter maturity. Of course, this decrease in expenditure may be driven by

consumers substituting toward lower quality vehicles. To account for the role of substitution in

explaining our results, we analyze car prices holding quality fixed with a battery of manufacture

year-make-model-trim (“YMMT ”) ⇥ purchase-month fixed eﬀects (e.g., 2014 Honda Accord LXs

purchased in February of 2017). Our results suggest that treated and untreated borrowers pay

materially diﬀerent prices for observationally identical cars purchased at the same point in time,

controlling for any time-invariant diﬀerences across geographic region. We find that one month of

exogenously lower maturity is associated with treated borrowers paying 0.3% lower prices. As oﬀered

maturity most frequently changes by 12 months, our estimates imply that the modal reduction in

oﬀered maturity reduces car prices in our sample by 3.6%, or roughly $720 on a $20,000 car.3 These
estimates imply that aﬀected borrowers are able to oﬀset around 25% of the potential increase in

    2
        Englmaier et al. (2017) present evidence that in the European used-car market, cars are treated as aging relative
to the year they were first registered.
    3
        To assess the magnitude of this estimate, note that estimates of gross margins on used cars are 5–20% (Gavazza
et al. (2014), Huang et al. (2015), and Larsen (2018)).


                                                             2
monthly payment through lower negotiated prices on equivalent vehicles.

    We focus on maturity primarily because we expect borrowers to significantly value long maturi-

ties. Previous work has shown the importance of monthly payments for household decision-making

(see, for example, Argyle, Nadauld, and Palmer (2020)), and the modal variation in maturity (12

months) has as large an impact on the monthly payment of an average vehicle as would a seven

percentage-point increase in interest rates. Still, we are interested in the impact of credit terms

broadly, and we exploit the fact that lenders’ policies may feature discontinuities in interest rates

that coincide with maturity discontinuities to both refine our maturity estimates and to separately

estimate the eﬀect of interest-rate variation. Using a two-stage least-squares procedure in which we

simultaneously instrument for both maturity and interest rates, we find that maturity accounts for

70–80% of the impact of our credit-supply shocks. Accounting for contemporaneous shifts in interest

rates, borrowers spend 0.74% less per month of shorter maturity, oﬀsetting 60% of the increase in

monthly payment. Controlling for substitution, borrowers who receive 12 months shorter maturity

pay about 2.8% less when purchasing a car of a given YMMT in a given month, corresponding to

an elasticity of price with respect to monthly payment size of -0.19. This implies a lower bound on

the consumer discount rates needed to rationalize these results of around 11.6%.4

    Meanwhile, we estimate that, for a one percentage-point increase in interest rates, borrowers

spend 1.95% less on their car purchase, enough to oﬀset around 70% of the increase in monthly

payment. The fact that borrowers respond similarly to a change in monthly payment whether that

change came from interest rate or maturity variation is consistent with monthly payments playing

a central role in their decision-making. Finally, for the same YMMT in the same month, borrowers

with one percentage-point higher interest rate would pay a 0.9% lower price.

    We conduct several robustness exercises to address the most plausible alternative explanations

for our pricing results, including the possibility that YMMT by month fixed eﬀects do not adequately

capture the variation in vehicle quality. A finance-induced shock to demand could lead treated

borrowers to shift toward unobservably lower quality, less expensive cars. For example, a borrower

could opt for a car with the same YMMT that is in worse condition or has higher mileage and

thus a lower price. We address this possibility in several ways in section B; in one test, we examine

   4
       By contrast, Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013) estimate that in the context of fuel economy, the average
buyer acts as if having a discount rate roughly equal to her loan interest rate.


                                                          3
a subset of our data comprised of repeat sales—transactions involving the exact same vehicle. If

treated-borrower purchases occur at lower values because of diﬀerences in unobserved quality, these

diﬀerences should persist in the second transaction. In a subsample of roughly 8,700 vehicles for

which we observe a subsequent transaction, we find no diﬀerence in the second transaction price of

cars originally treated with low maturity in the first transaction (relative to other cars of the same

YMMT sold in the same month).5 Instead, treated cars’ prices appear to rebound when sold at a

later time, inconsistent with an interpretation in which treated borrowers buy lower quality cars.

We further address concerns about unobserved heterogeneity in car quality through an analysis

of pricing eﬀects within subsamples of older and newer cars. Unobserved variation in car quality

increases with car age, yet our estimates are similar in samples of relatively young and old cars.

Using a subsample of cars for which we have mileage information, we also show that treated cars

do not have higher mileage at the time of sale. Finally, we show that borrower characteristics do

not change in economically meaningful ways with our treatment and that our results are robust to

the Oster (2017) adjustment for potential unobserved correlated heterogeneity.

   Why would one consumer with diﬀerent financing terms pay a diﬀerent price than another

consumer purchasing the same car at the same point in time? Our inclusion of commuting zone

fixed eﬀects rules out the eﬀect being driven by variation in average prices of cars across geographic

markets, while lender fixed eﬀects cast doubt on clientele selection eﬀects across lenders. Instead,

we argue that the lower private values caused by poorer financing terms may influence the search

or bargaining games inherent in the car market. Car buyers have access to an array of sellers

from whom they might purchase a car. However, because it is costly to search across sellers, a

buyer visiting a particular seller stands to gain from consummating the transaction with that seller.

Similarly, the seller, not knowing when an alternative buyer might show up, minimizes his cost of

carry by selling to the current customer. The transaction price is the result of bargaining over the

corresponding bilateral surplus. In this setting, aﬀected borrowers have two potential margins of

adjustment: i) they can absorb their finance-induced demand shock by searching more for a better

deal, or ii) they can oﬄoad some of the cost of poor financing terms onto the seller, eﬀectively

leveraging their lower reservation price to negotiate a better transaction price.


   5
       We also test for endogenous selection into observable resale and find none.


                                                           4
     To distinguish between these bargaining and search explanations for our capitalization results,

it would be useful to have information on sellers. If borrowers respond by increasing their search

intensity, they are exploiting variation in prices across sellers, while borrowers who negotiate better

prices take advantage of price dispersion within seller. Not observing anything about sellers, we

examine the subset of lenders for which we have loan application data. If buyers respond to poor

financing terms by searching more intensively for a vehicle, we might expect more time to elapse

between loan application and origination. However, we find no evidence that treated borrowers

spend more time shopping for a vehicle, suggesting that the lower transaction prices are likely the

result of more successful negotiations by treated borrowers.

     While our dataset is focused on the auto market, similar search and bargaining dynamics are at

play in the markets for many big-ticket items in which consumers transact infrequently (real estate,

machines, furniture, etc.). Based on our results, it seems reasonable to expect individual financing

terms to influence the bargained outcomes across a broad range of markets.6

     The balance of the paper is organized as follows. Section I discusses the literature and conceptual

motivation. Section II discusses the dataset. Section III outlines the empirical strategy that we

employ, and section IV discusses results and mechanism. Section V concludes.


                    I.   Contribution to the Literature and Conceptual Motivation


A.       Related Literature

     The empirical literature studying the causal link between credit and prices has been concentrated

in the housing market. See, for example, Mian and Sufi (2009), Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko

(2012), Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2013), Favara and Imbs (2015), Landvoigt, Piazzesi, and

Schneider (2015), Zevelev (2016), Di Maggio and Kermani (2017), Verner and Gyöngyösi (2018),

and Davis et al. (2017), none of which has studied loan maturity.7 Favara and Imbs (2015) exploit

     6
         In section I, we also discuss related literature on the strategic use of debt in bargaining games.
     7
         A recent empirical macro literature also studies the causes and consequences of credit shocks for house prices
(Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor (2015)), price-discrimination markups (Cornia, Gerardi, and Shapiro (2011)), business
cycles (Borio and Lowe (2002), Mian, Sufi, and Verner (2017), and Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017)), and stock
markets (Hansman et al. (2018)). See Mian and Sufi (2018) for a survey of recent work on credit-driven business
cycles.


                                                               5
state-level exposure to bank branching deregulation as an instrument for credit-supply shocks to

demonstrate a causal link between credit expansion and house prices. Di Maggio and Kermani

(2017) use state-level variation in anti-predatory lending laws’ impact to trace a boom and bust

in house prices resulting from credit-supply shocks. These papers feature geographic variation in

credit supply shocks that may aﬀect local credit markets in complex ways as opposed to quantifiable,

individual-level payment shocks.8 In addition, they do not examine the cross-sectional implications

of credit capitalization on individual borrowers. Closer in spirit to our work is Adelino, Schoar, and

Severino’s (2013) analysis of conforming loan limits (CLL) and housing prices. While an increase

in the CLL impacts house prices in the cross-section (with prices near the CLL more aﬀected),

the diﬀerentiated nature of real estate does not permit disentangling whether two borrowers with

diﬀerent access to financing terms would pay diﬀerent prices for the same house.

We diﬀer from previous work along a second dimension. The set of frictions that are the source

of credit-supply shocks in the literature are often macro in nature. Aside from examples cited

above, these include credit shocks driven by regulation (Rice and Strahan (2010)), financial in-

novation (Mian and Sufi (2009), and Nadauld and Sherlund (2013)), government credit subsidies

(Lucca, Nadauld, and Shen (2018)), and funding market failures (Benmelech, Meisenzahl, and

Ramcharan (2017)). In each of these papers, macroeconomic fluctuations influence the aggregate

supply of credit. In contrast, our setting demonstrates the existence of a diﬀerent class of relevant

credit-market frictions. Our results underscore that firm-level institutional idiosyncrasies play an

important role in determining the borrower-level supply of credit and that such policies have ma-

terial eﬀects on consumer outcomes. Moreover, we are the first paper to study the eﬀect of loan

maturity on prices.9

    Our paper also contributes to a literature that explores the importance of finance in the market

for used cars. Hortaçsu et al. (2013) document that dealers who purchase used cars at auto auctions

incorporate expectations of manufacturers’ financial distress into prices, where pricing discounts

reflect financing-related uncertainty around manufacturers’ ability to deliver on future obligations

    8
        For example, reduced-form credit shocks resulting from local regulatory changes could aﬀect credit terms, lending
standards, expectations, local aggregate demand, and incomes.
    9
        Hertzberg et al. (2018) argue a shared sentiment that the role of maturity has been understudied relative to
interest rates in this literature.


                                                             6
such as warranties. Adams, Einav, and Levin (2009) explore the sensitivity of car demand to

financing conditions and show that out-of-pocket liquidity plays a large role in purchasing decisions.

In a related paper, Einav, Jenkins, and Levin (2012) document how down payment requirements

eﬀectively mitigate adverse selection by screening risky borrowers. Our results shed further light on

the critical role that financing conditions, and more specifically loan maturity, play in the market

for used cars.

    Our results are related to the corporate finance literature highlighting the strategic role that debt

plays in determining bargaining outcomes.10 Israel (1991) and Muller and Panunzi (2004) argue

that debt can be used to influence bargaining outcomes in the market for corporate control. Spiegel

and Spulber (1994) show that debt burdens influence the prices charged by regulated firms such as

utilities. Hennessy and Livdan (2009) demonstrate the strategic role of debt in the allocation of

surplus between firms and their suppliers, and Matsa (2010) documents the influence of debt on the

outcomes of negotiations between firms and organized labor. In each case, debt limits the financial

flexibility of firms, which strengthens a firm’s bargaining position. We show a similar dynamic in a

retail setting. Borrowers who are oﬀered shorter maximum maturity have limited financial flexibility

and appear to be able to use this to influence the outcome of the bargaining game with car sellers.11

    Within the vast public-finance literature on economic incidence, several papers have looked

specifically at the market for new cars and the incidence of taxes and manufacturer subsidies.

Although these papers do not examine the incidence of financing shocks per se or the distributional

implications of individual-level changes in access to credit, they document capitalization eﬀects of

cost shocks into vehicle prices. For example, Busse et al. (2006) examine the eﬀects of manufacturer

cash rebates for new cars, documenting that incidence depends on statutory incidence, that is,

whether the rebate is issued to buyers or sellers. Consistent with our findings that prices capitalize

changes in credit terms, they find that prices rise by 10-30% of the amount of a customer rebate.

Sallee (2011) finds that new Toyota Prius prices did not capitalize hybrid vehicle tax incentives

at all, attributing the lack of pass-through to Toyota’s concerns about future demand given the

dynamics of buyer price beliefs. Busse et al. (2012) find that resale prices capitalize exposure

  10
       See also related work in psychology, for example, Lee and Ames (2017).
  11
       See also Diamond’s (1991) model of debt-contract maturity, in particular theoretical results on borrower prefer-
ence for longer maturity and lender reluctance for the same in the presence of private information.


                                                           7
to gasoline taxes.12 We complement this literature by studying the transmission of credit-supply

shocks with cross-sectional identification, further emphasizing that disaggregate credit shocks can

have disaggregate price eﬀects.

      Finally, we note the contribution of this paper relative to Argyle, Nadauld, and Palmer (2017)

and Argyle, Nadauld, and Palmer (2019). Though each paper uses the same broad set of auto

data, the three papers diﬀer in economic focus. Argyle, Nadauld, and Palmer (2017) documents the

relevancy of physical search frictions in consumer loan markets, showing that consumers originate

loans that do not represent the plausibly lowest available rate to them and that the number of

credit providers within a reasonable commute of a potential borrower’s home leads to significant

variation in the take up of oﬀered loans. Argyle, Nadauld, and Palmer (2019) documents that

even relatively unconstrained borrowers make loan decisions based on monthly payment amounts.

In particular, many consumers anchor around hundred-dollar-multiple amounts (e.g., $200, $300,

$400, etc.), supporting the conjecture that cognitive frictions like mental accounting influence how

consumers make high-stakes debt decisions.

      The present paper builds on the other papers in this research agenda by documenting that

monthly payment shocks are capitalized into asset purchase prices in a way that, depending on

borrower discount rates, oﬀsets much of the value of easier credit. Ultimately, while costly search and

a focus on monthly payments are necessary ingredients into this finding, they do not imply the cross-

sectional pricing eﬀects of individual credit shocks that are the contribution of this paper. Lastly,

our empirical strategy also diﬀers from these related papers; we exploit vehicle-level discontinuities

in oﬀered maturity across the car-age space while the companion papers exploit borrower-level

discontinuities across the FICO spectrum.


B.        Conceptual Motivation

      The central question of the paper is how individual borrowers respond to diﬀerences in credit

terms. To guide our empirical design and the interpretation of our tests, it is useful to briefly sketch

the key economic characteristics of our empirical setting, as these shape the way that financing

impacts the durable goods market. Two primary frictions are important in the auto-loan market:

     12
          Other relevant incidence papers include Goolsbee (1998), who shows that investment tax credits increase capital
goods prices, and MaCurdy (2015), who shows that consumer prices increase following minimum wage increases.


                                                              8
financial constraints and search costs. Consider a financially constrained borrower with utility over

transportation services where “quantities” of transportation services correspond to the quality of

available vehicles. Because the borrower is constrained, the terms of credit influence the borrower’s

demand for transportation services. In particular, a decrease in oﬀered maturity will decrease

demand, driving down the private value that the borrower attaches to any particular vehicle. Absent

additional frictions, aﬀected borrowers would respond by substituting to lower quality vehicles.

   However, search costs open another avenue for aﬀected borrowers. Costly search confers local

market power on sellers, supporting equilibria with price dispersion across sellers; indeed, one of the

motivating examples in Stigler’s (1961) seminal paper on search was the variation in posted prices

across Chevrolet dealers in Chicago. Costly search raises the possibility that aﬀected borrowers

might pay less for equivalent vehicles by searching longer for a seller willing to sell at a lower price.

   Similarly, search costs also impact the supply side of the auto market as sellers are uncertain

when willing buyers will arrive. Because auto sellers pay a significant cost of carry on their inventory,

they stand to gain from consummating a transaction with a current customer rather than waiting

for a new one to arrive. When the two parties have met, both the buyer’s search costs and the

seller’s carrying costs are minimized if they can complete a transaction. Given this surplus, sellers

cannot commit to posted prices, and bargaining ensues with the negotiated price dividing the

bilateral surplus. Thus, costly search gives rise to bargaining, introducing the prospect that aﬀected

borrowers might be able to exploit their lower private value to negotiate a lower price.

   To summarize, in a world where financially constrained borrowers face search costs, borrowers

have three margins of adjustment to absorb a financing shock: i) they can substitute to lower quality

goods, ii) they can pay higher search costs to find a lower price on a given good, or iii) they can

oﬄoad some of the cost onto the seller by negotiating a lower price. We aim to quantify the extent

to which borrowers substitute vs. pay lower prices for equivalent goods and to shed light on whether

lower prices arise from increased search or more successful bargaining.

   It is worth noting the role that search costs play in the loan market as well. Argyle, Nadauld,

and Palmer (2017) provide evidence of significant search costs in the loan market, documenting that

borrowers accept loan terms that are inferior to others that would be available to them. Given the

lender-specific nature of our financing shocks, our empirical design builds on this fact. Without

search costs in the loan market, we would be unable to construct control and treatment groups

                                                   9
defined by their diﬀerential loan terms.

   Financial constraints and search costs are not unique to the auto market. Similar frictions are

at play in a wide variety of markets, notably real estate. While the diﬀerentiated nature of housing

makes it diﬃcult to hold quality constant when measuring prices, it seems reasonable to expect

that diﬀerences in access to credit may drive individual-level variation in home price transactions

as well.


                                              II.   Data


   Our data on auto loan originations come from a technology firm that provides data warehousing

and analytics services to retail-oriented lending institutions nationwide. We begin with a dataset

consisting of over four million auto loans originated by 372 unique lenders covering all 50 states.

The data include only loans originated directly through the lending institution, as opposed to

so-called indirect loan applications processed through auto dealerships. Direct loan applications

occur primarily in one of two ways. First, a borrower may identify the exact car she would like to

purchase and then apply for a loan. In this circumstance, lenders evaluate the collateral and oﬀer

loan terms specific to the collateral. Alternatively, a borrower may apply for an auto loan without

having identified a specific car she would like to buy. In this circumstance, lenders evaluate a

potential borrower based on her credit characteristics. An approved application then specifies rough

financing terms, conditional on a bundle of collateral characteristics, with loan terms finalized after

the borrower selects a specific car. In either case, final negotiations for the car purchase typically

occur after the borrower learns about the financing terms.

   Our sample includes loans originated between 2005 and 2017, though over 80% were originated

between 2011 and 2017. The growth in originations over time is mostly driven by growth in our

data provider’s client base, though it also partly reflects increased reporting of loan originations over

time within lender as our data provider’s products became more integral to the lenders’ businesses.

Moreover, aggregate auto loan originations have increased substantially over our sample period,

with outstanding auto debt in the U.S. increasing 56% between 2010 and 2017. Similar data are

used in Argyle, Nadauld, and Palmer (2017, 2019).

   The dataset, anonymized of any personally identifiable information, includes loan contract fea-



                                                    10
tures such as the purchase price, loan amount, maturity, interest rate, and origination date. We

also have information on the underlying collateral, including the VIN number in most cases, which

allows us to extract the manufacture year, make, model, and trim (YMMT ) of the vehicle. Borrower

information includes FICO scores and self-reported debt-to-income (DTI) ratios.

   We begin with a sample of 4,192,502 loans to detect maturity policies in each lender ⇥ car

age ⇥ month cell, as described in detail in the following section. After inferring lender maturity

policies, we drop loans that were not originated during a stable policy regime, eliminating roughly

two thirds of the observations (mostly consisting of those lender ⇥ car age ⇥ month cells with the

fewest observations). We lose an additional quarter of the remaining observations that are missing

vehicle trim information that we use in YMMT fixed eﬀects to hold observable vehicle quality fixed.

   These two restrictions leave us with a final dataset of 972,621 loans originated by 112 unique

lenders. Table I reports summary statistics broken out by treatment and control groups. The average [Insert
                                                                                                        Table I
borrower in our sample has a credit score at loan origination of 714, slightly above the national about
                                                                                                  here.]

average of 700. As most of our lenders are credit unions, our data does not have strong coverage

of subprime borrowers. Average back-end DTI ratios, which measure the monthly fraction of total

debt-service payments to income, are around 35%. Examining collateral and loan characteristics,

most of the car purchases we study involve used cars; the average car in our sample is 3.9 years

old and sold for $20,341. The average loan-to-value is 90.7%, with average maturity of 61.3 months

and interest rate of 4.1%. We discuss the comparison of treatment and control groups after defining

them in section A.


                                    III.   Empirical Strategy


   We are interested in measuring consumer responses to variation in credit terms. To what extent

do borrowers absorb shorter maturity by substituting toward diﬀerent goods? Can borrowers oﬀset

some of the cost of shorter maturity loans by negotiating better prices for the same durable goods

relative to buyers who were oﬀered longer maturity loans at the same time? In answering these

questions, we face immediate identification challenges, as the relationship between credit and prices

may be driven by a variety of economic mechanisms, including simple reverse causality. For example,

lenders—willing to oﬀer longer maturities for higher quality collateral—may use price as a proxy



                                                 11
for unobservable collateral quality. In this case, buyers who pay higher prices, perhaps because

they have higher private value for the good, would also receive longer maturities. Alternatively, any

aspects of quality that are observable to the lender but not to the econometrician may jointly drive

both higher prices and longer maturities.

   To overcome these empirical challenges, the ideal experiment would feature randomly assigned

loan maturities. We do our best to approximate this by exploiting maturity rules used by lenders

based on the age of cars. Based on conversations with lenders, the maximum maturity borrowers

are oﬀered on an auto loan is frequently determined as a function of car age, a practice that is

motivated by lenders’ risk management concerns. Longer maturity increases the likelihood that

the loan balance exceeds the collateral value during the life of a loan, exposing lenders to losses

in the case of default. For older cars with shorter remaining expected life, lenders oﬀer shorter

maturity on average (Figure 1). However, instead of smoothly mapping car age into oﬀered maturity, [Insert
                                                                                                         Figure
many lender policies feature discrete drops in maximum oﬀered maturity at particular car ages, as 1here.]
                                                                                                     about

illustrated in Figure 2. This leads to a discontinuous drop in maturity oﬀered for a given car as it

ages across a break in a given institution’s maturity schedule. To the extent that all cars of a given

manufacture year are considered the same age, these discontinuities should occur as the calendar

moves from December to January, when all cars turn one year older. To the best of our knowledge,

there are no industry standard rules mapping car age to loan maturity; indeed, we find variation

across lenders in the casuch as desiredr ages at which their maturity schedules feature discrete

drops in oﬀered maturity. At any point in time, we observe treated buyers (those borrowing from

an institution with a discrete drop in maturities in January for a car of the age being purchased)

and untreated buyers (those borrowing from an institution without such a discrete drop for the car

age being purchased), even for cars of the same YMMT. We use this feature of the data to construct [Insert
                                                                                                         Figure
a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences quasi-experiment, comparing the change in prices paid before and after 2here.]
                                                                                                    about

January 1 for borrowers treated with an exogenous maturity shock to the corresponding price change

for untreated borrowers. To be clear, our variation does not arise from some lenders changing their

policies in January; rather, predetermined maturity schedules interact with the passage of time to

treat individual cars with persistent maturity shocks beginning in January.

   In addition to randomly assigned maturities, the ideal experiment would also hold fixed the

quality of the goods purchased by treated and untreated borrowers. Absent this, it would be

                                                 12
impossible to disentangle the extent to which borrowers given exogenously shorter maturity respond

by spending less on lower quality goods or negotiating better prices on the same goods. One of the

strengths of our dataset is that we can hold fixed the quality of the goods to a significant extent by

controlling for YMMT fixed eﬀects interacted with the month of sale. Thus, the spirit of our tests

is to compare the prices of two cars of the same YMMT being purchased in the same month, where

one buyer receives exogenously diﬀerent maturity than the other. While these fixed eﬀects soak up

a large majority of the variation in car quality, as we discuss the interpretation of our tests, we will

be careful to address the possibility that our results are aﬀected by any residual variation in quality

within YMMT in a given month.


A.    Identifying Loan Maturity Policies by Car Age

     The first step in our analysis is to empirically identify age-based maturity policies for the 372

lenders in our sample so that we can assign vehicles experiencing a discrete change in maturity on

January 1 to a treatment group and compare their prices to a control group of vehicles experiencing

no change. A key challenge we face is that some lender maturity policies may be based on variables

that are correlated with age, for example, mileage or even price. Misidentifying a price-based

maturity policy as an age-based one would bake in a price-maturity relationship, a worst-case

scenario for our identification. With this in mind, we design our algorithm to detect age-based

maturity policies conservatively. The benefit of not contaminating our instrument with endogenous

variation in maturity is worth the cost of potentially missing some actual age-based maturity policies.

     Since each lender is likely to have its own maturity policies applying to cars of various ages,

we look for rules—sustained periods of stable maturity—at the lender ⇥ car-age level, where car

age is defined as the calendar year of loan origination minus the year of manufacture. Here we

face a second challenge: the amount of unexplained variation in maturity. Table II shows the [Insert
                                                                                                           Table II
distribution of maturity within lender ⇥ car age ⇥ month cells, relative to the maximum within about
                                                                                               here.]

each cell. On average, only 16.5% of borrowers receive the maximum observed maturity in their

cell, while between 9% and 17% of borrowers receive maturities in each six-month band within 24

months of the maximum. Clearly, not everyone financing a car of a given age at a given lender in a

given month receives the same maturity. Considering this variation in maturity, it is not surprising

that the average maturity for a lender ⇥ car age varies a lot from month to month—the standard

                                                  13
deviation of the change in average maturity is 3.6 months. This makes it infeasible to detect stable

maturity policies based on average maturity.

    Instead, we focus on particular percentiles of the maturity distribution to detect maturity poli-

cies. Because maturities cluster significantly on multiples of 3, 6, or 12 months (71% are multiples

of 12 months), individual percentiles of maturity have the benefit of being very stable, but they

come with the cost of potentially being unaﬀected by actual policy discontinuities. Suppose, for

example, that there is a policy discontinuity that results in the proportion of buyers oﬀered the max-

imum maturity (say, 72 months) decreasing from 50% to 25% in January. At the 80th percentile

of maturity, this would look like a stable regime of 72 months oﬀered maturity. To increase the

probability that we successfully detect the policy discontinuities, we pool the 70th, 80th, and 90th

percentiles. The choice of these upper percentiles is driven by our focus on the maximum oﬀered

maturity; however, we show in Appendix A (and Appendix Tables AV–AVII) that we can reliably

detect age-based maturity policies at lower percentiles and that our results are not sensitive to the

set chosen.                                                                                                            [Insert
                                                                                                                       Figure
    To illustrate our method of categorizing lender policies, consider Figure 3 which plots the 80th                   3 about
                                                                                                                       here.]
percentile of maturity for three-year-old cars (panel A) and four-year-old cars (panel B) in each

month for the largest lender in our sample. The x’s represent the individual monthly observations,

and we categorize long periods of identical (or nearly identical) maturities as lender policies, as

shown in the boxed areas. For each month, we examine the six months before and after; if at least

five of the six months both before and after have the same maturity as the month in question,

we consider the entire 13-month period to be part of a lender maximum maturity policy.13 For

three-year-old cars shown in the figure, we identify two separate lender policies: a 66-month policy

lasting from December 2007 through December 2012, followed by a 72-month policy lasting from



  13
       We require that the endpoints of the 13-month window do not deviate from the prevailing maturity policy. This
prevents us from including the first month of a new policy in the time window of an old policy. For the purposes of
detecting maturity policies, we round each maturity to the nearest three months such that, for example, maturities
of 60 months (the most prevalent maturity at 27% of the data) are grouped with maturities of 61 months (2% of the
data) and 59 months (0.5%). While a significant majority (84%) of the loans in our data already have maturities that
are multiples of three months, some borrowers receive abnormal terms, perhaps motivated by demand-side factors
such as a desired monthly payment level (Argyle, Nadauld, and Palmer (2019)).


                                                         14
January 2013 through July 2017 (the end of our sample). For four-year-old cars, we identify four

separate lender policies over time, each shown in dashed red boxes.14

    Having identified stable lender maturity policies, the next step is to follow cars as they age over

time to observe any discontinuous transitions from one oﬀered maturity level to another. Figure

4 combines the policies for three-year-old and four-year-old cars from Figure 3 into one plot. The

policies for three-year-old cars are shown as dashed bars, while the policies for four-year-old cars are

shown as solid bars. Note that a three-year-old car in any given December becomes a four-year-old

car the following January, and therefore becomes subject to (potentially) diﬀerent oﬀered maturity.

The vertical dotted lines correspond to the set of year-ends for which cars turning four years old

would have experienced a discrete drop in maturities at this particular lender.                                              [Insert
                                                                                                                             Figure
    Consider the example of a 2006 Honda Civic LX illustrated in the figure. In December 2009,                               4 about
                                                                                                                             here.]
as a three-year-old-car, this car would be subject to a 66-month maximum maturity policy. Yet

the same car sold in January 2010 would be subject to the 60-month maturity policy in eﬀect for

four-year-old cars. We group cars experiencing this kind of discrete maturity shock in January into

the set of treated observations. In contrast, consider the 2012 Honda Civic LX example shown in

the upper right of the figure. By late 2015, this lender’s policy allows 72-month loans for both three-

and four-year-old cars. Thus, a four-year-old car sold in January 2016 would be subject to the same

oﬀered maturity as the three-year-old car sold in December 2015. We group all occurrences in which

a given car experiences the same oﬀered maturity from December to January into the control group.

The treated subset of our final sample consists of any cars subject to a policy with a discrete drop

in oﬀered maturity at any of the 70th, 80th, or 90th percentiles from December to January, while

control observations are those subject to a policy with continuous oﬀered maturity at any of these

percentiles.15

    Our requirement that we observe a stable maturity percentile for at least a year to infer the


  14
       The 80th percentile of loan maturities is more volatile in the early part of our sample because there are fewer
loans during that time period. The coverage of our data provider improves over the early part of our sample, even
within lender.
  15
       Of course, it is possible for a lender to have a discrete drop in maturity policy at one percentile (say, the 70th)
but to have a continuous policy at another (say, the 90th). We consider any such cases as treated since they display
a maturity shock.


                                                            15
existence of an age-based maturity policy is important to distinguish age-based policies from other

policies that indirectly link car age to maturity. To see this, suppose that a lender has a policy that

ties maturity directly to the price rather than the age of a vehicle. As we move through the calendar

year, the prices of, say, three-year-old cars would decrease, causing the maturity distribution to

shift to the left from one month to the next. At some point during the year, the 80th percentile

(or another percentile) of the maturity distribution would drop to a lower level. If we allow for age-

based maturity policies that were in place for less than a year, we would risk misidentifying these

price-based maturity policies as age-based ones that were updated during the middle of the year.

Age-based policies diﬀer from price- or mileage-based policies in that the only month boundary that

an age-based policy respects is December to January. To ensure that the policies we identify are

truly driven by the age of the car, we need to see stable maturity across the entire calendar year.

   This observation suggests a way to assess how eﬀective our approach is at isolating exogenous

variation in the supply of maturity arising from age-based maturity policies. To the extent that we

have correctly identified age-based maturity policies, any discontinuities in lenders’ oﬀered maturity

should be concentrated in January, as cars nominally become one year older. In contrast, if we

are mistakenly picking up price- or mileage-based policies, we would expect discontinuities to be

uniformly distributed throughout the calendar year. Another possibility is that our categorization

is contaminated with false positives arising from variation in the unexplained portion of maturity

(perhaps periods with high demand for maturity at a particular lender followed by periods with

lower demand). We would also expect the timing of such false positives to be roughly uniformly

distributed.

   Figure 5 shows the timing of maturity discontinuities. We detect 118 lender ⇥ car age ⇥ month

combinations for which there is a discrete drop in maturity from one month to the next, as shown

in panel A of the figure. Of these, 106 (90%) occur in January, with no other month having more

than three. While we cannot know how many of the 12 non-January negative maturity shocks we

identify represent actual policy updates vs. false positives, in the worst case Figure 5 suggests that

no more than two or three of the 106 January maturity discontinuities that define our treatment

are false positives.                                                                                      [Insert
                                                                                                          Figure
   While static age-based policies will lead to a concentration of maturity discontinuities in January,   5 about
                                                                                                          here.]
it is also possible that lenders re-evaluate and update their maturity policies disproportionately

                                                  16
in January. It would be hard to argue that variation arising from proactive lender decisions is

exogenous to the price of vehicles, as deteriorating local economic conditions could jointly drive

shorter maturities and lower demand for cars. To assess this possibility, in panel B of Figure 5

we show the 71 instances of discrete increases in maturity policies for cars as they age one month.

Given that these positive maturity shocks run against the natural age-maturity relationship, they

almost certainly arise from proactive policy updates. It is not surprising to find such updates, given

that the bulk of the loans in our data were originated during a period of lengthening maturities.

The 71 occurrences are distributed roughly evenly across months, with no single month accounting

for more than 13 positive shocks. In particular, there is no evidence that lenders are inclined to

update maturity policies at the new year, as January accounts for only three of the 71 positive

discontinuities.

     Because maturity policies are very persistent, we include all months July through December in

the pre-period and all months January through June in the post period, although monthly event

studies will allow us to focus on the months around the end of the year. This leaves us with a total

sample of 972,621 cars, of which 54,757 (5.6%) are treated observations defined by our 106 January

discontinuities. Table I tabulates summary statistics for the treatment and control samples. The

groups are very similar on observables, including FICO scores at origination, debt-to-income ratios

(DTI), and loan-to-value (LTV) ratios. Although the diﬀerences in means are mostly statistically

significant owing to the precision aﬀorded by our large sample size, the typical diﬀerence is a tenth

of a standard deviation, suggesting that treatment- and control-group borrowers are balanced for

practical purposes. Consistent with being slightly older (4.29 vs. 3.86 years), treated cars have

slightly lower prices ($18,821 vs. $20,432), shorter maturities (59.3 months vs. 61.4 months), and

higher interest rates (4.31% vs. 4.09%). While much of this price diﬀerence is absorbed by our rich

controls for vehicle heterogeneity, our empirical results below show that some of the price diﬀerential

is a causal eﬀect of treatment-group borrowers being oﬀered shorter maximum maturities in the post

period.


B.    First Stage Results

     We now turn to estimating the reduced-form impact of our detected maturity shocks on the

average borrower’s maturity. Recall that a maturity “shock” in our data does not arise from lenders

                                                  17
changing policies but from borrowers buying a car that has recently crossed a discontinuity in a

lender’s maturity policy. In Table III, we estimate


  M aturityiglt =   1 T reatmenti   +   2 P ostt   +   3 T reatmenti   ⇥ P ostt + Xit0 + 'g +   l   + "iglt   (1)


where M aturityiglt is the loan maturity of transaction i, in geography g, financed by lender l

in month t. Event time runs from July through the following June with P ost equal to zero for

transactions occurring July through December and one for January through June. Treatment is a

dummy equaling one for observations within a Lender ⇥ EventAge ⇥ EventY ear group with an

identified shock to oﬀered maturity occurring in January and zero for any observations in groups for

which maximum allowable maturity is not changing. We use EventAge to refer to the age that cars

turn during January of the event year and define EventY ear as the calendar year of that January.

Controls Xit consist of borrower characteristics (DTI and FICO score) and various fixed eﬀects that

control for the quality of collateral, such as YMMT by month fixed eﬀects. In some specifications,

we also control for commuting zone fixed eﬀects 'g and lender fixed eﬀects             l.   We double cluster

our standard errors by month and commuting zone.                                                                    [Insert
                                                                                                                    Table
                                                                                                                    III
   Table III reports the results. Column 1, without any fixed eﬀects, shows a first-stage eﬀect                     about
                                                                                                                    here.]
on average maturity of –2.4 months, meaning that the maturity for treatment-group borrowers de-

creased by an average of 2.4 months after their cars aged across a maturity discontinuity on January

1 relative to any change in maturity for control-group borrowers. As shown in Table I, cars in the

treated group are slightly older and have slightly shorter maturities than cars in the control group.

In column 2 we add car-age fixed eﬀects, which predictably narrow the gap between treatment- and

control-group maturities but leave the T reatment ⇥ P ost coeﬃcient of interest unchanged, sug-

gesting that our diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences specification accounts for heterogeneity across car age. In

column 3 we add finer collateral fixed eﬀects, controlling for the car age interacted with make (e.g.,

Honda), model (e.g., Accord), and trim (e.g., LX). Column 4 adds a time dimension, interacting

YMMT fixed eﬀects with year-month fixed eﬀects. In this case, the coeﬃcient measures the diﬀer-

ence in maturity oﬀered to buyers of the same YMMT during the same month but with diﬀerent

lender maturity policies. In column 5 we add commuting zone fixed eﬀects to account for potential

diﬀerences in maturity norms across geography. Anecdotally, prices of cars diﬀer by geography, and


                                                       18
column 5 allows for the same to be true of maturities. Finally, column 6 adds lender fixed eﬀects.

The estimated magnitude of our detected maturity shock is robust across all specifications, showing

a stable eﬀect on originated maturities of slightly more than two months.                                                 [Insert
                                                                                                                          Figure
    As indicated above, auto loan maturities cluster significantly on multiples of three, six, or twelve                  6 about
                                                                                                                          here.]
months. While the most common change in maximum allowable maturity for treated borrowers is

–12 months (Figure 6), not everyone receives the maximum maturity. Table III shows that average

originated maturity decreases by around two months, meaning that many borrowers either do not

qualify for the maximum maturity or endogenously choose shorter maturity than the maximum

allowable. Borrowers that demand loan maturities lower than the maximum allowable could be

unaﬀected by any changes in maturity policy. Our instrumental-variables strategy below is designed

precisely to deal with any such sorting behavior. The key takeaway from Table III is that the

members of the treated group are consistently more likely to be treated with shorter maturities

than members of the control group.                                                                                        [Insert
                                                                                                                          Figure
    To test for whether the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences coeﬃcients in Table III are aﬀected by pretrends,                     7 about
                                                                                                                          here.]
Figure 7 plots the conditional average maturity for each month from July through June for the

treatment and control groups.16 The figure shows stable maturities for the control group throughout

the entire event year. The treatment group, in contrast, has stable maturities that are slightly higher

than the control group from July through December, followed by a sharp drop in January, continuing

to February. Maturities in February through June are stable and significantly lower than those in the

control group. It is diﬃcult to say exactly why the drop in maturities spans January and February,

though it is possible that this is driven by lenders and borrowers agreeing to terms in December

before the car purchase is finalized in January in some cases. This event-study approach supports

our diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences parallel trends identifying assumption and bolsters our interpretation of

the T reatment ⇥ P ost coeﬃcients in Table III as causal eﬀects of year-end discontinuous maturity

policies.




  16
       Specifically, we control for the expected decrease in maturity as a car ages and any diﬀerences across geography
by regressing maturity on car age ⇥ month fixed eﬀects and commuting zone fixed eﬀects. We then plot the average
residuals within each month for treatment and control groups.


                                                           19
                                                   IV.    Results


    Having identified plausibly exogenous variation in the supply of maturity, we now estimate the

eﬀect of maturity on consumer expenditure and car prices in the cross section of borrowers. We

run the same specification as in equation (1), replacing the dependent variable with the log of the

car price. For consistency, we include the same borrower controls (DTI and FICO). Similarly, we

include the same sets of fixed eﬀects in each column as we did in Table III.                                            [Insert
                                                                                                                        Table
                                                                                                                        IV
    We report these reduced-form results in Table IV. In column 1, where we don’t include any fixed                     about
                                                                                                                        here.]
eﬀects, we find a statistically insignificant eﬀect of -2.6%. Of course, one way in which borrowers

are likely to respond to lower maturity is by shifting toward cheaper cars, either older cars or lower-

end models. Controlling for car age fixed eﬀects (column 2) sharpens our estimation significantly

(as evident in smaller standard errors and the increase in R2 from 0.06 to 0.37) with little eﬀect

on the coeﬃcient magnitude. Holding fixed the age of the car, aﬀected borrowers spend 2.7% less

on their car purchase, significant at the 1% level. This includes both substitution toward cheaper

make/model/trims as well as any eﬀect of financing terms on the negotiated price of a given car.

To separate these two eﬀects, we exploit the rich information on collateral quality available in our

dataset.

    In column 3 we interact the car age fixed eﬀects with make-model-trim fixed eﬀects, eﬀectively

comparing the prices paid by two borrowers with diﬀerent financing terms who each bought, say,

a four-year-old Honda Accord LX. The fixed eﬀects soak up a large proportion of the variation,

with the R2 jumping to 0.87. The coeﬃcient drops to 0.9%, indicating that a significant portion

of the eﬀect on expenditure from column 2 is being driven by a shift of aﬀected borrowers toward

lower-quality vehicles. While it may not be surprising that decreased access to maturity aﬀects

demand, recall that our financing treatment varies by lender. Evidently, many borrowers prefer

to buy a lower-quality vehicle rather than to shop for better financing.17 This specification also

highlights the importance of holding the quality of the good fixed when measuring the impact of

credit terms on durable goods prices, one of the virtues of our setting and dataset. In column

4 we interact YMMT fixed eﬀects with year-month fixed eﬀects such that the coeﬃcient tells us

  17
       In Section B we test observable borrower characteristics for selection into treatment and find no economically
meaningful results.


                                                          20
the diﬀerence in price paid by an aﬀected borrower for the same YMMT purchased in the same

month. These YMMT⇥month fixed eﬀects absorb any time-varying shocks to YMMT values, for

example, because of the introduction of a new model. Because prices may diﬀer systematically

across geographic regions, we supplement these fixed eﬀects with commuting zone fixed eﬀects in

column 5. Finally, we add lender fixed eﬀects in column 6 to rule out our results being driven

by any lender-specific clientele-selection eﬀects. Across all of the more stringent specifications, the

estimated eﬀect of a shock to maturity on the price paid for the same YMMT in the same month

is significant and stable around 0.6–0.7%. Recall that the magnitude of our estimate for the first-

stage eﬀect on average maturities was about 2.3 months. The estimates in Table IV, then, indicate

that a borrower who is shocked with 12 months shorter maturity would pay about 3.6% less for an

observationally identical car. Directly estimating the value of an extra month of oﬀered maturity

by two-stage least squares, Table V (with columns corresponding to those in Tables III and IV)

shows a price eﬀect around 0.3% per month of maturity.18                                                                    [Insert
                                                                                                                            Table V
                                                                                                                            about
    The estimates in Table IV compare average prices during the post-period (January through                                here.]

June) to average prices throughout the pre-period (July through December) for treatment and

control groups. As shown in Figure 7, the trends in maturity moved roughly in parallel across

treatment and control groups except around year end. To the extent that the diﬀerence in prices

is being driven by shifts in lender maturity policies, we would expect the time series pattern of

prices to match that of maturities. In Figure 8, we plot the average residuals from a regression of [Insert
                                                                                                                            Figure
log price on car age ⇥ month fixed eﬀects and commuting zone fixed eﬀects, as we did in Figure 8here.]
                                                                                                  about

7 for maturities. Control vehicles show a flat pattern over the entire event year, while treated

vehicles’ prices are largely flat but for a large drop in January and February, matching the pattern

of maturities shown in Figure 7. One of the virtues of our diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences setup is that the

presence of a control group helps rule out the possibility that our results are driven by seasonality

in the car market. For example, Adams, Einav and Levin (2009) show that demand for used cars

increases significantly among subprime borrowers from late January through early March, when

   18
        See De Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2017) and Hudson, Hull, and Liebersohn (2017) for a precise discussion
of the identification conditions needed for the consistency of diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences instrumental-variables estimators.
In particular, the necessary assumptions around parallel trends, treatment exogeneity, monotonicity, and stability of
treatment eﬀects across time and subgroups are each quite plausible in our setting.


                                                           21
many buyers would receive EITC rebates. Our month fixed eﬀects, the parallel price patterns in

Figure 8, and the persistence of our price eﬀects throughout the year confirm that our control group

eﬀectively addresses any such seasonal patterns.

   One potential concern with our empirical approach is that our results could be driven by the fact

that we use the same sample to determine discontinuities in oﬀered maturity—i.e., the assignment

of treatment and control—as we do to estimate potential pricing eﬀects. Though we have tried

to provide evidence that we are capturing actual shocks to the supply of maturity, we attempt to

further mitigate these concerns with the following validation exercise. Within a given lender ⇥ car

age ⇥ month cell, we randomly assign half the loans to a training sample and the other half to a

hold-out sample. We use the training sample to identify lender maturity policies in order to define

treatment and control observations, following the procedure outlined in Section A. We then use

the hold-out sample to estimate our reduced form pricing regressions. In this way, we estimate the

eﬀect of maturity on prices out of sample relative to the data we use to detect oﬀered maturity

discontinuities. The results, shown in Appendix Table AI, closely mirror those in Table IV in terms

of magnitudes and significance.

   To evaluate the magnitude of these estimates, consider a borrower buying an average car priced

at $20,000 financed by a 72-month loan at an interest rate of 4.1% and an LTV of 90%. Under these

parameters, the borrower would put $2,000 down and have a monthly payment of $282.43 for 72

months. If we ignore our estimated consumer response to shorter financing, a counterfactual treated

borrower receiving a 60-month loan (the modal maturity shock in our data is 12 months) would

have a monthly payment of $332.31, or $49.88 higher. In response to the shorter financing, column

2 of Table V indicates that a treated borrower would spend about 13.4% less on a vehicle (1.12% per

month of maturity ⇥ 12 months), or $17,312. The resulting monthly payment would be $287.65,

only $5.22 higher than that paid by untreated borrowers. In other words, borrowers aﬀected with

shorter maturity spend less on a car so as to oﬀset 90% of the increase in their monthly payment.

The majority of this comes from substitution to lower quality vehicles. Controlling for substitution,

columns 4–6 indicate that a treated borrower would pay about 3.6% less (0.30% per month of

maturity), or $19,280, for an observationally equivalent car. The resulting monthly payment of

$320.35 indicates that borrowers are able to oﬀset 24% of the monthly payment increase from

shorter maturity through lower negotiated prices.

                                                   22
     We can also quantify our estimates in terms of the implied borrower discount rates. Aﬀected

borrowers pay monthly payments of $320.35 for 60 months, while untreated borrowers pay $282.43

for 72 months. The lower price paid by treated borrowers also results in a lower down payment

($1,928 vs. $2,000). The internal rate of return on the marginal cash flows for treated borrowers is

about 14.2%—the annual discount rate that would make borrowers indiﬀerent between shorter and

longer maturity. To the extent that borrowers are not able to fully oﬄoad the cost of decreased

access to finance onto sellers, this represents a lower bound on borrower discount rates.


A.    Isolating Maturity Eﬀects from Interest Rate Eﬀects

     Our results presented thus far have focused on the maturity dimension of the financing contract,

motivated by evidence in Argyle, Nadauld, and Palmer (2020) that constrained consumers have

stronger preferences over maturity than over interest rates. However, given that maturities and

interest rates frequently move together in a contract bundle, the empirical strategy discussed in

Section III is subject to the concern that identified breaks in maturity policies may be coincident

with breaks in lenders’ interest rate policies. While any interest-rate eﬀect contained in our estimates

would not invalidate a claim that we are estimating a causal eﬀect of credit on prices generally, it

would compromise the interpretation that estimated price eﬀects are driven by changes in maturity.

In this section, we turn our attention to disentangling the eﬀects due to changes in maturity from

those due to changes in interest rates.

     We begin by examining whether the maturity shocks we detect coincide with changes in interest

rates by re-estimating the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences specifications from Table III, with interest rates

for each loan replacing maturity as the dependent variable. We report the results in Table VI. With [Insert
                                                                                                           Table
no fixed eﬀects, the coeﬃcient of interest on T reatment ⇥ P ost is six basis points and statistically VI
                                                                                                       about
                                                                                                           here.]
insignificant. As we control for increasingly fine collateral fixed eﬀects in columns 2–4, the estimate

remains insignificant, ranging in magnitude from four to nine basis points. In column 5 we add

commuting zone fixed eﬀects to the YMMT ⇥ month fixed eﬀects of column 4, which increases the

coeﬃcient to 12 basis points, marginally significant at the 10% level. Finally, with the addition of

lender fixed eﬀects in column 6, the coeﬃcient is 16 basis points, significant at the 1% level. Figure

9 plots the time series pattern of interest rates during the event year for the treatment and control [Insert
                                                                                                           Figure
groups. Consistent with the estimates in the table, rates appear to be somewhat higher in the post- 9here.]
                                                                                                       about


                                                  23
period months for treated cars, though the pattern appears much less stark than the corresponding

pattern for maturities in Figure 7. This is not surprising given that our empirical design is built

to detect maturity breaks rather than interest rate breaks. Still, though the relationship is not

strong, the consistent message from Table VI and Figure 9 is that interest rates appear to increase

somewhat for treated cars in the post-period, which could potentially be driving some of the lower

prices that we observe for treated borrowers in the post period.19

    In an eﬀort to pin down a causal estimate of maturity accounting for any interest-rate impact,

we estimate a two-stage least squares regression, instrumenting for both maturity and interest rates.

We estimate separate first stages for maturity and rates as follows:

                                   X                               X
                                                                                       0
                 M aturityiglt =        ⇡kmat Ik,ilt ⇥ P ostt +        ↵kmat Ik,ilt + Xiglt    mat       mat
                                                                                                      + viglt      (2)
                                    k                              k
                                   X                               X
                                                                                        0
                      Rateiglt =        ⇡krate Ik,ilt ⇥ P ostt +       ↵krate Ik,ilt + Xiglt   rate      rate
                                                                                                      + viglt      (3)
                                    k                              k


As before, Xiglt contains borrower controls, lender fixed eﬀects, commuting zone fixed eﬀects, and

rich collateral fixed eﬀects. The key innovation with respect to the reduced-form formulations is the

instrument set, which is a full set of treatment-cell indicators interacted with P ost. In our notation,

k indexes the individual Lender ⇥ EventAge ⇥ EventY ear cells that make up our treatment group,

with k = 0 corresponding to the control group. The Ik,ilt indicator variables identify whether a

given borrower i financing their purchase with lender l at time t was in treatment cell k, as defined

in section A. The key feature of this specification is to allow unique magnitudes of the diﬀerence-

in-diﬀerences coeﬃcients ⇡k for each treated cell. Identifying the unique impact of maturity policy

breaks separately from interest rate breaks relies on the magnitudes of ⇡kmat and ⇡krate not being

perfectly correlated across each of the 106 identified policy breaks. The exclusion restriction is

satisfied if variation in ⇡kmat and ⇡krate is exogenous to pricing outcomes, only aﬀecting prices through

loan maturities and interest rates.

    Consider the following illustrative example. A particular institution has a policy in place that

  19
       Note that the evidence that any interest-rate movements coincident with our shifts in maturity are positive
further supports the claim that we have identified true shifts in the supply of maturity. If the changes were driven by
demand for maturity, we would expect to see lower interest rates associated with the lower maturities, as borrowers
often have a menu of maturity-interest rate pairs from which to choose, with an upward-sloping term structure.


                                                          24
decreases allowable maturity by six months as a vehicle manufactured in 2006 rolls from three years

old in December 2009 to four years old in January 2010. The same institution’s policy calls for a 20

basis point increase in interest rates in this scenario. Meanwhile, a diﬀerent lender’s policy results

in a 12-month decrease in maturity and a 10 basis-point interest-rate increase as three-year-old

vehicles age by a year. The variation in the magnitudes of the maturity and interest-rate breaks

across Lender ⇥ EventAge ⇥ EventY ear combinations allows us to simultaneously identify the

causal impact of maturity and interest rate changes on prices.

   With 106 coeﬃcients on policy discontinuities, we do not report a full set of first stage results.

In each column and for every endogenous variable, though, the F -statistic for joint significance of

the instruments has a p-value less than 0.1%. Meanwhile, the correlation between the estimated

coeﬃcients on maturity and interest rates is small, varying between -0.19 and -0.13 across the six

columns. The takeaways from the first stage regressions are that the instrument set strongly predicts

each endogenous variable and that there is suﬃcient independent variation to separately identify

the price impact driven by each variable.

   Instruments for maturity and interest rates allow for a second-stage specification that utilizes

equations (2) and (9) and is given by

                          X
                                                                                            0
       log P riceiglt =       ↵k Ik,ilt + ⌘ mat M aturityi + ⌘ rate Ratei + ⌘ LT V LT Vi + Xiglt µ + "iglt   (4)
                          k


such that the ⌘ coeﬃcients are semi-elasticities of price with respect to maturity and interest rates

and represent the local average treatment eﬀects on prices for complier borrowers aﬀected by the

instruments. We report estimates in Table VII, where each column corresponds to the same column [Insert
                                                                                                                   Table
of Table IV. In general, the estimated impact of a one-month change in maturity is 70–80% as large VII
                                                                                                   about
                                                                                                                   here.]
once we account for concurrent changes in interest rates. The estimate in column 6, for example,

indicates that for a car of the same YMMT bought in the same month, holding fixed average

diﬀerences in prices across commuting zones and lenders, an additional month of supplied maturity

translates into 23 basis points higher price, significant at the 1% level. This compares to an estimate

of 29 basis points per month of maturity in the two-stage least squares specification without interest

rates in Table V, indicating that roughly 80% of the eﬀect on prices previously estimated is coming

through the maturity channel. The coeﬃcient on Rate indicates that for a one percentage-point


                                                        25
increase in interest rates, prices fall by 90 basis points. Given our first-stage estimate of a change in

interest rates of 16 basis points, these estimates imply that roughly 14 basis points of price impact

is driven by changes in interest rates, compared to the total price impact of 70 basis points reported

in Table IV.

   The estimates in Table VII allow us to refine our interpretation of the impact of maturity

on durable goods markets, accounting for changes in interest rates. Using the same average bor-

rower/average car calibration as above, the estimates in column 2 imply that a borrower oﬀered 12

months shorter maturity spends 8.9% less on a car, enough to oﬀset 60% of the increase in monthly

payment. The estimates in columns 4–6 indicate that around 20% comes from a lower negotiated

price, while the remaining 40% is due to a shift to lower quality vehicles.

   We can also interpret the price discount that aﬀected borrowers receive in terms of implied

discount rates. For buyers purchasing an average car as described above, these estimates imply a

break-even discount rate of 11.6%, meaning that at that borrower discount rate sellers would bear

the entire cost of shorter maturity. Buyers with discount rates below this IRR of 11.6% would

happily accept lower maturity if it meant attaining the discounts we estimate; however we note that

maturity shocks could aﬀect the reservation prices of such buyers suﬃciently to alter bargaining

outcomes. Buyers and sellers share the cost of lower maturity equally at a borrower discount rate

of 30%.

   Table VII also allows us to independently assess a borrower’s response to changes in interest

rates. Column 2 indicates that borrowers respond to a one percentage-point higher interest rate by

spending 1.95% less on a car. While the impact on monthly payments coming from such an interest

rate change is comparatively small (only $8.29 in this case), the lower expenditure oﬀsets 68% of

the increase in monthly payment, similar to the consumer response to shorter maturity. The fact

that borrowers respond similarly to diﬀerences in monthly payments regardless of the source of the

change is consistent with monthly payments being a focal point of consumer decision-making. In

the case of interest rates, the 68% lower expenditure is split roughly equally between substitution

to lower quality cars (36%) and lower negotiated prices for equivalent cars (32%), as columns 4–6

indicate that borrowers pay about 0.90% less controlling for vehicle quality.

   In addition to interest rates, it is natural to ask whether lenders have LTV policies that feature

discontinuities that correspond to our inferred maturity discontinuities. If so, part of the result

                                                   26
that we are attributing to diﬀerences in maturity might be driven by diﬀerences in required down

payments. This would complement Adams, Einav, and Levin (2009), who show that vehicle de-

mand is very sensitive to available liquidity for a population of subprime borrowers. To assess this

possibility, we might again re-run our main diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence specification with LTV as the

dependent variable. However, Argyle, Nadauld, and Palmer (2019) show that borrowers demand

smaller loans when oﬀered less favorable maturity, so it is diﬃcult to know whether a significant

eﬀect on LTV should be interpreted as a discontinuity in lender LTV policies or an endogenous

response by borrowers to decreased access to maturity. Moreover, car age explains only 0.2% of

the variation in LTV in a simple univariate regression, compared to 17% of maturity and even 7%

of interest rates. Given the likelihood that LTV eﬀects may be driven by endogenous responses

in borrower demand, we interpret any regressions involving LTV cautiously. In Appendix B, we

present results that aﬀected borrowers have lower LTVs by around two percentage points (relative

to a baseline of 90%), although this has very little eﬀect on the estimated price response to a change

in oﬀered maturity or interest rates (see Appendix Tables AVIII and AIX).


B.    Unobserved Heterogeneity

     One novel aspect of our empirical strategy is that our ability to control for YMMT ⇥ month fixed

eﬀects substantially reduces the scope for our estimates of price eﬀects to be driven by substitution

toward lower quality goods. Indeed, the R2 of our pricing model in Table IV is over 0.9. Still,

the fixed eﬀects cannot conclusively rule out the possibility that unobserved vehicle or borrower

heterogeneity plays some role in our results. Vehicles of a given YMMT in a given month may still

exhibit meaningful diﬀerences in vehicle condition, including mileage, accident history, and whether

they were owned by smokers or driven by aggressive, pizza-delivering teenagers. Similarly, borrowers

who take up loans with lower maximum maturities may also be diﬀerent in some way correlated with

their demand for cars. We address these concerns in several ways: by analyzing repeat-sales prices,

testing for heterogenous eﬀects in subsamples with relatively less scope for unobserved heterogeneity,

examining the mileage of treated car purchases for a subsample of cars for which we have odometer

data, and checking for changes in borrower composition in our diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences framework.

     We first attempt to address unobserved quality concerns by evaluating prices for cars that sold

multiple times in our sample. If our pricing results are driven by consumers that shift demand to

                                                  27
cars with unobservably lower quality in response to being oﬀered lower maturity loans, the lower

quality would presumably be manifest in a lower relative price when the car is sold again. Relaxing

our sample selection criteria for power considerations, our entire dataset features 8,697 cars with at

least two transactions. We require the two transactions to occur at least 18 months apart to avoid

contamination resulting from aggressive purchasers looking to quickly flip cars. Our repeat-sales

pricing analysis begins with the calculation of pricing residuals for every transaction in our data,

conditioning on YMMT ⇥ month fixed eﬀects               Y M M T (i),t ,   lender fixed eﬀects 'l , and commuting

zone fixed eﬀects ↵g in the following regression


                                log P riceiglt = ↵g + 'l +     Y M M T (i),t   + uiglt .                     (5)


We then evaluate whether the fitted pricing residuals for second sale transactions are unusually low

if the first sale for that car was a transaction with T reatment ⇥ P ost = 1 by running a diﬀerence-

in-diﬀerences regression, with T reatment and P ost taking their values as of the first sale at t0 :


                     ûiglt =    1 T reatmentit0   +   2 T reatmentit0      ⇥ P ostt0 + "iglt .              (6)


If our price results are being driven by unobserved diﬀerences in quality, these diﬀerences would

likely be persistent, resulting in lower prices for those same cars when sold a second time.

   Before estimating equation (6), we assess the scope for our sample of repeat sales to be selected

in important ways. Specifically, a concern for this exercise is the possibility for cars to only be

observed selling twice in our data if they have not decreased in value significantly. Such endogenous

resale behavior would bias our estimates of price eﬀects at the second sale upwards if correlated with

T reatment ⇥ P ost. In Appendix Table AII, we estimate a linear-probability model to see whether

cars that faced financing with exogenously lower maturity due to a lender’s maturity discontinuity

(T reatment ⇥ P ost = 1) are less likely to be sold again. We find no evidence of diﬀerential selection

into resale.

   Table VIII presents results estimating equation (6). Column 1 reports that cars previously [Insert
                                                                                                                   Table
                                                                                                                   VIII
treated with low maturity sell for a statistically insignificant higher price (60 basis points) when               about
                                                                                                                   here.]
sold a second time. Of course, this sample is diﬀerent from our main sample, so in column 2 we



                                                       28
estimate the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences regression for the first sale of the same 8,697 cars, essentially the

same specification as in column 6 of Table IV.20 The estimate shows that our main price result—a

pricing discount for cars treated with low maturity relative to otherwise comparable cars—holds in

this subsample, though the statistical significance is muted due to a substantially smaller sample size.

The diﬀerence between the first- and second-sale estimates is significant at the 10% level, indicating

that financing-related discounts appear to rebound when the same car is sold subsequently. While

we acknowledge that we only observe a small subsample of cars with repeat transactions, this price

rebound at second sale is inconsistent with many forms of unobserved vehicle quality (accident

history, high mileage, etc.) driving our results.

    A complementary approach to testing whether our results are driven by unobserved vehicle

heterogeneity is to examine subsamples of our data where the scope for unobserved heterogeneity

is reduced. Younger cars, for example, have less time to accumulate quality diﬀerences such as the

beneficial eﬀects of fastidious maintenance or the negative impacts of heavy use or accidents. As

one measure of this, we show using National Household Travel Survey microdata that the standard

deviation of vehicle mileage is strongly increasing in vehicle age (see Appendix Figure A1). To the

extent that dealers may specialize in older and younger cars, this analysis also helps us understand

whether dealer heterogeneity could be driving some of our results. Dividing our sample by the sample

median age (five years), we re-estimate our 2SLS specification in equation (4) for young (average

age three years old) and old cars (average 8.5 years old) and report these results in Appendix Table

AIII. Though the R2 indicates greater scope for substitution to lower priced cars of a given YMMT

among older vehicles, we find very similar eﬀects of a month of oﬀered maturity on prices in both

samples, and a formal test fails to reject the equality of the maturity coeﬃcients in the two samples.

    For a subsample of our cars, we were able to collect mileage information from the California

Bureau of Automotive Repair and merge by VIN. For these cars we can directly observe mileage

to test whether cars purchased by treated borrowers have higher mileage. In Appendix Figure A2

we plot an event study of mileage in this subsample. The figure shows no apparent diﬀerence in

mileage for treated cars sold in the first half of the calendar year.

    Next, we follow the exercise of Oster (2017) and adjust our estimates for omitted variables

  20
       The only diﬀerence is that the fixed eﬀects are accounted for in the creation of the pricing residuals rather than
being estimated directly in the regression.


                                                            29
bias. In Appendix Table AIV, we adjust the T reatment ⇥ P ost coeﬃcients in the six reduced-form

price regressions from Table IV. Unsurprisingly, the potential bias is meaningfully large without

adequate fixed eﬀects (columns 1–2), though it still does not change the sign of our estimates. With

the addition of Age ⇥ MMT fixed eﬀects, however, the adjusted estimate is within our original 95%

confidence interval (column 3). This is true of the more aggressive fixed eﬀect structures as well

(columns 4–6), where we see estimates very similar to the unadjusted coeﬃcients reported earlier.

The results of Appendix Table AIV suggest that the scope for our price results to be driven by

unobserved product or borrower heterogeneity correlated with maturity policies is quite limited

thanks to the richness of our controls.

     Finally, we examine diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimates using the borrower controls (FICO and

DTI) as dependent variables to explore potential changes in borrower composition. As expected

given implied changes in monthly payments, we find a slight increase in reported DTIs in some
                                             1
specifications (point estimates range from   25   to   1
                                                       30   of a standard deviation) but no significant result

when lender fixed eﬀects are included. We find no significant change in FICO scores, regardless of

the fixed eﬀect structure. Figure 10 plots event studies of FICO and DTI by month of the year [Insert
                                                                                                                 Figure
for treatment and control groups separately. The magnitudes of any diﬀerences are economically 10
                                                                                               about
                                                                                                                 here.]
small with no consistent nor statistically significant pattern that would suggest the composition of

treated borrowers changing in January relative to control-group borrowers.

     Taken together, these results suggest that unobservable heterogeneity in borrowers or car quality

is not a likely source of bias in our estimates of the causal impact of maturity on prices.


C.    Mechanisms

     What is the underlying mechanism that would result in two buyers of observationally identical

goods paying diﬀerent prices? Our discussion of the economic framework, outlined in Section B,

described the set of possible borrower reactions to shorter maturity loans. Borrowers could satisfy

a binding budget constraint by substituting into lower quality cars, searching for a better price on

their car of first choice, or bargaining over the surplus defined by the diﬀerence between buyer and

seller private valuations (i.e., marginal willingness to pay and marginal willingness to accept). We

separate price eﬀects from substitution by comparing estimates without tight collateral controls (a

2.7% expenditure impact in columns 1–2 of Table IV) to estimates with tight collateral controls (a

                                                       30
0.7% impact in columns 4–6). Though collateral controls facilitate the estimation of “same car” price

eﬀects, they do not convincingly distinguish between search or bargaining as mechanisms driving

price eﬀects.

   In an eﬀort to disentangle these mechanisms, we exploit a subsample of lenders in our data that

provide details on loan applications. Merging application data to subsequently originated loans

yields a sample of 54,929 loans, allowing for the construction of a variable that measures the number

of days elapsed between a loan application and origination. The average (interquartile range) of

the time between loan application and origination is 6.4 days (0 to 8 days). We again employ our

diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences framework to estimate whether borrowers treated with exogenously shorter

maturity loans wait longer to originate a loan after filling out an application, under the presumption

that borrowers are searching in the interim. We report the results in Table IX. The limited loan [Insert
                                                                                                           Table
                                                                                                           IX
application sample size does not allow for the YMMT collateral controls featured in previous tables,       about
                                                                                                           here.]
so we control for collateral quality with car age fixed eﬀects. The negative and insignificant estimates

indicate that T reatment⇥P ost observations are not associated with a meaningfully larger number of

days between application and origination, suggesting that treated borrowers are not spending more

days shopping for cars in response to lower maturity loans. These results cast some doubt on the

possibility that borrowers respond to maturity shocks by increasing their search eﬀort, though our

test is admittedly limited in addressing the possibility that treated borrowers search more intensely

over the same number of days as non-treated borrowers.

   Unfortunately, our data do not facilitate direct measurement of bargaining behavior. Demon-

strating bargaining as the exact mechanism would require, at the very least, diﬀerences between

posted prices and realized prices. The ideal data to find positive evidence of bargaining would in-

volve a detailed set of oﬀers and counteroﬀers leading to equilibrium prices as in Larsen (2018). Our

data do provide compelling evidence that substitution cannot fully explain the decreased expendi-

ture of treated borrowers, and suggestive evidence from application data indicates that additional

search by treated borrowers is not playing a substantial role. The totality of evidence indicates

that bargaining likely plays a meaningful role in the way that finance is capitalized into the price

of equivalent-quality used cars.




                                                  31
                                                  V.     Conclusion


    We study the consumer response to individual-level variation in credit terms. We find that

borrowers that are treated with shorter maturity spend less on a car so as to oﬀset 60% of the

increase in monthly payment. Two-thirds of this decrease in expenditure comes from substitution

toward lower quality vehicles, while the remaining third arises as a result of negotiating better prices

on equivalent vehicles. Borrowers treated with 12 months shorter maturity pay roughly 2.8% less

than unaﬀected borrowers for cars of the same manufacture year-make-model-trim (YMMT ) at the

same point in time. These results are not driven by changes in the interest rates of the accompanying

loans. Moreover, the prices of cars bought by aﬀected borrowers, if anything, rebound when sold in

later transactions, indicating that initial price diﬀerentials were unlikely to be driven by unobservable

quality diﬀerences within YMMT. Our interpretation is that constrained buyers, pinched by lower

maturity and the associated higher monthly payments, have a lower private valuation for cars in

their choice set. This lower private valuation aﬀects their incentives in the search and bargaining

processes inherent in the auto market, resulting in lower realized prices for observationally equivalent

vehicles. Frictions in the auto market likely play a significant role in facilitating the pass-through of

finance terms to prices at the individual level—including search and bargaining or sticky demand

driven by consumer preferences for a certain car type, brand, or dealership. While it is an open

question whether our results would generalize to other markets, many markets for big-ticket items

are characterized by similar frictions (real estate, machines, furniture, higher education, etc.).

    Our focus on the cross section of prices raises interesting questions regarding the incidence

of credit-supply shocks. Our results suggest that the price impact of changes in credit terms is

concentrated among aﬀected borrowers, rather than being spread across all borrowers through

an aggregate demand channel. This serves to decrease any wedge in surplus between treated and

untreated borrowers caused by diﬀerential access to credit. Meanwhile, sellers are sorted into winners

and losers based on the financing of their buyers.21
    Our analysis also speaks to the transmission of policy actions through to final-goods prices. For


  21
       Note that our findings of the impact of consumer financing disruptions on sellers provides a positive economic ra-
tionale for commonplace vertical integration between lenders and dealers. See Murfin and Pratt (2019) for theoretical
and empirical evidence on vendor financing in heavy construction equipment.


                                                            32
example, one goal of monetary policy is to influence consumer demand through the interest-rate

channel. Our results demonstrate how capitalization eﬀects can blunt monetary policy’s ability

to aﬀect demand by changing monthly payments. Moreover, demand, and ultimately prices, can

be influenced through dimensions of the credit surface besides rates, such as maturity. Given

the importance of monthly debt service capacity to consumer demand and equilibrium prices, a

parameter of interest is an estimate of the sensitivity of durable goods prices to changes in monthly

debt service payments. The elasticity of price to changes in monthly payments can be calculated

by dividing estimated price changes (2.8% from a 12-month maturity shock) by estimated changes

in monthly payment amounts (14.4%). This calculation implies an elasticity estimate of –0.19,

suggesting that policy actions that increase monthly payment amounts by 10% would be associated

with price declines of 1.9%.

   We view our results as a novel contribution to the literature investigating the link between credit

and prices. While most studies that link credit and prices evaluate credit shocks in the time series

and examine their impact on aggregate price levels, our cross-sectional identification documents

the existence of a transmission mechanism between aggregate shocks like monetary policy and

aggregate prices. A monetary policy shock plausibly impacts many factors in general equilibrium,

including interest rates, lending standards, expectations, investment, and aggregate demand. We

use a microeconometric empirical strategy to isolate the credit-terms channel and demonstrate its

importance. Additional evidence suggests that financing terms may aﬀect the dynamics of the

bargaining game between sellers and retail buyers, consistent with the literature showing the eﬀect

of corporate debt on various forms of negotiations. Finally, our results also have implications for

the optimal design of macroprudential policy. Given the tight link between payment size, asset

prices, and demand, maturity is an important if presently overlooked lever in aﬀecting prices and

consumption. Overall, our results call for further examination of the attributes of loan contracts

that consumers most value with potential implications for credit product design.




                                                 33
                                          References

Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino (2013), Credit Supply and House Prices:
   Evidence from Mortgage Market Segmentation, NBER Working Paper No. 17832.

Argyle, Bronson, Taylor Nadauld, and Christopher Palmer (2017), Real Eﬀects of Search Frictions
   in Consumer Credit Markets, MIT Sloan Working Paper 5242-17.

— (2020), Monthly Payment Targeting and the Demand for Maturity. Review of Financial Studies,
  Forthcoming.

Benmelech, Efraim, Ralf Meisenzahl, and Rodney Ramcharan (2017), The real eﬀects of liquidity
   during the financial crisis: Evidence from automobiles. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(1),
   317–365.

Bhutta, Neil and Daniel Ringo (2017), The Eﬀect of Interest Rates on Home Buying: Evidence from
   a Discontinuity in Mortgage Insurance Premiums, SSRN Working Paper No. 3085008.

Borio, Claudio and Philip William Lowe (2002), Asset prices, financial and monetary stability:
   exploring the nexus, BIS Working Paper No. 114.

Busse, Meghan, Christopher Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer (2012), Stranded Vehicles: How Gaso-
   line Taxes Change the Value of Households’ Vehicle Assets, Working Paper.

Busse, Meghan, Jorge Silva-Risso, and Florian Zettelmeyer (2006), $1,000 cash back: The pass-
   through of auto manufacturer promotions. American Economic Review 96(4), 1253–1270.

Cornia, Marco, Kristopher Gerardi, and Adam Shapiro (2011), Price Discrimination and Business-
   Cycle Risk, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper 2011-3.

Correia, Sergio (2016), Linear Models with High-Dimensional Fixed Eﬀects: An Eﬃcient and Feasible
   Estimator. Tech. rep. Working Paper.

Davis, Morris, Stephen Oliner, Tobias Peter, and Edward Pinto (2017), The Impact of Interest Rates
   on House Prices and Housing Demand: Evidence from a Quasi-Experiment, Working Paper.

De Chaisemartin, Clément and Xavier D’HaultfŒuille (2017), Fuzzy diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences. The
   Review of Economic Studies 85(2), 999–1028.

Di Maggio, Marco and Amir Kermani (2017), Credit-induced boom and bust. The Review of Fi-
   nancial Studies 30(11), 3711–3758.

Englmaier, Florian, Arno Schmöller, and Till Stowasser (2017), Price Discontinuities in an Online
   Market for Used Cars. Management Science.

Favara, Giovanni and Jean Imbs (2015), Credit Supply and the Price of Housing. American Economic
   Review 105(3), 958–992.

Gavazza, Alessandro, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Nikita Roketskiy (2014), A quantitative analysis of
   the used-car market. American Economic Review 104(11), 3668–3700.




                                               34
Glaeser, Edward, Joshua Gottlieb, and Joseph Gyourko (2012), Can Cheap Credit Explain the
   Housing Boom? Housing and the Financial Crisis. University of Chicago Press, 301–359.

Goolsbee, Austan (1998), Investment tax incentives, prices, and the supply of capital goods. Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 113(1), 121–148.

Hansman, Christopher, Harrison Hong, Wenxi Jiang, Yu-Jane Liu, and Juan-Juan Meng (2018),
   Riding the Credit Boom, NBER Working Paper No. 24586.

Hennessy, Christopher and Dmitry Livdan (2009), Debt, bargaining, and credibility in firm–supplier
   relationships. Journal of Financial Economics 93(3), 382–399.

Hertzberg, Andrew, Andres Liberman, and Daniel Paravisini (2018), Screening on loan terms: evi-
   dence from maturity choice in consumer credit. The Review of Financial Studies, 3532–3567.

Huang, Guofang, Hong Luo, and Jing Xia (2015), Invest in information or wing it? A model of
   dynamic pricing with seller learning, SSRN Working Paper No. 2668838.

Hudson, Sally, Peter Hull, and Jack Liebersohn (2017), Interpreting Instrumented Diﬀerence-in-
  Diﬀerences, MIT Mimeo.

Israel, Ronen (1991), Capital structure and the market for corporate control: The defensive role of
    debt financing. Journal of Finance 46(4), 1391–1409.

Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M Taylor (2015), Betting the house. Journal of Interna-
   tional Economics 96, S2–S18.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Tyler Muir (2017), How credit cycles across a financial crisis, NBER
   Working Paper No. 23850.

Landvoigt, Tim, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider (2015), The Housing Market(s) of San
   Diego. American Economic Review 105(4), 1371–1407.

Larsen, Bradley (2018), The Eﬃciency of Real-World Bargaining: Evidence from Wholesale Used-
   Auto Auctions, NBER Working paper No. 20431.

Lee, Alice J and Daniel R Ames (2017), “I can’t pay more” versus “It’s not worth more”: Divergent
   eﬀects of constraint and disparagement rationales in negotiations. Organizational Behavior and
   Human Decision Processes 141, 16–28.

Lucca, David O, Taylor Nadauld, and Karen Chen (2016), Credit supply and the rise in college
   tuition: Evidence from the expansion in federal student aid programs. FRB of NY Staﬀ Report
   No. 733.

Matsa, David (2010), Capital structure as a strategic variable: Evidence from collective bargaining.
  Journal of Finance 65(3), 1197–1232.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2009), The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence from
   the US mortgage default crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4), 1449–1496.

— (2011), House prices, home equity-based borrowing, and the US household leverage crisis. Amer-
  ican Economic Review 101(5), 2132–56.


                                                35
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2018), Finance and business cycles: the credit-driven household demand
   channel, NBER Working Paper No. 24322.

Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner (2017), Household debt and business cycles worldwide.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Müller, Holger and Fausto Panunzi (2004), Tender oﬀers and leverage. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 119(4), 1217–1248.

Nadauld, Taylor and Shane Sherlund (2013), The impact of securitization on the expansion of
   subprime credit. Journal of Financial Economics 107(2), 454–476.

Oster, Emily (2017), Unobservable Selection and Coeﬃcient Stability: Theory and Evidence. Journal
   of Business & Economic Statistics, 1–18.

Rice, Tara and Philipe Strahan (2010), Does Credit Competition Aﬀect Small-Firm Finance? Jour-
   nal of Finance 65(3), 861–889.

Sallee, James (2011), The surprising incidence of tax credits for the Toyota Prius. American Eco-
    nomic Journal: Economic Policy 3(2), 189–219.

Spiegel, Yossef and Daniel Spulber (1994), The capital structure of a regulated firm. The RAND
   Journal of Economics, 424–440.

Stanton, Richard, Chris Strickland, and Nancy Wallace (2015), A New Dynamic House-Price Index
   for Mortgage Valuation and Stress Testing, Working Paper.

Verner, Emil and Gyozo Gyöngyösi (2018), Household Debt Revaluation and the Real Economy:
   Evidence from a Foreign Currency Debt Crisis, Working Paper.

Zevelev, Albert (2016), Does Collateral Value Aﬀect Asset Prices? Evidence from a Natural Exper-
   iment in Texas, SSRN Working Paper No. 2815609.




                                               36
                                      Figures and Tables



                              Figure 1: Average Maturity By Car Age
           65
           60
       Maturity
       55  50
           45




                  0   1   2   3   4   5   6    7      8    9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                                   Car age

Note: Figure plots the average maturity of an auto loan in our data as a function of the age of the
underlying collateral.




                                                37
                        Figure 2: Hypothetical Lender Maximum Maturity Rule

       Months




                                                                Expected car life




                                                             Max allowable loan maturity



                0   1       2   Age1     4     5     6      7      Age2     9       10   11
                                               Car Age

Notes: Figure depicts a hypothetical discontinuous lender rule. While the conditional expected
remaining life of a car decreases smoothly with car age, many lenders have discrete maximum
allowable loan maturity rules that discontinuously decrease maximum allowable maturity once a
car age reaches certain cutoﬀs.




                                                38
                                                    Figure 3: Example-Lender Maturity Policies
                                                  Panel A: Example Maturity Policy for 3-year-old Cars




                               72
                  Maturity (80th percentile)
                 63          6660        69




                                               2006m1    2008m1    2010m1      2012m1   2014m1       2016m1   2018m1

                                                                  Individual Obs.         Policies


                                                  Panel B: Example Maturity Policy for 4-year-old Cars
                               72       69
                 Maturity (80th percentile)
                 63         66 60




                                     2006m1             2008m1    2010m1      2012m1    2014m1       2016m1   2018m1

                                                                  Individual Obs.         Policies


Notes: Figure plots the maturity policies for the largest lender in our data. Individual observations
x capture the 80th percentile of maturity for a given car age within a given month at this lender.
Boxed areas correspond to the maturity policies identified by our algorithm (see section A for
details). Panels A and B show the policies for three- and four-year-old cars, respectively.




                                                                              39
                                           Figure 4: Example-Lender Maturity Shocks


                 72                                                               2012 Honda Civic LX
                                                                                        (control)
                         69
       Maturity policies
             66




                                       2006 Honda Civic LX
                                            (treatment)
                 63
                 60




                              2006m1     2008m1        2010m1      2012m1   2014m1     2016m1           2018m1

                                                     3 year old cars         4 year old cars


Notes: Figure illustrates our empirical design by plotting treatment- and control-group observations
against identified maturity policies for the example lender used in Figure 3. Dashed rectangles cor-
respond to the lender’s maturity policy for three-year-old cars, as identified in Figure 3. Similarly,
the solid rectangles represent the maturity policy for four-year-old cars for the same lender. Dotted
vertical lines represent instances of maturity shocks in which a given vehicle would receive discontin-
uously lower maturity in January relative to December. As an example of a treated transaction in
our sample, a 2006 Honda Civic LX bought in December 2009 would have had a maturity policy of
66 months, whereas the same vehicle purchased in January 2010 would have a 60 month maximum
allowable maturity. In contrast, by 2016 the policies for three and four year old cars are both 72
months. Thus, a 2012 Honda Civic LX bought in December 2015 or January 2016 has the same
allowable maturity and is assigned to the control group.




                                                                 40
                               Figure 5: Distribution of Maturity Shock Timing
                                          Panel A: Negative Maturity Shocks




                      120
                                106



                      100 80
                Frequency
                   60 40
                      20




                                      3      2    1      1                 1    1       1   2
                      0




                                 J    F     M    A      M      J     J     A    S   O   N   D
                                                      Month of maturity shock

                                          Panel B: Positive Maturity Shocks
                      120
                      100 80
                Frequency
                   60 40
                      20




                                            13                 13
                                      9           8
                                                                     5     6    4
                                 3                       3                          2   3   2
                      0




                                 J    F     M    A      M      J     J     A    S   O   N   D
                                                      Month of maturity shock


Notes: Figure plots the number of discrete changes in maturity identified in our data that occur in
each month for both negative (panel A) and positive (panel B) shocks to maturity.




                                                             41
                        Figure 6: Distribution of Maximum Maturity Shocks by Size in Months
                              59

                   60
                   40
       Frequency




                                                              34
                   20




                                                                              9

                                              4
                   0




                             −12             −9             −6                −3              0
                                              Change in maturity (months)

Notes: Figure plots number of occurrences of detected discontinuous maturity drops in January
based on the size of the drop in maximum oﬀered maturity.




                                                        42
                               Figure 7: Average Maturities Around Year End by Treatment


                1
       Maturity (months)
        −1      −2    0




                           J     A     S     O      N     D     J      F      M    A       M   J
                                                           Month

                                                    Treatment       Control


Notes: Figure plots the average conditional maturity by month around the year end for both
treatment and control groups. We first regress maturity on car age ⇥ month-of-sale fixed eﬀects
and commuting zone fixed eﬀects and then plot average residuals within each month.




                                                          43
                              Figure 8: Average Price Around Year End by Treatment


                   .02
                   0
       Log Price
                   −.02
                   −.04




                          J   A     S     O     N       D     J        F    M   A    M   J
                                                         Month

                                                    Treated       Control


Notes: Figure shows average conditional log price around year end for both treatment and control
groups. We first regress the log of car price on car age ⇥ month-of-sale fixed eﬀects and commuting
zone fixed eﬀects and then plot the average residuals within each month.




                                                        44
                           Figure 9: Average Interest Rate Around Year End by Treatment


             .002
             .001
       Interest Rate
             0
             −.001
             −.002




                       J      A      S     O     N      D     J      F      M    A        M   J
                                                         Month

                                                  Treatment       Control


Notes: Figure shows the average conditional interest rate around the new year for both treatment
and control groups. We first regress interest rate on car age ⇥ month-of-sale fixed eﬀects and
commuting zone fixed eﬀects and then plot the average residuals within each month.




                                                       45
          Figure 10: Average Borrower Characteristics Around Year End by Treatment
                                          Panel A: FICO Scores




                  4
                  2
                FICO
                  0
                  −2
                  −4




                          J   A   S      O    N     D     J      F      M   A   M   J
                                                     Month

                                               Treatment      Control


                                      Panel B: Debt-to-Income Ratios
                  .01
                  .005
                DTI
                 0−.005
                  −.01




                          J   A   S      O    N     D     J      F      M   A   M   J
                                                    Month

                                               Treatment      Control


Notes: Figure plots an event study of average borrower characteristics by treatment and control
group and month of year. Panel A plots average FICO scores, and panel B plots average debt-to-
income ratios. We first regress each dependent variable on car age ⇥ month-of-sale fixed eﬀects and
commuting zone fixed eﬀects and then plot the average residuals within each month.




                                                    46
                                   Table I: Summary Statistics

                  Overall Estimation Sample     Control Sample    Treatment Sample     Diﬀerence
                              (1)                    (2)                (3)             (2) - (3)

      FICO                   714.1                     714.5             706.9              7.6
                             (69.0)                    (69.0)            (68.2)            [0.3]
      DTI                    0.346                     0.347             0.331            0.016
                            (0.256)                   (0.259)           (0.199)          [0.001]
      LTV                    0.907                     0.907             0.907            0.000
                            (0.222)                   (0.222)           (0.217)          [0.001]
    Car Age                   3.88                      3.86              4.29            -0.43
                             (2.95)                    (2.94)            (3.09)           [0.01]
    Car Price               20,341                    20,432            18,821            1,611
                            (9,432)                   (9,460)           (8,951)           [39.5]
    Maturity                  61.3                      61.4              59.3              2.1
                             (12.8)                    (12.8)            (12.4)           [0.05]
  Interest Rate             0.0410                    0.0409            0.0431          -0.0022
                           (0.0244)                  (0.0244)          (0.0246)         [0.0001]

  Observations              972,621                  917,864            54,757

Notes: Table shows means and standard deviations in parentheses for the overall estimation sample
(1), alongside statistics for the control (2) and treatment (3) samples. The diﬀerences in means (2)
- (3) are reported in the final column with standard errors in brackets. FICO is the credit score of
the borrower as of the origination date of the loan; DTI is the back-end debt-to-income ratio of the
borrower; LTV is the loan-to-value ratio for the vehicle being financed.




                                                47
              Table II: Maturity Distribution within Lender ⇥ Car Age ⇥ Month

            Maturity (Relative to Max)   Percent of Borrowers   Cumulative Percent

                          0                        16.5               16.5
                       [-6, 0)                      9.2               25.7
                      [-12, -6)                    17.2               43.0
                     [-18, -12)                    10.3                53.2
                     [-24, -18)                    14.8                68.0
                        < -24                      32.0               100.0

Notes: The table shows the maturity distribution relative to the maximum maturity within lender
⇥ car age ⇥ month cells. Within each cell, we report the average percentage of borrowers who
receive maturity within each six month band relative to the maximum maturity in that cell.




                                              48
               Table III: First-Stage Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences Results on Maturity

  Maturity                    (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)

  Treatment ⇥ Post        -2.404***   -2.390***        -2.021***   -2.157***   -2.284***   -2.290***
                           (0.664)     (0.303)           (0.277)    (0.304)     (0.271)     (0.265)
  Treatment                 -0.932      -0.395            -0.325     -0.371     0.561**      0.368
                           (0.955)     (0.406)           (0.403)    (0.365)     (0.282)     (0.263)
  Post                    -0.872***   0.913***          0.754***
                           (0.197)     (0.188)           (0.102)

  Borrower Controls          Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
  Car Age FE                             Yes
  Car Age ⇥ MMT FE                                       Yes
  YMMT ⇥ Month FE                                                    Yes         Yes         Yes
  Commuting Zone FE                                                              Yes         Yes
  Lender FE                                                                                  Yes

  Observations             972,621     972,621         972,621     972,621     972,621     972,621
  R-squared                 0.004       0.132           0.207       0.350       0.407       0.447

Notes: Table reports diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences regressions of loan maturities measured in months
over an event year from July to June. Treatment is a dummy equal to one for loans that originate
from a lender whose maximum maturity policy changed discontinuously for the transacted car on
January 1, as discussed in section III. Post is a dummy equal to one for observations after January
1st. Borrower controls include FICO (the credit score of the borrower at loan origination) and DTI
(the back-end debt-to-income ratio of the borrower at origination). MMT signifies combinations
of make-model-trim; YMMT signifies combinations of manufacture year-make-model-trim. Robust
standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered by month and commuting zone. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  49
                Table IV: Reduced-Form Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences Results on Log Price

   log(Price)                  (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)

   Treatment ⇥ Post           -0.026    -0.027***      -0.009***   -0.006**   -0.007***   -0.007***
                             (0.033)      (0.006)        (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.002)
   Treatment                  -0.059    -0.025***        -0.009*     -0.007     0.006       0.006
                             (0.050)      (0.008)        (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.005)     (0.005)
   Post                     -0.052***    0.061***       0.060***
                             (0.007)      (0.006)        (0.006)

   Borrower Controls           Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
   Car Age FE                             Yes
   Car Age ⇥ MMT FE                                      Yes
   YMMT ⇥ Month FE                                                   Yes        Yes         Yes
   Commuting Zone FE                                                            Yes         Yes
   Lender FE                                                                                Yes

   Observations              972,621    972,621        972,621     972,621    972,621     972,621
   R-squared                  0.060      0.369          0.872       0.909      0.911       0.914

Notes: Table reports diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences regressions results of log(prices) over an event year
from July to June. Treatment is a dummy equal to one for loans that originate from a lender whose
maximum maturity policy changed discontinuously for the transacted car on January 1, as discussed
in section III. Post is a dummy equal to one for observations after January 1st. Borrower controls
include FICO (the credit score of the borrower at loan origination) and DTI (the back-end debt-
to-income ratio of the borrower at origination). MMT signifies combinations of make-model-trim;
YMMT signifies combinations of manufacture year-make-model-trim. Robust standard errors (in
parentheses) are double clustered by month and commuting zone. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  50
                Table V: Two-Stage Least Squares Eﬀects of Maturity on Log Price

 log(Price)                  (1)          (2)             (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)

 Maturity                   0.0109    0.0112***        0.0042***   0.0027**   0.0032***   0.0029***
                          (0.0112)     (0.0025)         (0.0014)   (0.0012)    (0.0012)    (0.0010)
 Post                    -0.0423***   0.0503***        0.0566***
                          (0.0134)     (0.0055)         (0.0054)
 Treatment                 -0.0486    -0.0209**          -0.0079    -0.0061    0.0044      0.0048
                          (0.0469)     (0.0085)         (0.0049)   (0.0051)   (0.0038)    (0.0041)

 Borrower Controls           Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
 Car Age FE                               Yes
 Car Age ⇥ MMT FE                                        Yes
 YMMT ⇥ Month FE                                                     Yes        Yes         Yes
 Commuting Zone FE                                                              Yes         Yes
 Lender FE                                                                                  Yes

 Observations              972,621      972,621         972,621    972,621     972,621     972,621
 R-squared                  0.210        0.411           0.874      0.911       0.913       0.916

Notes: Table reports diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences regressions of log prices for an event year running
from July to June using two-stage least squares. The excluded instrument is Treatment ⇥ Post,
where Post is a dummy equal to one for observations after January 1st. Treatment is a dummy
equal to one for loans that originate from a lender that experienced a discontinuous policy change,
as discussed in section III. Borrower controls include FICO (the credit score of the borrower
at loan origination) and DTI (the back-end debt-to-income ratio of the borrower at origination).
MMT signifies combinations of make-model-trim; YMMT signifies combinations of manufacture
year-make-model-trim. Robust standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered by month and
commuting zone. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  51
                    Table VI: Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences Results on Interest Rates

    Interest Rate              (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)

    Treatment ⇥ Post          0.0006      0.0004     0.0007      0.0009     0.0012*    0.0016***
                             (0.0010)   (0.0011)    (0.0008)    (0.0007)    (0.0007)    (0.0005)
    Treatment                 0.0001     -0.0002    -0.0020*   -0.0030***    -0.0009     -0.0005
                             (0.0014)   (0.0017)    (0.0011)    (0.0008)    (0.0005)    (0.0004)
    Post                      0.0002     -0.0006     -0.0001
                             (0.0007)   (0.0006)    (0.0002)

    Borrower Controls          Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes
    Car Age FE                            Yes
    Car Age ⇥ MMT FE                                    Yes
    YMMT ⇥ Month FE                                               Yes         Yes        Yes
    Commuting Zone FE                                                         Yes        Yes
    Lender FE                                                                            Yes

    Observations             972,621    972,621     972,621     972,621     972,621     972,621
    R-squared                 0.426      0.443       0.499       0.604       0.640       0.664

Notes: Table reports diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences regressions of loan interest rates over an event year
from July to June. Treatment is a dummy equal to one for loans that originate from a lender whose
maximum maturity policy changed discontinuously for the transacted car on January 1, as discussed
in section III. Post is a dummy equal to one for observations after January 1st. Borrower controls
include FICO (the credit score of the borrower at loan origination) and DTI (the back-end debt-
to-income ratio of the borrower at origination). MMT signifies combinations of make-model-trim;
YMMT signifies combinations of manufacture year-make-model-trim. Robust standard errors (in
parentheses) are double clustered by month and commuting zone. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   52
         Table VII: Two-Stage Least Squares Eﬀects of Maturity and Rate on Log Price

 log(Price)                       (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)

 Maturity                      0.0044*    0.0074***      0.0034***   0.0022***   0.0024***   0.0023***
                               (0.0025)    (0.0015)       (0.0007)    (0.0004)    (0.0004)    (0.0004)
 Interest Rate                   -0.365   -1.951***      -1.467***   -0.920***   -0.863***   -0.905***
                                (0.846)     (0.628)        (0.418)     (0.323)     (0.328)     (0.333)

 Borrower Controls                Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
 Car Age FE                                   Yes
 Car Age ⇥ MMT FE                                          Yes
 YMMT ⇥ Month FE                                                       Yes          Yes         Yes
 Commuting Zone FE                                                                  Yes         Yes
 Lender FE                                                                                      Yes

 Int. Rate 1st Stage p-value     0.000      0.000         0.000       0.000       0.000        0.000
 Maturity 1st Stage p-value      0.000      0.000         0.000       0.000       0.000        0.000
 Corr(Mat/Rate Coeﬀs)           -0.134      -0.162        -0.192      -0.160      -0.147       -0.187

 Observations                   972,621    972,621        972,621     972,621     972,621     972,621
 R-squared                       0.164      0.421          0.875       0.911       0.914       0.916

Notes: Table reports two-stage least-squares regressions of log transaction prices on loan maturity
and interest rate. Excluded instruments are the interactions of Post with Treatment dummies
that identify treated lender ⇥ event age ⇥ event year combinations (as discussed in section III).
Borrower controls include FICO scores, DTI, and Treatment dummies. Corr(Mat/Rate Coeﬀs) is the
correlation across cells of the first-stage coeﬃcients for the maturity and interest rate instruments.
MMT signifies combinations of make-model-trim; YMMT signifies combinations of manufacture
year-make-model-trim. Robust standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered by month and
commuting zone. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                    53
            Table VIII: Repeat Sales Reduced-form Eﬀects of Treatment on Log Price

                                 Second-sale log(Price)   Initial-sale log(Price)   Diﬀerence
                                          (1)                       (2)              (1) - (2)

        Treatment ⇥ Post                  0.006                   -0.012             0.018*
                                         (0.007)                 (0.010)             (0.011)
        Treatment                         -0.005                  0.009
                                         (0.004)                 (0.010)

        YMMT ⇥ Month FE                   Yes                      Yes
        CZ FE                             Yes                      Yes
        Lender FE                         Yes                      Yes

        Observations                     8,697                    8,697
        R-squared                        0.001                    0.001

Notes: Table reports diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences regressions results of log price residuals for a subse-
quent second sale (1) and the initial sale (2) for those cars that we observe transacting twice in the
entire dataset, at least 18 months apart. These pricing residuals û are calculated from equation (5)
by controlling for manufacture year-make-model-trim by month fixed eﬀects, commuting zone, and
lender fixed eﬀects. Post is a dummy equal to one for observations for which the first sale occurred
after January 1st. Treatment is a dummy equal to one for observations for which the first loan
was originated by a lender whose maximum maturity policy changed discontinuously for the trans-
acted car on January 1, as discussed in section III. YMMT signifies combinations of manufacture
year-make-model-trim. Robust standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered by month and
commuting zone. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   54
     Table IX: Reduced-form Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences Results on Days Spent Car Shopping

                                    (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)

            Treatment ⇥ Post        -1.18     -2.11    -1.33    -2.11    -1.94     0.42
                                   (1.03)    (1.61)   (1.38)   (1.81)   (1.75)   (1.70)
            Treatment             -3.69**   -4.12**    -1.47    -1.94    -1.74    -1.05
                                   (1.73)    (1.66)   (1.85)   (1.50)   (1.55)   (1.35)
            Post                     0.12      0.30     1.31     0.95     1.03
                                   (0.68)    (0.64)   (1.07)   (1.12)   (1.12)

            Borrower Controls      Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
            Car Age FEs                      Yes                Yes      Yes      Yes
            Lender FEs                                 Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
            CZ FEs                                                       Yes      Yes
            Loan Month FEs                                                        Yes

            Observations          54,929    54,929    54,929   54,929   54,929   54,929
            R-squared              0.01      0.01      0.05     0.05     0.05     0.06

Notes: Table reports diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences regression results where the dependent variable mea-
sures the number of days elapsed between a loan application and loan origination. An event year
runs from July to June, and the variable Post is a dummy equal to one for observations after January
1st. Treatment is a dummy equal to one for loans that originate from a lender whose maximum
maturity policy changed discontinuously for the transacted car on January 1, as discussed in sec-
tion III. Borrower controls include FICO (the credit score of the borrower at loan origination) and
DTI (the back-end debt-to-income ratio of the borrower at origination). Robust standard errors (in
parentheses) are double clustered by month and commuting zone. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                55
                                             Appendix

                                                                                                       [Insert
                                                                                                       Figures
                                                                                                       A1 to
                                                                                                       A2
                                                                                                       about
                                                                                                       here.]




                                                                                                       [Insert
                                                                                                       Tables
                                                                                                       AI to
                                                                                                       AIV
                                                                                                       about
                                                                                                       here.]




A.    Robustness to Maturity Discontinuities Classification Criteria

     In Section A, we describe the tradeoﬀs that we face in classifying maturity policies and dis-

continuities. In the main results, we focused on discontinuities defined at any of the 70th, 80th,

or 90th percentiles of the maturity distribution for a given lender by car age. However, we find

that age-based maturity policies are reliably detectable at lower percentiles than those we focused

on in the draft, down to at least the 40th percentile. Appendix Table AV shows the number of

negative January discontinuities that we identify at each percentile, as well as the percentage of

the negative discontinuities detected using that percentile that occurred in January. While the [Insert
                                                                                                       Table
absolute maximum maturity in any given month is not a particularly reliable statistic (likely due AV
                                                                                                  about
                                                                                                       here.]
to lenders’ willingness to make exceptions to maturity rules in special cases), all percentiles from

the 90th to the 40th show more than 30 January discontinuities and have a percentage of negative

discontinuities that occur in January around 90%. For reference, Appendix Table AV shows 293

total January discontinuities; no other month had more than six.

     In Appendix Tables AVI and AVII, we revisit our main first-stage and reduced-form specifications [Insert
                                                                                                       Table
                                                                                                       AVI
                                                                                                       about
                                                  56                                                   here.]
using discontinuities detected at any percentile from 50 to 90. Because discontinuities can occur in

a given cell at more than one percentile, this results in 150 January discontinuities (vs. 106 in the

main results). The sample is also slightly larger (just under 1.1 million vs. just under 1.0 million)

and has a slightly larger percentage of treated observations (6.7% vs. 5.6%). The results are in all

respects very similar to those in our main specifications.                                              [Insert
                                                                                                        Table
                                                                                                        AVII
                                                                                                        about
                                                                                                        here.]


B.    Loan-to-value Ratios

     Anecdotally, lenders often tie their LTV policies to the blue book value of a car as opposed

to the price of each transaction. We do our best to imitate this practice by estimating the value

associated with a given transaction as the average transaction price for cars of the same YMMT sold

in the same state during the same half-year, excluding the vehicle in question. In cases for which

there were no other vehicles of the same YMMT sold in the same state, we pool all transactions

nationally. We pool transactions during a six-month period to maximize the number of transactions

from which we estimate the average price without crossing the pre-post boundary of our event year.

This will give us correct values on average in each pre- and post-period, though values will be

overestimated in January and July and underestimated in June and December, with inverse eﬀects

on LTVs. Jackknifing LTVs in this way also helps to avoid any mechanical relationship between

LTV and T reatment ⇥ P ost, as we have seen that prices are lower for aﬀected borrowers. We report

the results in Table AVIII. Consistent with tighter credit, we find that LTVs decrease by around [Insert
                                                                                                        Table
two percentage points for treated borrowers across all specifications, from a baseline of around 90%. AVIII
                                                                                                      about
                                                                                                        here.]
Note that, in the event that some lenders have LTV policies tied to the actual purchase price of

each transaction, these results overstate the diﬀerence between treated and control LTVs, as our

measurement of loan-to-book-value will mechanically result in lower LTVs among treated vehicles

with lower purchase prices. Moreover, as discussed in Section A, LTV diﬀerences may also represent

an endogenous response of borrowers who demand smaller loans when oﬀered less favorable terms.

     To evaluate the eﬀect of LTV on price, we estimate a two-stage least squares regression, instru-

menting for maturity, interest rates, and LTVs under the assumption that these LTV results rep-

resent exogenous policy-determined variation and not an endogenous borrower response to shorter

maturity. We report the results in Table AIX. As described in Section A, the instrument set in- [Insert
                                                                                                        Table
                                                                                                        AIX
                                                                                                        about
                                                  57                                                    here.]
cludes diﬀerences in the magnitudes of maturity, interest rate, and LTV policy discontinuities. The

results suggest that LTV is negatively related to price for the specifications with weaker fixed eﬀects

but becomes positively (but insignificantly) related to price with stronger fixed eﬀects. Relative to

Table VII, we cannot reject equivalence of coeﬃcients on maturity nor interest rate for any column

and the coeﬃcient on maturity is about 90% as large as reported in Table VII. While we stress that

we wish to be cautious in interpreting these results, the table suggests that LTV is not the major

driver of the price-financing relationship in our dataset.




                                                  58
                                                 Figure A1: Mileage Variation by Car Age


                        50,000  40,000
           Standard Deviation (miles)
       20,000      30,000
                        10,000




                                         1   2     3       4       5        6        7     8   9   10
                                                               Vehicle Age (years)

Notes: Figure plots standard deviation of vehicle odometer readings in miles by vehicle age for used
cars 1–10 years old observed in the 2017 National Household Travel Survey.




                                                                   59
                       Figure A2: Average Mileage Around Year End by Treatment


          10000
          5000
       Mileage
          0
          −5000
          −10000




                   J     A     S     O     N     D     J      F      M      A      M      J
                                                  Month

                                           Treatment       Control


Notes: Figure plots an event study of average mileage by treatment and control group and month
of year for a subsample of cars sold in California for which we have odometer data. We first regress
mileage on car age ⇥ month-of-sale fixed eﬀects and commuting zone fixed eﬀects and then plot the
average residuals within each month.




                                                 60
 Table AI: Reduced-Form Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences Results for Log Price Using Hold-out Sample

     log(Price)                  (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)

     Treatment ⇥ Post         -0.0003     -0.031**      -0.012***   -0.009*   -0.009**   -0.009***
                              (0.025)      (0.012)        (0.004)   (0.005)    (0.004)    (0.003)
     Treatment               -0.101***    -0.026**         -0.007    -0.008   0.006**    0.008***
                              (0.037)      (0.012)        (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.003)    (0.002)
     Post                    -0.062***    0.055***       0.063***
                              (0.008)      (0.005)        (0.006)

     Borrower Controls           Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
     Car Age FE                              Yes
     Age ⇥ MMT FE                                         Yes
     YMMT ⇥ Month FE                                                 Yes        Yes        Yes
     Commuting Zone FE                                                          Yes        Yes
     Lender FE                                                                             Yes

     Observations             232,984     232,984       232,984     232,984   232,984    232,984
     R-squared                 0.070       0.325         0.885       0.923     0.925      0.926

Notes: Table reports diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences regressions results of log prices for an event year
running from July to June using a diﬀerent sample to define treatment and control than the one
used in estimation. We randomly divide observations into two groups at the lender ⇥ car age ⇥
month-of-sale level. Using the first group to define treatment and control (see section III), we repeat
the reduced-form analysis of prices from Table IV using only the hold-out sample. Borrower controls
include FICO (the credit score of the borrower at loan origination) and DTI (the back-end debt-
to-income ratio of the borrower at origination). Robust standard errors (in parentheses) are double
clustered by month and commuting zone. See notes to Table IV for more details. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   61
                 Table AII: Linear-Probability Model of Observed Resale Selection

  I(Second Sale Observed)        (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)

  Treatment ⇥ Post               0.0009     0.0007        0.0015      0.0014     0.0016     0.0017
                               (0.0013)   (0.0018)      (0.0017)    (0.0019)   (0.0017)    (0.0017)
  Treatment                     -0.0006    -0.0012       -0.0012     -0.0014    -0.0021   -0.0026**
                               (0.0014)   (0.0019)      (0.0019)    (0.0019)   (0.0013)    (0.0013)
  Post                        0.0025***    -0.0004     -0.0014***
                               (0.0006)   (0.0006)      (0.0003)

  Car Age FE                                Yes
  Age ⇥ MMT FE                                            Yes
  YMMT ⇥ Month FE                                                     Yes        Yes        Yes
  Commuting Zone FE                                                              Yes        Yes
  Lender FE                                                                                 Yes

  Observations                 963,612    963,612       963,612     963,612    963,612    963,612
  R-squared                     0.001      0.006         0.0256      0.190      0.198      0.199

Notes: Table reports linear-probability model diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences regressions of a dummy for
whether a given vehicle was observed being resold in our sample. Borrower controls include FICO
(the credit score of the borrower at loan origination) and DTI (the back-end debt-to-income ratio
of the borrower at origination). Sample includes the first sale per VIN from the main estimation
sample subject to observing at least two sales per YMMT category. Robust standard errors (in
parentheses) are double clustered by month and commuting zone. See notes to Table VIII for more
details. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  62
 Table AIII: Two-Stage Least Squares Eﬀects of Maturity and Rate on Log Price by Vehicle Age

                                       0–5 year old cars        6+ year old cars
              log(Price)                (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)

              Maturity                0.0023**    0.0025**   0.0022***    0.0019***
                                      (0.0011)    (0.0011)    (0.0006)     (0.0006)
              Interest Rate            0.3552      0.5287    -1.1577***   -1.2614***
                                      (1.0143)    (1.0523)    (0.4177)     (0.4129)

              YMMT ⇥ Month FE            Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes
              Commuting Zone FE          Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes
              Lender FE                               Yes                    Yes

              Observations            523,648     523,648     448,943      448,943
              R-squared                0.907       0.909       0.870        0.876

Notes: Table reports 2SLS regressions of log transaction prices on maturity and rates for used cars
less than five years old (column 1) and five or more years old (column 2). Excluded instruments are
the interactions of Post with Treatment dummies that identify treated lender ⇥ event age ⇥ event
year combinations (as discussed in section III). Borrower controls include FICO scores, DTI, and
Treatment dummies. Robust standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered by month and
commuting zone. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                 63
              Table AIV: Price Eﬀects Adjusted for Potential Omitted Variable Bias

         log(Price)                        (1)         (2)    (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)

         Estimated Coeﬃcient             -0.026    -0.027    -0.009   -0.006   -0.007   -0.007
         Omitted Variables
                                         -0.068    -0.071    -0.029   -0.010   -0.009   -0.007
         Bias-Adjusted
         Includes Zero?                    No          No     No       No       No       No
         Adjusted Coeﬃcient within
                                           No          No     Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
         Original Confidence Interval?

         Car Age FE                                    Yes
         Car Age ⇥ MMT FE                                     Yes
         YMMT ⇥ Month FE                                               Yes      Yes      Yes
         Commuting Zone FE                                                      Yes      Yes
         Lender FE                                                                       Yes

Notes: Table reports coeﬃcients adjusted for omitted variable bias for the reduced-form price
regressions performed in III. The first row reports the uncorrected coeﬃcients found in Table
III. The second row reports coeﬃcients adjusted for potential omitted variable bias following Oster
(2017). The third row reports whether the interval between the unadjusted and adjusted coeﬃcients
includes zero. Finally, the fourth row reports whether the adjusted coeﬃcient is included in the 95%
confidence interval of the observed regression. MMT signifies combinations of make-model-trim;
YMMT signifies combinations of manufacture year-make-model-trim.




                                                  64
                          Table AV: January Discontinuities by Percentile

                                                            January Share of
                                 Count of January               Negative
                  Quantile        Discontinuities          Discontinuities (%)

                    Max                  12                       70.6
                    P90                  40                        93
                    P80                  38                        95
                    P70                  47                        87
                    P60                  49                       90.7
                    P50                  37                       94.9
                    P40                  32                       91.4
                    P30                  22                       81.5
                    P20                  13                       61.9
                    P10                   3                        25

Notes: Table shows the number of negative January discontinuities that we identify at each decile,
as well as the percentage of the negative discontinuities detected using that quantile that occurred
in January. All percentiles from the 90th to the 40th show more than 30 January discontinuities
and have a percentage occurring in January near or above 90%. For reference, the table shows 293
total January discontinuities; no other month had more than six.




                                                65
Table AVI: Robustness of Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences Maturity Results to Alternative Discontinuity
Detection Criteria

   Maturity                   (1)          (2)              (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)

   Treatment ⇥ Post        -2.423***   -2.312***         -1.971***   -2.072***   -2.185***   -2.216***
                            (0.476)     (0.275)            (0.235)    (0.272)     (0.221)     (0.253)
   Treatment                 -0.389      -0.421             -0.392     -0.421     0.720**     0.686**
                            (1.098)     (0.423)            (0.413)    (0.371)     (0.326)     (0.336)
   Post                    -0.792***   0.971***           0.827***
                            (0.176)     (0.184)            (0.094)

   Borrower Controls          Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
   Car Age FE                              Yes
   Car Age ⇥ MMT FE                                        Yes
   YMMT ⇥ Month FE                                                     Yes         Yes         Yes
   Commuting Zone FE                                                               Yes         Yes
   Lender FE                                                                                   Yes

   Observations            1,091,578    1,091,578        1,091,578   1,091,578   1,091,578   1,091,578
   R-squared                 0.003        0.127            0.202       0.340       0.398       0.437

Notes: Table reports diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences regressions of loan maturities measured in months
over an event year from July to June. Post is a dummy equal to one for observations after January
1st. Treatment is a dummy equal to one for loans that originate from a lender whose maximum
maturity policy changed discontinuously for the transacted car on January 1, as discussed in section
III. Treated observations are those with discontinuities at any of the 50th, 60th, 70th, 80th, or 90th
percentile of the maturity distribution, whereas Table III uses maturity discontinuities at only the
70th, 80th, or 90th percentiles. Borrower controls include FICO (the credit score of the borrower
at loan origination) and DTI (the back-end debt-to-income ratio of the borrower at origination).
MMT signifies combinations of make-model-trim; YMMT signifies combinations of manufacture
year-make-model-trim. Robust standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered by month and
commuting zone. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                    66
Table AVII: Robustness of Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences Price Results to Alternative Discontinuity De-
tection Criteria

  log(Price)                  (1)         (2)              (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)

  Treatment ⇥ Post           -0.033    -0.024***        -0.008***   -0.007***   -0.009***   -0.009***
                            (0.025)      (0.005)          (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.003)     (0.003)
  Treatment                  -0.024    -0.025***         -0.016**    -0.014*      0.006       0.008
                            (0.055)      (0.007)          (0.007)    (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.006)
  Post                     -0.050***    0.060***         0.059***
                            (0.005)      (0.006)          (0.005)

  Borrower Controls           Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
  Car Age FE                              Yes
  Car Age ⇥ MMT FE                                        Yes
  YMMT ⇥ Month FE                                                     Yes         Yes         Yes
  Commuting Zone FE                                                               Yes         Yes
  Lender FE                                                                                   Yes

  Observations             1,091,578   1,091,578        1,091,578   1,091,578   1,091,578   1,091,578
  R-squared                  0.057       0.365            0.868       0.905       0.908       0.911

Notes: Table reports diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences regressions results of log(prices) over an event year
from July to June. Post is a dummy equal to one for observations after January 1st. Treatment
is a dummy equal to one for loans that originate from a lender whose maximum maturity policy
changed discontinuously for the transacted car on January 1, as discussed in section III. Treated
observations are those with discontinuities at any of the 50th, 60th, 70th, 80th, or 90th percentile
of the maturity distribution, whereas Table IV uses maturity discontinuities at only the 70th, 80th,
or 90th percentiles. Borrower controls include FICO (the credit score of the borrower at loan
origination) and DTI (the back-end debt-to-income ratio of the borrower at origination). MMT
signifies combinations of make-model-trim; YMMT signifies combinations of manufacture year-
make-model-trim. Robust standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered by month and
commuting zone. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   67
                     Table AVIII: Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences Results on LTVs

  Loan-to-Value               (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)

  Treatment ⇥ Post        -0.022***   -0.023***        -0.020***   -0.024***   -0.023***   -0.021***
                           (0.004)     (0.003)          (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)
  Treatment                 0.004       0.006            0.006       0.010     0.012***    0.010***
                           (0.009)     (0.009)          (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.003)     (0.003)
  Post                      -0.002      -0.000           -0.005
                           (0.005)     (0.005)          (0.004)

  Borrower Controls          Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
  Car Age FE                             Yes
  Car Age ⇥ MMT FE                                       Yes
  YMMT ⇥ Month FE                                                    Yes         Yes         Yes
  CZ FE                                                                          Yes         Yes
  Lender FE                                                                                  Yes

  Observations             972,621     972,621         972,621     972,621     972,621     972,621
  R-squared                 0.007       0.014           0.053       0.224       0.255       0.270

Notes: Table reports diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences regressions of loan-to-value ratios over an event year
from July to June. Post is a dummy equal to one for observations after January 1st. Treatment
is a dummy equal to one for loans that originate from a lender whose maximum maturity policy
changed discontinuously for the transacted car on January 1, as discussed in section III. Borrower
controls include FICO (the credit score of the borrower at loan origination) and DTI (the back-end
debt-to-income ratio of the borrower at origination). MMT signifies combinations of make-model-
trim; YMMT signifies combinations of manufacture year-make-model-trim. Robust standard errors
(in parentheses) are double clustered by month and commuting zone. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1




                                                  68
      Table AIX: Two-Stage Least Squares Eﬀects of Maturity, Rate, and LTV on Log Price

 log(Price)                 (1)          (2)             (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)

 Maturity                 0.0102**   0.0090***     0.0035***     0.0020***    0.0021***   0.0020***
                          (0.0040)    (0.0019)      (0.0010)      (0.0006)     (0.0006)    (0.0006)
 Interest Rate           -1.4475**   -2.1823***    -1.4860***    -0.8581***   -0.7828**   -0.8324***
                          (0.6463)    (0.6001)      (0.4434)      (0.3004)     (0.3016)    (0.3065)
 Loan to Value           -0.7908**    -0.2432*       -0.0139       0.0346       0.0429      0.0386
                          (0.3183)    (0.1360)      (0.1253)      (0.0637)     (0.0654)    (0.0642)

 Borrower Controls          Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 Car Age FE                              Yes
 Car Age ⇥ MMT FE                                       Yes
 YMMT ⇥ Month FE                                                    Yes         Yes          Yes
 Commuting Zone FE                                                              Yes          Yes
 Lender FE                                                                                   Yes

 Observations             972,621      972,621         972,621    972,621      972,621     972,621
 R-squared                 0.050        0.409           0.871      0.913        0.917       0.919

Notes: Table reports two-stage least-squares regressions of log transaction prices on loan maturity,
interest rate, and LTV. Excluded instruments are the interactions of Post with Treatment dummies
that identify treated lender x event age x event year combinations (as discussed in section III).
Borrower controls include FICO scores, DTI, and Treatment dummies. MMT signifies combinations
of make-model-trim; YMMT signifies combinations of manufacture year-make-model-trim. Robust
standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered by month and commuting zone. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  69
