NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GEOGRAPHY OF LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY AND THE PROVISION OF PUBLIC
GOODS
Klaus Desmet
Joseph Gomes
Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín
Working Paper 24694
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24694

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018

Gomes gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Fundación Ramón Areces, and
Ortuño-Ortín thanks the Spanish Ministry of Economics and Competitiveness (grant
ECO2013-42710-P). We benefitted from discussions with Boris Gershman, Stelios
Michalopoulos, Ömer Özak, Diego Puga, Frédéric Robert-Nicoud, Jan Stuhler, Elisabet
Viladecans and Romain Wacziarg, as well as from presentations at Essex, Heidelberg, the NBER
Political Economy Meetings, the CEPR/CURE workshop in Paris, the University of Oxford
CSAE Conference, the 10th CESIfo Workshop on Political Economy, the British Academy
Workshop on "Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Peace Operations and Conflict Resolution". The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Klaus Desmet, Joseph Gomes, and Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Geography of Linguistic Diversity and the Provision of Public Goods
Klaus Desmet, Joseph Gomes, and Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín
NBER Working Paper No. 24694
June 2018
JEL No. H4,O18,O57,R1,Z10,Z13
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the importance of local interaction between individuals of different linguistic
groups for the provision of public goods at the national level. The micro-founded conceptual
framework we develop predicts that a country's public goods (i) decrease in its overall linguistic
fractionalization, and (ii) either increase or decrease in its local learning multiplier, a measure of
how local interaction affects antagonism towards other groups in the society at large. After
constructing a 5 km by 5 km dataset on language use for 223 countries, we empirically explore
these theoretical predictions. While overall fractionalization worsens public goods outcomes, we
find a positive causal effect of local learning. Conditional on a country's overall diversity, public
goods outcomes are maximized when there are a few large-sized groups and the diversity of each
location mirrors that of the country as a whole. Our large-scale study, spanning the entire globe,
confirms experimental micro-evidence in favor of contact theory.

Klaus Desmet
Department of Economics and
Cox School of Business
Southern Methodist University
3300 Dyer, Suite 301
Dallas, TX 75205
and NBER
kdesmet@smu.edu
Joseph Gomes
Navarra Center for International Development
Campus Universitario s/n
Pamplona 31009
Navarra, Spain
jgomes@unav.es

Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín
Universidad Carlos III
28903 Getafe Madrid
Spain
iortuno@eco.uc3m.es

The Geography of Linguistic Diversity
and the Provision of Public Goods∗
Klaus Desmet
SMU

Joseph Gomes
Universidad de Navarra

Ignacio Ortuño-Ortı́n
UC3M

May 2018

Abstract
This paper analyzes the importance of local interaction between individuals of different linguistic
groups for the provision of public goods at the national level. The micro-founded conceptual framework
we develop predicts that a country’s public goods (i) decrease in its overall linguistic fractionalization,
and (ii) either increase or decrease in its local learning multiplier, a measure of how local interaction
affects antagonism towards other groups in the society at large. After constructing a 5 km by 5 km
dataset on language use for 223 countries, we empirically explore these theoretical predictions. While
overall fractionalization worsens public goods outcomes, we find a positive causal effect of local learning.
Conditional on a country’s overall diversity, public goods outcomes are maximized when there are a few
large-sized groups and the diversity of each location mirrors that of the country as a whole. Our largescale study, spanning the entire globe, confirms experimental micro-evidence in favor of contact theory.
Keywords: linguistic diversity, geographic diversity, public goods, contact theory, conflict theory, antagonism, local learning
JEL Codes: H4, O18, O57, R1, Z10, Z13

1

Introduction

Although living in ethnolinguistically heterogeneous societies can be challenging, within countries diversity
is often viewed more positively in highly diverse areas than in relatively homogenous locations.1 This is
consistent with contact theory, which argues that repeated interpersonal contact tends to reduce prejudice
and conflict between individuals of different groups (Allport, 1954). Not everyone agrees with contact theory
though. Conflict theory posits the exact opposite: interaction with other groups generates greater prejudice
and antagonism (Blumer, 1958). With some notable exceptions, most of the micro-evidence falls on the
∗ Desmet:
Department of Economics and Cox School of Business, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX,
kdesmet@smu.edu, Gomes: University of Navarra, ICS, Navarra Center for International Development, Pamplona,
Spain, jgomes@unav.es, Ortuño-Ortı́n: Department of Economics, Universidad Carlos III, Getafe (Madrid), Spain, iortuno@eco.uc3m.es. Gomes gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Fundación Ramón Areces, and Ortuño-Ortı́n
thanks the Spanish Ministry of Economics and Competitiveness (grant ECO2013-42710-P). We benefitted from discussions
with Boris Gershman, Stelios Michalopoulos, Ömer Özak, Diego Puga, Frédéric Robert-Nicoud, Jan Stuhler, Elisabet Viladecans and Romain Wacziarg, as well as from presentations at Essex, Heidelberg, the NBER Political Economy Meetings, the
CEPR/CURE workshop in Paris, the University of Oxford CSAE Conference, the 10th CESIfo Workshop on Political Economy,
the British Academy Workshop on “Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Peace Operations and Conflict Resolution”.
1 For example, in sub-Saharan Africa more heterogenous countries exhibit relatively lower degrees of inter-ethnic trust, but
within countries we see the opposite: inter-ethnic trust tends to be higher in highly heterogeneous localities (Robinson, 2013).
As another example, while the pro-Brexit movement ran on a platform of regaining control over the inflow of migrants into
the United Kingdom, the perception of there being too much diversity was especially strong in areas with few foreign-born
residents, and much less so in cosmopolitan London (Lawton and Ackrill, 2016).

side of contact theory.2 However, for lack of a conceptual framework and a comprehensive database, no
large-scale analysis of the issue, spanning the entire globe, has been conducted.
This paper starts by conceptualizing how the intensity of local interaction and contact with other
groups affects the antagonism an individual feels towards the rest of society. In the absence of local interaction, it is intuitive to assume that antagonism is increasing in the share of those other groups in the society
at large. In the presence of local interaction, the intensity of this antagonism may be either mitigated or
reinforced, depending on whether contact theory or conflict theory prevails. According to these theories, the
change in antagonism depends on the degree of interaction, and this change extends to the entire out-group.
Illustrating this with an example, the more local contact a Dutch-speaking Belgian has with French-speaking
Belgians, the more this affects her prejudice towards all French speakers, not just those residing in her own
locality but also those living in the rest of the country. That is, the change in prejudice experienced by a
Dutch speaker depends on the local share of French speakers, but the effect of this change extends to the
aggregate share of French speakers.
To formalize these insights, we assume that the intensity of an individual’s local interaction with
another group is increasing in the local share of that group; and how much this affects his antagonism towards
that other group in the society at large depends on the aggregate share of that group. We interpret these
assumptions in terms of learning: the larger the share of the other group locally, the more an individual learns
about that group through local interaction; and the larger the share of the other group in the aggregate, the
more this local learning affects the individual’s overall antagonism. As a result, the local group share and
the aggregate group share are complementary in their effects on an individual’s antagonism. The intuition
for this complementarity is as follows: the change in an individual’s opinion about another group can only
have an important impact on her overall antagonism if that other group is sizable in the society at large.
Because the local group share gets multiplied by the aggregate group share when evaluating the effect of
local interaction on antagonism, we refer to this effect as the local learning multiplier.
While the local learning multiplier tends to be greater in societies with lower degrees of segregation,
both concepts differ in a fundamental way. Consider two societies, one with two equally-sized large groups,
and another with ten equally-sized small groups. Suppose groups in both societies are perfectly mixed
geographically, so that there is no segregation in either society. In spite of this perfect spatial mixing, the
local learning multiplier is larger in the first society, with two big groups, than in the second society, with ten
small groups. This result can be understood in the following way. When an individual interacts locally with
another group, she learns something about that group. Learning a lot about few groups and then applying
this larger knowledge to few groups has a bigger impact than learning a little about many groups and then
applying this smaller knowledge to many groups. This is another way of stating that the complementarity
between local group shares and aggregate group shares yields a greater local learning multiplier in the society
with a few large groups.
2 In a meta-analysis by Pettigrew and Tropp (2006), 94 percent of 713 independent samples of 515 studies support contact
theory. In contrast, Putnam (2007) finds evidence in favor of conflict theory.

2

When taking a society’s aggregate ethnolinguistic composition as given, more local mixing tends to
increase the local learning multiplier. However, the above discussion clarifies that a society with a high degree
of local mixing does not necessarily have a large local learning multiplier. Indeed, in highly fractionalized
societies with many groups, the local learning multiplier will be small, even if the different groups are
perfectly mixed at the local level. The local learning multiplier will only be large in societies where people
are clustered into a few large-sized groups that are geographically mixed. This makes the local learning
multiplier reminiscent of a polarization index, though it relies on very different micro-foundations. As we
will explain in more detail in the theory section, in the framework of Esteban and Ray (1994) polarization
has to do with an individual’s identification with the own group, whereas in our framework local learning is
related to an individual’s identification with other groups.
Why do we care about inter-group interaction and the local learning multiplier? Antagonism between
groups is a leading explanation for why more diverse countries have worse political economy outcomes. This is
why many empirical papers have explored the effect of ethnolinguistic fractionalization on different economic,
social and political outcomes.3 Our theory suggests that these studies suffer from an omitted variable bias
when not controlling for local interaction. To be more precise, our conceptual framework yields an antagonism
index that is a linear combination of two terms: the society’s overall ethnolinguistic fractionalization and the
society’s local learning multiplier. In the absence of local interaction, antagonism is measured by a society’s
overall ethnolinguistic fractionalization, henceforth referred to as its global fractionalization; in the presence
of local interaction, that antagonism is either diminished or augmented by the local learning multiplier.
Drawing the correct inference about the effect of diversity on different political economy outcomes requires
us to control for both terms. In this paper, we focus on a variety of public goods outcomes related to health,
education and infrastructure, and empirically explore the effects of a country’s global fractionalization and
its local learning multiplier.
In addition to micro-founding an antagonism index that captures how local interaction affects the
degree of antagonism between groups at the national level, this paper makes three more contributions.
First, we model the link between a society’s antagonism and its public goods. We start by postulating
that an individual’s valuation of public goods depends on how much antagonism she feels towards others in
society. We then show that if public goods are financed by private contributions, their provision depends
on a society’s average antagonism. Second, to bring the theory to the data, we develop a global database of
language use at the local level, and empirically analyze the effect of our new antagonism measure on public
goods for virtually all countries of the world. Third, using an instrumental variable approach, we make
causal statements about whether increased local learning improves or worsens outcomes. Identifying the
causal effect of local interaction on the provision of public goods is relevant for the design of policies that
have an impact on the degree of local learning. We now discuss these last two contributions in some more
detail.
3 See,

e.g., Alesina et al. (2003), Alesina and La Ferrara (2000) and Alesina, Baqir and Hoxby (2004).

3

Before empirically investigating the effect of the spatial distribution of ethnolinguistic diversity on
the provision of public goods, we need detailed geographic information on the number of speakers of different
languages. The Ethnologue has information on the number of speakers per country of 6,905 unique languages
(Lewis, Simons and Fennig, 2014). It also provides language maps that show the geographic distribution of
languages in each country. Together with information on population at a fine geographic resolution from
Landscan, we use an iterative proportional fitting algorithm to assign the number of speakers of different
languages to each 5 km by 5 km cell in the world. We cross-validate our algorithm using census data for
sub-Saharan Africa from Gershman and Rivera (2016). Once we have information on the speakers of different
languages at a 5 km by 5 km resolution, we compute our measures of global fractionalization and the local
learning multiplier for each country. The underlying assumption is that local interaction occurs within cells
of 5 km by 5 km.4
We then explore the effect of global fractionalization and the local learning multiplier on a wide
variety of public goods outcomes in health, education and infrastructure at the country level. We start with
an OLS approach and find that global fractionalization has a negative association with public good provision,
whereas the local learning multiplier has a positive association with public good provision. This suggests that
the local learning multiplier mitigates the antagonism felt towards other groups, hence providing support to
the contact theory hypothesis. The magnitudes of the effects are considerable. For example, a one standard
deviation increase in the local learning multiplier lowers child mortality by 7.5 per thousand live births. To
put this figure into perspective, in its effect on child mortality, a one standard deviation increase in the local
learning multiplier is equivalent to a 62 percent increase in GDP per capita. As another example, a one
standard deviation increase in the local learning multiplier lowers illiteracy by 6.2 percentage points. This
corresponds to a standardized β of -30 percent, i.e., a one standard deviation increase in the local learning
multiplier decreases the illiteracy rate by 30 percent of its standard deviation.
Reverse causality is a potential concern. In societies with poor public goods individuals from the
same linguistic group may prefer to geographically cluster to support each other. If so, public goods would
affect the spatial sorting of individuals of different groups. This does not necessarily imply that our regressions
suffer from reverse causality since the local learning multiplier is not the same as a standard measure of
geographic mixing. Still, to address any remaining concerns, we develop an instrument based on a country’s
geographic distribution of linguistic groups as predicted by the language use of its closest neighbor. More
particularly, for each cell in a given country, we determine the languages spoken in the closest cell in
a neighboring country, and use that information to predict language use in the original cell. With this
information, we compute a predicted local learning multiplier that serves as an instrument. We then rerun
all our regressions using an IV approach. Reassuringly, the results are, if anything, stronger. For example, a
one standard deviation increase in the local learning multiplier lowers child mortality by 16.4 per thousand
live births, compared to 7.5 in the OLS analysis. Using the methodology developed by Conley et al. (2012),
4 Note that we do not distinguish between contact and exposure. For a discussion on the difference between both concepts,
see, for example, Finseraas et al. (2016).

4

we show that violations to the exclusion restriction do not qualitatively affect our results. This allows us to
conclude that there is a causal positive effect of the local learning multiplier on the quality of public goods.
Overall, contact theory trumps conflict theory.
Our paper contributes to four strands of the literature. First, a few papers have analyzed how the
spatial distribution of diversity matters for different outcomes at the country level. In an unpublished working
paper, Matuszeski and Schneider (2006) show that civil war is more likely in societies where ethnic groups
are more clustered. However, their algorithm to assign speakers of different languages to geographic cells
ignores the existence of widespread languages, thus introducing a bias in many countries of the New World.
Also related is the empirical paper by Alesina and Zhuravskaya (2011) who find that geographic segregation
has a negative effect on the quality of government. However, the question whether segregation worsens
outcomes is not entirely settled: an interesting recent paper by Hodler, Valsecchi and Vesperoni (2017) uses
a more general segregation index and finds that outcomes such as governance and economic development
improve when ethnically more distant groups live more separated in space. Finally, in an empirical study
of sixteen African economies, Robinson (2013) shows that local level diversity increases inter-ethnic trust at
the country level.
In contrast to our work, these papers do not provide a theoretical framework that conceptualizes how
local interaction affects the antagonism that derives from a country’s overall diversity. Instead, they measure
the impact of local interaction by either using a segregation index or a local fractionalization index. We
have already highlighted the meaningful differences between standard measures of segregation and the local
learning multiplier: segregation is low whenever groups are geographically mixed, whereas the local learning
multiplier is high whenever there are a few large groups that are geographically mixed. As compared with a
local fractionalization index, the local learning multiplier also differs in a crucial aspect. The effect of local
learning on an individual’s antagonism depends on her pre-existing prejudice towards the out-group. This
explains why local group shares and aggregate group shares are complementary, thus entering multiplicatively
in our antagonism measure. In contrast, under local fractionalization an individual’s change in antagonism is
unrelated to his pre-existing prejudice towards the out-group. There is no complementarity, and local group
shares enter additively in the local fractionalization measure. Since contact theory and conflict theory are
about the effect of local interaction on an individual’s pre-existing prejudice, local learning captures this in
a way that local fractionalization does not.
Second, some studies look at the relation between diversity and different political economy outcomes
at the local level. In the context of local public goods, examples include Alesina, Baqir and Easterly (1999)
at the level of cities in the U.S.; Dahlberg et al. (2012) at the level of Swedish municipalities; Munshi and
Rosenzweig (2015) at the level of wards in India; and Algan et al. (2016) at the level of apartment blocks in
France. Also noteworthy is the paper by Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2016) who analyze the effect of local
diversity on local economic growth at a spatial resolution of one degree by one degree. Rather than analyzing
the effect of local diversity on local outcomes, our paper explores how local interaction affects outcomes at

5

the national level. In particular, controlling for a country’s total diversity, we study how an increase in local
learning affects the support for public goods at the country level.
Third, a number of experimental papers have explored the effect of contact on prejudice. For
example, Burns, Corno and La Ferrara (2015) show how living with a randomly assigned roommate from a
different ethnicity at the University of Cape Town reduces prejudice, and Carrell et al. (2015) find that white
males in the U.S. Air Force Academy are more accepting of blacks if they are exposed to a greater number
of black peers. Similarly, Boisjoly et al. (2006) conclude that white students who are randomly assigned
African American roommates are more likely to endorse affirmative action and to be more empathetic towards
other groups. In an overview of this literature, Bertrand and Duflo (2016) conclude that the overwhelming
evidence is in favor of contact theory.5 Rather than focusing on small-scale micro-evidence of the relation
between interaction and prejudice, we conduct a large-scale analysis of the causal effect of local interaction
on public goods provision at the national level across the globe. In doing so, we confirm the findings of this
experimental literature.
Fourth, several papers have constructed datasets of language use at the local level. Like us, they
combine linguistic maps with information on the number of speakers at the country level. Weidman et al.
(2010) rely on the Atlas Narodov Mira to create the GREG (Geo-Referencing of Ethnic Groups) database,
whereas Matuszeski and Schneider (2006) use maps from the Ethnologue with the same goal.6 A recurring
issue is how to allocate the shares of different language speakers in areas where more than one language is
spoken. Our paper tackles this problem by using an iterative proportional fitting algorithm, commonly used
in statistics. Unlike the methods used in other papers that allocate language speakers to cells, this algorithm
respects both the cell populations and the country-language population totals. Another approach is to use
census and survey data. Gershman and Rivera (2016) follow this method to estimate local diversity measures
for around 400 first-level administrative regions in 36 countries of sub-Saharan Africa. To cross-validate our
algorithm, we compare our local diversity measures to the ones in Gershman and Rivera (2016). Focusing on
the regions for which Gershman and Rivera (2016) use census data, we find correlations in local diversity of
0.80 at the regional level and 0.96 at the country level. These high correlations for sub-Saharan Africa give
us confidence in our algorithm. Compared to using census or survey data, our approach has the important
advantage that we can generate a consistent dataset of local language use for the entire world.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops a conceptual framework of antagonism and shows how it relates to the provision of public goods. Section 3 discusses the data, and provides
details of the algorithm to assign languages and populations to all 5 km by 5 km cells in the world. Section
4 empirically establishes the positive effect of local learning on public goods provision. Section 5 concludes.
5 For a counter-example, an experiment by Enos (2014) who sent a small number of Spanish-speaking people to commuter
trains in homogeneously white communities finds evidence in favor of conflict theory.
6 One important difference is that the Ethnologue has information on 6,905 distinct languages, whereas the GREG data has
929 groups.

6

2

Conceptual Framework

A country is geographically partitioned into K cells, indexed by ` or k. Each cell is small relative to the
country. There are N individuals in the country, partitioned into M linguistic groups, indexed by i or j.
Denote by s`i the share of people of location ` who belong to linguistic group i, by s` the share of individuals
who live in cell `, and by si the share of individuals who belong to linguistic group i. Each individual belongs
P
P
P
to one linguistic group i and lives in one cell `, so that i s`i = 1, ` s` = 1 and i si = 1. An individual
who speaks language i and resides in ` has preferences over private consumption c and public consumption
G of the form
U`i (c, G) = ln c + v`i ln G,

(1)

where the valuation parameter v`i depends negatively on the antagonism the individual feels toward others
in society. Public consumption G is common to the entire country, and is hence not cell-specific. Examples
may include national education, nation-wide health policies and defense. Individuals only differ from each
other by where they reside and which language they speak. In particular, all individuals have the same
income y, which we normalize to 1.7 In what follows we start by proposing a model of antagonism, and then
relate it to the valuation of public goods.8

2.1

Antagonism

Start with the simple case of each individual feeling antagonism of 1 towards people of other linguistic groups
and of 0 towards people of her own group. For now, where individuals live is assumed to be inconsequential;
this is equivalent to assuming that local contact between individuals of different groups is irrelevant. The
P
average antagonism experienced by an individual of linguistic group i is then j6=i sj . Summing up over all
P P
individuals of all linguistic groups yields an average antagonism in society of i j6=i si sj . This is of course
nothing else than the well-known ethnolinguistic fractionalization index, which measures the probability that
two randomly drawn individuals belong to different groups. Since this measures the overall fractionalization
of a country, we will refer to this index as global fractionalization and will denote it by ELFglob .
Local interaction and antagonism towards other groups. We now allow for the possibility that local
interpersonal contact with other groups mitigates or reinforces the antagonism an individual experiences
towards individuals of those groups. There are two opposing views in the literature on how interpersonal
contact may affect prejudices people hold against others. Contact theory argues that knowing people from
another group reduces prejudice against that group. Conflict theory also says that contact affects prejudice,
but in this case the effect goes the other way, so that knowing people from other groups increases prejudice
7 Some of the robustness tests in the empirical part of the paper will control for overall income inequality and for income
inequality between ethnic groups.
8 For alternative models of the relation between ethnic diversity and public goods, see, e.g., Miguel and Gugerty (2005) which
focus on local public goods and the role of social sanctions, and Alesina and La Ferrara (2000) who look at the relation between
diversity and group formation.

7

against that group.
Antagonism towards other groups: global fractionalization and local learning multiplier
If interpersonal contact affects antagonism, then the spatial distribution of the different groups becomes
important for the degree of antagonism in society. We assume that interpersonal contact happens in the cell
where an individual resides, but the frequency of this local contact affects the antagonism towards people of
other groups in the society at large. To be more precise, the antagonism an individual of group i and cell `
feels towards an individual of group j in the society at large is given by
1 + βs`j ,

(2)

where the share s`j captures the frequency of contact with people of group j in his own cell `. A positive value
of β is consistent with conflict theory since interpersonal contact increases antagonism and thus reinforces
prejudice. In that case an individual of group i and cell ` feels greater antagonism towards an individual
of group j in society if the share of group j is bigger in his own cell. In contrast, a negative value of β
is consistent with contact theory because more local contact with group j mitigates the prejudice of an
individual of group i against an individual of group j in the society at large.
Starting from (2), we can now compute the share-weighted antagonism felt by an individual of group
i and cell ` towards all individuals of group j in society:
a`ij = sj (1 + βs`j ) = sj + βsj s`j ,

(3)

where the first term can be interpreted as the antagonism in the absence of local interaction and the second
term can be interpreted as the mitigating or reinforcing effect of local interaction on antagonism.
The average antagonism of all individuals of cell ` towards all other individuals in society is then:


X
X
a` =
s`i 
sj (1 + βs`j ) .
i

j6=i

Taking the population-weighted average across all cells yields a measure of the average antagonism in society:


X
X X
A=
s` 
s`i
sj (1 + βs`j ) ,
i

`

j6=i

which can be re-written as
A =

XX
i

si sj + β

X

j6=i

= ELFglob + β

s`

i

`

X
`

= ELFglob + βLL,

s`

XX

XX
i

s`i s`j sj

j6=i

s`i s`j sj

j6=i

(4)

where the first term is the country’s overall linguistic fractionalization and the second term is the probability
that when an individual 1 is randomly matched with an individual 2 of his own cell and an individual 3
8

from the society at large, 2 and 3 belong to the same group and 1 belongs to a different group. The second
term can be thought of as the average effect of local interaction on the antagonism experienced towards
others in the society at large. That is, local learning about others can either increase or decrease the tension
an individual feels towards others in the overall society. We call this second term LL the local learning
multiplier.
We use the terminology of a multiplier when referring to LL because of the complementarity between
the local group shares, s`j , and the aggregate group shares, sj . The intuition for this complementarity is
easy to understand: how much an individual learns about other groups depends on the local shares; and
how much that learning affects her antagonism towards those other groups in the society at large depends
on the aggregate shares. That is, learning about another group locally can only have an important effect on
antagonism if that other group is sizable in the aggregate. As we will now see, this complementarity is key
when comparing the local learning multiplier to indices of segregation, polarization and fractionalization.
Relation with segregation
The local learning multiplier is different from standard indices of segregation used in the literature.9 Segregation measures the extent to which cells differ from each other, whereas the local learning multiplier
measures how local interaction affects antagonism in the society at large. To see the difference between
both indices, take two countries, one with language shares (1/3, 1/3, 1/3) and the other with language shares
(0.5, 1/6, 1/6, 1/6), so that ELFglob is the same in both countries. There is perfect geographic mixing, so
that the linguistic composition of each cell mirrors that of its country. As a result, segregation is zero in
both countries. However, it is easy to show that the country with shares (1/3, 1/3, 1/3) has a higher local
learning multiplier than the country with shares (0.5, 1/6, 1/6, 1/6).
The intuition is straightforward: learning about fewer, but bigger, groups is more useful than learning
about more, but smaller, groups. Because of the complementarity between local group shares and aggregate
group shares, local learning multipliers are bigger in societies with fewer, larger groups. As we will see in the
data, this difference between segregation and the local learning multiplier is not just theoretically relevant.
Controlling for global fractionalization, we find a correlation between the residuals of both indices of 0.54.
As expected, the correlation is positive. However, it is far from perfect, implying that both concepts are
empirically different.
Although segregation and local learning are different, when we take the aggregate linguistic composition of a country as given, segregation is minimized when local learning is maximized. This occurs when
there is perfect spatial mixing.10 The worst way to learn about other groups in society is to have no other
groups locally, and the best way to learn about other groups in society is for the local environment to mirror
that of the country. Again, this does not imply that there will be a lot of learning in countries that are
9 For
10 A

a survey, see Massey and Denton (1988), and for a recent application, see Alesina and Zhuravskaya, (2011).

formal proof is available upon request.

9

spatially mixed. As mentioned before, in highly fractionalized societies, with many small groups, the amount
of learning will be limited.
Relation with polarization
The functional form of the local learning multiplier is related to that of a standard polarization index, though
their micro-foundations are very different. The comparison between both indices is sharpest when focusing
on a society that is spatially perfectly mixed. In that case s`i = si for all ` and all i, yielding a local learning
P P
multiplier equal to i j6=i si s2j . Esteban and Ray (1994) micro-found an index of polarization by positing
that the antagonism an individual experiences towards others increases in the size of his own group. The
idea is that an individual feels greater antagonism if he identifies more strongly with his own group, and this
happens when the size of his group is bigger. As a result, instead of the standard fractionalization index,
P P
P P
2
11
i
j6=i si sj , which ignores the role of identification, they obtain a polarization index,
i
j6=i si sj .
As can be seen, in the case of perfect spatial mixing, the local learning multiplier is identical to an
index of polarization, with one subtle difference in notation: in the polarization index the quadratic term
shows up in the own-group share, whereas in the local learning multiplier the quadratic term shows up in
the other-group share. Of course, since i and j are interchangeable, whether the quadratic term appears in
the own group or in the other group is irrelevant for the final expression, so that both indices are identical
in spatially mixed societies. Yet, the subtle difference in notation points to the relevant difference in microfoundations between the two indices. In the polarization index, it is the identification with the own group
that explains the quadratic term on the own-group share. Although we did not frame the local learning
multiplier in terms of identification, we can use the same concept to interpret our index. Local interaction
with another group leads to identification with that other group, which then affects the antagonism felt
towards that group in the society at large. So we also get a quadratic term, but in the other-group share,
rather than in the own-group share. Under that interpretation, identification with the own group underlies
the polarization index, whereas identification with the other group underlies the local learning multiplier.
In addition to the different micro-foundations, one other difference between the two indices is important. Whereas polarization is commonly viewed as being detrimental to economic, political and social
outcomes, local learning may have a benign effect by mitigating a society’s antagonism if contact theory
prevails. Hence, if we empirically find that local learning improves public goods outcomes, this would be
consistent with an index that has micro-foundations based on contact theory, and it would not fit an index
with micro-foundations related to polarization.
In spite of these parallels between local learning and polarization, their similarity should not be
overstated. The equivalence in the functional forms of polarization and local learning only applies in the
case of perfect spatial mixing. When groups are not perfectly mixed across a country’s geography, the
11 Esteban and Ray (1994) consider a more general index where identification with the own group i is a function of sα , with
i
α ∈ [1, 1.6]. This yields a polarization index which is a function of s1+α
. In our discussion we take α = 1. For further reference,
i
see also the work of Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005).

10

equivalence breaks down.
Relation with local fractionalization
Our measure of average antagonism is a linear combination of global fractionalization and average local
learning. Other papers have taken the view that what might matter is global fractionalization and average
local fractionalization. For example, Matuszeski and Schneider (2006) analyze the effect of the difference
between global and local fractionalization on conflict, and Robinson (2013) studies the relation between
global fractionalization and local fractionalization on trust. Although these papers do not provide a model to
rationalize their choice of focusing on global and local diversity, it would be easy to do so by slightly changing
our model. However, as we will see, those changes would make it incompatible with the underpinnings of
contact theory or conflict theory.
A possible way to rationalize the inclusion of local fractionalization is to ignore the complementarity
between local and global group shares by supposing that the antagonism an individual of group i and cell `
feels towards people of group j in the society at large is given by
a`ij = sj + βs`j ,

(5)

so that the average antagonism experienced by individuals of cell ` towards any other individuals in society
would be
a` =

X



X
s`i 
sj + βs`j  .

i

j6=i

Average antagonism in society by individuals of any cell can then be written as
!
!
X
X
X
2
2
A =
1−
si + β
s` 1 −
s`i
i

= ELFglob + β

`

X

i

s` ELF`

`

= ELFglob + βELFloc ,

(6)

where ELFloc is the population-weighted average of local fractionalization across cells.
In spite of its intuitive interpretation and its appealing simplicity, this index does not appropriately
capture the basic insights of contact theory and conflict theory which argue that local interaction may reduce
or increase the prejudice individuals feel towards the out-group. These theories imply that local interaction
can only have an effect on antagonism if there is antagonism in the first place. The alternative index based
on global and local fractionalization does not satisfy this premise. To see this, consider a situation where
sj ≈ 0 and s`j ≈ 1, and assume β < 0. Since no one outside cell ` is from group j, the antagonism
experienced by individuals of group i and cell ` towards individuals from group j is essentially zero.12
However, expression (5) would imply that the antagonism experienced by individuals of group i and cell `
12 Recall that each cell is very small relative to the country, so that s
`j does not affect average antagonism directly, but only
through the local learning multiplier.

11

towards individuals of group j is β. That is, local fractionalization reduces antagonism even if there was
no antagonism to start with. This happens because local fractionalization enters additively into the overall
expression of antagonism. In contrast, in our corresponding measure of antagonism (3) local learning enters
multiplicatively in the antagonism felt toward the out-group, so that the change in antagonism is always a
fraction of the pre-existing antagonism. For example, in the above example, using (3), the tension felt by
individuals of group i and cell ` towards the out-group would be zero.

2.2

Public Goods Provision

As shown in equation (1), we assume that the valuation v`i that an individual from linguistic group i and cell
` attaches to the public good G is a negative function of the antagonism he feels. The average antagonism
experienced by an individual of group i living in cell ` towards the rest of society is
a`i =

X

sj (1 + βsj s`j ).

j6=i

Note that since β can be negative, a`i need not be positive. Hence, we postulate
v`i =

κ1
,
κ2 + a`i

(7)

where κ1 ≥ 1 and κ2 ≥ 0 is large enough so that v`i > 0.
Suppose that G is determined by private contributions.13 In particular, consider a simultaneous
private contribution game where the equilibrium concept is Nash. We denote by g`i the contribution of an
agent living in ` of group i. The total level of the public good is then
G=

XX
`

g`i .

i

An agent with valuation v`i chooses his contribution g`i by solving
max ln(1 − g`i ) + v`i ln(G−`i + g`i )
g`i

s.t.

1 ≥ g`i ≥ 0

where G−`i is the contribution of the rest of agents.
Proposition 1 Suppose that in the Nash equilibrium of the contribution game all agents contribute a strictly
positive amount. Then we have that G is a decreasing function of total average antagonism A. In particular,
G=

κ1 N
.
κ1 + N (κ2 + A)

(8)

Proof. See Appendix A.
For our empirical estimation it will be useful to linearly approximate (8). After dividing numerator
and denominator by κ1 N and assuming that 1/N ≈ 0, we can write
G≈
13 Later

κ1
κ2 + A

(9)

we will briefly discuss that a similar result can be derived in a model where G is determined by a democratic vote.

12

Assuming that κ2 is sufficiently large and that A is sufficiently small, we can take a first-order Taylor
approximation of (9) which yields
G≈

κ1
κ1
κ1
κ1
κ1
− 2A =
− 2 ELFglob − 2 βLL.
κ2
κ2
κ2
κ2
κ2

(10)

This will serve as our estimating equation in the empirical part. From (10) we can conclude that the
provision of public goods depends negatively on global fractionalization and either positively or negatively
on the local learning multiplier (positively if β < 0 and negatively if β > 0). The theory implies that one
should distinguish between global fractionalization and local learning when empirically exploring the relation
between diversity and public goods provision.14

3

Data

In this section we describe the different data we use in our empirical analysis. After briefly describing the
data on public goods, we mainly focus on how we construct a database of language use at the local level for
the entire globe.

3.1

Public Goods

When analyzing the effect of diversity on the provision of public goods, we do not focus on a particular public
good. Instead, we look at many different measures, related to health, education and infrastructure. In doing
so, we build on previous work by La Porta et al. (1999), Alesina et al. (2003) and Desmet, Ortuño-Ortı́n
and Wacziarg (2012). The exact variables, their sources and summary statistics are given in Appendix B
and Table B.1. Our analysis is done at the country level.

3.2

Spatial Distribution of Languages

To compute the local learning index for all countries of the world, we need to know how many people speak
each language at the local level. To that end, we start by splitting up the world in grid cells. Since local
learning has to do with the degree of personal interaction in people’s daily lives, we need grid cells of a size
that captures this daily interaction. In our baseline analysis we take a grid with a resolution of 5 km by 5
km to be a reasonable size. In what follows we explain how we allocate the speakers of the world’s different
languages to the individual grid cells.
We use two main data sources. The first data source is the World Language Mapping System, the
digitized version of the 17th edition of the Ethnologue. This gives us a polygon shapefile, where most of the
6,905 languages are represented as polygons across space. Since in some areas more than one language is
spoken, these polygons may overlap. In addition, when certain widely spoken languages in a country cannot
be assigned to any particular geographic region, Ethnologue classifies them as widespread languages. This
14 If instead of a private contributions mechanism, a democratic vote decides the public good, the exact same result would
hold if the mean agent coincides with the median agent. The result would still hold qualitatively if the median agent and the
mean agent are not too different. In this context the mean agent refers to the agent with the mean valuation of the public good.

13

is equivalent to having a polygon that consists of the entire country.15 A few languages are assigned to
specific points, rather than to polygons, and a few others have unknown locations. For the point languages,
we create circular polygons around the points, with a radius that is proportional to the number of speakers
of those languages.16 As for the languages with unknown locations, we treat them as widespread. Some
areas, such as the sparsely populated Sahara Desert, have no information on languages. In those cases we
assign the language of the nearest cell that has information on language. Since we use grid cells of 5 km by
5 km, we rasterize the data using a resolution of 20 3000 by 20 3000 . In addition to the linguistic polygons, the
Ethnologue also provides the number of people that speak the different languages by country.
The second data source is Landscan which provides population at the same resolution of 3000 by
3000 . Here as well, we rasterize the data using a resolution of 20 3000 by 20 3000 . To make the language data
from the Ethnologue consistent with the population data from Landscan, we normalize the language data for
each country so that the sum of a country’s different language speakers equals the country’s total population
according to the World Bank.
These two data sources yield three pieces of information: the number of people per grid cell; the
number of speakers of each language per country; and whether a language is spoken or not in a given grid
cell. What it does not tell us is how many people speak each language in each cell. Hence, using these three
pieces of information, we need to allocate language speakers to grid cells. To that end, we use an iterative
proportional fitting algorithm, commonly used in statistics, which we now describe in further detail.17 We
will later cross-validate the outcome of our algorithm with actual census data from Gershman and Rivera
(2016).
The iterative proportional fitting algorithm is a way of allocating language speakers to cells, such
that the total population per cell and the total population per language correspond to their actual values.
Consider a country that has M linguistic groups and is split up into K cells. Using the two data sources,
we construct three matrices that correspond to the three pieces of information we referred to above: N is a
K x 1 matrix of which the elements give the total population of each cell; L is a 1 x M matrix of which the
elements give the number of speakers of each language in the country; B is a K x M binary matrix of which
the elements take a value 1 if the language corresponding to the column is spoken in the cell corresponding
to the row (and a value 0 otherwise). The iterative proportional fitting algorithm then goes through the
following steps.
1. Step 0. Define T (0) = B.
2. Step 1. For each location `, assign a share T (2n−2) (`, i)/

P

j

T (2n−2) (`, j) to language i. Hence,

T (2n−2) (`, i)
T (2n−1) (`, i) = P (2n−2)
N (`, 1),
(`, j)
jT
15 Excluding
16 We

widespread languages, there is a maximum of seven overlapping polygons.

ignore point languages that account for less than 0.5% of the population.

17 See,

e.g., Deming and Stephan (1940) and Bishop, Fienberg and Holland (1975).

14

(11)

where n = 1, 2, . . . refers to the times the algorithm has iterated through Step 1 and Step 2. To provide
some intuition, the first time the algorithm goes through Step 1, the cell’s population gets divided
equally between the different languages that are spoken there. If, for example, 5 languages are spoken
in a cell, then each language gets assigned 20 percent of that cell’s population. This allocation always
P
ensures that j T (2n−1) (`, j) = N (`, 1), i.e., the sum of people allocated to each cell is equal to the
actual population of each cell. That is, the allocation satisfies the marginals on the cell populations.
3. Step 2. For each language i, assign a share T (2n−1) (`, i)/

P

k

T (2n−1) (k, i) to cell `. Hence,

T (2n−1) (`, i)
T (2n) (`, i) = P (2n−1)
L(1, i)
(12)
(k, i)
kT
P
This allocation always ensures that k T (2n) (k, i) = L(1, i), i.e., the sum of population allocated to
a language is equal to the actual total number of speakers of that language. That is, the allocation
satisfies the marginals on the language populations.
4. Step 3. Go through Step 1 and Step 2 until T (2n−1) (`, i) converge to T (2n) (`, i) for all ` and i.
This iterative proportional fitting algorithm therefore provides us with an allocation of language
speakers by cell, T (2n) (`, i). If the three matrices L, N and B are fully consistent with each other, then the
iterative proportional fitting algorithm is guaranteed to converge. However, there may be small inconsistencies between the data sources. As a simple example, it is possible that the polygon assigned to language i
has a population that is smaller than the total population that speaks language i. This inconsistency could
in principle be due to three reasons: the local population data from Landscan may contain imprecisions; the
country-level language shares from the Ethnologue might have errors; or the language polygons from the
Ethnologue may not be a completely accurate reflection of where the different languages are spoken. How we
deal with these minor inconsistencies requires taking a stance on the most likely source of error. We take the
view that local population and language shares are relatively easy to estimate, whereas language polygons
are unlikely to be completely precise. For example, although most Catalan speakers in Spain live in the East
of the country, a small percentage of them live in other parts of the country. However, since Catalan is not a
“widespread” language in the sense that is not widely spoken across the entire territory, the Ethnologue assigns a specific polygon to Catalan. Given the binary nature of such a geographic polygon, it hence assumes
that all Catalan speakers reside within the polygon. Since this is obviously an approximation, we replace
the 0 values in the binary matrix B by 0.000001. This amounts to allowing some speakers of language i to
live outside their corresponding language polygon. With this correction, the iterative proportional fitting
algorithm is once again guaranteed to converge (Fienberg, 1970).

3.3

Global Diversity and Local Learning Measures

With the spatial distribution of languages at a resolution of 5 km by 5 km in hand, we can now compute,
for each country, our measures of global fractionalization and the local learning multiplier. For comparison
purposes, we will also compute a measure of local fractionalization.
15

When measuring linguistic fractionalization, it is not always obvious which linguistic groups should
be used as primitives. For example, should Walloon and Picard, two variations of French, be considered
as two separate language groups or should they be aggregated into French? To address this issue, Desmet,
Ortuño-Ortı́n and Wacziarg (2012) use the language tree of the Ethnologue to compute measures of linguistic
fractionalization at different levels of aggregation. There are 15 possible levels of aggregation, going from the
most aggregate at level 1, where only the big language families, such as Indo-European and Niger-Congo are
considered to be different groups, to the most disaggregate at level 15, where Walloon and Picard are taken
to be different groups. As Desmet, Ortuño-Ortı́n and Wacziarg (2012) argue, coarse divisions, obtained at
high levels of aggregation, can be thought of as cleavages that go back far in history, whereas finer divisions,
obtained at low levels of aggregation, are due to more recent cleavages. They show that certain political
economy outcomes, such as conflict, are better explained by measures of linguistic fractionalization at high
levels of aggregation, indicating that they have to do with deep cleavages. In contrast, other outcomes,
such as economic growth, are better explained by measures of linguistic fractionalization at low levels of
aggregation, suggesting that they depend on more shallow cleavages.
In the case of public goods, Desmet, Ortuño-Ortı́n and Wacziarg (2012) find that intermediate levels
of aggregation are most relevant. Hence, in our benchmark empirical analysis of public goods, we aggregate
languages to level 5, though we also check the robustness of our results to using both higher and lower
levels of aggregation. To give a sense of what this level of aggregation means, it implies that Spanish,
Catalan and Portuguese are aggregated into the same group, but French and Italian are not. Similarly,
Hindi and Urdu are considered to be in the same group. As another example, in Tanzania 104 out of
the 129 languages are aggregated into the same group (Niger-Congo/Atlantic-Congo/Volta-Congo/BenueCongo/Bantoid/Southern).
Using aggregation level 5, Figure 1 and Figure 2 show global fractionalization and the local learning
multiplier by country.18 As is immediately obvious, there are many differences between both indices. Compare, for example, Chad and the Central African Republic. Global fractionalization is much higher in Chad,
but the local learning multiplier is much higher in the Central African Republic. Figure 3 also displays the
local learning multiplier, but now for each grid cell separately. Consistent with the previous example, there
are more areas of high local learning in the Central African Republic than in Chad.19
The left-hand panel of Figure 4 shows a scatterplot of both indices. What stands out is that
countries with very high degrees of global fractionalization tend to have low local learning multipliers. The
most fractionalized countries, such as Papua New Guinea (PNG), Mali (MLI) and Nigeria (NGA), have
so many groups that local learning is limited, independently of how much the groups are locally mixed.
Another relevant finding is the important heterogeneity in the degree of local learning between countries
18 Table

B.1 give summary statistics of the different indices and Table B.2 reports correlations between them.

19 Appendix

Figures C.1 through C.3 display the same maps, but for level 15 of aggregation. Compared to level 5, some of
the countries in the central and the southern part of Africa now display much higher levels of diversity. For example, Zambia,
where nearly everyone speaks a language of the Niger-Congo family, is much more diverse at level 15 than at level 2. Appendix
Figures C.4 through C.6 also show maps for level 2 of aggregation.

16

Figure 1. Global ELF by Country – Level 5

Figure 2. Local Learning by Country – Level 5

17

Figure 3. Local Learning at 5 km by 5 km Resolution – Level 5

with intermediate levels of global fractionalization. Compare, for example, Guatemala (GTM) and Mauritius
(MUS). In spite of overall diversity being essentially identical in Guatemala (0.53) and in Mauritius (0.52),
local interaction is lower in Guatemala. The reason is that in Guatemala many of the speakers of indigenous
languages live in the central and northwestern highlands, having limited contact with Spanish speakers. In
contrast, according to Chiba (2006), Mauritians “switch languages according to the occasion in the way
other people change clothes”. As a result, the local learning multiplier is much higher in Mauritius (0.20)
than in Guatemala (0.06).

.2

.25

Figure 4. Global Fractionalization, Local Learning Multiplier, and Segregation
TTO
FJI

FJI
TTO

LVA

Local Learning Multiplier (res)
0
.1

EST
MDA
IRN

ARE
MNE
LTU

ISR
ZAF
TJK

PRY

COG
BOL
GEO

CAF

IRQ

GMB
UGA
MYS
PER GNB

ZAR
USA
ITA
OMNUZB

.05

LBN
MOZ

LKA

DJI
NAM
AZE
TUR

0

VNM
NLD CYP SEN SDN
ECU
FIN
ERI
UKR
HRV
HUN
NZL
EGY
GABFRAARMMNG MRT PAN
TKM
PRTBWA
SVK
DZA
PRI
MEX
THA
SYR
GRC
SWE
KWT
POL
SWZ
RUS
LBY
CHL
DOM
ZWE
JOR
KHM
CHN
ZMB
MDG
GNQ
ROM
GUY
HND
ESP
VEN
TZA
CRI
CZE
AUT
COL
JPN
BGD
BGR
BRA
SOM
DNK
SVN
IRL
GBR
AGO
NIC
ARG
COM
NOR
TUN
URY
SLV
MWI
BIH
RWA
AUS
BDI
HTI

0

.2

TGO
ALB

GTM

NER BEN
AFG

SRB

MKD BEL
BFA CHE
MMR
PHL CMR
LAO
MAR
CAN

LBR

CIV

MLI

GHA NPL BTN
PAK

ETH
SLE
IDN

KEN
GIN

MUS

EST
KGZ

ARE
ISR

KAZ
MDA

LTU

MNE

ZAF

IRN
PRY

IRQ
LBN
MOZ

USA
MYS

CAF

ITA
GEO
PER
GNB OMN

SLE
IDN

NGA
TCD
IND

UGA
COG
BOL

TJK

GMB
ZAR

UZB
FIN
UKRHRV NAM
HUN
NZL
LKA
EGY
GAB
ECU NLD
VNM
DJI
PRT
PRI
BWA
AZE
TUR FRA
ARM
KWT
SWE
ALB
SWZ
GRC CHL
POL
DOM
ZWE
CYP MEX
JOR
SEN GNQTGO
ZMB
MDG
MNG
ESP CZE
KHM
VEN
AUT
BGD
HND
COL
GUY
SDN
CRI
SVN
CHN
AGO
JPN
DNK
ARG
NER
COM
BRA
NORSRB LBR
SVK
GBR
ERI
TZA
URY
SLV
THA
MWI
MRTPAN
BIH TUN
RWA
BDI
SOM
HTI
BEN
GTM RUS
SYR NIC
IRL
AUS
ROM
CIV
BGR
MKD
AFG GHA
DZA
NPLCHE
BEL
MLI
BTN
PHL
MMR
PAK
CAN
LAO
ETHKEN

TKM

LBY
BFA

CMR
MAR

GIN
NGA

PNG

-.1

Local Learning Multiplier
.1
.15
.2

LVA
KGZ
KAZ

MUS

TCD
IND
PNG

.4

.6

.8

1

Global ELF

a. Global ELF and local learning multiplier

-.4

-.2

0
Segregation (res)

.2

b. Segregation and local learning multiplier

In the theoretical section we already addressed the relation between the local learning multiplier
18

.4

and segregation. The right-hand side panel of Figure 4 plots their empirical relation. For segregation, we
compute the segregation index of Alesina and Zhuravskaya (2011) using our data at the 5 km by 5 km level.
Comparing both indices is cleaner when controlling for global fractionalization, so the scatterplot represents
residuals of regressions on global fractionalization. As expected, local learning tends to be greater in less
segregated societies. However, the correlation is far from perfect, standing at 0.59. This suggests that there
are important differences between both indices. Mali (MLI) is a case in point: there is a fair amount of local
mixing, so that segregation is relatively low. However, because the country is made up of many different
groups, the amount of local learning is limited.

3.4

Cross-Validation

To assess the quality of our iterative proportional fitting algorithm that allocates language speakers to grid
cells, we compare our local diversity measures to the ones obtained by Gershman and Rivera (2016). Rather
than using maps, they rely on national population censuses and regional household surveys to infer the
linguistic composition of almost 400 first-level administrative regions in 36 sub-Saharan African countries.
They then use the language tree from the Ethnologue to compute local fractionalization measures for these
regions at different levels of linguistic aggregation. To compare our measures to the ones in Gershman and
Rivera (2016), we start by aggregating our 5 km by 5 km language allocation up to the same first-level
administrative regions, and then calculate for each of these regions a measure of local fractionalization.
At linguistic aggregation level 5, we find a correlation between our measure of local fractionalization
and the one in Gershman and Rivera (2016) of 0.70 at the level of first-level administrative regions. The
local fractionalization measures in Gershman and Rivera (2016) that are based on census data are arguably
of higher quality than those that are based on survey data. If we limit ourselves to first-level administrative
regions for which local fractionalization comes from census data, the correlation with our index increases to
0.80. Since our empirical analysis uses population-weighted local indices at the country level, it is useful to
compare country-level local fractionalization indices. When doing so, the correlation between our measure
and the one based on Gershman and Rivera (2016) further increases to 0.96 for countries with census data.
It is encouraging to find such high correlations, in spite of the differences in the underlying data on linguistic
groups.20 This cross-validation gives us confidence in the algorithm we use to allocate language speakers to
cells.

4

Empirical Analysis

In this section we test our theory by exploring the impact of global fractionalization and local learning
on a country’s provision of public goods. Equation (10) from the theory provides the following estimating
20 The Ethnologue is much more detailed in the number of linguistic groups than Gershman and Rivera (2016). For example,
whereas Mali has 54 unique linguistic groups in the Ethnologue, it only has 9 unique groups in the Gershman and Rivera (2016)
data.

19

equation:
Gc = γ 0 Xc + γ 1 ELFglob,c + γ 2 LLc + εc ,

(13)

where Gc is the level of public goods in country c, ELFglob,c is the global fractionalization measure of country
c, LLc is the local learning multiplier of country c, Xc are a set of additional controls, εc is an error term,
γ 0 = κ1 /κ2 , γ 1 = −κ1 /κ22 , and γ 2 = −(κ1 /κ22 )β. Our main coefficient of interest will be γ 2 : if its sign
is consistent with an improvement in public goods, we will interpret this as implying that local learning
reduces antagonism towards other groups, making individuals more willing to contribute to public goods. As
mentioned in the previous section, in the benchmark we use grid cells of 5 km by 5 km to compute LLc and
a linguistic aggregation level of 5 to compute both ELFglob,c and LLc . We start by ordinary least square
analysis, and then turn to instrumental variable analysis.

4.1

Local Learning and Public Goods (OLS Analysis)

In our baseline analysis we focus on child mortality. It measures the mortality rate under age 5 (per 1,000
live births), and captures well the effectiveness of public goods provision. We then extend our analysis to
include a variety of additional measures. In particular, we focus on two more health outcomes (hospital beds
per 1000 people, rate of measles immunization), two education outcomes (illiteracy rate, log of average years
of schooling) and two infrastructure measures (percentage of households with access to improved sanitation
and km of roads per 1,000 people).
Child mortality. Table 1 analyzes the relation between global fractionalization, local learning and child
mortality, using OLS. The first two columns follow the standard approach of the literature and only control
for a country’s global fractionalization. The first specification includes regional dummies and latitude as
covariates, whereas the second specification is identical to the one in Desmet, Ortuño-Ortı́n and Wacziarg
(2012) and also controls for legal origin and GDP per capita. Consistent with previous papers, we find that
an increase in a country’s level of fractionalization is associated with worse outcomes. The coefficients on
global fractionalization are statistically significant at the 1% level. The next two columns replace global
fractionalization by the local learning multiplier. The coefficients switch signs, suggesting that a higher local
learning multiplier is associated with less child mortality, but the coefficients are not statistically significant
at the 10% level.
Motivated by the theory, in the last two columns we include simultaneously global fractionalization
and the local learning multiplier. As before, countries with higher levels of global fractionalization continue
to have greater rates of child mortality. In fact, the coefficients are larger in magnitude. Focusing on column
(6), we find that a one standard deviation increase in global fractionalization raises child mortality by 11.3
per thousand live births. More interestingly, the local learning multiplier coefficients are now statistically
significant at the 1% level. Their sign is negative, indicating that local learning reduces child mortality. The
economic magnitude of the effect is substantial. Using once again column (6) as our preferred specification,
a one standard deviation increase in the local learning multiplier lowers child mortality by 7.5 per thousand
20

Table 1. Child Mortality: Global ELF and Local Learning

Global ELF

Child mortality
(3)
(4)

(1)

(2)

39.221∗∗∗
(10.548)

23.991∗∗∗
(8.713)

Local Learning Multiplier
Absolute Latitude
Latin America & Carib.
Sub-Saharan Africa
East and S.E. Asia

-0.713∗∗∗
(0.180)
-12.372∗
(6.960)
77.872∗∗∗
(9.403)
-1.009
(9.989)

Log GDP per Capita
French Legal Origin
German Legal Origin
UK Legal Origin
Constant
Observations
R2

46.918∗∗∗
(9.093)
178
0.685

-35.929
(38.870)
-0.874∗∗∗
(0.169)
-17.783∗∗
(6.886)
78.650∗∗∗
(9.696)
-1.671
(10.121)

-17.299
(30.606)
-0.134
(0.203)
-7.583
(5.343)
59.418∗∗∗
(8.553)
-3.360
(8.253)
-17.918∗∗∗
(2.001)
-13.925∗∗
(5.608)
-22.743∗∗∗
(4.762)
-15.833∗∗∗
(5.708)
204.318∗∗∗
(18.766)

178
0.655

171
0.804

-0.139
(0.203)
-5.362
(5.385)
59.453∗∗∗
(8.352)
-3.492
(8.162)
-16.758∗∗∗
(1.959)
-17.976∗∗∗
(5.988)
-23.967∗∗∗
(4.723)
-20.610∗∗∗
(5.906)
191.137∗∗∗ 64.462∗∗∗
(19.086)
(8.854)
171
0.815

(5)

(6)

69.698∗∗∗
42.573∗∗∗
(13.235)
(10.720)
-214.470∗∗∗ -124.861∗∗∗
(48.706)
(38.912)
-0.646∗∗∗
-0.116
(0.170)
(0.197)
-10.189
-4.235
(6.510)
(5.502)
74.768∗∗∗
59.187∗∗∗
(8.642)
(7.882)
-7.234
-7.140
(9.506)
(8.104)
-15.589∗∗∗
(1.852)
-13.244∗∗
(5.212)
-19.595∗∗∗
(4.188)
-16.230∗∗∗
(5.402)
48.929∗∗∗ 178.437∗∗∗
(8.516)
(17.456)
178
0.719

171
0.825

Robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. The dependent variable is
the child mortality rate per 1000 live births. The Global ELF and the Local Learning Multiplier variables
are measured at level 5 of aggregation and are based on the authors’ calculations. The variable definitions
and data sources for each of the variables are provided in Appendix B.

live births. To put this figure into perspective, in its effect on child mortality, a one standard deviation
increase in the local learning multiplier has the same effect on child mortality as a 62% increase in GDP per
capita.
These findings are consistent with contact theory. A higher degree of linguistic diversity at the
country level implies greater antagonism, so that people value public goods less, but that negative effect is
mitigated if people accumulate knowledge about other groups in their daily lives. Next, we analyze whether
this result generalizes to a wider variety of public goods.
Other public good outcomes. Table 2 reports the results for an additional six public goods outcomes;
the specification is identical to the one in column (6) of Table 1. As in the case of child mortality, an increase
in a country’s overall linguistic fractionalization tends to be associated with worse outcomes, whereas an
increase in the local learning multiplier tends to be associated with better outcomes. The coefficients on
global fractionalization are statistically significant at the 5% level in four out of the six outcomes, whereas
the coefficients on the local learning multiplier are always statistically significant at the 5% level, with the

21

exception of road density. In terms of magnitude, a one standard deviation increase in the local learning
multiplier increases the rate of measles immunization by 4.0 percentage points. The corresponding standardized β is 26%, meaning that a one standard deviation increase in the local learning multiplier increases the
measles immunization rate by 26% of its standard deviation. In the case of illiteracy, the standardized β is
-30%. These results are further evidence in favor of contact theory.
Table 2. Other Public Goods Outcomes: Global ELF and Local Learning

Global ELF
Local Learning Multiplier
Absolute Latitude
Latin America & Carib.
Sub-Saharan Africa
East and S.E. Asia
Log GDP per Capita
French Legal Origin
German Legal Origin
UK Legal Origin
Constant
Observations
R2

(1)
Measles
Immunization

(2)
Hospital
Beds

(3)
Illiteracy
Rate

(4)
Schooling

(5)
Improved
Sanitation

(6)
Road
Density

-25.034∗∗∗
(4.563)
66.700∗∗∗
(15.851)
0.197∗∗
(0.087)
4.500∗
(2.672)
-9.335∗∗∗
(2.973)
2.434
(3.777)
1.384∗
(0.831)
2.192
(2.949)
3.260
(2.765)
7.458∗∗
(3.302)
66.595∗∗∗
(8.819)

-1.246∗∗
(0.612)
7.037∗∗
(3.042)
0.101∗∗∗
(0.019)
0.311
(0.450)
0.119
(0.470)
0.983
(0.903)
0.257∗
(0.155)
0.491
(1.448)
2.323
(1.483)
0.529
(1.454)
-2.049
(1.962)

31.697∗∗∗
(5.945)
-102.057∗∗∗
(22.085)
-0.301∗∗
(0.117)
-6.256∗
(3.434)
8.128∗
(4.163)
-14.255∗∗∗
(4.778)
-4.348∗∗∗
(1.137)
3.917
(3.495)

0.171
(4.142)
53.873∗∗∗
(10.918)

-0.244∗
(0.137)
1.369∗∗∗
(0.493)
0.008∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.211∗∗
(0.089)
-0.125
(0.109)
0.085
(0.102)
0.117∗∗∗
(0.022)
0.077
(0.080)
0.235∗∗∗
(0.064)
0.251∗∗∗
(0.082)
0.647∗∗
(0.256)

-25.065∗∗∗
(6.177)
81.892∗∗∗
(24.820)
0.136
(0.161)
-4.755
(4.781)
-25.303∗∗∗
(5.206)
-6.498
(6.484)
10.189∗∗∗
(1.279)
13.410∗∗∗
(4.079)
13.573∗∗∗
(3.585)
10.584∗∗∗
(4.038)
-17.277
(14.158)

1.146
(1.759)
5.387
(12.411)
0.173∗∗∗
(0.065)
2.332
(1.770)
2.958∗
(1.779)
-1.298
(2.124)
1.801∗∗∗
(0.452)
-14.003∗
(7.885)
-11.608
(7.914)
-10.932
(8.094)
-0.657
(9.531)

171
0.572

173
0.597

138
0.665

136
0.676

171
0.783

172
0.459

Robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. The column headings give the dependent
variables for each of the columns. The Global ELF and the Local Learning Multiplier variables are measured at level
5 of aggregation and are based on the authors’ calculations. The variable definitions and data sources for each of the
variables are provided in Appendix B.

Decentralization.

In our theory the geography consists of two levels: the local grid cells, where individuals

interact in their daily lives, and the country, where individuals from the different local cells decide the level
of public goods that everyone in the country has access to. In reality, in some countries there may be
heterogeneity in the access to certain public goods, and the financing of public goods may be decentralized.
To see whether this changes our results, we use data on decentralization from Treisman (2008). Table 3,
column (1), takes the benchmark specification and controls for whether a country has a federal structure.
Being a federal state has no direct effect on the provision of public goods. The rest of the results are largely

22

unchanged. In particular, global fractionalization continues to worsen child mortality, whereas the local
learning multiplier continues to have a benign effect, with both coefficients being statistically significant at
the 1% level.
Table 3. Child Mortality: Decentralization and Local ELF

Global ELF
Local Learning Multiplier

(1)
Federal State

(2)
Subnational

(3)
Federal State

(4)
Subnational

(5)
Local ELF

(6)
Local ELF

41.888∗∗∗
(12.288)
-144.832∗∗∗
(49.096)

23.267
(15.098)
-122.398∗∗
(54.170)

42.059∗∗∗
(14.144)
-151.335∗∗∗
(54.920)

24.922
(17.932)
-135.434∗∗
(64.481)

48.944∗∗∗
(13.711)

-47.828∗∗
(18.856)

34.830∗∗
(14.556)
-183.511∗∗
(85.957)
31.572
(42.139)

Local ELF
Decentralization(1)
Decentralization(1)
x Global ELF
Decentralization(1)
x Local Learning
Absolute Latitude
Latin America & Carib.
Sub-Saharan Africa
East and S.E. Asia
Log GDP per Capita
French Legal Origin
German Legal Origin
UK Legal Origin
Constant
Observations
R2

-0.138
(5.278)

0.956
(4.882)

-0.176
(0.197)
-5.530
(6.954)
57.497∗∗∗
(9.707)
-6.730
(8.716)
-16.829∗∗∗
(1.829)
-13.567∗∗
(6.172)
-20.811∗∗∗
(4.633)
-14.043∗∗
(6.034)
195.991∗∗∗
(20.039)

-3.336
(5.588)
0.415
(28.247)
80.245
(140.199)
-0.086
(0.212)
-3.183
(6.553)
61.806∗∗∗
(9.156)
-7.720
(9.040)
-16.021∗∗∗
(1.817)
-11.645∗
(6.103)
-18.677∗∗∗
(4.749)
-15.512∗∗
(6.306)
181.571∗∗∗
(20.401)

-1.895
(6.856)
4.769
(30.509)
81.601
(138.609)
-0.166
(0.205)
-4.689
(7.191)
57.085∗∗∗
(9.877)
-7.803
(9.061)
-17.002∗∗∗
(1.857)
-13.543∗∗
(6.168)
-20.214∗∗∗
(4.682)
-14.156∗∗
(6.063)
197.336∗∗∗
(20.148)

-0.115
(0.200)
-4.137
(6.389)
61.305∗∗∗
(9.102)
-7.278
(8.909)
-15.899∗∗∗
(1.787)
-12.351∗∗
(5.993)
-19.460∗∗∗
(4.701)
-15.868∗∗
(6.173)
181.963∗∗∗
(20.276)

-0.146
(0.199)
-4.339
(5.461)
59.323∗∗∗
(8.099)
-5.473
(8.072)
-15.930∗∗∗
(1.853)
-16.067∗∗∗
(5.457)
-22.047∗∗∗
(4.217)
-19.178∗∗∗
(5.581)
183.260∗∗∗
(17.735)

-0.101
(0.200)
-4.381
(5.487)
59.148∗∗∗
(7.848)
-7.545
(8.179)
-15.587∗∗∗
(1.868)
-12.281∗∗
(5.476)
-18.809∗∗∗
(4.442)
-15.118∗∗∗
(5.531)
177.671∗∗∗
(17.546)

149
0.849

122
0.848

149
0.850

122
0.849

171
0.821

171
0.826

Robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. The dependent variable is the child mortality
rate per 1000 live births. The Global ELF and the Local Learning Multiplier variables are measured at level 5 of aggregation
and are based on the authors’ calculations. In columns (1) and (3) decentralization is equal to 1 if country is a federal state,
and 0 otherwise, whereas in columns (2) and (4) it is equal to 1 if subnational governments have autonomy or residual
powers, and 0 otherwise. The variable definitions and data sources for each of the variables are provided in Appendix B.

As an alternative measure of decentralization, column (2) focuses on whether subnational governments have autonomy in certain areas and/or have residual powers (i.e., whether they can legislate in areas
that are not explicitly assigned to other levels). As before, this measure of decentralization has no direct
effect, and local learning continues to lower child mortality (with a coefficient that is statistically significant
at the 5% level). Columns (3) and (4) introduce interaction terms between our two measures of decentraliza-

23

tion and global fractionalization and the local learning multiplier. This does not change our findings. From
this we conclude that our results do not depend on a country’s degree of decentralization.
Local fractionalization. As argued in the theory, the local learning multiplier is different, but related
to local fractionalization. Whereas local learning captures the average effect of local interaction on the
antagonism experienced towards others, local fractionalization is the population-weighted average of fractionalization at the cell level. The former is micro-founded in contact (or conflict) theory, whereas the latter
is not. Column (5) in Table 3 displays what happens when we substitute the local learning multiplier by
local fractionalization, whereas column (6) introduces both measures jointly. Given the high correlation of
0.92 between both measures, the results have to be interpreted with some caution. Not surprisingly, we find
that local fractionalization, when introduced by itself, reduces child mortality. However, when we control
for both measures, the local learning multiplier trumps local fractionalization.
Different levels of linguistic and geographic aggregation. Desmet, Ortuño-Ortı́n and Wacziarg
(2012) find that diversity measured at an intermediate level of linguistic aggregation is most significant for
the provision of public goods. This is why our baseline analysis aggregates languages up to level 5 (out of
a maximum 15). To see whether our results change for lower and higher levels of linguistic aggregation, we
recompute our measures of global fractionalization and local learning for levels 15 and 2. Recall that at level
15 closely-related dialects, such as Walloon and Picard, are considered to be different languages, whereas at
level 2 all Romance languages, such as French and Spanish, pertain to the same group. Columns (1) and
(2) in Table 4 report our baseline regression, using level 15 and level 2. The results are virtually identical;
we only see a small drop in the statistical significance of the local learning multiplier, from 1% to 5%.
Our regressions so far are based on local learning that takes 5 km by 5 km cells to be a reasonable
area for an individual’s daily interaction. We next analyze whether our results are sensitive to that particular
choice. Column (3) in Table 4 reports our findings when computing local learning based on 10 km by 10
km cells. Essentially nothing changes: when in the benchmark a one standard deviation increase in the
local learning multiplier lowered child mortality by 7.5 per thousand live births, it now lowers it by 7.8 per
thousand live births.
Income inequality, linguistic inequality and segregation. The degree of inequality in a country may
be related to its linguistic diversity, and may affect public goods outcomes. Table 4, column (4), introduces
the income Gini coefficient as an additional control. We do not find a direct effect of income inequality
on child mortality, and the coefficients on global fractionalization and the local learning multiplier hardly
change.
Another concern is that income inequality between linguistic groups may be driving the results.
To explore whether this is the case, we use the ethnic inequality variable of Alesina, Michalopoulos and
Papaioannou (2016). They construct several measures of ethnic inequality. To be consistent with our

24

Table 4. Child Mortality: Linguistic Aggregation, Income Inequality, Ethnic Inequality and Segregation

Global ELF
Local Learning Multiplier

(1)
Level 15

(2)
Level 2

(3)
10km x 10km

(4)
Gini

(5)
Linguistic
Inequality

(6)
Linguistic
Segregation

30.154∗∗∗
(9.238)
-83.219∗∗
(38.757)

37.885∗∗
(15.410)
-90.960∗∗
(45.239)

43.074∗∗∗
(10.595)
-128.141∗∗∗
(38.250)

48.115∗∗∗
(11.287)
-165.075∗∗∗
(53.191)
-0.036
(0.442)

40.184∗∗∗
(12.099)
-113.338∗∗∗
(40.827)

35.494∗∗∗
(13.169)
-109.944∗∗
(46.750)

Gini
Linguistic Inequality

10.531
(8.378)

Linguistic Segregation
Absolute Latitude
Latin America & Carib.
Sub-Saharan Africa
East and S.E. Asia
Log GDP per Capita
French Legal Origin
German Legal Origin
UK Legal origin
Constant
Observations
R2

-0.015
(0.214)
0.292
(6.117)
56.759∗∗∗
(8.247)
-5.380
(8.750)
-15.674∗∗∗
(1.820)
-12.739∗∗
(5.461)
-18.853∗∗∗
(4.744)
-15.993∗∗∗
(5.956)
172.810∗∗∗
(18.404)

-0.137
(0.204)
-7.280
(5.461)
59.321∗∗∗
(8.412)
-4.927
(7.876)
-16.810∗∗∗
(1.913)
-14.424∗∗
(5.668)
-22.418∗∗∗
(4.474)
-16.821∗∗∗
(5.878)
192.504∗∗∗
(18.255)

-0.118
(0.196)
-4.198
(5.442)
59.105∗∗∗
(7.847)
-7.057
(8.171)
-15.513∗∗∗
(1.850)
-13.091∗∗
(5.201)
-19.670∗∗∗
(4.169)
-16.166∗∗∗
(5.397)
177.830∗∗∗
(17.404)

0.080
(0.254)
-0.257
(9.362)
66.139∗∗∗
(9.868)
-3.577
(9.102)
-17.004∗∗∗
(2.316)
-14.908∗∗
(6.084)
-19.544∗∗∗
(4.730)
-15.372∗∗
(6.913)
182.767∗∗∗
(21.897)

0.028
(0.207)
-2.043
(5.897)
62.983∗∗∗
(7.958)
-8.278
(8.284)
-14.945∗∗∗
(1.897)
-8.356
(6.071)
-14.420∗∗∗
(5.267)
-10.705
(6.534)
158.994∗∗∗
(19.528)

9.291
(13.291)
-0.060
(0.206)
-3.087
(5.820)
62.331∗∗∗
(8.078)
-9.591
(8.953)
-15.715∗∗∗
(1.910)
-11.672∗∗
(5.146)
-17.840∗∗∗
(4.304)
-14.619∗∗∗
(5.562)
174.944∗∗∗
(17.820)

171
0.819

171
0.812

171
0.826

124
0.842

165
0.827

161
0.833

Robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. The dependent variable is child mortality
rate per 1000 live births. The column headings refer to the robustness exercises carried out. The Global ELF and the Local
Learning Multiplier variables are measured at level 5 of aggregation, except in columns 1 and 2 where they are measured at,
respectively, levels 15 and 2 of aggregation. In column 3, we use the Local Learning Multiplier variable calculated at the 10
km x 10 km spatial resolution, instead of 5 km x 5 km. In column 4, we control for the income Gini coefficient, in column 5
we control for income inequality between linguistic groups, and in column 6 we control for linguistic segregation. The variable
definitions and data sources for each of the variables are provided in Appendix B.

25

measures of diversity, we use the one based on linguistic groups from the Ethnologue, aggregated to level 5.
Column (5) in Table 4 reports the results when we control for this measures of linguistic inequality. Once
again, the coefficients on global fractionalization and the local learning multiplier are very similar to our
baseline regression.
As discussed in our theoretical section, though our local learning multiplier is related to the degree
of local mixing, it differs from segregation in an important way. In particular, the local learning multiplier
tends to be high when there is spatial mixing and there are relatively few large-sized groups, whereas the
degree of segregation only depends on the degree of local mixing. To further explore the relative importance
of both indices, we use our data to calculate the linguistic segregation measure of Alesina and Zhuravskaya
(2011),21 and include it jointly with the local learning multiplier in our regression.
Table 4, column (6), reports the results. Our coefficients of interest do not change, while the
segregation variable itself is not statistically significant. From this we conclude that the local learning
multiplier captures a relevant determinant of public goods provision in a way that segregation does not.
Further robustness. Table 5 further analyzes the robustness of our findings in a variety of ways. We first
establish that the results are not driven by particular regions. To that end, we drop, one at a time, subSaharan Africa, East and Southeast Asia and Latin America & the Caribbean. Columns (1), (2) and (3) show
that the results are unchanged: the local learning multiplier is associated with lower child mortality, while
the opposite is true for global fractionalization. Next we replace legal origins by colonial origins. Column (4)
shows that this does not affect our main findings. As another robustness check we replace our three regional
dummies by the full set of six World Bank regional dummies. The results can be seen in column (5); nothing
changes. In column (6) we add a number of additional geographic dummies, such as roughness of terrain,
mean elevation, soil fertility and being landlocked, while dropping endogenous variables, such as GDP per
capita. We continue to find a benign effect of the local learning multiplier on child mortality. Lastly, column
(7) reports the most comprehensive specification, including GDP per capita, population and a full set of
geographic controls. Our coefficients of interest do not change qualitatively.
Table 6 takes this most comprehensive specification and replicates it for all other public goods
outcomes. As before, higher global fractionalization is associated with worse outcomes, whereas a bigger
local learning multiplier is associated with improved outcomes. The coefficients on global fractionalization
are statistically significant at the 5% level in four out of the six outcomes, whereas the coefficients on the
local learning multiplier are always statistically significant at the 5% level, with the exception of road density.
This confirms our findings in Table 2. From these different empirical exercises we can conclude that the
evidence in favor of contact theory holds across a broad variety of specifications and for a wide spectrum of
public goods.
21 To be precise, we do not use the data of Alesina and Zhuravskaya (2011), but rather use their segregation index applied to
our language data at the 5 km by 5 km grid cell level.

26

Table 5. Child Mortality: Further Robustness

Global ELF
Local Learning Multiplier
Absolute Latitude
Log GDP per Capita

(1)
Drop subSahara

(2)
Drop East
S.E. Asia

(3)
Drop Latin
America

(4)
Colonial
Origin

(5)
WB
Regions

(6)
Geography

(7)
All

28.186∗∗∗
(9.254)
-70.061∗∗
(27.660)
-0.035
(0.173)
-14.398∗∗∗
(1.616)

46.351∗∗∗
(11.893)
-126.716∗∗∗
(40.668)
-0.157
(0.201)
-15.392∗∗∗
(1.921)

48.739∗∗∗
(11.691)
-159.589∗∗∗
(45.200)
-0.166
(0.221)
-15.121∗∗∗
(1.926)

40.303∗∗∗
(10.807)
-107.179∗∗
(44.350)
-0.077
(0.200)
-15.597∗∗∗
(2.006)

40.505∗∗∗
(11.545)
-112.393∗∗∗
(42.105)
-0.068
(0.236)
-15.295∗∗∗
(2.062)

58.777∗∗∗
(13.298)
-195.534∗∗∗
(48.935)
-0.800∗∗∗
(0.292)

160.425∗∗∗
(16.759)

178.738∗∗∗
(18.172)

176.836∗∗∗
(18.190)

163.803∗∗∗
(15.170)

181.942∗∗∗
(25.033)

64.274∗∗∗
(24.155)

39.275∗∗∗
(10.413)
-138.121∗∗∗
(37.835)
-0.032
(0.264)
-14.101∗∗∗
(2.252)
-16.133∗∗
(6.944)
10.334
(30.316)
-2.764
(9.338)
2.858
(8.643)
13.708∗∗
(6.221)
1.168
(1.354)
125.271∗∗∗
(30.805)

Yes
No
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes
No

Yes
No
No
Yes

No
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes
No

125
0.687

159
0.832

139
0.826

175
0.826

171
0.826

149
0.809

147
0.868

Soil Fertility

1.790
(7.463)
-43.000
(28.485)
15.793∗
(7.997)
2.832
(10.051)
18.086∗∗∗
(6.539)

Roughness
Elevation
Island
Landlocked
Log Population
Constant
Baseline Regional Dummies
WB Regional Dummies
Legal Origins
Colonial Origins
Observations
R2

Robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. The dependent variable is child mortality rate per 1000
live births. The Global ELF and the Local Learning Multiplier variables are measured at level 5 of aggregation and are based on the
authors’ calculations. The column headings refer to the robustness exercises carried out. Column (1) drops countries from sub-Saharan
Africa, column (2) drops countries from East and South East Asia, column (3) drops countries from Latin American and the Caribbean,
column (4) replaces legal origin by colonial origin, column (5) replaces the three regional dummies of the baseline by six regional dummies
commonly used by the World Bank, column (6) controls for additional geographic features, and column (7) is the most comprehensive
specification that includes both the additional geographic features and population. The variable definitions and data sources for each of
the variables are provided in Appendix B.

27

Table 6. Other Outcomes: Comprehensive Specification

Global ELF
Local Learning Multiplier
Log GDP per Capita
Absolute Latitude
Soil Fertility
Roughness
Elevation
Island
Landlocked
Log Population
Constant
Legal Origins
Regional Dummies
Observations
R2

(1)
Measles
Immunization

(2)
Hospital
Beds

(3)
Illiteracy
Rate

(4)
Schooling

(5)
Improved
Sanitation

(6)
Road
Density

-26.074∗∗∗
(4.992)
61.983∗∗∗
(20.909)
0.897
(1.025)
0.080
(0.115)
3.587
(2.977)
-12.824
(12.409)
1.584
(3.446)
-7.659∗
(4.023)
-1.311
(2.548)
-0.889
(0.640)
98.263∗∗∗
(15.741)

-1.038
(0.642)
8.237∗∗
(3.725)
0.245
(0.176)
0.082∗∗∗
(0.025)
0.940
(0.595)
-0.047
(2.042)
-0.608
(0.609)
1.038
(0.787)
1.072∗∗
(0.474)
-0.064
(0.124)
0.941
(3.732)

31.271∗∗∗
(6.626)
-113.923∗∗∗
(25.651)
-6.451∗∗∗
(1.527)
-0.090
(0.166)
-9.472∗∗
(4.610)
1.743
(16.160)
-4.930
(4.739)
-2.186
(6.011)
-1.973
(3.737)
0.118
(0.871)
60.389∗∗∗
(19.651)

-0.276∗∗
(0.127)
1.451∗∗∗
(0.520)
0.153∗∗∗
(0.022)
0.000
(0.003)
0.315∗∗∗
(0.078)
-0.588∗∗
(0.288)
0.203∗∗
(0.088)
0.042
(0.083)
-0.082
(0.069)
-0.024
(0.016)
1.395∗∗∗
(0.377)

-29.751∗∗∗
(6.726)
98.518∗∗∗
(31.794)
9.254∗∗∗
(1.481)
-0.038
(0.170)
2.197
(4.196)
26.825
(18.806)
-6.554
(5.632)
-7.494
(5.559)
2.885
(3.423)
-0.410
(1.041)
11.148
(23.928)

2.044
(2.015)
-1.128
(15.601)
1.982∗∗∗
(0.624)
0.138
(0.107)
2.118
(2.431)
-24.410∗∗∗
(7.714)
5.481∗∗∗
(1.799)
3.468
(2.245)
-2.661∗
(1.410)
-1.244∗∗∗
(0.414)
21.100∗
(12.029)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

147
0.632

147
0.677

121
0.709

126
0.739

145
0.821

147
0.518

Robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. The column headings give the
dependent variables for each of the columns. The Global ELF and the Local Learning Multiplier variables are
measured at level 5 of aggregation and are based on the authors’ calculations. The specification is the same as the
one of column (7) in Table 5. The variable definitions and data sources for each of the variables are provided in
Appendix B.

4.2

Local Learning and Public Goods (IV Analysis)

In spite of the evidence consistent with contact theory, our findings so far fall short in establishing a causal
relation between local learning and public goods provision. A potential endogeneity concern is whether worse
provision of public goods may give individuals of the same group an incentive to geographically cluster. For
example, evidence by Greif (1993) and others have suggested that in the absence of an effective state, ethnic
groups may be able to provide security and contract enforcement to individuals of their own groups. If so, in
states with relatively poor public goods provision, people of the same linguistic or ethnic group may choose
to live together. This would imply a positive effect of public goods provision on the degree of spatial mixing.
Does this link between public goods provision and spatial mixing matter for the local learning
multiplier? We address this question in three ways. First, recall that the local learning multiplier is not a
measure of the degree of geographic mixing of different ethnolinguistic groups. Since there is a fair amount

28

of variation in the local learning multiplier for countries with similar levels of spatial mixing, this somewhat
weakens the potential endogeneity concern. Second, we consider the empirical evidence on whether spatial
sorting by ethnolinguistic groups is likely to be affected by public goods provision. Gershman and Rivera
(2016) use census data for a number of African countries, and find that diversity at the local level is very
stable over time. In particular, the correlation in local diversity over two to three decades exceeds 0.95.
More importantly for our purpose, their results indicate that the small changes in subnational diversity
are not related to regional economic performance. This also alleviates the endogeneity concern. Third, in
what follows we design an instrumental variable strategy, with the aim of causally establishing the relation
between the local learning multiplier and public goods.
Instrument for local learning. Our endogeneity concern relates to the spatial distribution of a country’s
language groups across its territory. That is, it does not pertain to the number and the population shares of
the groups, but to their geographic distribution. We therefore want to predict B, our K x M binary matrix
of language use by cell, in a way that is independent of any spatial sorting. Once we have a predicted matrix
of B, we can apply our iterative proportional fitting algorithm to get an instrument for the local learning
multiplier.
To create a predicted measure of local language use, we follow an approach similar to the one in
Alesina and Zhuravskaya (2011) by relying on language use in neighboring countries. In particular, for each
cell ` in country c, we determine the closest cell k in any of the neighboring countries of c. Any language
that is spoken in k and that is also spoken in c is then assigned to `. For languages that are spoken in c
and that are not spoken in any of the closest cells in the neighboring countries, we assume that they are
spoken in all cells of c. This methodology yields a K x M binary matrix B̂ with predicted values of language
use. We then use the same algorithm as the one described in Section 3.2, but using B̂ instead of B. This
yields a predicted measure of local learning.22 For this to be a valid instrument, the exclusion restriction
requires that the spatial distribution of languages in the closest cells of the neighboring countries does not
directly affect the public goods outcomes in the own country. We will discuss the plausibility of the exclusion
restriction at length at the end of this section.
IV results. Table 7 reports the IV results for our baseline regression. For five of the seven public goods, the
local learning multiplier has the expected sign and is statistically significant at the 5% level. (For the other
two outcomes, the effect is not statistically significant.) The F-statistics of the first stage are all larger than
the Stock-Yogo critical values, so we can reject the hypothesis that the instrument is weak. In general we find
the effect of local learning to be between 50% and 150% larger than in the OLS regressions. For example,
while a one standard deviation increase in the local learning multiplier lowered child mortality by 7.5 per
thousand in the OLS regression, it now lowers child mortality by 16.4 per thousand. The corresponding
22 Appendix D provides a simple example of how neighboring countries are used to predict a country’s geographic distribution
of languages.

29

Table 7. Global ELF and Local Learning (IV)

Global ELF
Local Learning Multiplier
Absolute Latitude
Latin America & Carib.
Sub-Saharan Africa
East and S.E. Asia
Log GDP per Capita
French Legal Origin
German Legal Origin
UK Legal Origin
Constant
First-Stage F-Statistic
Observations
R2

(1)
Child
Mortality

(2)
Measles
Immunization

(3)
Hospital
Beds

(4)
Illiteracy
Rate

(5)
Schooling

(6)
Improved
Sanitation

(7)
Road
Density

64.453∗∗∗
(13.435)
-271.882∗∗∗
(73.983)
-0.089
(0.204)
-2.908
(6.154)
58.875∗∗∗
(7.448)
-11.434
(7.894)
-14.214∗∗∗
(1.904)
-7.672
(5.985)
-14.447∗∗∗
(5.038)
-11.073∗
(5.915)
163.483∗∗∗
(18.745)

-29.824∗∗∗
(5.317)
98.887∗∗∗
(27.932)
0.192∗∗
(0.086)
4.209
(2.734)
-9.267∗∗∗
(2.876)
3.374
(3.634)
1.083
(0.835)
0.972
(2.962)
2.133
(2.798)
6.329∗∗
(3.204)
69.868∗∗∗
(8.960)

-0.400
(0.804)
1.368
(4.253)
0.102∗∗∗
(0.019)
0.345
(0.430)
0.096
(0.458)
0.809
(0.860)
0.307∗∗
(0.154)
0.693
(1.415)
2.513∗
(1.438)
0.712
(1.426)
-2.579
(1.960)

40.948∗∗∗
(7.208)
-164.212∗∗∗
(42.787)
-0.249∗∗
(0.121)
-5.263
(3.569)
8.990∗∗
(4.068)
-15.138∗∗∗
(4.893)
-3.548∗∗∗
(1.135)
3.942
(2.681)
-0.076
(4.260)
0.000
(.)
46.933∗∗∗
(11.373)

-0.360∗∗
(0.167)
2.107∗∗
(0.964)
0.008∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.212∗∗
(0.087)
-0.128
(0.103)
0.107
(0.101)
0.111∗∗∗
(0.022)
0.050
(0.087)
0.211∗∗∗
(0.073)
0.232∗∗∗
(0.084)
0.712∗∗∗
(0.258)

-30.904∗∗∗
(7.433)
120.844∗∗∗
(41.819)
0.130
(0.159)
-5.121
(4.830)
-25.216∗∗∗
(5.038)
-5.347
(6.378)
9.810∗∗∗
(1.253)
11.930∗∗∗
(4.184)
12.200∗∗∗
(3.764)
9.222∗∗
(4.116)
-13.221
(14.085)

4.326∗∗
(2.003)
-15.960
(12.495)
0.177∗∗∗
(0.062)
2.511
(1.687)
2.908∗
(1.691)
-1.924
(2.093)
1.998∗∗∗
(0.447)
-13.203∗
(7.599)
-10.865
(7.737)
-10.185
(7.787)
-2.798
(9.148)

60.885
171
0.810

60.885
171
0.562

61.604
173
0.589

41.292
138
0.646

36.568
136
0.670

63.386
171
0.780

60-943
172
0.445

Robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table gives the second stage of 2SLS IV regressions.
The column headings give the dependent variables for each of the columns. The Global ELF and the Local Learning variables are
measured at level 5 of aggregation and are based on the authors’ calculations. The Local Learning Multiplier variable has been
instrumented using a predicted Local Learning variable based on languages spoken in neighboring countries. The variable definitions
and data sources for each of the variables are provided in Appendix B.

standardized β is -29%.
Finally, Table 8 reports the IV regressions for all outcomes, using the most comprehensive specification of Table 5, which includes a host of geographic controls, as well as legal origins, regional dummies,
population and GDP per capita. With the exception of road density, for which we get the wrong sign, the
results for the local learning multiplier become stronger. A one-standard deviation increase in the local learning multiplier lowers child mortality by an estimated 19.2 per thousand, with a corresponding standardized
β of -33%. From this we can conclude that there is a causal effect between a higher local learning multiplier
and improved public goods outcomes. The evidence hence overwhelmingly supports contact theory.
Plausibility of the exclusion restriction. We now discuss the plausibility of our identification strategy
which relies on using predicted local learning as an instrument for observed local learning. For the exclusion
restriction to hold, the predicted local learning multiplier must not have a direct effect on public goods

30

Table 8. Global ELF and Local Learning, Comprehensive Specification (IV)

Global ELF
Local Learning Multiplier
Log GDP per Capita
Absolute Latitude
Soil Fertility
Roughness
Elevation
Island
Landlocked
Log Population
Constant
Legal Origins
Regional Dummies
First-Stage F-Statistic
Observations
R2

(1)
Child
Mortality

(2)
Measles
Immunization

(3)
Hospital
Beds

(4)
Illiteracy
Rate

(5)
Schooling

(6)
Improved
Sanitation

(7)
Road
Density

66.432∗∗∗
(13.729)
-351.169∗∗∗
(89.006)
-12.996∗∗∗
(2.324)
0.057
(0.264)
-15.957∗∗
(6.804)
-12.517
(31.618)
3.417
(9.307)
2.877
(7.916)
11.743∗
(6.374)
-0.644
(1.592)
138.714∗∗∗
(31.504)

-32.883∗∗∗
(6.292)
115.402∗∗∗
(43.620)
0.620
(1.017)
0.058
(0.111)
3.543
(2.837)
-7.095
(13.156)
0.035
(3.494)
-7.664∗∗
(3.736)
-0.819
(2.509)
-0.435
(0.707)
94.892∗∗∗
(15.570)

0.222
(1.037)
-1.651
(7.496)
0.297∗
(0.166)
0.086∗∗∗
(0.024)
0.948∗
(0.565)
-1.107
(2.130)
-0.321
(0.655)
1.039
(0.745)
0.981∗∗
(0.469)
-0.148
(0.136)
1.565
(3.618)

47.484∗∗∗
(9.072)
-235.940∗∗∗
(67.851)
-5.451∗∗∗
(1.567)
0.007
(0.183)
-9.151∗∗
(4.513)
-13.487
(17.791)
-0.934
(4.933)
-0.401
(6.184)
-2.704
(3.587)
-0.820
(0.916)
66.623∗∗∗
(22.155)

-0.344∗
(0.180)
1.932
(1.316)
0.151∗∗∗
(0.022)
0.000
(0.003)
0.316∗∗∗
(0.072)
-0.535∗
(0.308)
0.190∗∗
(0.088)
0.042
(0.077)
-0.082
(0.064)
-0.020
(0.016)
1.375∗∗∗
(0.345)

-39.049∗∗∗
(9.515)
171.615∗∗
(68.807)
8.911∗∗∗
(1.449)
-0.069
(0.167)
2.197
(4.108)
34.978∗
(19.036)
-8.727
(5.333)
-7.517
(5.149)
3.568
(3.464)
0.231
(1.110)
5.912
(23.192)

8.439∗∗∗
(3.016)
-51.297∗∗
(22.084)
2.243∗∗∗
(0.627)
0.159
(0.099)
2.159
(2.253)
-29.791∗∗∗
(8.222)
6.936∗∗∗
(1.936)
3.472∗
(2.037)
-3.123∗∗
(1.546)
-1.671∗∗∗
(0.518)
24.265∗∗
(11.738)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

29.078
147
0.847

29.078
147
0.614

29.078
147
0.661

20.204
121
0.655

21.688
126
0.737

28.456
145
0.813

29.078
147
0.470

Robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table gives the second stage of 2SLS IV
regressions. The column headings give the dependent variables for each of the columns. The Global ELF and the Local Learning
Multiplier variables are measured at level 5 of aggregation and are based on the authors’ calculations. The Local Learning variable
has been instrumented using a predicted Local Learning variable based on languages spoken in neighboring countries. The variable
definitions and data sources for each of the variables are provided in Appendix B.

over and above its indirect effect through the observed local learning multiplier. This exclusion restriction
might be violated if public goods in the neighboring countries have a direct effect on public goods in the
home country. To see why such a situation might be problematic for our identification strategy, recall that
the spatial distribution of languages in the neighboring countries affects both the predicted local learning
multiplier in the home country and public goods in the neighboring countries. The presence of crossborder spillovers in public goods might then lead to a direct relation between the predicted local learning
multiplier and public goods in the home country. For example, if higher immunization rates in the neighboring
countries lowers the spread of infectious diseases in the broader region, then any drop in child mortality in
the neighboring countries would extend to the home country. If there is a strong correlation between the
predicted local learning multiplier in the home country and the observed local learning multiplier in the
neighboring countries, such spillovers could imply a violation of the exclusion restriction. To address this

31

potential concern, we adopt a three-pronged strategy.
First, we clarify that we do not directly use the local learning multiplier of the neighboring countries
to predict the local learning index of the home country. Instead, for each cell in the home country we only
use information on which languages are spoken in the closest cell of its neighboring countries to predict which
languages are spoken in the home country cell. This procedure yields a predicted binary matrix of language
use for all cells in the home country, which is then used to construct a predicted local learning multiplier.
Hence, the predicted local learning multiplier of the home country may be very different from the local
learning multipliers of its neighbors. In fact, the correlation between both measures is essentially zero (to
be precise, between 0.03 and 0.06, depending on how we average the neighbors’ local learning multipliers).
With such a low correlation, it would be highly improbable that cross-border spillovers in public goods would
invalidate the exclusion restriction.
Second, to be exhaustive, we can of course still investigate whether the neighbors’ local learning
multiplier, global fractionalization and public goods affect outcomes. When controlling for these additional
variables in our otherwise identical IV specification of Table 8, the results are unchanged.23 In particular,
in Table 9 the local learning multiplier continues to have a significant and robust effect on the different
public goods. The magnitudes of the effects are very similar to those found in the specification without the
additional controls. This confirms our prior conclusion that the possible presence of cross-border spillovers
in public goods does not undermine our identification strategy. As an alternative specification, we could
separately control for, on the one hand, public goods, and on the other hand, local learning and global
fractionalization. Doing so does not substantially alter the magnitudes of the original effects of the local
learning multiplier.24
Third, while in the previous paragraphs we have argued that our identification strategy is likely
to hold, next we check for the sensitivity of our results to small violations of the exclusion restriction. To
that end, we follow the method outlined in Conley et al. (2012). Consider the equation we are interested
in estimating, but now allow the instrument to have a direct impact on the outcome. That is, Gc =
γ 0 Xc + γ 1 ELFglob,c + γ 2 LLc + γ 3 LLnc + εc , where LLnc is the instrument. The exclusion restriction assumes
that γ 3 = 0. Conley et al. (2012) provide a procedure that allows for inference even if γ 3 is not exactly
equal to zero. The idea is intuitive. If we were to know the true value of γ 3 , it would be straightforward to
estimate the above equation by 2SLS using LLnc as an instrument for LLc .25 Of course, we do not know
the true value of γ 3 . Conley et al. (2012) tackle this problem by making assumptions on the support of γ 3 ,
and then run 2SLS on different possible values of γ 3 . Following their Local to Zero approach, we assume
that γ 3 ∼ N (0, δ 2 ). Using their methodology, we can obtain a 95% confidence interval for our coefficient of
23 Neighboring country variables are computed as population-weighted averages of the neighboring countries’ variables. Results
do not change when either taking simple averages or using the populations in the home country cells that are exposed to each
neighboring country as weights.
24 Results
25 This

are available upon request.

requires first subtracting γ 3 LLnc from both sides of the above equation.

32

Table 9. Neighbors’ Global ELF, Local Learning and Public Goods, Comprehensive Specification (IV)

Global ELF
Local Learning Multiplier
Neighbors Global ELF
Neighbors Local Learning
Neighbors Public Goods
Controls Table 8
First-Stage F-Statistic
Observations
R2

(1)
Child
Mortality

(2)
Measles
Immunization

(3)
Hospital
Beds

(4)
Illiteracy
Rate

(5)
Schooling

(6)
Improved
Sanitation

(7)
Road
Density

61.371∗∗∗
(13.634)
-314.309∗∗∗
(81.949)
-26.123
(17.175)
-53.084
(99.801)
0.325∗∗∗
(0.125)

-30.656∗∗∗
(6.888)
105.024∗∗
(46.363)
5.872
(6.482)
54.277∗
(32.644)
0.080
(0.120)

-0.084
(1.105)
-0.886
(7.414)
0.320
(1.025)
-1.789
(6.297)
0.352∗∗∗
(0.124)

40.548∗∗∗
(9.041)
-211.004∗∗∗
(60.452)
0.018
(10.154)
-71.297
(57.609)
0.273∗∗
(0.121)

-0.346∗
(0.183)
1.798
(1.280)
0.141
(0.168)
0.034
(1.085)
0.090
(0.097)

-38.103∗∗∗
(10.341)
168.179∗∗
(68.696)
2.503
(9.931)
33.850
(63.486)
-0.005
(0.101)

6.089∗
(3.317)
-41.570∗∗
(20.454)
3.592
(4.998)
-24.927
(26.124)
0.136
(0.152)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

31.922
146
0.864

27.839
146
0.634

27.586
146
0.688

20.045
121
0.700

22.119
125
0.745

34.871
144
0.813

27.949
146
0.444

Robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table gives the second stage of 2SLS IV regressions.
The column headings give the dependent variables for each of the columns. The Global ELF and the Local Learning Multiplier variables
are measured at level 5 of aggregation and are based on the authors’ calculations. The Local Learning Multiplier variable has been
instrumented using a predicted Local Learning variable based on languages spoken in neighboring countries. The variable definitions
and data sources for each of the variables are provided in Appendix B.

interest, γ 2 .
How much this violation of the exclusion restriction affects our results for local learning depends of
course on the magnitude of δ. Table 10 presents the results when we allow the direct effect of the instrument
to be up to 10% to 50% of the marginal effect of the local learning multiplier on public goods from the IV
estimation. To interpret our findings, consider, for example, the row which says CI (2δ = 15%). It reports
the 95% confidence interval for the local learning coefficient when we allow the direct effect of the instrument
to be up to 15% of the marginal effect of local learning from the original instrumental variable specification.
When comparing the results with our original findings, reported in the upper panel of Table 10, we notice
that the confidence intervals do not change the significance of our original results. Even if we allowed for a
rather strong violation of the exclusion restriction so that the direct effect of the instrument were up to 25%
of the marginal effect of the local learning multiplier, our findings continue to be statistically significant.

5

Concluding Remarks

In this paper we proposed a conceptual framework of antagonism which suggests that both a society’s overall
linguistic diversity and its local learning about other groups should affect the provision of public goods.
Theoretically, we showed that local learning tends to be high when there are a few large-sized groups that are
spatially mixed. This makes local learning different from both segregation and local diversity. Empirically,
we found that overall linguistic diversity worsens the provision of public goods, whereas the opposite is true
for the local learning multiplier. To assuage concerns about reverse causality, we developed an instrumental

33

Table 10. Plausibly Exogenous IV Estimation, Comprehensive Specification

(1)
Child
Mortality

(2)
Measles
Immunization

(3)
Hospital
Beds

(4)
Illiteracy
Rate

(5)
Schooling

(6)
Improved
Sanitation

(7)
Road
Density

-351.169∗∗∗
(89.006)

115.402∗∗∗
(43.620)

-1.651
(7.496)

-235.940∗∗∗
(67.851)

1.932
(1.316)

171.615∗∗
(68.807)

-51.297∗∗
(22.084)

(32.4 310.9)
(27.1 316.2)
(11.3 331.9)
(-48.0 391.2)

(-95.8 -6.8)
(-97.3 -5.3)
(-101.7 -0.9)
(-118.8 16.2)

145

147

Panel A: IV
Local Learning

Panel B: 95% confidence intervals for Local Learning under γ 3 ∼ N (0, δ 2 )
CI
CI
CI
CI

(2δ
(2δ
(2δ
(2δ

=
=
=
=

10%)
15%)
25%)
50%)

Observations

(-539.5 -162.9)
(-555.5 -146.9)
(-599.8 -102.6)
(-746.2 43.8)

(26.8 204.0)
(23.0 207.8)
(12.0 218.8)
(-29.1 259.9)

147

147

(-16.3
(-16.4
(-16.4
(-16.4

13.0)
13.0)
13.1)
13.1)

(-377.5 -94.4)
(-387.5 -84.4)
(-415.9 -56.0)
(-512.5 40.6)

147

(-0.7
(-0.7
(-0.8
(-1.3

121

4.5)
4.6)
4.7)
5.2)

126

Panel A: Robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This panel presents the coefficients and standard
errors for the Local Learning Multiplier variable from the second stage of 2SLS IV regressions estimated in Table 8. The column headings
give the dependent variables for each of the columns. The Local Learning Multiplier variable has been instrumented using a predicted Local
Learning Multiplier variable based on languages spoken in neighboring countries. Please refer to the notes from Table 8 for further details.
Panel B: The 95% confidence intervals are computed allowing for violations in the exclusion restriction following the local to zero approach
of Conley et al. (2012) and using the Stata ado program “plusexog” created by Clarke (2014). The row which says CI (2δ = x%) reports the
95% confidence interval for the local learning coefficient when we allow the direct effect of the instrument to be up to x% of the marginal
effect of local learning from the original instrumental variable specification.

variable strategy. Doing so allowed us to causally establish the positive effect of the local learning multiplier
on public goods outcomes. This finding is consistent with contact theory which hypothesizes that prejudice
against other groups is mitigated by frequent interaction with those groups.
Another key contribution of this paper is the construction of a worldwide dataset on local language
use. To that end, we combined data on local population, country-level language use, and local language
maps. We then applied an iterative proportional fitting algorithm to allocate the speakers of 6,905 different
languages to all 5 km by 5 km cells in the world. By using data that span virtually all countries of the
world, our results provide important macro support to experimental evidence in favor of contact theory.
This database should also be useful for researchers interested in analyzing the effect of local diversity on a
variety of political economy outcomes, such as development and conflict.
Our paper has implications for public policies that affect the geographic distribution of ethnolinguistic groups within countries. Compare, for example, Guatemala and Mauritius, two countries with identical
levels of overall ethnolinguistic diversity, but with very different local learning multipliers. While geographic
separation limits contact between Spanish and indigenous language speakers in Guatemala, it is common for
individuals in Mauritius to interact on a daily basis with speakers of English, Kreol Morisien, French and
Bhojpuri. Our empirical results suggest that policies that improve the geographic mixing of ethnolinguistic
groups in Guatemala may help narrow the gap with Mauritius in public goods outcomes. Such policies are
common in some countries. For example, many European governments use social housing to geographically
spread ethnic minorities, making neighborhoods and cities more equal in their diversity. Singapore goes
even further by implementing a quota system ensuring that each housing block resembles the nation’s ethnic

34

make-up.26
Our findings also have implications for migration policy. Taking a country’s global fractionalization
as given, our empirical results suggest that public goods outcomes tend to improve when there are few
groups. A good example of a diverse country that achieves high local learning is Luxembourg: with around
45% of its population foreign-born, more than a third are of Portuguese origin and more than half come
from just two countries. Conditional on a country’s overall fractionalization, the predominance of a few large
groups that are spatially mixed makes for a high local learning multiplier, and hence improved public goods
outcomes. Policy makers may want to take this into account when designing migration policies.

References
[1] Alesina, A., Baqir, R., and Easterly, W., 1999. “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 114, 1243-1284.
[2] Alesina, A., Baqir, R., and Hoxby, C., 2004. “Political Jurisdictions in Heterogeneous Communities,”
Journal of Political Economy, 112, 348-396.
[3] Alesina, A., Devleeschauwer, A., Easterly, W., Kurlat, S., and Wacziarg, R., 2003. “Fractionalization,”
Journal of Economic Growth, 8, 155-194.
[4] Alesina, A. and La Ferrara, E., 2000. “Participation in Heterogeneous Communities,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 115, 847-904.
[5] Alesina, A., Michalopoulos, S., and Papaioannou, E., 2016. “Ethnic Inequality,” Journal of Political
Economy, 124, 428-488.
[6] Alesina, A. and Zhuravskaya, E., 2011. “Segregation and the Quality of Government in a Cross-Section
of Countries,” American Economic Review, 101, 1872-1911.
[7] Algan, Y., Hémet, C., and Laitin, D., 2016. “The Social Effects of Ethnic Diversity at the Local Level:
A Natural Experiment with Exogenous Residential Allocation,” Journal of Political Economy 124, 696733.
[8] Allport, G., 1954. The Nature of Prejudice, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
[9] Ashraf, Q. and Galor, O., 2013. “The ‘Out of Africa’ Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity, and Comparative Economic Development,” American Economic Review, 103, 1-46.
[10] Barro, R. and Lee, J., 2010. “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World, 1950-2010,”
NBER Working Paper #15902.
26 Similarly, the causal interpretation of contact theory was an important argument in the landmark U.S. Supreme Court case
Brown v. Board of Education in 1954 that led to the racial desegregation of public schools (Putnam, 2007). Naturally, these
policies are not exempt of controversy, as they trade off individual freedom of choice with social outcomes that are deemed
desirable.

35

[11] Bertrand, M. and Duflo, E., 2016. “Field Experiments on Discrimination,” NBER Working Paper
#22014.
[12] Bishop, Y. M. M., Fienberg, S. E., and Holland, P. W., 1975. Discrete Multivariate Analysis: Theory
and Practice, MIT Press.
[13] Blumer, H., 1958. “Race Prejudice as a Sense of Group Position,” Pacific Sociological Review, 1, 3-7.
[14] Boisjoly, J., Duncan, G.J., Kremer, M., Levy, D. M., and Eccles, J., 2006. “Empathy or Antipathy?
The Impact of Diversity,” American Economic Review, 96, 1890-1905.
[15] Burns, J., Corno, L. and La Ferrara, E., 2014. “Does Interaction Affect Racial Prejudice And Cooperation? Evidence From Randomly Assigned Peers In South Africa,” work in progress.
[16] Carrell, S. E. , Hoekstra, M. and West, J. E., 2015. “The Impact of Intergroup Contact on Racial
Attitudes and Revealed Preferences, NBER Working Paper #20940.
[17] Central Intelligence Agency (2001). The World Factbook 2001, Washington, DC: Central Intelligence
Agency.
[18] Chiba, E., 2006. “English Usage in Mauritius,” http://homes.chass.utoronto.ca/~cpercy/courses/
6362-chiba.htm (accessed September 1, 2014).
[19] Clarke, D. (2014). PLAUSEXOG: Stata module to implement Conley et al’s plausibly exogenous bounds.
Statistical Software Components
[20] Conley, T. G., Hansen, C. B., and Rossi, P. E. (2012). Plausibly exogenous. Review of Economics and
Statistics, 94(1), 260-272.
[21] Cornes, R. and Hartley, R., 2007. “Aggregative Public Good Games,” Journal of Public Economic
Theory, 9, 201-219.
[22] Dahlberg, M., Edmark, K., and Lundqvist, H., 2012. “Ethnic Diversity and Preferences for Redistribution,” Journal of Political Economy, 120, 41-76.
[23] Deming, W. E. and Stephan, F. F., 1940. “On a Least Squares Adjustment of a Sampled Frequency
Table When the Expected Marginal Totals are Known,” Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 11, 427-444.
[24] Desmet, K., Ortuño-Ortı́n, I., and Wacziarg, R., 2012. “The Political Economy of Linguistic Cleavages,”
Journal of Development Economics, 97, 322-338.
[25] Enos, R. D., 2014. “Causal Effect of Intergroup Contact on Exclusionary Attitudes,” PNAS, 111, 36993704.
[26] Esteban, J. M. and Ray, D., 1994. “On the Measurement of Polarization,” Econometrica, 62, 819-851.

36

[27] Fienberg, S. E., 1970. “An Iterative Procedure for Estimation in Contingency Tables,” Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 41, 907-917.
[28] Finseraas, H., Hanson, T., Johnsen, A. A., Kotsadam, A., and Torsvik, G., 2016. “Trust, Ethnic
Diversity, and Personal Contact: Experimental Field Evidence,” unpublished manuscript.
[29] Gershman, B. and Rivera, D., 2016. “Subnational Diversity in Sub-Saharan Africa: Insights from a New
Dataset,” unpublished manuscript.
[30] Greif, A., 1993. “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The Maghribi
Traders’ Coalition,” American Economic Review, 83, 525-48.
[31] Hodler, R., Valsecchi, M. and Vesperoni, A., 2017. “Ethnic Geography: Measurement and Evidence,”
CEPR Discussion Paper 12378.
[32] Karaivanov, A., 2009. “Heterogeneity, Returns to Scale, and Collective Action,” Canadian Journal of
Economics, 42, 771-807.
[33] La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R., 1999. “The Quality of Government,”
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15, 222-79.
[34] La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., and Shleifer, A. 2008. “The Economic Consequences of Legal Origins,” Journal of Economic Literature, 46, 285-332.
[35] Lawton,
gration

C.

and

Voted

Ackrill,

Mainly

for

R.

2016.

Brexit,”

“Hard
The

Evidence:
Conversation,

How

Areas

with

Low

Immi-

http://theconversation.com/

hard-evidence-how-areas-with-low-immigration-voted-mainly-for-brexit-62138

(accessed

15 January 2017).
[36] Lewis, P. M., Simons, G. F., and Fennig, C. D., 2014. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 17th edition,
Dallas: SIL International.
[37] Massey, D. S. and Denton, N. A., 1988. “The Dimensions of Residential Segregation,” Social Forces, 67,
281-315.
[38] Matuszeski, J. and Schneider, F., 2006. “Patterns of Ethnic Group Segregation and Civil Conflict,”
Harvard University, unpublished working paper.
[39] Miguel, E. and Gugerty, M. K., 2005. “Ethnic Diversity, Social Sanctions, and Public Goods in Kenya,”
Journal of Public Economics, 89, 2325-2368.
[40] Montalvo, J. G. and Reynal-Querol, M., 2005. “Ethnic Polarization, Potential Conflict, and Civil Wars,”
American Economic Review, 95, 796-816.

37

[41] Montalvo, J. G. and Reynal-Querol, M., 2016. “Ethnic Diversity and Growth: Revisiting the Evidence,”
UPF, mimeo.
[42] Munshi, K. and Rosenzweig, M., 2015. “Insiders and Outsiders: Local Ethnic Politics and Public Goods
Provision,” NBER Working Paper # 21720.
[43] Pettigrew, T.F. and Tropp, L.R., 2006. “A Meta-Analytic Test of Intergroup Contact Theory,” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 751-783.
[44] Putnam, R.D., 2007. “E Pluribus Unum: Diversity and Community in the Twenty-First Century,”
Scandinavian Political Studies, 30, 137-174.
[45] Robinson, A.L., 2013. “Ethnic Diversity, Segregation, and Ethnocentric Trust in Africa,” Stanford
University, unpublished working paper.
[46] Treisman, D., 2008. Decentralization Dataset. Downloaded on August 10, 2016 at http://www.sscnet.
ucla.edu/polisci/faculty/treisman/.
[47] Weidmann, N. B., Rod, J. K., and Cederman, L., 2010, “Representing Ethnic Groups in Space: A New
Dataset,” Journal of Peace Research, 47(4), 491-499.

38

A. Proof of Proposition 1
Proof.

We use the “replacement function” approach of Cornes and Hartley (2007) to analyze the Nash

equilibrium of a private contribution game. Given that agents have Cobb-Douglas utility functions and all
of them have the same income, the proof is simple. In our case the replacement function for an agent i from
cell ` with valuation of the public good v`i is
max{y −

G
, 0}
v`i

where y = 1 denotes the individual’s income and G denotes the total provision of public good (Karaivanov,
2009, example 3.1.1, page 780). The replacement function max{y −

G
v`i , 0}

gives “the quantity that if

subtracted from the total provision G, the player’s best reply response to the remaining quantity would
exactly replace the quantity removed” (Cornes and Hartley, 2007, page 205). Assuming all individuals
contribute a strictly positive amount, Karaivanov (2009) shows that the equilibrium total contribution G∗
solves
XX

N s` s`i (1 −

i

`

G
)=G
v`i

(14)

which can be written as
XX
`

N s` s`i −

i

XX
`


N s` s`i

i

κ2 + a`i
κ1


G=G

(15)

or
N − NG

XX
κ2
a`i
− NG
s` s`i
= G,
κ1
κ1
i
`

so

N−

X
NG
(κ2 −
s` a` ) = G.
κ1
`

Recall that average antagonism is
A=

X

s` a`

`

so the solution to (15) can be written as
G=

κ1 N
κ1 + N (κ2 + A)

(16)

Expression (16) shows that the equilibrium total contribution G is a decreasing function of average antagonism A.

39

B. Data Appendix
Child mortality. Child mortality rate per 1,000 live births, 1990-2010 average. Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank.
Hospital beds. Hospital beds per 1,000 people, 1990-2010 average. Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank.
Measles Immunization. Percentage of children between the age of 12 and 23 months that have been
immunized against measles, 1990-2010 average. Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank.
Improved sanitation. Percentage of population with access to improved sanitation facilities, 1990-2010
average. Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank.
Roads. Road network density, km per 1,000 people, 1990-2010 average. Source: World Development
Indicators, World Bank.
Illiteracy.

Percentage of people aged 15 and above who are illiterate, 1990-2010 average. Source: World

Development Indicators, World Bank.
School attainment. Log of 1 + average years of schooling for people 25 years of age and above, 1990-2010
average. Source: Barro R. and J.W. Lee v. 1.3, 04/13.
Decentralization.

Two measures of decentralization: countries classified as federal states, and countries of

which subnational legislatures have either autonomy in certain specified areas or residual powers to legislate
in areas not explicitly assigned to other levels of government. Source: Treisman (2008).
Log GDP per capita and log population. Both variables are the average for the period 1990-2010.
Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank.
Legal origin. French, German or UK legal origin Source: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2008).
Colonial origin. Country from which a country became independent. Source: CIA World Factbook
(2001).
Geographic controls. Absolute latitude, log of soil fertility, roughness of terrain and mean elevation.
Source: Ashraf and Galor (2013).
Gini coefficient. Income Gini coefficient, 1990-2010 average. Source: World Development Indicators,
World Bank.
40

Linguistic inequality. Income inequality between ethnic groups, based on linguistic groups of Ethnologue
aggregated to level 5. Source: Alesina, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2016).
Country boundary shapefile. ArcGIS shapefile with the political boundaries of all countries in the
world. Source: Seamless Digital Chart of the World Base Map Version 10.0, World GeoDatasets.
Ethnolinguistic maps. For information on linguistic groups we use the digitized version of the 17th
edition of Ethnologue which maps over 6,905 linguistic groups for the whole world. The data on different
languages come from a variety of censuses and years and approximately correspond to the 1990s. Source:
World Language Mapping System Version 17, World GeoDatasets.
Cell level population data. The cell level population data comes from LandScan who provide global
population distribution data at the resolution of approximately 1km X 1km (30” X 30”) which represents
an ambient population (average over 24 hours). Source: http://web.ornl.gov/sci/landscan/
Global fractionalization, local fractionalization, local learning, and linguistic segregation.
Own calculations.
Table B.1. Summary Statistics

1. Indices
Local learning (level 2)
Local learning (level 5)
Local learning (level 15)
Local learning (level 5, 10 km)
Global ELF (level 2)
Global ELF (level 5)
Global ELF (level 15)
Local ELF (level 2)
Local ELF (level 5)
Local ELF (level 15)
Local ELF (level 5, 10 km)
Local learning (level 5, instrument)
Local ELF (level 5, instrument)
2. Dependent variables
Child mortality
Measles immunization
Hospital beds
Illiteracy
School attainment
Improved sanitation
Roads

Obs

Mean

SD

Min

Max

223
223
223
223
223
223
223
223
223
223
223
223
223

0.05
0.05
0.06
0.05
0.19
0.25
0.38
0.12
0.14
0.20
0.14
0.06
0.18

0.07
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.21
0.26
0.31
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.16
0.06
0.18

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.90
0.97
0.99
0.71
0.73
0.73
0.73
0.25
0.83

184
183
188
147
141
190
181

56.49
81.72
3.64
20.08
1.98
69.35
7.43

55.49
15.48
3.25
20.39
0.44
30.70
8.52

4.20
27.00
0.17
0.00
0.67
7.03
0.32

230.80
99.00
20.62
80.97
2.63
100.00
54.12

41

Source:

42

0.95
0.69
0.94
0.74
0.59
0.38
0.97
0.91
0.67
0.89
0.79
0.68

1.00
0.73
0.98
0.66
0.58
0.39
0.89
0.92
0.69
0.89
0.83
0.68

LL (5)

1.00
0.70
0.39
0.28
0.26
0.62
0.62
0.75
0.58
0.59
0.41

LL (15)

1.00
0.66
0.58
0.40
0.88
0.91
0.68
0.92
0.82
0.67

LL
(5,10k)

1.00
0.84
0.59
0.83
0.78
0.60
0.79
0.67
0.80

G-ELF
(2)

1.00
0.76
0.65
0.78
0.63
0.78
0.66
0.90

G-ELF
(5)

1.00
0.43
0.55
0.76
0.56
0.44
0.64

G-ELF
(15)

1.00
0.92
0.68
0.91
0.75
0.74

L-ELF
(2)

1.00
0.76
0.98
0.79
0.83

L-ELF
(5)

1.00
0.73
0.60
0.65

L-ELF
(15)

1.00
0.77
0.81

L-ELF
(5,10k)

1.00
0.85

LL Inst
(5)

LL refers to local learning, G-ELF refers to global ELF, L-ELF refers to local ELF. First number in brackets corresponds to the linguistic level of aggregation, whereas the
second number corresponds to the geographic size of cells, with a default cell size of 5 km by 5 km. For example, L-ELF (5,10k) refers to the local fractionalization index
at linguistic aggregation level 5, using a cell size of 10 km by 10 km.

Local learning (level 5)
Local learning (level 15)
Local learning (level 5, 10 km)
Global ELF (level 2)
Global ELF (level 5)
Global ELF (level 15)
Local ELF (level 2)
Local ELF (level 5)
Local ELF (level 15)
Local ELF (level 5, 10 km)
Local learning (level 5, instr)
Local ELF (level 5, instr)

LL (2)

Table B.2. Correlations between Indices

Table B.3. Global Fractionalization and Local Learning by Country
Country
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
American Samoa
Andorra
Angola
Anguilla
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Aruba
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bermuda
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
British Virgin Islands
Brunei
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde Islands
Cayman Islands
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Cook Islands
Costa Rica
Cote d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
DRC

Global ELF

LL

0.681
0.562
0.342
0.066
0.000
0.011
0.141
0.500
0.011
0.119
0.328
0.033
0.017
0.410
0.295
0.000
0.018
0.092
0.000
0.537
0.755
0.552
0.000
0.746
0.538
0.002
0.084
0.034
0.167
0.578
0.150
0.439
0.000
0.067
0.474
0.429
0.000
0.000
0.433
0.848
0.042
0.084
0.021
0.008
0.521
0.000
0.040
0.715
0.090
0.000
0.244
0.024
0.370

0.060
0.079
0.024
0.033
0.000
0.005
0.070
0.250
0.005
0.029
0.143
0.000
0.008
0.065
0.147
0.000
0.008
0.046
0.000
0.041
0.046
0.057
0.000
0.062
0.115
0.001
0.028
0.007
0.084
0.135
0.007
0.032
0.000
0.015
0.024
0.011
0.000
0.000
0.113
0.044
0.017
0.014
0.008
0.004
0.117
0.000
0.009
0.059
0.037
0.000
0.040
0.009
0.072

Country
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
East Timor
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
French Polynesia
Gabon
Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guadeloupe
Guam
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia

LL refers to local learning.

43

Global ELF

LL

0.022
0.492
0.313
0.035
0.635
0.182
0.080
0.004
0.031
0.334
0.383
0.782
0.506
0.097
0.090
0.430
0.060
0.658
0.547
0.011
0.649
0.061
0.064
0.033
0.499
0.517
0.603
0.773
0.055
0.000
0.044
0.082
0.000
0.863
0.760
0.513
0.436
0.063
0.521
0.255
0.000
0.036
0.031
0.600
0.595
0.017
0.040
0.600
0.489
0.453
0.146
0.000
0.715

0.006
0.077
0.155
0.017
0.152
0.043
0.034
0.002
0.012
0.041
0.192
0.042
0.248
0.042
0.030
0.212
0.029
0.138
0.115
0.006
0.062
0.021
0.030
0.016
0.250
0.058
0.017
0.092
0.011
0.000
0.011
0.036
0.000
0.015
0.036
0.126
0.102
0.006
0.154
0.083
0.000
0.008
0.016
0.201
0.020
0.008
0.020
0.205
0.018
0.224
0.069
0.000
0.082

Country
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Martinique
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mayotte
Mexico
Micronesia
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Montserrat
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands Antilles
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Niue
Norfolk Island
North Korea
N. Mariana Islands
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Palestinian WB & Gaza
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania

Global ELF

LL

0.111
0.000
0.342
0.353
0.472
0.025
0.002
0.626
0.000
0.821
0.076
0.000
0.041
0.221
0.529
0.437
0.107
0.075
0.549
0.000
0.156
0.365
0.026
0.435
0.122
0.473
0.388
0.189
0.697
0.185
0.455
0.507
0.081
0.068
0.633
0.872
0.071
0.311
0.000
0.538
0.011
0.298
0.666
0.063
0.000
0.265
0.967
0.517
0.315
0.421
0.042
0.050
0.049
0.485
0.165

0.017
0.000
0.148
0.177
0.042
0.013
0.001
0.129
0.000
0.073
0.038
0.000
0.021
0.026
0.202
0.208
0.023
0.037
0.183
0.000
0.026
0.150
0.013
0.013
0.061
0.028
0.070
0.095
0.060
0.043
0.062
0.194
0.035
0.005
0.076
0.035
0.036
0.155
0.000
0.214
0.004
0.075
0.042
0.032
0.000
0.032
0.011
0.143
0.048
0.023
0.018
0.025
0.024
0.242
0.012

Country
Russian Federation
Rwanda
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Pierre and Miquelon
St. Vincent & Grenadines
Samoa
San Marino
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Korea
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Turks and Caicos Islands
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
U.S. Virgin Islands
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Viet Nam
Wallis and Futuna
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

LL refers to local learning.

44

Global ELF

LL

0.184
0.001
0.010
0.020
0.069
0.007
0.002
0.000
0.000
0.282
0.413
0.099
0.746
0.192
0.012
0.238
0.057
0.393
0.000
0.717
0.027
0.319
0.331
0.788
0.037
0.048
0.483
0.197
0.035
0.430
0.070
0.180
0.571
0.000
0.509
0.008
0.375
0.176
0.146
0.673
0.090
0.445
0.025
0.246
0.454
0.004
0.338
0.179
0.024
0.181
0.018
0.014
0.028
0.032

0.018
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.035
0.004
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.044
0.046
0.048
0.038
0.025
0.006
0.066
0.007
0.080
0.000
0.039
0.011
0.062
0.043
0.152
0.018
0.020
0.034
0.021
0.006
0.146
0.010
0.022
0.080
0.000
0.248
0.003
0.060
0.025
0.073
0.136
0.039
0.167
0.006
0.088
0.227
0.002
0.076
0.082
0.010
0.039
0.009
0.000
0.014
0.016

C. Appendix Figures
Figure C.1. Global ELF by Country – Level 15

Figure C.2. Local Learning by Country – Level 15

45

Figure C.3. Local Learning at 5 km by 5 km Resolution – Level 15

Figure C.4. Global ELF by Country – Level 2

46

Figure C.5. Local Learning by Country – Level 2

Figure C.6. Local Learning at 5 km by 5 km Resolution – Level 2

47

D. Instrument Construction
In this appendix we give an example of how neighboring countries are used to predict a country’s geographic
distribution of languages. We focus on the case of Belgium, and go through the following steps.
1. For each cell ` in Belgium, we determine the closest cell k in any of Belgium’s neighboring countries of
c. Figure D.1 illustrates this.
Figure D.1. Closest Neighbors of Each Cell in Belgium

2. Any language that is spoken in k and that is also spoken in Belgium is then assigned to `. Figure
D.2 represents one of the languages spoken in each cell k. In Figure D.3 we can see how the two
previous figures are combined to assign a language to each cell ` in Belgium. Of course, more than one
language may be spoken in a given cell k, including wide-spread languages. In that case, we use the
same procedure for each of the languages spoken in k.
Figure D.2. Languages in Belgium’s Neighbors

48

Figure D.3. Allocation of Neighbors’ Languages to Belgium’s Cells

3. For languages that are spoken in Belgium and that are not spoken in any of the closest cells in the
neighboring countries, we assume that they are spoken in all of Belgium’s cells.
4. The previous three steps yields a K x M binary matrix B̂ with predicted values of language use
in Belgium. Note that the maps above are for languages at level 15; we can easily aggregate this
information to the level we are interested in.
5. To allocate the number of language speakers to each cell in Belgium, we use the same algorithm as the
one described in Section 3.2, but using B̂ instead of B.
6. We then use this predicted allocation to construct our instrument for local learning in Belgium.

49

