                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          A DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING MODEL
                             OF RETIREMENT BEHAVIOR




                                   John Rust




                             Working Paper No. 2470




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 1987




Forthcoming in David Wise, (ed), The Economics of Aging, NBER, Cambridge, MA 1987.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research project on Aging. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #2470
                                                     December 1987




                  A Dynamic Programming Model of Retirement Behavior




                                      ABSTRACT




This paper formulates a. modcl of retiremEnt behavior based or the
o].ution to a stochastic dynamic programming problem. The workers
objective is to maximi:e expected thscounted utiHty over his remaining
lifetime. At each time period the worker chooses how much to consume and
whether to work full—time, part—time, or exit the labor force. The model
accounts for the sequential nature f the retirement decision problem,
and the role of expectati one of uncertain future van abi es such as the
worker's 4utue lifespan, health status, marital and family status,
employment status, as well as earnins from employment, assets, end
social security retirement, disability and medicare payments. This paper
applies a. neeted fixed point" algorithm tha.t converts the dynamic
programming problem into the problem of repeatedly recomputing the fixed
point to a contracti on mappi n operator as a subroutine of a standard
noni i   near me i mum likelihood pr oQrarr. The goal of the paper- is to
demonstrate that a fairly complex and realistic formulation cf the
retirement problem cart be estimated using this algorithm and a current
generati on supercomputer, the Cray—2.




                                                     Professor John Rust
                                                     Department of Economics
                                                     University of Wisconsin
                                                     Madison, WI 53706
1. Introduction

     This paper derives a model of the retirement behavior of older male workers

from the solution to a stochastic dynamic programming problem. The worker's

objective is to maximize expected discounted utility over his remaining

lifetime. At each time period t the worker chooses control variables (c,d)

where c denotes the level of consumption expenditures and dt denotes the

decision whether to work full-time, part-time, or exit the labor force. The

model accounts for the sequential nature of the retirement decision problem and

the role of expectations of the uncertain future values of state variables x

such as the worker's future lifespan, health status, marital and family status,

employment status, and earnings from employment, assets, social security

retirement, disability, and medicare payments. Given specific assumptions about

workers' preferences and expectations, the model generates            a   predicted

stochastic process for the variables (ct,d,xt). This paper, however, focuses on

the inverse or "revealed preference" problem: given data on {c,dt,x how can

one go backward and "uncover" the worker's underlying preferences                and

expectations?

     One can formalize the revealed preference problem as a problem of

statistical inference. The null hypothesis is that the data ct,d,xt} are

realizations of a controlled stochastic process generated from the solution to a

stochastic dynamic programming problem with utility function u and a stochastic

law of motion ii   that   depend on a vector of unknown parameters 0. The underlying

preferences u and expectations it    are "uncovered" by finding the parameter vector

o that maximizes the likelihood function for the sample of data. Standard

likelihood ratio, Lagrange multiplier and chi-square goodness of fit statistics

allow one to test whether or not workers are rational in the sense of acting "as


                                           1
if" they were solving the specified dynamic programming problem. If the data

appears to be consistent with the dynamic programming model, the estimated model

can be used to forecast the effect of policy changes such as reductions in

social security retirement or disability benefits. Policy forecasts require a

"structural" approach that attempts to uncover the underlying preferences u

rather than the traditional "reduced-form" approach which can be viewed as

uncovering the historical stochastic process for 1ct,d,x1. The problem with

reduced-form methods, noted by Marschak (1957) and later by Lucas (1976), is

that policy changes cause workers to reoptimize, yielding a new controlled

stochastic   process for               that is generally different from the

historical process of the previous policy regime. The structural approach allows

one to solve the dynamic programming problem under the new policy regime and

derive a predicted stochastic process for              Recovering the underlying

utility function is also useful for quantifying the extent to which workers are

hurt by various policy changes.

     Unfortunately, stochastic dynamic programming problems generally have no

tractable analytic solutions and are typically only described recursively via

Bellman's "principle of optimality". Without such a solution it appears

impossible to write down a simple, analytic likelihood function for the data.

This problem may have deterred previous researchers from estimating "structural"

models of retirement behavior that capture both uncertainty and the sequential

nature of the decision process.' Recently, the advent of new estimation

algorithms and powerful supercomputers has begun to make estimation of more

realistic stochastic dynamic programming models feasible, even though such

models have no analytic solution. The basic idea is very simple: the dynamic

programming problem and associated likelihood function can be        numerically


                                       2
computed in a subroutine of a standard nonlinear maximum likelihood algorithm.

Rust (1986) developed a "nested fixed point" (NFXP) algorithm that computes

maximum likelihood estimates of structural parameters of discrete control

processes, a class of markovian decision processes for which the control is

restricted to a finite set of alternatives. As its name implies, the NFXP

algorithm works by converting the dynamic programming problem into the problem

of computing a fixed point to a certain contr8ct ion mepping. A measure of the

inherent difficulty or comput8tional complexity of the dynamic programming

problem is the dimension of the associated fixed point problem. The NFXP

algorithm has been sucessfully programmed on an IBM-PC and applied to estimate a

model of bus engine replacement where the fixed point dimension was at most 180

(Rust, (1987)). By comparison, the fixed point dimension for the retirement

problem can be as large as several million.

     This paper shows how to apply the NFXP algorithm to the retirement problem

and demonstrates how to exploit the algebraic structure of the fixed point

problem in order to rapidly compute high-dimensional fixed points on parallel

vector processors like the Cray-2. With this technology one can formulate more

realistic models of retirement behavior. Section 2 reviews some of the empirical

issues that motivated the construction of the model. Section 3 develops the

model, formulating the retirement decision process as a discrete control

process. Section 4 presents computational results which show that fixed points

as large as several million dimensions can be rapidly and accurately calculated

on the Cray-2. A future paper will use the NFXP algorithm and data from the

longitudinal Retirement history Survey (RHS) to actually estimate the unknown

parameters of the model.




                                       3
2. Empirical motivation for the dynamic programming model

     The "a priori" structure of the dynamic programming model has been heavily

influenced by my interpretation of the extensive empirical literature on
retirement and consumption/savings behavior that has arisen over the last 20

years. This section summarizes some of the basic empirical and policy issues of

the retirement process that I wanted the model to capture.



2.1 Accounting for unplanned events and the sequential nature of decision-making

     Several existing models, such as Anderson, Burkiiauser and Quinn (1984), and

Burtless and Moffitt (1984), studied retirement behavior in the context of a

two-period model that divided time into a pre-retirement and post-retirement

phase. At some initial "planning date" before retirement, the worker is assumed

to choose a fixed optimal retirement date and fixed pre-retirement and post-

retirement consumption levels. Anderson, Burkhauser and Quinn used data from the

RHS survey to find out how closely workers' followed their initial retirement

plans. In the initial 1969 wave of the survey non-retired workers reported their

planned retirement age. By tracing workers over the subsequent 10 years they

were able to compare the actual and planned retirement dates, and found that

over 40% of the initial sample deviated from their initial retirement plans by

over one year.

     Clearly workers do not make single once and            for   all plans   about

consumption levels and retirement date. Rather, workers are constantly modifying

their plans in light of new information. Anderson, Burkhauser and Quinn found

that unexpected changes in health, labor market conditions, and government

policy (social security regulations, in particular) were the most important

factors leading to revised retirement plans. This suggests a stochastic dynamic


                                       4
programming formulation where the so]ution takes the form of an optimal decisioo

rule that specifies workers' optimal consumption and labor supply decisions as a

function of their current information.



2.2     Accounting   for bequests

        Many of the early studies of the impact of social security on private

saving were based on the life-cycle consumption hypothesis of Modigliani and

Brumherg (1954). Under the simple life-cycle model with no bequests,          1)

consurrption is predicted to remain constant or increse with age (depending on

whether the interest rate is greater than or equal to the subjective discount

rate), 2) workers are predicted to run down their accumulated wealth to zero by

their (certain) date of death, and 3) intergenerational transfers like social

security displace an equal amount of private savings (a greater amount if there

is a net wealth transfer, due to the wealth effect on consumption). Initial work

using cross-sectional data (Mirer (1979), Danziger et. al. (1982), Kurz (1984),

and Henchik and David (1983)) provided evidence that contrary to the simple

life-cycle model, age-wealth profiles are constant. (or possibly increase) with

age, and "the elderly not only do not dissave to finance their consumption

during retirement, they spend less on consumption gnods and services (save

significantly more) than the nonelderly at all levels of iticome" (Danziger et.

al. ,   (1982) page 224). A study of consumption profiles using the RHS data by

Hammermesh (1984) found that on average consumption excerds earnings by 14%

early in retirement, but that workers' respond "by reducing consumption at a

rate sufficient to generate positive changes in net financial worth within a few

years after retirement" (page 1). A study of estimated earnings and consumption

paths by Kotlikoff and Summers (1981) indicated that intergenerational transfers


                                         5
account for the vast majority of the capital stock in the U.S.,   with only a
negligible fraction attributable to life-cycle savings. Direct observations of

bequests from probate records (Menchik and David (1985)) showed that bequests

are a substantial fraction of lifetime earnings. Their results also demonstrated

that bequests are a luxury good, with a "marginal propensity to bequeath" that

is about 6 times higher in the top wealth quintile than in the lower four

quintiles. As a whole, these studies provide a strong case for including

bequests in a properly specified empirical model.

     The policy implications of bequests were first pointed out by Barro (1974).

Barro's "equivalence result" shows that under general conditions consumers can

offset the effects of government tax policy (such as social security) by

corresponding changes in private intergenerational transfers. In particular, the

net wealth transfers to social security beneficiaries during the 1970's are

predicted to be completely offset by increases in private savings for bequests.

     Recent theoretical and empirical research, however, has questioned the

importance of bequests as a determinant of consumption behavior          during

retirement. Davies (1981) showed that in a model with imperfect annuities

markets and uncertain lifetimes, risk averse consumers can continue          to

accumulate wealth during retirement through a precautionary savings motive even

though there is no bequest motive. Given that lifetimes are not certain, this

creates the empirical problem of distinguishing between intended and accidental

bequests. Recent panel data studies by Diamond and 11ausmn (1984), Bernheim

(1984), and Hurd (1986) found that the elderly do dissave after retirement. Hurd

found that average real wealth in the RHS decreased by 27% over the ten year

period of the survey and concluded that "there is no bequest motive in the RHS,

and, by extension, in the elderly population with the possible exception of the


                                       6
very wealthy. Bequests seems to be simply the result of mortality risk combined

with a very weak market for private annuities" (page 35). David and Menchik's

(1985) study also casts doubt on empirical relevance of Barro's equivalence

result. Their regressions of bequests on gross social security wealth and the

lifetime wealth increment LWI (the difference between the. discounted value of

social security receipts and social security taxes), produced no evidence that

bequests increase to offset increases in LWI; in fact, those in the top wealth

quintile appeared to decrease bequests in response to an increase in LWI.

However their results also cast doubt on the Davies variant of the life-cycle

model. To the extent that social security is a replacement for an incomplete

annuities market, one would expect that gross social security benefits would

decrease accumulated private wealth and unanticipated bequests. David and

Henchik found a positive (albeit statistically insignificant) coefficient on

gross social security benefits, and concluded that the "results indicate no

significant effect of social security wealth on the age-wealth profile, a

finding at odds with the life-cycle hypothesis. We find that social security

does not depress or displace private saving and that people do not deplete their

private assets in old age as is commonly assumed." (page 432).

     These conflicting theoretical and empirical results suggest the need to

build a model that allows for both uncertain lifetimes and a bequest motive. A

unified treatment may help to sort out their separate effects on the path of

consumption during retirement. However the fact that bequests are not needed to

explain the slow rate of wealth decumulation suggests that it will be very

difficult to separately identify workers' subjective discount factors, the

parameters of their bequest functions, and        their   subjective   mortality

probability distributions.


                                      7
2.3 Accounting for the joint endogeneity of labor supply and savings decisions

    The decline in labor force participation rate of older males over the past

30 years is a well-known phenomenon; the participation rate for workers aged 55-

64 declined from 86.8% in 1960 to 72.3% in 1980, and the rate for workers aged

65+ declined from 33.1% to 19.1% over the same period. Nany people have blamed

this decline on the historical increase in social security retirement benefits,

which increased in real terms by more than 50% from 1968 to 1979, the decade of

the R}1S survey. Savings rates have also declined in the postwar era, from an

average of 8.8% in the 50's, 8.7% in the 60's, 7.7% in the 70's, to only 5.1%

since 1980. Some researchers including Feldstein (1974) have claimed that social

security "depresses personal saving by 30-50 percent" (Feldstein (1974), page

905). However according to economic theory an actuarially fair social security

program should have no effect on aggregate savings or labor supply decisions,

simply inducing a 1     for 1 displacement of private savings by public savings

(Crawford and Lilien (1982)). It is well known, however, that the social

security benefit formulas are not actuarially fair, with strong incentives for

early retirement (especially beyond age 65, see Burtless and Noffitt (1984)).

However if workers' increase their savings to prepare for earlier retirement,

then the theoretical impact of social security on aggregate savings is

ambiguous: the decreased savings due to the tax and wealth transfer effects may

be offset by the increased savings due to the early retirement effect.

     Empirical work designed to resolve these questions has failed to provide

clear conclusions about social security's impact on labor supply and savings

behavior. While analyses of labor supply decisions generally agree that social

security does induce earlier retirement, there is substantial disagreement over

the magnitude of the effect. Some studies such as Boskin and Hurd (1974) find a


                                       8
substantial impact, while others such as Sueyoshi (1986) find a moderate impact,

and still others such as Burtless and Moffitt (1984) and Fields and Mitchell

(1985) find a very small impact; in fact, the latter study found that a 10%

decrease in benefits would increase the average retirement age by at most 1.7

months. Studies of social security's impact on aggregate savings are in

disagreement about even the sign of the effect. For example Barro (1978) used

the same time series data as Feldstein (1974) and an alternative measure of

social security wealth and found that increases in social security increased

aggregate savings. He concluded that "the time-series evidence for the United

States does not support the hypothesis that social security depresses private

saving." (page 1). Studies using longitudinal data such as Xotlikoff (1979) have

generally found that social security reduces private saving, hut have not found

the   1   for 1 displacement of private savings that the simple life-cycle model

predicts. Kotlikoff's results show a partial offset ranging from 40 to 60 cents

for every additional dollar of social security benefits; the increased savings

due to early retirement did not turn out to be large enough to offset social

security's negative tax and wealth transfer effects.

      A careful analysis of the impact of changes in social security benefits

requires a model that treats labor supply and consumption as jointly endogenous

decisions. Although a model that focuses on the last stage of the life-cycle

probably won't be able to shed much light on social scnrity's impact on

aggregate savings, it should address the historical decline in labor force

participation of older men. The discrepancies in previous empirical results

emphasize the need to carefully model the actuarial and benefit structure of the

social security system, and if possible, to model workers' expectations and

uncertainties about changes in future benefits.


                                        9
2.4 Accounting for health and the impact of social security disability insurance

    Health problems are a major source of uncertainty in retirement planning,

especially in terms of lost earning potential arid unanticipated health care

costs. Data from the NLS and RHS surveys indicate that poor health is a major

factor in retirement decisions, especially among early retirees. Of the people

retired in the 1969 wave of the RHS survey, 65% reported they were retired due

to poor health; for those who had been out of the labor force for more than 6

years (the early retirees) the figure was 82%. Health problems are prevalent

even among those who work; 39% of the 1969 RHS sample reported a health problem

that limited their ability to work or get around, even though 63% of this group

continued to work at a full or part-time job. However the inherent subjectivity

of self-reported health measures arid the financial incentives for claiming poor

health in order to receive disability payments have lead some to question the

accuracy of health variables and the importance of poor health as a cause of

retirement (Parsons, (1982)). In fact, some researchers (Bound, (1986)) have

presented evidence (see figure 1) that suggests that much of the decline in the

labor force participation rates of older males over the last 30 years can be

ascribed to increases in disability claims allowed under the social security

disability insurance program instituted in the late 50's and substantially

liberalized during the 70's. Other researchers, such as Kotlikoff (1986),

suggest that disability insurance may also be partly responsible for the decline

in saving rates since it eliminates the need for precautionary saving to insure

against unexpected illness or disability.

                         (figure 1 here)

     To the extent that qualification for disability insurance requires medical

examination, the classification "disabled" is relatively more objective than


                                      10
self-reported measures of poor health. However other approaches that use more

"objective" measures of health status such as impairment indices (Chirikos arid

Nestel, (1981)), or ex post mortality (Parsons, (1982), Mott and Haurin,

(1981)), generally obtain results that are in broad agreement with studies that

use self-reported measures of health status (although there are certain

questions for which the alternative measures lead to important differences, see

Chirikos and Nestel (1981), page 113), Regardless of how it is measured, health

status clearly has a significant impact on the labor force participation

decision and appears to be one of the most important variables driving the

dynamics of the retirement process. It is important, however, to find a measure

of health status that doesn't rely heavily on subjective self-assessments) for

example classifying as "disabled" only those who have had doctor certification

of disability (as is required in order to obtain disability benefits). The model

must also incorporate the regulations and uncertainties governing the receipt of

social security disability insurance: only by doing so can we hope to sort out

the relative impact of liberalized disability vs. social retirement benefits on

the declining labor force participation rate of o]der males.



2.5 Accounting for "partial retirement" and multiple labor force transitions

     Many models treat retirement as a dichotomous choice between full-time work

and zero hours of work. However economic theory suggests that workers might be

better off if they could make a gradual transition from full-time work into

retirement. Thus, at the other extreme are the labor supply models of Gordon and

Blinder (1980) and MaCurdy (1983) that treat hours of work as a continuous

choice variable. Gustman and Steinmeier (1983), (1984) have shown that a

majority of non self-employed workers face implicit or explicit minimum hour


                                     11
constraints that prevent them from gradually phasing out of their full-time

jobs. Their analysis of the RI-IS data showed that approximately one third of all

workers attempt to circumvent the minimum hours constraint through a spell of

"partial retirement" in a part-time job. This suggests that a trichotomous

choice       model with the alternatives full-time work, part-time work, and

retirement may be a better approximation to the actual choice sets facing

workers than either the binary or continuous-choice formulations.

     The RHS data show substantial variation in the paths workers follow into

retirement. Table 1 presents the sequence of self-reported labor market states

in the first 4 waves of the RHS.

                         (table I here)

Table    I    indicates that one needs at least a three alternative choice set to

adequately explain the variety of labor force transitions that occur along the

path to retirement. Table 1 also indicates that the transition into retirement

seems to be nearly an absorbing state; very few people "unretire" by re-entering

a full-time job once fully or partially retired, (or part-time job once fully

retired). These numbers differ significantly from labor market re-entry rates

presented by Diamond and Hausrnan (1984b) using NLS data. Table 2 reproduces

their estimates of the fraction of men in the NLS survey that re-enter full-time

work from the state of retirement or partial retirement.

                        (table 2 here)

A possible explanation for the discrepancy is that Gustman and Steinmeier used a

self-reported measure of labor force status to construct Table 1.2 The concept

of "retirement" is ambiguous: is someone who quits their full-time career job

and takes a part-time job retired? Workers may interpret the concept differently

and respond differently even though they are in identical labor force states.


                                          12
This suggests the use of objective measures of labor force status based on

reported hours of work. Furthermore, from a modelling standpoint it seems

undesirable to impose a priori constraints such as making retirement an

absorbing state, or prohibit various transitions to and from different labor

market states. The model should have the flexibility to allow the data and the

estimated parameter values "explain" what types of transitions actually occur.



     Developing a tractable empirical model that incorporates all these features

is a challenging undertaking. Certainly a unified model will lack some of the

fine detail of previous models that focused on specific aspects of the

retirement process. However the most important cost is the computer time

required to solve and estimate the model. To my knowledge there is no simple

analytic solution to the model I present in the next section:      it seems to

require numerical solution, a substantial computational task. Before presenting

the model, I should answer a natural question: isn't there a better way to

estimate the model than by "brute-force" numerical solution of the dynamic

programming problem? In particular, MaCurdy (1983) developed a relatively simple

scheme for estimating an intertemporal model of labor supply and consumption in

the presence of taxes and uncertainty. Why not use HaCurdy's method? MaCurdy's

approach is not well-suited to the retirement problem due to his assumption that

consumption and hours of work are continuous choice variables. This allows

MaCurdy to derive first order conditions for the stochastic dynamic programming

problem that equate the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and

leisure to the real wage rate. This provides a computationally convenient

"orthogonality condition" to estimate the identified parameters of the model.

Unfortunately, the method depends critically on the assumption that workers do


                                      13
not face minimum hours constraints in their full-time jobs, and that one always

has an interior solution with positive values for consumption and hours of work.

MaCurdy recognizes this: "because the procedure ignores statistical problems

relating to the endogeneity of labor decisions, (it is)          of limited use in

estimating period-specific utilities associated with households in which corner

solutions for hours of work are not a certainty. . . such as households with wives

and older households where retirement may occur" (HaCurdy (1983), page 277). The

next section presents a model and estimation algorithm that can accomodate

minimum hours constraints and corner solutions, hut at thc cost of repeated

numerical solution of the dynamic programming problem over the course of the

maxirrurn likelihood estimation procedure.




                                          14
 3. Theoretical formulation of the dynamic programming mode]

      This section presents a theoretical mode] of retirement behavior that

attempts to account for some of the empirical issues raised in section 2. The

ultimate goal is to estimate and test the mode] using the RHS panel data. The

primary factors limiting the realism of the model are computational feasibility,

arid the availability of good data. The construction of the theoretical model

reflects these practical constraints. In particular, the R}IS has limited data on

private pension plans, so I restrict the model to male heads of household with

no private pensions. Given the negligible use of private annuities and health

plans among RHS respondents, it follows that social security is the predominant

source of both retirement and health insurance benefits for this subsample.

3.1 State and control variables

      In order to represent the fundamental dynamics of retirement behavior the

model should include the following "state variables" which directly           or

indirectly affect workers' realized utility levels:



        accumulated financial and nonfinancial wealth

        total income from earnings and assets

aw:     the social security "average monthly wage"

h :     health status of worker (good health/poor health/disabled/dead)

        age of worker

e :     employment status (full-time/part-time/not employed)

ms:     marital status (married/single)



The state variables represent (a subset of) workers' current information that

affects their expectations about their remaining lifespan, future earnings and


                                      15
retirement benefits, and their future health and family status. Since social

security retirement and disability benefits are determined from the worker's

primary insurance amount (a function of aw, which is in turn a complicated

weighted average of past earnings), the variable aw summarizes the worker's

expectations of future benefits accruing to him in retirement or disability,

assuming fixed social security rules governing timing and eligibilty for

benefits. Since it is very difficult to formulate a low-dimensional state

variable representing how the social security benefit structure changes over

time, I assume that workers' had "semi-rational" expectations of the benefit

structure, equal to the regulations in force as of 1973. Although real benefits

increased 51.2% between 1968 and 1979, the majority of the increase, 46.7%, was

in effect by 1973 (see Anderson, Burkhauser and Quinn, (1984)). The 1973 Social

Security Act also changed the ttearnings test" to reduce the 100% tax on earnings

beyond the previous earnings limit to a 50% tax on all earnings over $2,100.   I

describe the expectations assumption as "semi-rational" because I assume that

workers correctly anticipated the cumulative changes in social security that

came into effect over the period 1969-1973, but maintained static expectations

that no further changes would occur thereafter.

     Given these expectations, at each time t the worker must choose values of

the following ttcontrol variables":




d: the employment decision (full-time/part-time/exit labor force)

c: the level of planned consumption expenditures



The worker's sequential decision problem is to choose at each time t values for

the control variables itE(c,d) that maximize the expected discounted value of



                                      16
 utility over his remaining lifetime, where his expectations are conditioned   by
the current values of the state variables xt(wt,h,a ,ms ,e,y,aw). The goal

 is to specify a model that is parsimonious, yet rich enough to allow for certain

kinds of heterogeneity. Perhaps the most important source of heterogeneity is

differences in workers' attitudes towards retirement. Some workers may be

"workaholics" who prefer working to the idle leisure of retirement, whereas

others are "leisure lovers" who would jump at the chance to quit their jobs.

     Notice that the formulation distinguishes between the worker's employment

state and his employment decision. This feature allows the model to account for

various labor force transitions, including "unretJrement" and        job search
behavior, summarized in Table 3.

                         (table 3 here)



3.2 Formulating retirement behavior as discrete control process

     I model retirement behavior as a discrete control process, a discrete-time

markovian decision problem where the control variable is restricted to a finite

set of alternatives. This framework represents workers' preferences        as a
discounted sum of a state-dependent utility function        u(x,i), and their
expectations as a markov transition probability n(xt+1Ix,i). "Blackwell's

Theorem" (Blackwell, (1965), Theorem 6) establishes that under very general

conditions, the solution to a markovian decision problem ta1es the form of a

decision rule it=ft(x) that specifies the agent's optimal action i in state

x. Note, however, that if the econometrician is assumed to observe the complete

state vector x, this framework implies that knowledge of the true utility
function u would enable him to solve for f and perfectly predict the agent's

choice in each state x, producing a degenerate statistical model. A possible


                                      17
solution is to "add an error term" in order to obtain a nondegenerate

statistical model of the form it(x)t. Unfortunately, such ad hoc solutions

are internally inconsistent: the economic model assumes that the agent behaves

optimally, yet the statistical implementation of the model assumes that the

agent randomly departs from optimal behavior. One wants a framework that can

account for the fact that the agent has information t.           that    the econometrician

doesn't observe. By incorporating such unobserved st8te varL'ihles one obtains a

non-degenerate, internally consistent statistical model generated by optimal

decision rules of the form i=f(x,c). Rust (1986) developed a formal
statistical framework for structural estimation of discrete markovian decision

problems with unobserved state variables. The following table summarizes the

basic structure of the problem:

                          (table 4 here)

The solution to the decision problem consists of a sequence of decision-rules or

controls                 that maximize expected discounted utility over an infinite

horizon.   Define the   v8lue function V by




(3.1)       V(x,E)        sup             (3t)tu(x f)+t(f)] x,t}
                           11
                                    j=t


where                           ,    f(x,t)EC(xt)   for all t,
                                                                 x,     and      and where

the expectation is taken with respect to the transition density for the

controlled stochastic process                  determined from    IT    and the transition

density p(x+1,tt+1x,tt,i). Under general conditions specified in Rust (1986),

the value function V will be the unique solution to Bellman's equation




                                               18
(3.2)     V(x,t)       max [u(x,i)+t(i)+EV(x,t,i)]
                       iEC(x)


where the function EV(x,t,i) is defined by



(3.3)     EV(x,E,i)
                          crV(y,)p(dy,diiIx,c,i).


Blackwell's Theorem implies that the solution II is st8tIonary 11f,f,f,. .   ., and
rnarkoviari   so the agent's optimal decision rule i=f(x,) depends only on the

current values of he state variables, determined by finding the alternative i

that attains the maximum in Bellman's equation



(3.4)         f(x,c)    argrnax [u(x,i)+c(i)+EV(x,t,i)].
                        iC(x)


The sample likelihood function is derived from the            conditional    choice

probabilities P(iIx), which are obtained from the agent's optimal decision rule

1f(x,t) by integrating out over the unobserved state variable c using the

conditional density of t given x. From equation (3.4) one can see that the

unobservables enter nonlinearly in the conditional expectation of the value

function,      EV(x,t,i).       Under standard distributional assumptions for the

unobservables,         will be continously distributed on RN, where NtC(x). This

raises serious computational difficulties, since calculation of P(ilx) will

ordinarily require N-dimensional numerical integration over t     in the optimal

decision rule defined by (3.4). However, the expected value function EV(x,t,i)

entering (3.4) will almost never have a convenient analytic formula, but must be

computed by numerically integrating the value function V in (3.3). The value




                                           19
function must in turn be numerically computed by solving V as a functional fixed

point to Bellman's equation (3.2). Since t       is   a vector of continuous state

variables, it must be discretized in order to compute V on a digital computer.

The discretization procedure approximates the true function V, an element of an

infinite-dimensional Banach space B, by a suitable vector in a high-dimensional

Euclidean space. Even with a very coarse grid approximation to the true

continuous distribution of     the dimensionality of the resulting discrete

approximation will generally be too large to be computationally tractable. These

computational problems motivated Rust (1986) to make the following assumption on

the joint transition density for



Conditional Independence Assumption: The markov transition density factors as



(3.5)
                                                               iEC(x).


This assumption involves two restrictions. First, x1 is a sufficient statistic

for       which implies that any statistical dependence between      and        is

transmitted entirely through the vector          Second, the probability density

for x1 depends only on x and i, and not on       Although (3.5) is a strong
assumption, Rust (1987) developed a simple LaGrange multiplier statistic to test

its validity. The payoff to assumption (3.5) is given by the following theorems

of Rust (1986).




                                     20
Theorem 1: Let G(v(x)Ix) denote the Soci8l Surplus function, defined by



 (3.6)        G(v(x)Ix) max [v(x,i)+t(i)Jq(dEx)
                             iEC(x)


              and let G.(v(x)Jx) denote the partial derivative of G(v(x)Ix) with

              respect to v(x,i). Then under assumption (35)3      the   conditional

              choice probability P(iFx) is given by


(3.7)         P(ilx)=G.(v(x)Ix)       iEC(x)


              where the function v is the unique fixed point to the contraction

              mapping v=T(v) defined by



(3.8)         v(x,i) =   u(x,i)+(G(v(y)y).n(dyx,j)    iEC(x).



             The function v is related to the value function V defined in (3, 1)

             and (3.2) by



(3.9)        V(x,t) = max [v(x,i)+(i)J.
                     itC(x)



Theorem 2: Under assumption (3.5) the controlled stochastic process ti,x} is

             markovian with transition density given by



(3.10)




        Products of the transition density given in (3.10) form the likelihood
function for the process                   This function is difficult to evaluate



                                          21
primarily because the conditional choice probability P(ilx) requires calculation

of the value function v as a fixed point of the contraction mapping (3.8).

Theorem 1 shows that from the standpoint of evaluating (3.10), there are two

major payoffs to assumption (3.5). First, it implies that c does not enter the

expected value function EV(x,t,i), so that t     enters V only additively as shown
in (3.9). This implies that the conditional choice probabilities P(ilx) for the

dynamic discrete choice model are given by exactly the same formulas as for

static discrete choice models, except that the relevant utility function is not

the static utility function u, but the fixed point v of the contraction mapping

(3.8). Second, assumption (3.5) implies that the dynamic programming problem can

be   solved   by   computing   the   fixed   point     v=T(v)   over   the         space

r=(x,i)xEvM,iEc(x)}. This is a much easier task than computing the fixed point

V(x,t) over the direct state space V (x,t)xE,tE1,N#C(x)} since £                    is   a


continuous-valued N-dimensional vector which must be discretized into         values

(where K is the diameter of the grid for t), whereas the argument i entering

v(x,i) is already discrete and assumes at most N values.

     Given a parametric specification for the unknown objects u, q and       11,     one

can "recover" the agent's underlying preferences (,u) and expectations (ii,q) by

finding parameter values that maximize the likelihood function, This suggests

the following "nested fixed point algorithm": an "outer" non-linear optimization

algorithm searches for parameter vector      0    that maximizes the likelihood

function, and an "inner" fixed point algorithm re-calculates the fixed point v0

of (3.8) each time the outer optimization algorithm updates its estimate of 8.

Rust (1986) showed that under certain regularity conditions, the NFXP algorithm

produces consistent and asymptotically normally distributed parameter estimates.

     Before presenting parametric specifications for u, q and i,         I    should


                                      22
mention some drawbacks of the discrete control formulation. Although I have

argued that there are good reasons for treating the employment decision dt as

discrete, both time t and the consumption decision           appear to be better

approximated by continuous variables. Ny apology is that          the   discrete

formulation seems to be the best available compromise given the computational

and data limitations   I   face. The computational limitation is that to my

knowledge, there are no estimation algorithms available for continuous-time

stochastic control problems, or for dynamic programming models where the

decision variable is mixed discrete/continuous.' The data limitation is that

individuals in the RHS are sampled at two year intervals with only limited

retrospective information on their states and decisions between survey dates. In

theory, one could formulate a very fine grain discrete-time model (regarded as a

close   approximation to the actual continuous-time decision process) and

"integrate out" the dates for which no data are available, but the computational

burden required to solve the model and perform the integrations appears to be

prohibitive. Therefore I     interpret the decisions it(dt,c) as "plans", as of

date t, that are revised at the same two-year time intervals as the survey

dates. Thus, the state variables x refer to the worker's state at time t, and

the decisions i(d,c) refers to the worker's plans regarding consumption and

labor force participation over the next two years. The plans need not be

fulfilled, hence there will be a conditional probability distribution for the

state x1 at time t+l conditional on the current state   x, and plan i(d,c)
chosen at time t. Under this interpretation it is much more natural to regard

the choice of a "consumption plan" c as an interval rather than a specific

number since there will be unforseen future events that cause actual consumption

to deviate from the plan. The use of consumption intervals also helps mitigate


                                      23
the effects of the inevitable errors in variables in the constructed consumption

data.5 Since I do not actually observe the consumption t1plan" chosen by the

worker in the RHS, in the empirical implementation of the model I will assume

that the consumption intervals are sufficiently wide that the ex post realized

consumption interval coincides with the ex ante plan.



3.3 Specification of Workers' Preferences

     The following table summarizes the formulation of the retirement problem as

a discrete control process.

                         (table 5 here)

Death, quite naturally, is treated as an absorbing state and the bequest

function specifies the utility of entering this state. The dynamic programming

problem proceeds by backward induction from the (uncertain) age of death over

two-year time intervals back to an initial age, 58, the age of the youngest

respondent in the first wave of the RHS.

     It remains to specify the functional forms for b, u, , and   q.' The NFXP

algorithm places no restrictions on the functional forms for b, u, and n but

computational tractability appears to require that the         distribution   of

unobservables q be a member of McFadden's (1981) "Generalized Extreme Value"

(GEV) family.7 The GEV family is closed under the operation of maximization,

leading to convenient closed-form expressions for the social surplus function

(3.6) and its derivatives, the choice probabilities (3.7). This feature greatly

simplifies the NFXP algorithm, avoiding the numerical integrations that are

normally required for other multivariate distributions.   I chose a particular

member of this family whose cumulative distribution function Q(t,8) is given

below


                                      24
                                3       J
(3.11)       Q(c,04) =   exp-Z      [
                                        Z
                                            exp{t(6,j)/O45}04Ei},         6=1,2,3,
                               5=1 j=1




Since the corresponding density q does riot depend on x,            it follows that the

unobserved state variables are serially independent in this specification.

Formula (3.11) includes the standard multivarjate extreme value distribution         as

a special case when 845=13 5=1,2,3. The latter distribution satisfies the well-

known hA   property:   the components t(5,j) and E(d,c) are contemporaneously
independent when                            dhen 8 are not all equal to 1 one obtains a

pattern of contemporaneous correlation in the components of           c represented by
the following choice tree

                         (figure 2 here)

Thus, (3.11) allows correlation in the unobserved state variables affecting the

consumption decision c given the labor supply decision d, but assumes
independence in unobserved state variables corresponding to different labor

supply choices. Formula (3.11) yields the following nested Jogit formulas for

the conditional choice probabilities



(3.12)      P(d,cIx,O)P(cx,d,8)P(dx,8)



where P(c!x,d,8) and P(d!x,O) are given by




(3.13)     P(cx,d,O) =         exPvO(x,c,d)/84d}
                          J
                          Z exPv8(x,j)d)/O4}
                         j=1



                                                25
(3.14)      P(djx,O) =          exptl(d)04d}
                           3
                           Z exp1I(6)O45
                          6=1


and   where the Inclusive V8lue, 1(d),     is    defined by




                          J
(3.15)       1(d)   ln[Z expvO(x,d,j)/O4d}]               d1,2,3.
                         j=l



Finally (3.11) yields an explicit formula for the fixed point condition (3.8)




(3.16)        v8(x,d,c) =

                                 ! [! expv0(y,6,j)/O45fl°4ó](dyx,d,c,83)
              u(x,d,c,O2)+fy ln[6=1 j=1


with   the implicit "terminal condition" that v8(x,d,c)b(w,ms,01) if hs"dead".

       It remains to specify the functional forms for the bequest and utility

functions, b and u.            I assume that the bequest function has the following

functional form




(3.17)        b(w,ms,8i)w°h1(912+Oi3ms)




The    coefficient O will reflect a diminishing or increasing marginal utility of


                                               26
bequests depending on whether          is greater or less than 1. The David and

?lenchik study discussed in section 2.3 suggests that possibly 811>1. Presumably

a married worker obtains greater utility from bequests to remaining spouse than

from bequests to friends, institutions, or the government. Thus, I expect that

013 is positive.

     The utility function is slightly more complicated; I assume that it has the

following functional form




(3.18)      u(d,c,e,h,a,ms,02) =
            3     3
                      '
                                           ][e°2hh][O2i2+O2ia+O2ims+O2i5hsJ
           i=1 j=l




According to (3.18), utility is a function of consumption, c, and the level of
leisure,        e. Ranking the employment states as lft, 2pt, and 3ne, I expect the

coefficient           should be negative for a leisure lover,   arid   positive   for a
"workaholic't. The coefficient 8210 should be positive and less than 1 if there

is diminishing marginal utility of consumption. The basic utility obtained from

consumption and leisure is modified by the last factor in (3.18) which accounts

for health status, age, marital status, and the presence of children. Ranking

the health states as lgood health, 2fair health, 3disabled, I expect that the

coefficient 02 should be negative; being in worse health diminishes the

utility obtained from consumption or leisure (or work, if he is a work-lover).

It is not clear what sign to expect for the coefficient 07j3 on the age

variable. Perhaps as one gets older, one's remaining lifetime becomes more

precious, suggesting a positive coefficient. However aging might also result in




                                          27
general mental and physical deterioration independent of that captured by the

health variable, suggesting a negative sign. One would ordinarily expect the

presence of a spouse would increase the worker's utility, suggesting a positive

value for 02Ih

    The final term in (3.18) is the double summation term that reflects the

monetary and psychic "search costs" of changing employment states. Perhaps the

hardest transition to make is from the retired state to find a new full-time

job. This suggests the coefficient on I{d=1,e31 should be a large negative

number, reflecting the data in table I of section 2.5 that very few retired

workers ever "unretire" and return to work at a full-time job. On the ether

hand, it should be relatively easy to make the reverse transition and retire

from either a full or part-time job; Id3,e1 or Id3,e2}. Thus, the
coefficients on these terms should be positive, possibly reflecting the utility

value of any retirement bonuses or incentives. I would also expect that it is

relatively easier to move into a part-time job from a full-time job than vice

versa, so I expect the coefficient on I[d2,e1) to exceed the coefficient for

Idl,e2}. To the extent that workers desire to make a gradual transition from

work to retirement, the coefficient on I{d2,efl should be positive, reflecting

the prevalence of "partial retirement" discussed in section 2.5. The remaining

coefficients reflect the utility costs of decisions to remain in the current

employment state; Id3,e3J, Id2,e21, and I[d1,el}. For leisure lovers,
there should be disutility associated with the decision to continue working,

hence I expect the coefficient on I{dl,el to be negative, but substantially

less than coefficients for Itdl,e2) or Idl,e3}. The workers who do
partially retire might enjoy the experience, so it is possible that the

coefficient for Id2,e21 is positive. In any case, it should be easier to


                                     28
remain on a current part-time job than to find a new one, so the coefficient for

Id=2,e=2} should exceed the coefficients for Itd=2,e=lJ or I1d2,e=3. Of all

the decisions, it is perhaps easiest to remain retired; thus at least for

leisure lovers I expect that the coefficient for I{d=3,e=3} to be positive.

    The primary source of population heterogeneity that I wish to account for

is the distinction between work lovers and leisure lovers. Rather than treat

this as unobserved heterogeneity, one can use the responses from attitudinal

questions in the RHS to classify each worker as a "work lover" or "leisure

lover", interacting this taste variable with the coefficients of u that can be

expected to differ between work lovers and leisure lovers. One can account for

additional heterogeneity by making certain parameters functions of time-

invariant socio-demographic variables, the most important of which are race and

the worker's main career occupation and industry.



3.4 Specification of workers' expectations

     Having specified the general form of the worker's per period objective

function, it remains to specify the law of motion for the state variables. I

assume that the observed state vector                                         evolves

according to a parametric markov transition density 1T(xt+lIxt,it,03) that

depends on the worker's consumption and labor supply decision i(d,c). The

transition density embodies the worker's expectations about his future health,

his lifespan, and the future levels of income and his stock of wealth. More

precisely, I assume that workers' individual expectations about future values of

the state variables coincide with the population behavior of these variables (as

represented by the estimated transition density 11)   within   each socio-demographic

stratum.


                                      29
       Since the transition probability       iT    only depends on observable variables
          one could in principle use non-parametric methods to estimate it. With

a discrete state space, the non-parametric estimate of ir(x+1Ixt,it) is simply

the number of transitions (x+i,xt,it) divided by the total number                     of


transitions of the form                   summed over all states y. However with a

large number of discrete cells and a limited amount of data, the non-parametric

estimate of iT    will   be identically zero for many transitions (xt+i,x,it) even

though it is clear that such transitions can actually occur with positive

probability. Therefore it is preferable to use parametric functional forms for i

that    "smooth out" the data on state transitions to yield positive estimates for

all transition probabilities that are logically possible. It is also desirable

to     use flexible functional forms that            don't impose arbitrary a priori

restrictions on possible transitions. The conditional logit           model (with full

sets of alternative-specific dummies and sufficient terms for interactions of

different explanatory variables) is an ideal candidate. However, given the very

large number of possible states for                a single joint estimation of n is out

of the question. It is much simpler to decompose             as a product of conditional

probabilities for each component x(m), resulting             in a series of tractable

conditional logit estimations where the number of alternatives equals the

(relatively small) number of values that each component x(m) can assume.            Since

a multivariate probability density can always be decomposed as a product of the

conditional and marginal densities of its components, there is no loss in

generality in this approach.

       The state variable a representing the worker's age has the simplest law of

motion: a÷ia+2. To keep a in a finite number of cells, I will assume that




                                         30
there is a maximum age of say 98 years which is treated as an absorbing state.

This does not necessarily imply that all people die with probability 1 at age

98, rather the model simply does not account for further increases in the

mortality hazard beyond age 98. For all practical purposes, however, the
mortality rate for men over age 90 is so high that there is no effective loss in

generality from assuming that all workers die with probability 1 at age 98, an

assumption that leads to substantial computational simplifications as I show in

section 4. Therefore I assume that life ends with probability 1   at age 98 or
before, implying that a takes on 20 values in increments of 2 from a starting

age of 58.

   The state variable ht representing health takes on one of four values,

l,2,3,4}, where 1 denotes good health, 2 denotes a health condition which the

respondent reports to limit his ability to get around or work (yet which is not

so severe that the worker is actually disabled), 3 denotes that the worker has

been certified by a doctor to be disabled (and hence is not working and is

eligible for social security disability benefits), and 4 denotes the absorbing

state of death. States 1 and 2 are obviously somewhat subjective in nature.

State 3, on the other hand, is much less subjective since social security has

fairly strict rules regarding doctor certification of disability in order for a

worker to receive disability benefits. According to social security rules, any

person receiving disability benefits cannot work, so the employment state for a

person with h3 should be the singleton ene1. It is possible, however, for a

disabled person to try to search for a job at the risk of losing his disability

benefits. Thus, even though a person is disabled I allow the worker the full set

of employment decisions, d[ft,pt,ne}. This allows me (in at least a crude way)




                                     31
to study the effect of disability insurance on workers' incentives to re-enter

the labor force.     Transitions between health states l,2,31 obey a parametric

transition probability of the form



(3.19)



which gives the probability of health next period as a function of health this

period, age, marital status, employment status, wealth, and the labor supply and

consumption decisions. The function T can be taken to have a trinomial logit

form, with separate coefficients for each of the independent variables and their

interactions. The estimated health transition probability can be interpreted as

accounting for workers' perceptions of the "leniency" of admission to the

disability program. To see this, note that the conditional probability that

ht+13 given ht=2 can be interpreted as a worker's chances of getting onto the

disability roles given that he is not in good health at time t.     A   separate

binomial logit probability function captures workers' mortality assessments as a

function of their age and other state variables x.

     A binomial logit probability function will also be used to capture the

stochastic process for ms, worker marital status, as a function of the state

variables x and decision variables (ct,d). Marital status takes on two states,

married or single. A married man may lose his wife through death or divorce, but

once single, is allowed to remarry.

     The state variable e representing the worker's employment status takes on

three values [ft,pt,ne), corresponding to full-time work, part-time work, and

not in the labor force, respectively. The conditional probability density for

e+1 has a trinomial logit form



                                      32
(3.20)       .n(ele,a,ms,w,h,y,d;o).


It is particularly important to allow for the effects of age and health on re-

employment     probabilities. Wealth and income are included as proxys for

unobserved job skills which may make the worker more employable: presumably

wealthier, higher income workers have better job skills and are thus more

employable. I include last period employment status e to control for any

structural state dependence due to past lapses into unemployment or retirement.

Presumably there is more "stigma" to being unemployed rather than retired, so

that an unemployed worker might face lower probabilities of re-employment than a

retired person. Thus, the model might be able to provide some insight into the

"discouraged worker effect" wherein a worker decides to retire rather than face

the frustration of trying to search for a new job. I expect that a workers'

chance of being fired from his current job to increase with age and poor health,

to decrease with "experience" as proxied by his current income and wealth, y

and w. I also expect that full-time jobs to be more secure than part-time jobs.

Handatory retirement beyond a certain age can be incorporated as a probability 1

chance of being fired when a exceeds the retirement age.

     It remains to describe the transition probability function for wealth, w.

The standard budget equation is that wealth next period equals wealth this

period plus earnings, income from investments, less consmuption expenditures:



(3.21)



Thus, predicting next period's wealth reduces to predicting next period's


                                      33
earnings conditional on a specific choice of consumption interval c. This

requires estimating a transition density for total income y of the form



(3.22)



Here the function ii can be thought of as an earnings function which predicts the

worker's earnings and investment income over the next two years as a function of

his observed state x (including his last period income           and employment

decision d. The earnings function captures workers' expectations about their

future earnings streams and the retirement or disability benefits due to them

under social security. For example, if the worker is currently employed full-

time (eft). then TT will predict his next period earnings on his job. These

earnings will be a function of his age and health and level of job experience.

Wealth w and income y are included as proxies for job skills, since presumably

wealth, job earnings and "ability/experience" are highly correlated. n also

includes investment income on existing wealth,       where   is a random rate of

return on the worker's investment portfolio. Wealth will be measured to include

both real and financial wealth, including real estate, the cash value of

insurance policies, and other personal property such as automobiles and

furniture, etc.   If the worker is currently unemployed and searching for work

(dpt or d=ft, and ene), then the earnings function predicts the worker's UI

benefits. If the worker is retired, (ene and a62), then n predicts the

worker's social security benefits. These benefits are a function of the worker's

average monthly wage, aw (which determines his primary insurance amount and

benefits), and his marital status, ms. i also predicts payments from Social




                                      34
Security disability insurance and Medicare in the event the worker is disabled

or in bad health, and the death benefit in the event the worker dies. Thus, the

earnings function iT   completely   embodies the worker'.s expectations of his future

earnings streams under      all      eventu8lities,    retirement,   employment,   or

unemployment, and includes contingent payments for health and life insurance.

Changes in social security policy, such as changes in benefit levels or

retirement ages can be represented through appropriate changes in the earnings

function. One can simulate the effects of changes in social security policy by

approriately altering the earnings function           and recomputing the new optimal

retirement strategy. This allows one to quantify how much workers are "hurt" by

a policy change by measuring the lump-sum fee workers would be willing to pay in

order to keep the existing social security rules intact, and to measure how the

policy change alters the probability of retirement for each configuration of the

state variables.

     The final state variable is the average monthly wage, awe. As an average of

lifetime earnings, aw will be fairly insensitive to earnings levels and labor

supply choices at the end of the worker's career, especially once it is

discretized. Thus, there are no real dynamics for aw; it is simply an indicator

of the level of benefits coming due to the worker. There is some question as to

whether the average wage need even be included in the model since it should be

very highly correlated with the earnings y on the worker's full-time job and

wealth, w. This is an empirical issue. If aw can be adequately proxied by

and w, I would eliminate it as a state variable to conserve on the

dimensionality of the fixed point problem.




                                         35
4. Numerical computation of the dynamic programming model

        As described in section 3, the revealed preference problem reduces to

estimation of the unknown parameter vector 0(,01,02,03,0,), where O<<l is the

worker's intertemporal discount factor, 0 are the parameters entering the

bequest function b, 82 are the parameters entering the utility function u,               03

are the parameters of the transition probability for the observed state

variables iT, and 0, are the parameters of the transition probability for the

unobserved state variables q. The unknown parameters can be estimated be maximum

likelihood method using the following three step procedure:

 p_j Estimate the vector 0 entering the transition density 1T(xt+lxt,it,03)
         using the partial likelihood function L1(03) defined by


                      K    5
(4.1)      L1(03)     II   TI

                    kl = ir(x+i kt k'1t k'°
          (where k indexes individuals in the RHS sample)
Step 2 Using the initial consistent estimate 03 from step 1, estimate
      (,O1,02,8) using the partial likelihood function L2(,81,02,ô3,84)
         defined by


                                     K    5
(4.2)      L2(,81,62,3,0)            11
                                          11 P(i ktk,,0102,03s04fl
                                    k=l t=1


         where P is defined by (3.12)-(3.15) and the fixed point condition (3.16)


Step 3 To get correct estimated standard errors and asymptotically efficient
       parameter estimates for 8, compute 1 Newton-step from the initial
         consistent estimate Ô      using     the full likelihood function Lf(O) defined by




(4.3)     Lf(O)                 P(it÷1kIxt+1k,0)iT(xt+1kjxtk,itk03)
                    k=l




                                                 36
    The nested fixed point algorithm is required only in steps 2 and 3 in order

to compute the value function v8 enteringthe conditional choice probabilities

P. This requires recomputing the fixed point v0 of the contraction mapping

(3.16) each time the outer nonlinear maximization algorithm computes new values

for 0. As discussed in section 3, if there are continuous state variables, then

the fixed point v8 is an element of an infinite-dimensional Bariach space B. The

computational strategy is to discretize the continuous state variables,      and in

effect, approximate the infinite-dimensional space B by a high-dimensional

Euclidean   space RN. The dimension of the fixed    point problem N is equal to the

number of possible values that I and the discretized values       that x can assume.

Suppose that w    is discretized into 100 cells,      into 5 cells, and c into

cells. Assuming that aw can be proxied by w and                   the remaining state

variables assume the following number of values: h:4, a:2O, e:S, ms:2, d:3.

The implied fixed point dimension is                                      Thus, a 3.6

million   dimensional fixed   point must be repeatedly recalculated in the fixed

point subroutine of the nested fixed point algorithm during the course of the

parameter search. It Is therefore necessary to find algorithms to compute high-

dimensional    fixed points as rapidly as possible, say, in less than 30 seconds on
a supercomputer such as the Cray-2.
     By Theorem I the fixed point problem can be written as vT(v), where the

contraction operator T is defined in formula (3.16). There are two principal

algorithms for computing contraction fixed points: contraction iterations and

Newton-KantoroVich      iterations.   Contraction    iterations    involve   repeated

evaluations of the contraction mapping T starting from an arbitrary initial

estimate v0:



                                         37
(4.4)                                          contraction iteration
            vk+lT(vk)


The Newton-Kantorovich method converts the fixed point problem into the problem

of finding a zero of a nonlinear operator, (l-T)(v)=D, where 1 is the identity

operator on B and 0 is the zero element of B. This nonlinear equation is then

solved for v using Newton's method:



(4.5)                                          Newton-Xantorovich iteration
            vk+lvk-[I-T'(vk)I 11IT)(vk)


where T'(vk) is the Frchet derivative of T with respect to v evaluated at the

point Vk. The method of successive approximations is guaranteed to converge for

contraction mappings, however, the convergence is very slow (especially when

is close to 1). Newton's method has a very rapid quadratic rate of convergence,

however the method is only guaranteed to work in a "domain of attraction" of

points sufficiently close to the true fixed point v. The other disadvantage of

Newton's method is that one must solve an NxN linear system involving the matrix

[I_T'(vk)ll. For large N the time and storage required to solve the linear system

becomes prohibitive.

        Although the fixed point problem looks formidahie at first glance, the

retirement problem has special structure that can he exploited in order to

dramatically reduce the computational burden of the fixed point problem. There

are two principal features of the retirement problem that can be effectively

exploited: 1) using the absorbing state of death to induce a backward recursion

for the value function, and 2) exploiting the sparsity structure of the

transition probability matrix representation of n, in particular exploiting the


                                      38
deterministic transitions for at and the banded structure of the wealth

transition probabilities. The first feature is based on the observation that in

the absorbing state of death the value function has an 8 priori known functional

form: v0=b. Therefore v8 need only be calcu]ated for the 3 remaining health

states, reducing the effective dimension of the problem from N3.6 million to

N=2.7   million.   Under the additional assumption that worker's die with

probability 1 beyond some fixed age (say 98), one can compute the fixed point
                                                                                v8
in a single contraction iteration, essentially by bach'ards induction from the

last year of life (in this case, age 98). From an economic perspective, this is

a relatively innocuous assumption since extremely few workers live beyond age

90. However, without this assumption one is faced with an infinite-horizon

problem since the model places no upper bound on the lifespan of the worker.    In

this case a combination of contraction and Newton-Kantorovich iterations are

required in order to compute v0, increasing the required computer time by

several orders of magnitude. Since the assumption of fixed lifespan is

relatively innocuous and leads to substantial computational simplications, I

will adopt it in my empirical work. The second feature, exploiting the sparsity

structure, allows one to economize on the number of storage locations required

to hold the matrix representation of i and significantly reduce the number of

operations needed to evaluate the contraction mapping T (3.16) or solve the NxN

linear system in the Newton-Xantorovich iteration (4.5).

     To understand the latter point, consider the work involved in computing a

single evaluation of the contraction mapping T. Once the state vector x is

discretized, the majority of the work is the required integration with respect

to the transition probability u. This is         equivalent   to   left   matrix

multiplication of the "vectorized" integrand by the matrix representation of ii.


                                      39
HatriX multiplication is a very simple operation that is easily "vectorized" for

maximum efficiency on   a   vector processor like the Cray-2. However, such matrix-

vector multiplications require order N2 multiplications and additions, where N

is the number of discrete cells that x can assume. Even a machine that can

multiply at 400 megafiops (400 million floating point operations per second) can

get quickly bogged down when N exceeds several hundred thousand. It is therefore

essential to reduce the total number of multiplications by exploiting the

sparsity of the matrix representation of n.     Unfortunately, standard algebraic

techniques for sparse matrices typically do not perform well on vector

processors owing to the irregular memory reference patterns for their elements,

creating "bank conflicts" that prevent the processors from running at maximum

efficiency with continuously full vector pipelines. For example, even after

extensive modification and optimization of standard sparse linear equation

solvers, the resulting code typically runs slower than 12 megaflops on the Cray-

1 (Duff, (1984)). This is significantly slower than the Cray-i's peak rates of

160 megflops on dense linear algebra problems. The trick, then, is to exploit

the sparsity structure of the transition matrix to reduce the total number of

operations while at the same time attempting to keep the non-zero elements in a

"locally dense" configuration so they can be fed to the vector registers in a

continuous stream, allowing the processors to run uninterrupted at nearly peak

speed.

     Figures 3 through 8 depict different "sparsity patterns" for the matrix

representation of n depending on the ordering of the component state variables

in x. 11 can be regarded as a direct product of 3 types of transition matrices,

1) a circulant matrix for a, 2) a banded matrix for w, and 3) a dense matrix




                                          40
representing the joint transition matrix for the remaining state variables.

These "component" matrices are depicted in figure 3. By varying the order of

these component matrices in the construction of the direct product, one obtains

different sparsity patterns for i.             Figures   4, 5, and 6 depict the sparsity

patterns for the orderings (d,w,a), (w,a,d), and (a,d,w), respectively. None of

these orderings is particularly desirable, for they all lead to fairly irregular

and dispersed memory reference patterns. Figure 7 depicts the "optimal" sparsity

pattern, (a,w,d), which produces the maximum amount of local density in the

storage pattern for the matrix elements. The matrix-vector multiplication under

this structure occurs in an outer do-loop over age values I          to 20, calling a
block-banded matrix multiplication subroutine specially designed to keep the

vector pipelines continuously full. Figure 8 shows the                 packed    storage

arrangement for the block banded matrices that form the off-diagonal sectors of

   This arrangement allows one to fully exploit the sparsity of i        while   keeping

the vector processor running at nearly maximum efficiency.

                 (figures 3,4,5,6,7,8 here)

     Exploitation of sparsity patterns is particularly important in the infinite

horizon case. For sufficiently high discount factors           it will be optimal to use

Newton-Kantorovich iterations rather than contraction iterations alone, but the

former requires the solution of the linear system involving the matrix [I-

T'(v)]. However it is easy to see that T'(v) is simply             times the transition

probability matrix for the controlled process                which is isomorphic to the

basic transition matrix for it.    Thus, for each ordering of the underlying state
variables, the matrix [I-T'(v)J will have the same sparsity pattern as the

matrix representation of it   in   figures 4 through 7 except for the l's along the

diagonal. Under the "optimal" ordering (a,w,d), one can see from figure 8 that


                                          41
except for the lower (a,a) block, this matrix [I-T'(v)J is already in upper

triangular   form.   Thus, solving the linear system only requires an LU
factorization of the lower (a,a) block followed by recursive back-substitution

to compute the solution for age groups a-I to 1. Since LU factorization is an

order N3 operation, the time saved under the optimal ordering is proportional to

a3, which amounts to a speed-up of 8,000 times when a20. Further speed-ups can

be obtained by accounting for the block-banded structure of the (a,a) block of

[I-T'(v)]. I have designed a block elimination algorithm which LU factors the

(a,a) block of [l-T'(v)] using a banded Crout decomposition, with elimination

operations that are performed on dxd blocks instead of individual matrix

elements. The matrix [l-T'(v)) has sufficient diagonal dominance that the block

elimination algorithm is numerically stable even though pivot operations only

occurs within the elementary dxd block operations of the block elimination

procedure. Thus, by determining the optimal ordering of state variables one can

design a special linear equation algorithm that fully exploits the sparsity

structure of the [I-T'(v)] matrix while keeping the vector processors running

continuously at nearly peak efficiency. This fortiutous situation allows one to

solve linear systems that are orders of magnitude larger than the largest

systems solvable using standard sparse matrix software.

     I conclude with table 6 which presents timings of the fixed point algorithm

on the Cray-2. As one can see, the "finite horizon" assumption that workers die

with probability 1    after age 98 allows one to expand the dimension of the

problem by an order of magnitude. The average performance rate of 220 megaflops

is good performance for a single processor bank of the Cray-2.' Overall table 6

demonstrates that one can exploit the power of the supercomputer and the special

structure of the fixed point problem to permit estimation of a fairly realistic


                                     42
model of retirement behavior. In future work I plan to usc this technology to

actually estimate the unknown parameters of the model.

                          (table 6 here)




                                      43
"This research is pert of an NBER project on the economics of aging
administered by David Wise, JFK School, Harvard University funded by
National Institute for Aging grant 3 P01 AG05842-01. Cpu time on the
Cray-2 supercornputer was provided under grant SES-8419570 of the
National Science Foundation.

' Burtless and Moffitt (1984) and Gustman and Steinmeier (1986) provided
two of the most recent structural analyses of retirement behavior.
Burtless and Moffitt allowed state-dependent preferences, but simplified
the sequential decision problem by assuming that pre- and post-
retirement consumption levels are fixed, leading to a  two-stage
approximation to the sequential labor supply/consumption decision.
Gustman and Steinmeier estimated a fully sequential continuous-time
model of consumption and labor supply, however they assumed perfect
certainty and perfect capital markets.

2The authors reported, however, that "the correspondence among outcomes
based on these alternative definitions (i.e. objective measures based
on reductions in hours or wages) is relatively close, and the main
conclusions of the paper remain unchanged using the alternative measure"
(footnote 7, page 405).

3j omit certain regularity conditions needed to insure existence of an
optimal stationary policy. For details, see Rust (1986).

There have been recent advances in estimation methods for static
discrete/continuous choice models by Dubin and McFadden (1984), and
Haneman (1984). However it is unclear whether these methods will extend
to dynamic programming models. An alternative possibility is to attempt
to merge the "orthogonality condition" method of Hansen and Singleton
(1982) with the discrete choice framework of Rust (1986). However a
difficulty with this approach has been to specify a tractable stochastic
process for the continuum of unobservables corresponding to each
possible  value  of the continuous choice variable. Without such
unobservables, one obtains a statistically degenerate model where the
continuous choice variable is an exact function of other observed
variables in the model.

 The RHS has incomplete data on consumption expenditures. Rather than
use this data directly, one can compute consumption from the budget
equation w +iwt+ytc since both income and wealth are measured much
more compee1y and accurately in the RHS. An unfortunate complication
is that the RHS records total income only for even numbered years.
Therefore one must impute income in odd-numbered years based on
retrospective information on labor force status in those years, and a
matched data file on social security earnings available for both even
and odd numbered years.

'These functional forms presented should be viewed as first guesses as
to which specifications will "work". The final specification will be
chosen from the results of a specification search over alternative
functional forms using the NFXP algorithm.

'Recent advances in simulation estimators by McFadden (1986) and Fakes
and Pollard (1986) offer the hope of significantly extending the range
of estimable distributions q for the unobservables. However it is not
clear whether their methods, which depend heavily on the having the
simulation errors enter linearly and additively separably, directly
extends to allow simulation instead of integration in the fixed point
condition (3.8). In that case the simulation error is no longer
additively separable, and the simulations must increase with the sample
size to avoid inconsistency due to non-linear "errors in variables".

'A simple check of the numerical accuracy of the method is to compute
the fixed point with b and u identically equal to 1. It is easy to see
that in this case v0=l/(l-), so the numerical results of the algorithm
can be checked against this exact solution. Running the algorithm in 64
bit single precision with .999999 I found the computed solution agreed
with the theoretical solution to 12 significant digits.

'A simulation analysis of the Cray-2 processor (on a Macintosh PC) by
Lawrence Liddiard (1986) suggests that a single processor .an achieve a
maximum rate of 433 megaflops for dense matrix multiplication. In
practice the highest rates that have been recorded for the University of
Minnesota Cray-2 have been on the order of 360 megaflops. The single
processor average of 220 megaflops reported in table 6 has been acheived
using standard library kernels without special assembly language coding
to optimize the flow of data from common memory to local memory and the
vector registers and back to common memory. The easiest way to get
significant speed increases is to utilize all four processors of the
Cray-2 simultaneously. The fixed point computation can be fairly easily
decomposed into sets of four independent subtasks (e.g. a separate
processor is dedicated to computing the fixed point v0 and the remaining
processors assigned to computing each of the derivatives av0/o),
allowing a sustainable processing rate of approaching 880 megflops.
                Table 1: Distributions of Retirement Sequences


        Sequence         Frequency          Sequence           Frequency


         ffrr              16.2%             frxx                 1.6%
         ffff              14.4              rrrx                 1.5
         fffr              11.2              fppp                 1.4
         rrrr               8.6              frrx                 1.1
         frrr               7.3              prrr                 1.1
         ffxx               5.4              ffrp                 1.1
         fffp               4.8              ffpx                 0.7
         ffpp               2.8              ffpf                 0.6
         ffpr               2.8              fppr                 0.5
         ffrx               2.5              pqrr                 0.5
         rrxx               2.2             others                9.8
         fprr               2.1




                    Table 2: Labor Market Re-entry Rates


          One year re-entry rates         Two year re-entry rates


        Self-described                  Self-described
        retired or un-   Not full-      retired or un-     Not full-
Age     able to work     time worker    able uo work       time worker


45-59       18.54          52.55            4.00              53.76
50-54       16.23          46.93           17.68              41.03
55-59       15.94          31.85           10.31              25.23
60-64       13.37          15.45            9.57               7.15
65-69       11.74           5.02            9.04               2.94
Total       14.53          29.48           10.13              16.72




Source: Custman and Steinmeier (1986), page 566. The first letter in the
retirement sequence is the individual's status in 1969, the first year .pf the
RHS. The second, third, and fourth letters indicate their status in 1971,
1973, and 1975, respectively. The notation of the letters is: f-working full-
time, p-working part,time, r-fully retired, x-status indeterminant. Sequences
with a frequency less than 0.5% were grouped in the category "others".
                  Table 3: Accounting for Labor Force Transitions
                             in the Dynamic Programming Node)

     Employment       Employment
     state, e         decision, dt                  Interpretation


1.      ft                ft           continue working at current full-time job


2.      ft               Pt            quit current fu]l-time job, search for a
                                       new part-time job
3.      ft               ne            if a62, retire; if a<62 and disabled,
                                       receive disability insnrance; otherwise
                                       exit labor force

4.     pt                ft            quit current part-time job and search for
                                       a full-time job

5.     pt                pt            continue working at current   part-time job
6.     Pt                ne            if a62, retire; if at<62 and disabled,
                                       collect disability insurance; otherwise
                                       exit labor force

7.     ne                ft            unemployed, disabled, or retired worker
                                       searching for full-time job
8.     ne                pt            unemployed, disabled, or retired worker
                                       searching for part-time job
9.     ne                ne            if a 62, remain retired; if a<62 and
                                       disabled, collect disability insurance;
                                       otherwise remain out of labor force
                 Table 4: Summary of Notation for Discrete Control Problem

Symbol                                       Interpretation


                           Choice set; a finite set of feasible values for the
C(x)                       control variable    when the observed state variable
                            is x.
                            A #C(x)_dimensional vector of state variables
                            observed by the agent hut not by the econometrician.
                            t (I) is interpreted as an unobserved component of
                            utility of alternative i in time period t.

xx(l),. . .     ,x(Hfl      An H-dimensional vector of state variables observed by
                            the agent and econometrician.

                            Realized single period utility obtained in state
u(x,i)+t(i)                 (xt,t) when alternative i is chosen.

                            Markov transition density for next period state
                            variable when alternative i is chosen and when the
                            current state is (x,c).


                   Table 5: Summary of the Retirement Decision Problem


          Item                                          Notation


1. Choice set                       C(x)l,2,3@fc1,.. .    ,c},     lft, 2pt, 3ne

2. Control vector                                                        ..
                                    i=(d,ct); dE{l,2,3, cEc' ,.
3. State vector (observed)

4. State vector (unobserved)

5. Bequest function                 b(wt,ms,cst,Oi)
6. Utility function

7. Transition density (x)           1T(xt+1Ixt,it,03)
                                                                   see (3.11)
8. Transition density (t)           q(cJx,O4)GEV(C(x),O4)
9. Parameter vector                 O(B,e1,O2,O3,O)1 1x(1+X1+K24-X,+X)
                Table 6: Fixed Point Computation Times on the Crv-2

                                        Finite                 Infinite
             Item                      Horizon                 Horizon


Age categories,            a              20                          20

Wealth categories,         w             100                      ]00

Dense block size,          d              50                          90

Consumption levels,       /c               0                           5


Labor decisions,                           3                           3


Maximum bandwidth (blocks)                10                          10


Fixed point dimension, N               300,000                 2,700,000

CPU   time    (seconds)                  14.3                     6.9

Average rate (megaflops)                 198                      220




  Times are for 1 processor on the University of Minnesota 4 processor Cray-2
  with 256 million word common memory.
                   MEN, 45-54 YEARS OLD
     9
     8
     7
I-
z 6
w
0    5
w 4
     3
     2
     1


     057      62       67               72   77   82
                             YEAR



                   MEN, 55-64 YEARS OLD
     35


     25
I—
z 20
Lu
0
uJ   15
a-
     10
      5

      0                                           82
         57   62        67              72   77
                             YEAR

                             FIGURE 1
               F                  NE




                                                   CI
Cl I   S   S       S   S      I        I   S   S




                   FIGURE 2
                                      State Transition Matrices
            a-   matrix                           w- matrix                                            d-matrix
           (circulant)                            (banded)                                                   (dense)
       I                                   d1 u1 u1                                        '11   '12   1j3
                                                                                                              • • •    'id
                                                                                                       S      S   S
            I                                d2   l         2                              !122                        '2d
                 1                         '1 '2 d3 Ut          U2
                                                                                           .                           .
                                                                                           S                           S
-n
'—4
                     I                        j   '2   d4 U1 U2
G)                                                                                         S                            S
                          1                       11    1       d5 u1        U2
P1
                                                        S       S       S    S     S
(.-)                          1
                                           ——
                                  1                                 1   2    W-1       I
                                                                                                       S      S   S
                                  1                                     '1   '2            tdl'd2                      1dd
                                                  TYdd
                (axa)                                  (wxw)                                                 (dxd)
SPARSITY PATTERN:
     (d,w,a)
      FIGURE 4
                _affi_
                rramaa
SPARSITY PATTERN:
     (w,a,d)

     FIGURE 5
           0,
           .
           Cl)
           —
      a,   —I
C.,   —

rn    -
a,
           -4
           'ii
           z
SPARSITY PATTERN:
     (a,w,d)




     FIGURE 7
       stflIsJ            • JflM.                     rJngvi              IJfl ODRP1IJU                                            IVUM        I   lilA
                                      w       dxd blocks                                                        J.+u+1 dxd blocks
                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                .
 Dl   U11   U112   U113                                                                                         D1        U1   U12 U13
                                                                                                                                                    0           0
                                                                                                                                                            -
L21    D2 U21 U22 U23                                                                                       L2,1          02           U22 U23                  0
                                                                                                                               U2,1
L31 L32
      L41 L42

             t;    U3,1 U32 U33
                   D4     U1 U42      U43

                                                                                                            L L
                                                                                                            —i        --_-         0 U             U
                                                                                                                                                       1?
                                                                                                                                                            U
            L5)1 L5,2     05   U5)1   U5,2 U513                                                             L5,1 L5,2              D5 U5,1 .J5,2 U5,3
                    S     S     •         5       S       S                                                     .         S        S       S           S        S
                          S     S         S       •       S       S                                             .         S        •       S           S        S
                                S         S       •       S       S       S                                     .         S        S       S           •        S   W   dxd
                                                                                                                                                                    blocks
                                          S       S       S       S       S       S                             .         .        .       .           S        S
                                              L       L       0       U       U       U                     L         L        0  U                         U
                                              W-5,i W-5,2 W-5 W-5,i W-5,2 W-5,3                             W-5,1     W2       WW
                                                                                                                                U
                                                      L       L       D       U       U     U               L         L        D       U           U        U
                                                      W-4,1 W4,2       W-4 W-4,1 W4,2 W-4,3                 W-4t *4,2 W-4 W-44 W-4,2 W-4,3
—                                                             L       L
                                                                      W-3,2
                                                                      L
                                                                              0
                                                                              W UW-3 W3,2
                                                                              L
                                                                                     U
                                                                                      D

                                                                                          U
                                                                                            U
                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                    U

                                                                                                            L
                                                                                                            W-3,1
                                                                                                            L L D U

                                                                                                                      L
                                                                                                                      W2 W w-31
                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                 U

                                                                                                                                       U           U        U
                                                                                                                                                            W3
                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                      W-2,IW-2,2 W-2 W-2,IW-2,2             W-21 W-2,2 W-2 W-2,1 W-2,2
                                                                              L       L     D       U       L         L        D       U            0       0
                                                                              W-1,l W-1,2    W-1 W-1,1      W-l,1 W-1,2        W—1     W—t,1
                                                                                      LL  W,1W,2
                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                            L
                                                                                                                W,1
                                                                                                                      L
                                                                                                                          W
                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                   W    0           0       0
Bibi iraphy

Anderson, K.H. Burkhauser, R.V. Butler, J.S. (1984) "Work After Retirement: A
Hazard Model of Labor Market Re-entry" manuscript.

Anderson, K.H. Burkhauser, R.V. Quinn, J.F. (1984) "Do Retirement Dreams Come
True? The Effect of Unexpected Events on Retirement Age" DP 1,750-84, Institute
for Research on Poverty, University of Wisconsin, Madison.

Barro, R.J. (1974) "Are Government Bonds Net Worth?" Journal of Political
Economy 82-6, 1095-1117.

Barro, R.J. (1978) The Impact of Social Security on Private Saving The American
Enterprise Institute, Washington.

Berndt, E. Hall, B. Hall, R. Hausnian, J. (1974) "Estimation and Inference in
Nonlinear Structural Models" Annals of Economic end Social ITeasurement 3 653-
665.

Bernheini, D. (1984) "Dissaving After Retirement: Testing the Pure Life Cycle
Hypothesis" NBER Working Paper 1409.

Blackwell,   D. (1965) "Discounted Dynamic Programming" Annals of Statistics 36,
226-235.

Blinder, A. Gordon, R.H. Wise, D.E. (1983) "Social Security, Bequests, and the
Life-Cycle Theory of Savings" in F. Modigliani and R. Hemming (eds.) The
Determinants of National Saving and Wealth New-York, St. Martin's Press, 89-122.

Bodie, Z. Shoven, J.B. (eds.) (1983) Financial Aspects of the United States
Pension System University of Chicago Press.

Boskin, M. (1977) "Social Security and Retirement Decisions" Economic Inquiry
January.

Boskin, M.J. Kotlikoff, L.J. (1985) "Public Debt and United States Savings: A
New Test of the Neutrality Hypothesis" in K. Brunner and A.H. Meltzer (eds.) The
"New Monetary Economics", Fiscal Issues and Unemployment Volume 23, North-
Holland, Anisterdani.

Boskin, M.J. Kotlikoff, L.J. Puffert, D.J. Shoven, J.P. (1986) "Social Security:
A Financial Appraisal Across and Within Generations" NBER Working Paper 189.2.

Boskin, H., Hurd, H., (1978) "The Effect of Social Security on Early Retirement"
Journal of Public Economics 10, 361-377.

Boskin, M.J. Shoven, J.B. (1986) "Poverty Among the Elderly: Where are the Holes
in the Safety Net?" NBER Working Paper 1923.

Bound, J. (1986) "The Disincentive Effects of the Social Security Disability
Program" manuscript, University of Michigan.

Burkhauser, R.V. (1980) "The Early Acceptance of Social Security: An Asset
Maximization approach" Industrial and Labor Relations Review 33, 484-492.
Burkhauser, R.V. (1979) "The Pension Acceptance Decision of Older Workers"
Journal of Human Resources 14-1, 63-75.

Burkhauser, R.V., Turner, J.A. (1978) "A Time-Series Analysis of Social Security
and its Effect on the Market Work of Men at Younger Ages" Journal of Political
Economy 86, 701-715.

Burtless, G., Aaron, H. (eds) (1984) Retirement and Economic Behavior Brookings
Institution, Studies in Social Economics.

Burtless, G. Moffitt, R.A. (1985) "The Just Choice of Retirement Date and Post-
Retirement Hours of Work" Journal of Labor Economics, April.

Burtless, G., Moffitt, R. (1984) "The Effect of Social Security Benefits on the
Labor Supply of the Aged" in Burtless, Aaron (eds) Retirement and Economic
Behavior.

Cartwright, W.S. Friedland, R.B. (1985) "The President's Commission on Pension
Policy Household Survey 1979" Review of Income and Wealth 31, 285-308.

Chirikos, T.N. Nestel, C. (1981) "Impairment and Labor Market Outcomes: A Cross-
Sectional and Longitudinal Analysis" in Fames, H. (ed.) Work and Retirement,
MIT Press, Cambridge.

Congressional Quarterly Inc. (1983) Social Security and Retirement Congressional
Quarterly, Washington.

Crawford, V.P., Lilien, D.M. (1981) "Social Security and the Retirement
Decision" Quarterly Journal of Economics August, 505-529.

Danziger, S., Haveman, R. Plotnick, R. (1981) "How Income Transfers Affect Work,
Saving, and the Income Distribution" Journal of Economic Literature 19-3, 975-
1028.

Danziger, S. van der Gaag, J. Smolensky, E. Taussig, N. (1982) "The Life-Cycle
Hypothesis and the Consumption Behavior of the Elderly" Journal of Post-
Keynesian Economics 5, 208-227.

Darby, M.R. (1979) The Effects of Social Security on Income and the Capital
Stock American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C.

Davies, J.B. (1981) "Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption, and Dissaving in
Retirement" Journal of Political Economy 89-3, 561-577.

Deaton, A. (1986) "Life-Cycle Models of Consumption: Is the Evidence Consistent
with the Theory?" NBER Working Paper 1910.

Diamond, P. (1977) "A Framework for Social Security Analysis" Journal of Public
Economics 8-3, 275-298.

Diamond, P. Hausman, J. (1984a) "Individual Retirement and Savings Behavior"
Journal of Public Economics 23, 81-114.
Diamond, P.A., Hausman, J.A. (1984b) "The Retirement and Unemployment Behavior
of Older Men" in Burtless, Aaron (eds) Retirement and Economic Behavior.

Diamond, P. Mirrlees, J.A. (1978) "A Model of Soc:ial Insurance with Variable
Retirement" Journal of Public Economics 10, 295-336.

Dubin, J. McFadden, D. (1984) "An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric
Appliance Holdings and Consumption" Econometrica 52-2, 345-362.

Duff, I.S. (1984) "The Solution of Sparse Linear Equations on the Cray-I" in
J.S. Kowalik (ed) High Speed Computation Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

Feldstein, M. (1974) "Social Security, Induced Retirement and Aggregate Capital
Accumulation" Journal of Political Economy 82, 905-926.

Feldstein, M. (1983) "Social Security Benefits and the Accumulation of Pre-
retirement Wealth" in F. Modigliani and R. Hemming (eds.) The Determinants of
National Wealth and Saving St. Martin's Press, New York 3-23.

Feistein, N. Pellechio, A.J. (1979) "Social Security and Household Wealth
Accumulation: New Microeconometric Evidence" Review of Economics and Statistics
61-3, 361-368.

Feldstein, N,S. Pellechio, A. (1979) "Social Security and Household Wealth
Accumulation: New Microeconomic Evidence" Review of Economics and Statistics 61,
361-368.

Fields, G.S. Mitchell, O..S. (1985) Retirement, Pensions, and Social Security
M.I.T. Press.

Fuchs, V.R. (1982) "Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory Study" in V.
Fuchs (ed.) Economic Aspects of Health University of Chicago Press.

Gordon, RH. 'Blinder, A.S. (1980) "Market Wages, Reservation Wages, and
Retirement Decisions" Journal of Public Economics 14, 277-308.

Gotz, G.A. McCall, J.J. (1984) "A Dynamic Retention Model for Air Force
Officers" Research report R-3028-AF, The Rand Corporation, Santa Monica,
California.

Gustman, AL. Steinmeier, T.L. (1983) "Minimum Hours Constraints and Retirement
Behavior" Economic Inquiry 3, 77-91.

Gustman, A.L. Steinmeier, T.L. (1984) "Partial Retirement and the Analysis of
Retirement Behavior" Industrial and Labor Relations Review 37, 403-415.

Gustman, A. Steinmeier, T.L. (1986) "A Structural Retirement Model" Econometrica
54-3, 555-584.

Hall, A. Johnson, T. (1980) "The Determinants of Planned Retirement Age"
Industirl and Labor Relations Review 33-2, 241-255.

Hamermesh, D. (1984) "Consumption During Retirement: The Missing Link in the
Life Cycle" Review of Economics and Statistics 66, 1-7.
Haneman, W.M. (1984) "Discrete/Continuous Models of Consumer Demand"
Econornetrica 52-3, 541-562.

Hansen, L.P. Singleton, K. (1982) "Generalized Instrumental Variables Estimation
of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models" Econometrica 50-5, 1269-1286.

Harris, L. (1984) Retirement nd Income Garland Publishing, New York.

Hurd, M.D. (1986) "Savings and Bequests" NBER Working Paper Series 1826.

Irelan,L. Motley, D. Schwab,K. Sherman, S. Murray, J. (1976) Almost 65: Baseline
Data for the Retirement Ristory Study HEW Research Report 49.

King, H. (1985) "The Economics of Saving: A Survey of Recent Contributions" in
K. Arrow and S. Harkapohja (eds,) Frontiers of Economics Basil Blackwell,
Oxford.

King, H. Dicks-Mireaux, L.D. (1982) "Asset Holdings and the Life-Cycle" The
Economic Journal 92, 247-267.

Kotilkoff, L.J. (1979) "Testing the Theory of Social Security and Life Cycle
Accumulation" American Economic Review 69, 396-410.

Kotlikoff, L.J. (1986) "Health Expenditures and Precautionary Savings" NBER
Working Paper Series 2008.

Kotlikoff, L.J. Smith, D.E. (1983) Pensions in the American Economy University
of Chicago Press.

Kotlikoff, L.J. Summers, L.H. (1981) "The Role of Intergenerational Transfers in
Aggregate Capital Accumulation" Journal of Political Economy 89, 706-732.

Kotlikoff, L.J. Spivak,A. Summers, L.H, (1982) "The Adequacy of Savings"
American Economic Review 72-5, 1056-1069.

Kurz, H. (1981) "The Life-cycle Hypothesis and the Effects of Social Security
and Private Pensions on Family Savings" INSSS Technical Report 335, Stanford
University.

Kurz, H. (1985) "Hetrogeneity and Savings Behavior: A Comment" in K. Arrow and
S. }iarkapohja (eds.) Frontiers of Economics Basil Blackwell, Oxford.

Kurz, H. (1984) "Capital Accumulation and the Characteristics of Private
Intergenerational Transfers" Economica 51, 1-22.

Liddiard, L.D. (1986) "How to get the most out of a Cray-2" manuscript,
University of Minnesota.

Lucas, R.E. (1976) "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique" in Brunner, K.
Meltzer,A.K. (eds) The Philips Curve end Labor Markets Carnegie-Rochester
Conference on Public Policy 1, North Holland.

MaCurdy, T.E. (1983) "A Simple Scheme for Estimating an Intertemporal Model of




                             .i   tall
Labor Supply and Consumption in the Presence of Taxes and Unccrtainty"
InterrjatiOt?83 Economic Review 24-2, 265-289.

Marschek, J. (1953) "Economic Measurements for Policy and Prediction" in Hood,
W.C., Koopmans, T.C. (eds) Studies in Econometric Method Wiley.

McFadden, D. (1987) "A Method of Simulated Moments for Estimation of Multinomial
Probits without Numerical Integration" Econometrica, forthcoming.

Menchik, PL. David, H. (1983) "Income Distribution, Lifetime Savings, and
Bequests" American Economic Review 73-4, 672-690.

Menchik, P.L. David, H. (1985) "The Effect of Social Security on Lifetime Wealth
Accumulation and Bequests" Economica 52-208, 421-434.

Miller, R. (1984) "Job Matching and Occupational Choice" Journal of Political
Economy 92-6, 1086-1120.

Hirer, T.W. (1979) "The Wealth-Age Relation among the Agd" An7erican Economic
Review 69-3, 435-443.

Hirer, T. (1980) "The Dissaving Behavior of the Aged" Southrn Economic Journal
46, 1197-1205.

Mitchell, OS., Fields G.S. (1984) "The Economics of Retirement Behavior"
Journal of Labor Economics 2-1, 84-105.

Modigliani, F. (1975) "The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving Twenty Years Later"
in H. Pakin (ed.) Contemporary Issues in Economics Manchester University Press.

Modigliani, F. Brumberg, F. (1954) "Utility Analysis and the Consumption
Function: An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data" in K. Kurihara (ed.) Post-
Keynesian Economics New Brunswick.

Morrison, H.H. (1982) Economics of Aging: The Future of Retirement van Nostrand
Rheinhold, New York.

Hott, F.L. Haurin, R.J. (1981) "The Impact of Health Problems and Mortality on
Family Well-Being" in Parnes, H. (ed.) Work arid Retirement, MIT Press,
Cambridge.

Hunnell, A,H. (1977) The Future of Social Security Brookings Institution,
Washington, D.C.

Pakes, A. (1986) "Patents as Options: Some Estimates of the Value of Holding
European Patent Stocks" Econometrica 54-4, 755-784.

Pakes, A. Pollard, D. (1986) "The Asymptotics of Simulation Estimators"
manuscript, University of Wisconsin.

Parnes, H.S. (editor) (1981) Work and Retirement MIT Press, Cambridge.

Parnes, H.S. (editor) (1983) Policy Issues in Work nd Retirement W.E. Upjohn
Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, Michigan.
Parsons, DO. (1982) "The Male Labour Force Participation Decision: Health,
Reported Health, and Economic Incentives" Economics 49, 81-91.

Pellechio, A.J. (1979) "Social Security Financing and Retirement Behavior"
American Economic Review 69-2, 284-287.

Quinn, J. F. (1977) "Microeconomic Determinants of Early Retirement: A Cross-
Sectional View of White Married Men" Journal of Human Resources 12, 329-346.

Quinn, J.F. Burkhauser, R.V. (1983) "Is Mandatory Retirement Overrated?:
Evidence from the 1970's" Journal of Human Resources 18-3, 337-358.

Rust, J. (1986) "Maximiurn Likelihood Estimation of Discrete Control Processes"
SSRI Working Paper 8407.

Rust, J. (1987) "Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines: An Empirical Model of
Harold Zurcher" Econometrica, forthcoming.

Rust, J. (1987a) "An Inverse Solution Algorithm for Structural Estimation of
Discrete Control Processes"

Sargent, T.J. (1981) "Interpreting Economic Time Series" Journal of PolItical
Economy 89-2, 213-248.

Schulz, J.H.(1976) The Economics of Aging Wadsworth Publishing, Belmont,
California.

Sickles, R.C. Taubman, P. (1986) "An Analysis of the Health and Retirement
Status of the Elderly" Econometrics 54-6, 1339-1356.

Sheshinski, E. (1978) "A Model of Social Security and Retirement Decisions"
Journal of Public Economics 10, 337-360.

Stein, B. (1980) Social Security and Prensioris in Transition Free Press,
Macmillan Publishing Co., New York.

Sueyoshi, G. (1986) "Social Security and the Determinants of Full and Partial
Retirement: A Competing Risks Analysis" manuscript, M.I.T.

Thompson, L.H. (1981) "The Social Security Reform Debate" Journal of Economic
Literature 21-4, 1425-1467.

Tobin, J. (1967) "Life-Cycle Saving and Balanced Growth" in W. Feliner (ed.) Ten
Economic Studies in the Tradition of Irving Fisher New-York, 231-256.

White, B. (1978) "Empirical Tests of the Life-Cycle Hypothesis" American
Economic Review 68, 547-560.

White, B. (1984) "Empirical Tests of the Life-Cycle Hypothesis: Reply" American
Economic Review 74, 258-259.

Williams, C.A.jr. Turnbull, J.G. Cheit, E.F. (1982) Economic and Social
Security: Social Insurance nd Other Approaches Wiley, New York.
Wise, D. (ed.) (1985) Pensions, Labor and Individual Choice University of
Chicago Press.

Wolpin, K. (1984) "An Estimable Dynamic Stochastic Model of Fertility and Child
Mortality" Journal of Political Economy 92-5, 852-874.

Yaari, ME. (1965) "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the
Consumer" Reviefr of Economic Studies 32, 137-150.

Levhari, D. Mirman, L.J. (1977) "Savings and Consumption with an Uncertain
Horizon" Journal of Political Economy 85-2, 265-281.

Zabaiza, A., Pissarides, C., Barton, H. (1980) "Social Security and the Choice
Between Full-time Work, Part-time Work, and Retirement" Journal of Public
Economics 14, 245-276.
