                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE MISSING PROFITS OF NATIONS

                                       Thomas R. Tørsløv
                                        Ludvig S. Wier
                                        Gabriel Zucman

                                       Working Paper 24701
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24701


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 2018, Revised April 2020




We thank Alan Auerbach, Johannes Becker, Olivier Blanchard, David Bradbury, Richard
Bolwijn, Iain Campbell, Kimberly Clausing, Alex Cobham, Mihir Desai, Michael Devereux, Fritz
Foley, Maya Forstater, Teresa Fort, Roger Gordon, Martin Hearson, Niels Johannesen, Petr
Janský, Michael Keen, Edward Kleinbard, Claus Kreiner, Paul Krugman, Gaetan Nicodeme,
Mitchell Petersen, Thomas Piketty, Nadine Riedel, Dani Rodrik, Emmanuel Saez, Juan Carlos
Suárez Serrato, Felix Tintelnot, John Van Reenen, Eric Zwick, and numerous seminar and
conference participants for helpful comments and reactions. Zucman acknowledges financial
support from Arnold Ventures and the FRIPRO program of the Research Council of Norway. The
authors retain sole responsibility for the views expressed in this research. An appendix and all
data and code are available online at http://missingprofits.world The authors retain sole
responsibility for the views expressed in this research, which do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Thomas R. Tørsløv, Ludvig S. Wier, and Gabriel Zucman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Missing Profits of Nations
Thomas R. Tørsløv, Ludvig S. Wier, and Gabriel Zucman
NBER Working Paper No. 24701
June 2018, Revised April 2020
JEL No. F23,H26,H87

                                           ABSTRACT

By exploiting new macroeconomic data known as foreign affiliates statistics, we show that
affiliates of foreign multinational firms are an order of magnitude more profitable than local firms
in low-tax countries. By contrast, affiliates of foreign multinationals are less profitable than local
firms in high-tax countries. Leveraging this differential profitability, we estimate that close to
40% of multinational profits are shifted to tax havens globally. We analyze how the location of
corporate profits would change if all countries adopted the same effective corporate tax rate,
keeping global profits and investment constant. Profits would increase by about 15% in high-tax
European Union countries, 10% in the United States, while they would fall by 60% in today's tax
havens. We provide a new international database of GDP, trade balances, and factor shares
corrected for profit shifting, showing that the rise of the corporate capital share is significantly
under-estimated in high-tax countries.

Thomas R. Tørsløv                                 Gabriel Zucman
University of Copenhagen,                         Department of Economics
Øster Farimagsgade 5                              University of California, Berkeley
DK-1353 Copenhagen                                530 Evans Hall, #3880
thomas.torslov@econ.ku.dk                         Berkeley, CA 94720
                                                  and NBER
Ludvig S. Wier                                    zucman@berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
ludvig.wier@econ.ku.dk




Appendix and Data are available at http://gabriel-zucman.eu/missingprofits/
1         Introduction
Perhaps the most striking development in tax policy throughout the world over the last few
decades has been the decline in corporate income tax rates. Between 1985 and 2018, the global
average statutory corporate tax rate has fallen by about half, from 49% to 24%. In 2018, the
United States cut its rate from 35% to 21%.
        One reason for this decline is international tax competition. By cutting their tax rates,
countries can attract capital and profits from abroad (see Keen and Konrad, 2013, for a survey
of the large literature on tax competition). Despite the prominence of tax competition in both
the academic literature and the public debate, however, we do not currently have comprehensive
estimates of how much profit each country loses or attracts because of international differences
in corporate tax rates. Although there are excellent data on U.S. multinationals, which have
been used extensively to study the location and tax-optimization choices of U.S. firms,1 until
recently there was no similar data covering the multinationals of other countries. As a result,
we do not currently have a clear view of the extent to which globalization and tax competition
are redistributing profits across nations.
        Our paper attempts to fill this gap by drawing on new data. In recent years, the statistical
institutes of most of the world’s developed countries—including the major tax havens—have
started releasing new macroeconomic data known as foreign affiliates statistics. Following new
international guidelines, these statistics record the wages and profits of foreign firms, defined
as firms more than 50% owned by foreign shareholders (i.e., typically subsidiaries of foreign
multinational companies). By combining these data with existing national accounts aggregates
which cover all firms incorporated in a given country, we can estimate the profits made and
wages paid in each country by local firms (i.e., all firms incorporated in a given country which
are not foreign) and foreign firms separately. This makes it possible to obtain a comprehensive
view of where multinational companies book their profits, and in particular to estimate the
amount of profit booked in tax havens globally.2
        Using our new database, we consider the following thought experiment. Imagine that all
countries agreed tomorrow to a perfect international tax harmonization, i.e., agreed to apply
the same effective corporate income tax rate, keeping global profits and the global capital stock
    1
    See, e.g., Gravelle (2009), Clausing (2009, 2016), Guvenen et al. (2018).
    2
    A number of papers attempt to estimate the amount of profits shifted globally (Crivelli, de Mooij and Keen,
2015; Bolwijn et al., 2018, Cobham and Janský, 2018) and the implied tax revenue losses. To our knowledge,
however, it is the first time that profits gains and losses for each country are estimated based on directly
observable data covering the activities of multinationals in tax havens.



                                                      1
constant. By how much would profits booked in the United States, the European Union, and de-
veloping countries increase compared to today’s situation—and by how much would they fall in
low-tax places like Ireland? And would a lot of capital move back to today’s high tax-countries
(with potentially significant effect on wages, depending on the elasticity of substitution between
capital and labor), or would firms merely change the location of paper profits without many
tangible assets moving across borders? In other words, how does tax competition redistribute
profits internationally and what is the relative importance of tax competition for tangible capital
vs. tax competition for paper profits? Answering these questions is important to better under-
stand the redistributive impacts of globalization, that is, which countries (and social groups)
have gained most from it, and which have gained less or lost.
   The new foreign affiliates statistics exploited in this paper have a number of strengths to
address these questions. They are more comprehensive than financial accounting data on which
a lot of the literature is based (see Section 2). They provide direct information on the profits
booked in tax havens and do not double-count the profits of indirectly-held affiliates. We stress
at the outset, however, that we are well aware of the deficiencies of existing foreign affiliates
statistics; in many ways, these statistics are still in their infancy. Despite their limitations
(discussed in Section 4.2 below), these macro data are at present the most comprehensive that
exist to study the activities of multinational corporations in a global perspective, a question
so important that we cannot wait for perfect data before we start addressing it (and which
has indeed been addressed in the past by many authors using less comprehensive data than we
presently have). In addition, we feel that a useful way for scholars to contribute to future data
improvement is to use the existing statistics in a systematic manner, so as to better identify
their limits and how these limits could be overcome. Our article, therefore, can also be viewed as
an attempt to assess the internal consistency of the foreign affiliates statistics of all the world’s
countries, and to pinpoint the areas in which progress needs to be made.
   Using our new database, we document a simple but striking fact: Foreign firms are sys-
tematically more profitable than local firms in low-tax countries, while the opposite is true in
high-tax countries. More precisely, for local firms (i.e., firms that are not subsidiaries of a foreign
multinational group) the ratio of pre-tax profits to wages is typically around 30%–40% in both
high-tax and low-tax countries. For foreign firms, the ratio of pre-tax profits to wages is an
order of magnitude higher than 30%–40% in low-tax countries, while it is lower than 30%–40%
in high-tax countries. For example, foreign firms in Ireland (a low-tax country) have a profits-
to-wage ratio of 800%: for $1 of wage paid to Irish employees, foreign multinationals report $8


                                                  2
in pre-tax profits in Ireland.3 In the UK by contrast, foreign firms have a profits-to-wage ratio
of 26% only. Global macro data thus show a large redistribution of profits within divisions of
multinational companies, away from high-tax countries and towards low-tax places.
       To better understand the high profits booked in tax havens, we provide decompositions
into real effects (more tangible capital used by foreign firms in tax havens) and profit shifting
effects (above-normal returns to capital and receipts of interest). This distinction matters
because these two processes have different distributional implications. Movements of tangible
capital across borders affect wages, to the extent that tangible capital has a finite elasticity of
substitution with labor. By contrast, movements of paper profits (i.e., profit shifting) don’t: for
a given global profitability, whether profit is booked in the United States or in Bermuda has no
reason to affect workers’ productivity in either of these places. Our results show that the high
profits-to-wage ratios of multinationals in tax havens are primarily explained by shifting effects.
Tangible capital is internationally mobile—and there is evidence that this mobility has become
slightly more correlated with tax rates over the last twenty years—but globally, machines have
not massively moved to low-tax places; paper profits have.
       Using the differential profitability of foreign firms in high- vs. low-tax countries, and new
bilateral balance of payments data recently published by tax havens, we develop a methodology
to estimate the amount of profit shifted into each haven and the profit loss for individual high-
tax countries. Our computations are relative to a benchmark in which, keeping global profit
fixed, all countries had the same effective corporate tax rate (for instance, all countries applied
the current global average effective corporate tax rate).4 Globally, we find that close to 40%
of multinational profits—defined as profits made by multinational companies outside of the
country where their parent is located—are shifted to tax havens in 2015. The governments of
the (non-haven) European Union countries appear to be the prime losers of this shifting, with
a reduction in profit of about 20% relative to our benchmark. The governments of tax havens
derive sizable benefits from this phenomenon: by taxing the large amount of paper profits they
attract at very low rates (typically less than 5%), they generate more tax revenue, as a fraction
of their national income, than the United States and non-haven European countries that have
much higher rates. We also find that U.S. multinationals shift comparatively more profits than
   3
      This corresponds to a capital share of corporate value-added of 80%–90% in foreign firms operating in
Ireland, vs. around 25% in local Irish firms.
    4
      We do not have anything to say in this paper about the effect of increasing or cutting the global effective
corporate tax rate, a question studied by the large literature on the efficiency costs of capital taxation. Instead,
we take the global effective corporate tax rate as given, and ask how the geography of profits and capital would
change if all countries applied it.



                                                         3
multinationals from other countries.
      Our estimate for the amount of profit shifted globally—close to 40% of multinational profits—
is sizable, but it appears to be well founded empirically. In particular, we find similar magnitudes
using two fully independent methodologies and data sources: our benchmark “above-normal
profitability” methodology, based on the high profits-to-wage ratios recorded in foreign affili-
ates statistics by foreign firms in tax havens, and an “above-normal cross-border transactions”
methodology, based on the high exports of services and receipts of intra-group interest recorded
in the balances of payments of tax havens. In 2015, the “above normal profitability” yields
an estimate of $616 billion for the amount of profit shifted to tax havens globally, while the
“above-normal cross-border transactions” methodology yields an estimate of $646 billion.
      We discuss two main implications of these findings. First, our results suggest that the
headline economic indicators—including GDP, trade balances, and corporate labor and capital
shares—of a number of countries are distorted. The flip side of the profits shifted to tax havens
is that output, net exports and profits recorded in non-haven countries are too low. We provide
a new database of corrected macro statistics for all OECD countries and the largest emerging
economies. Adding back the profits shifted out of high-tax countries increases the corporate
capital share significantly. By our estimates, the rise in the European corporate capital share
since the early 1990s is twice as large as recorded in the official national accounts (used, e.g.,
by Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2014). This finding has implications for current debates about
the changing nature of technology and inequality.
      Second, our results can be used to quantify the tax revenues that individual countries could
gain under different corporate tax reform scenarios. We consider one such scenario, the taxation
of shifted profits by source countries, and find that corporate tax receipts could increase by
up to 15% in the United States and 20% in a number of European countries compared to
today. Looking forward, our data could be used to quantify the revenue implications of more
fundamental reforms, such as the use of a formulary apportionment system (e.g., Gordon and
Wilson, 1986; Avi-Yonah and Clausing, 2007), or a destination-based corporate cash flow tax
(Auerbach, 2010). We also plan to update our database and estimates annually, making it
possible for researchers and policy-makers to track the effects of ongoing policy efforts aimed at
reducing corporate profit shifting, such as the OECD “base erosion and profit shifting” (BEPS)
initiative, or the effect of tax changes such as the 2017 US tax reform.5
      The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we relate our work to the literature.
  5
      Preliminary updated estimates for 2016 and 2017 are available in Tørsløv et al. (2020).



                                                        4
Section 3 outlines our conceptual framework and methodology, and Section 4 describes the data.
We present our estimates of the amount of profits shifted to each tax haven in Section 5, before
analyzing the implications of this phenomenon for non-haven countries in Section 6. Section 7
discusses our corrected estimates of factor shares and trade balances. We provide concrete
proposals to improve economic statistics and the monitoring of global activity in the conclusion
(Section 8). This paper is supplemented by an Online Appendix that enables the reader to
reproduce all our estimates step by step starting from publicly available data. All the data used
in this research are available online.6


2       Related Literature
We start by relating our work to previous attempts to estimate global profit shifting and to the
literature on international tax competition.

2.1      Microeconometric Estimates of Profit Shifting
A large body of work studies international profit shifting using accounting micro-data, collected
in the Orbis database of Bureau van Dijk.7 Profit shifting is estimated by running regressions
of the following form:


                          log(πic ) = α + β(τp − τc ) + δF irmi + γCountryc + ic                                   (1)

where πic denotes the pre-tax profits booked by company i in country c, τc the tax rate in
country c, τp the tax rate in the parent’s country (or the average tax rate of foreign affiliates),
and F irmi and Countryc firm and country controls.8 A positive β̂ is interpreted as evidence
of profit shifting, and the global amount of profits shifted for tax reasons is extrapolated from
the estimated β. The OECD (2015) uses this methodology for its official estimate of the size of
base erasion and profit shifting (Johansson et al., 2017).
    6
      The Appendix and dataset, as well as updated estimates and visualizations, are available at http:
//missingprofits.world.
    7
      See Kalemli-Özcan et al. (2015) for a presentation of these data.
    8
      The literature considers four measures for the incentives to shift profits: (1) the differential with the tax rate
of the parent’s country (e.g., Dharmapala and Riedel, 2013); (2) the weighted tax rate differential with all other
subsidiaries (e.g., Huizinga and Laeven, 2008); (3) the unweighted tax rate differential with other subsidiaries
(e.g., Johansson et al. 2017), and (4) the statutory corporate tax rate (e.g., Lohse and Riedel, 2013). On a priori
ground, it is unclear which of these measures is preferable. Heckemeyer and Overesch (2017) give an overview
of 26 studies using this approach; see also de Mooij and Ederveen (2008), Riedel (2018), Wier and Reynolds
(2018), and Beer, de Mooij and Liu (2019). A number of studies (e.g., Egger et al. 2010) use the Bureau van
Dijk Amadeus database, which is the European subset of Orbis.



                                                           5
       Although this methodology has generated important insights, it also faces limitations. First,
little micro-data exists about the profits booked by multinationals in low-tax countries. Orbis
provides accurate information about the global consolidated profits of most of the world’s multi-
nationals (see, e.g., Cobham and Loretz, 2014). Multinational companies, however, are generally
not required to publish their profits country by country (or subsidiary by subsidiary). Orbis
relies on administrative information in public business registries to record the profits made by
multinationals in their various subsidiaries. Because countries such as France maintain compre-
hensive registries, almost all the profits made by French resident firms (including subsidiaries
of foreign multinationals) can be seen in Orbis.9 But in many countries public registries either
do not exist (e.g., Bermuda), or contain no income information (e.g., United States, Ireland,
Switzerland).10 Profits booked by multinationals in these countries are not visible in Orbis.
       For instance, as shown by Figure 1, Orbis correctly reports that the worldwide consolidated
profits of Apple were 55.3 billion euros in 2016. If one adds up all the profits recorded in Orbis by
all of Apple’s subsidiaries throughout the world, however, then one finds only 2.0 billion euros.
None of the profits made by Apple in the United States or in Ireland, Jersey, or similar tax
havens are visible.11 Similarly large discrepancies are observed for Google Alphabet, Facebook,
and Nike. In Figure 2, we compare the consolidated global profits of each multinational in
Orbis to the sum of its subsidiary-by-subsidiary profits. In 2012, 17% of the global profits of
multinationals could be traced in Orbis. That is, 83% were booked in subsidiaries unknown to
Orbis, or for which no profits data was available. The problem is particularly acute for low-
and zero-tax countries.12
       The limited reporting of data in tax havens has two main implications. First, it means that
estimating equation 1 with publicly available accounting micro-data can deliver estimates of
   9
     In 2010 for instance, the national accounts of France report that French resident corporations made $240
billion in pre-tax profits after net interest payments. In Orbis one finds a very close figure, $237 billion.
  10
     In the Spring of 2017, the United Kingdom announced that it would mandate its overseas territories (e.g.,
Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, and the Cayman Islands) to develop public registries of the owners of
companies formed there by the end of 2020. It is unclear whether income or balance sheet information will
be made available in these registries. This initiative doesn’t capture the Crown Dependencies (such as Jersey,
Guernsey and Isle of Man).
  11
     The use of tax havens by Apple is documented in, e.g., U.S. Senate (2014).
  12
     A number of papers study shifting by U.S. multinationals using data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
on the activities of U.S. multinationals abroad (see, e.g., Clausing, 2009; Guvenen et al., 2018) and IRS data
(e.g., Altshuler and Grubert, 2005; Grubert, 2013; Dowd, Landefeld and Moore, 2017, and De Simone, Mills
and Stomberg, 2017). These data do not suffer from the problems in Orbis, as U.S. multinationals have to
(confidentially) report information on all their subsidiaries to the BEA and to the IRS. These data can only
be used to study shifting by U.S. multinationals, while we are interested in shifting by all multinationals. See
Section 4.2 below for how our data relate to the Bureau of Economic Analysis statistics on the activities of U.S.
multinationals abroad.



                                                       6
β that are downwards biased. It is only in the special case where the semi-elasticity of profit
shifting with respect to tax rate differentials is constant that the estimated β is unbiased.13
There is evidence in the literature, however, that the shifting elasticity is nonlinear, with more
responsiveness at lower tax rates than at higher ones.14 One may also imagine that multina-
tional companies try to shift profits in a discreet manner (e.g., for public relation reasons). In
the extreme case where they only shift profits to subsidiaries that do not publish income state-
ments, the estimated β in Orbis is zero, while in actual facts it is positive and possibly large.15
Second, estimating equation 1 with accounting micro-data can lead to biased inferences about
the location of shifted profits. If only high-tax countries have public registries, then one can
find that all profit shifting takes place between high-tax countries, whereas in actual facts this
shifting may be second-order relative to the shifting to low-tax countries.
       The main difference between our work and the micro-econometric estimates of global profit
shifting is that we rely on direct (macro) data on the profits booked by multinationals in tax
havens, namely foreign affiliates statistics. These macro data are more comprehensive than the
data available in Orbis or similar databases, for one simple reason. While Orbis has to rely
on publicly available corporate registries, statistical authorities have access to a much broader
set of information to compile their foreign affiliates and national account statistics: corporate
income tax returns, censuses of the activities of domestic and foreign corporations, and private
income statements and balance sheets. As a result, the flow of profits recorded in these macro
data is much larger than the one in Orbis. These macro data are not perfect however; they have
limitations and sometimes need to be corrected, as we discuss in Section 4.2 below.

2.2       Macro Estimates of Profit Shifting
A nascent literature takes a macro perspective to study profit shifting. The OECD (2015) itself,
although it used Orbis for its official BEPS estimate, suggested that global macro data be used
to estimate profit shifting.
       Most of this macro literature uses U.S. statistics, hence focuses on U.S. multinationals only
(Clausing, 2009, 2016; Gravelle, 2009; Zucman, 2014; Guvenen et al., 2018). In this paper, we
take a global perspective: we estimate profit shifting by all the world’s multinationals and the
  13
     Even in this case, extrapolating the global amount of profits shifted from β̂ requires to be able to observe in
which countries multinationals have subsidiaries—which is not possible in Orbis, since subsidiaries in countries
with no public corporate registry are not visible.
  14
     For instance, using U.S. corporate income tax data, Dowd et al. (2017) find tax semi-elasticities of 4.7 at
corporate tax rates of 5 percent and 0.6 at tax rates of 30 percent. See also Wier and Reynolds (2018).
  15
     Relatedly, Bilicka (2019) studies profit shifting outside of the United Kingdom using UK tax data, and finds
that accounting data underestimate the true size of profit shifting relative to more comprehensive tax data.


                                                         7
implications of this phenomenon for each OECD country, the main emerging economies, and
tax havens. This global perspective allows us to estimate how tax competition redistributes
profits internationally, thus shedding light on the redistributive effects of globalization. Our
database and results are relevant for policy-makers across the world and make it possible to
put the United States in an international perspective. For example, we can study whether U.S.
multinationals shift more profit than multinationals from other countries.16
       Two pioneering recent studies, Crivelli, de Mooij and Keen (2015) and Bolwijn et al. (2018),
use global macro data to study profit shifting and are the most closely related to our work.17
The main difference is that we rely on different methodology and data (namely, foreign affiliates
statistics and bilateral balances of payments).18 The foreign affiliates statistics we use allow
us to observe the profits booked by multinationals in tax havens and to compute factor shares
in foreign vs. local firms across the world. This enables us to produce an estimate of profit
shifting based on the abnormally high capital share reported by foreign firms in tax havens.19
One advantage of this methodology is that it produces estimates of profit shifting that can be
easily tracked by policy makers on a year-to-year basis. Moreover, the new bilateral balance of
payments we use enable us to provide bilateral estimates of profit shifting (i.e., how much profits
are shifted by French firms to Luxembourg, by German firms to the Netherlands, etc.), which
was not possible with earlier approaches. Bilateral estimates are a necessary input to calibrate
quantitative models of international tax competition and multinational production with profit
shifting (e.g., Wang, 2018). Our database, available online at http://missingprofits.world,
could be used to calibrate such models in the future.
  16
     Methodological similarities and differences with the important work of Clausing (2009) and Guvenen et al.
(2018) are further discussed in Section 3.3 below.
  17
     These studies are replicated and tested for robustness in Janský and Palanský (2017) and Cobham and
Janský (2018).
  18
     Bolwijn et al. (2018) rely on the balance of payments and FDI statistics of non-haven countries; Crivelli,
de Mooij and Keen use corporate income tax revenue data. A number of papers in international finance (e.g.,
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2018) use tax havens’ international investment positions, but this literature attempts
to characterize patterns in international investment, not to estimate the size of profit shifting as we do here.
  19
     Crivelli, de Mooij and Keen (2015) infer the tax revenue losses due to international corporate tax avoidance
for developing vs. advanced economies from the correlation between corporate tax revenue collected and the
statutory tax rates of other countries estimated in a panel model. We view their approach and ours as comple-
mentary. Using the methodology in Crivelli, de Mooij and Keen (2015), Cobham and Janský (2018) estimate
country-level tax revenue losses due to international corporate tax avoidance. As in Crivelli, de Mooij and Keen
(2015), these estimates are based on the estimated cross-country correlation between corporate income tax rev-
enue and foreign countries’ tax rates. A systematic reconciliation of their findings with ours is a fruitful avenue
for future research.




                                                        8
2.3       Literature on Tax Competition
Our paper is also related to the large theoretical literature on international tax competition. A
large body of work focuses on competition for tangible capital (see Keen and Konrad, 2013). A
number of studies also consider competition for paper profits, its interaction with competition
for tangible capital, the incentives of tax havens, and the costs involved for non-haven coun-
tries.20 Our contribution to this literature is to provide a first empirical quantification of the
international redistribution of profits due to tax competition for paper profits vs. capital.


3        Conceptual Framework and Methodology
There are three main steps in our analysis. We first compute the profitability of local vs. foreign
firms across countries, including, most importantly, in tax havens. Second, we estimate the
extent to which the relatively high profitability of foreign firms in tax havens can be explained by
profit shifting to tax havens vs. higher capital intensities in low-tax places. Third we apportion
the shifted profits to the countries where they would have been booked absent international
differences in tax rates. We discuss each step in turn.

3.1       Macroeconomic Profitability Ratios
In the first step of our analysis, we study the macroeconomic ratio π of pre-tax corporate profits
to wages. We are interested in how this statistic varies across countries, and how it varies
within countries but across foreign-owned (πf ) vs. local (πl ) firms. The profits-to-wage ratio is
easy to compute and closely related to factor shares of output, which allows for straightforward
interpretations of the economic forces at play. It is not the only relevant margin to compare
local and foreign firms: profits-to-assets and effective tax rates are also relevant and ideally all
need to be analyzed together, as we do below.
       We define π at the country level as follows. Using standard notations, we denote by Y the
corporate output (or value-added) of a country, obtained by combining effective labor AL and
capital K.21 We include in the corporate sector all resident corporations, both non-financial
and financial. Part of corporate output is paid to workers, and the rest, operating surplus,
accrues to the owners of capital: Y = F (K, AL) = rK + wL. In this framework, r includes both
the normal return to corporate capital and any above-normal return (i.e., r is not necessarily
  20
     See Slemrod and Wilson (2009); Hong and Smart (2010); Johannesen (2010); the application of the Kanbur
and Keen (1993) model of commodity tax competition to profit shifting in Keen and Konrad (2013).
  21
     Here and in what follows we consider output at factor cost, i.e., before indirect taxes.


                                                    9
equal to the marginal product of capital). The capital share of corporate output is α = rK/Y
and the ratio of operating surplus to wages is α/(1 − α). Corporations pay p percent of their
operating surplus rK in net interest. We define (pre-tax) corporate profits as (1 − p) · rK. Our
ratio of interest π measures the profits made by resident firms per dollar of wage paid: π =
(1 − p) · α/(1 − α).22 We subtract net interest paid from corporations’ operating surplus because
interest payments are typically deductible from the corporate tax base while interest received
(e.g., by banks) is typically taxable. At the country level, net interest paid by corporations
is generally small (interest paid by non-financial corporations is offset by interest received by
financial corporations), so π is usually close to α/(1 − α). As we shall see, the main exception
involves tax havens which receive net interest from foreign countries; for them π > α/(1−α). We
also subtract capital depreciation from profits, because depreciation is deductible from taxable
profits. Thus Y , α, r, and π are all net of capital depreciation.
       Our main objective is to study how the profits-to-wage ratio differs for foreign corporations
(πf ) vs. local firms (πl ) within each country. We define πf and πl analogously to π. That is,
πf is equal to the pre-tax profits (after net interest payments) made by foreign firms divided by
the wages paid by these firms: πf = (1 − pf ) · αf /(1 − αf ), where αf is the net-of-depreciation
capital share of the net value-added of foreign firms. In the data (described in Section 4.2 below),
following internationally-agreed guidelines foreign firms include all firms where foreign investors
own more than 50% of shares with voting rights. This condition is sufficient but not necessary:
there are a few other ways firms can be classified as “foreign-controlled” (see Eurostat, 2012).
Local firms are all firms that are not foreign. By definition, π = s · πf + (1 − s) · πl , where s is
the share of wages paid by foreign firms.

3.2       Decomposing Tax Havens Profits: Tangible Capital vs. Shifting
In a perfectly competitive model where factors are paid their marginal product (an assumption
we relax below), a high recorded profits-to-wage ratio π in tax havens can have two reasons:
either paper profits are being shifted to tax havens, or there’s a lot of capital used in production
and the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor is greater than 1. We are interested
in quantifying the relative contributions of profit shifting vs. movements of tangible capital to
the high profit-to-wage ratios π of tax havens.
       There are three forms of profit shifting (see Heckemeyer and Overesch, 2017, for a survey),
  22
    Our measure of wage always include non-wage employee compensation (such as retirement benefits, health
benefits, payroll taxes, etc.). That is, “wage” in this article always refers to what is called “employee compen-
sation” in the national accounts (SNA code D.1).


                                                       10
and each affects the recorded profit-to-wage ratio π. First, multinational groups can manipulate
intra-group exports and import prices: subsidiaries in high-tax countries can try to export goods
and services at low prices to related firms in low-tax countries, and import from them at high
prices.23 Such transfer price manipulations increase the recorded πf (hence π) in tax havens.
Second, multinationals can shift profits using intra-group interest payments: affiliates in high-
tax countries can borrow money (potentially at relatively high interest rates) from affiliates
in low-tax countries, which again increase πf in tax havens.24 Last, multinationals can move
intangibles—such as trademarks, patents, logos, algorithms, or financial portfolios—produced
or managed in high-tax countries to affiliates in low-tax countries. These affiliates then receive
royalties, interest, or payments from final customers, which boost πf .25 Movements of intangibles
can be analyzed like transfer price manipulations and intra-group borrowing because they have
the same distributional implications: for a given global stock of intangibles, these movements
relocate profits across countries (away from where R&D or financial activity takes place) without
affecting wages.26 By contrast, if the elasticity of substitution between labor and tangible capital
is finite, movements of tangible capital across borders affect wages.27
       To identify what part of the profits reported by foreign firms in tax havens reflects profit
shifting vs. movements of tangible capital, it is convenient to start by considering the simple
case where all countries—havens and non-havens—have the same aggregate Cobb-Douglas pro-
duction function Y = K α (AL)1−α and factors are paid their marginal product. If net interest
paid (p) is zero and α = 25%, then all countries have a true π = 33% and any deviation of the
recorded π from this value reflects profit shifting (countries with recorded π above 33% attract
paper profits from abroad, while countries with recorded π below 33% shift profits abroad).
With Cobb-Douglas production, the stock of tangible capital does not affect π, because any
  23
     There is evidence of such transfer price manipulations in the literature; see, e.g., Clausing (2003); Bernard,
Jensen and Schott (2006); Vicard (2015); Cristea and Nguyen (2016); Liu, Schmidt-Eisenlohr and Guo (2018).
  24
     See, e.g., Huizinga, Laeven, and Nicodeme (2008).
  25
     See Faulkender et al. (2017) for evidence suggestive of profit shifting by U.S. multinationals through the
relocation of intangibles in low-tax countries. See Langenmayr and Reiter (2017) for evidence of profit shifting
by German banks through the strategic relocation of financial portfolios in tax havens.
  26
     One potential concern with our treatment of intangibles is that some of the intangibles booked in tax havens
may not have been shifted there but produced locally, by workers employed in R&D. However the available
evidence shows that more than 90% of R&D workers of multinational firms are employed in high-tax countries;
see Section 5.3 below.
  27
     There is a view among some policy-makers (e.g., underlying “patent box” policies as in the United Kingdom
and the related “foreign-derived intangible income” provisions introduced in the 2017 U.S. tax reform) that
encouraging companies to locate intangible assets domestically, while benefiting the tax base, may also benefit
domestic productivity. One way to rationalize this view is that firms may be more likely to locate tangible assets
(office space, headquarters, etc.) in places where they book their intangibles. But it is hard to come up with
a plausible reason to believe that the location of intangibles per se may significantly affect productivity (for a
given stock of intangible assets).


                                                        11
increase in the capital stock is perfectly offset by a corresponding fall in the marginal product
of capital.
   In the more general case where countries have a constant elasticity of substitution (CES)
production function, the effect of the capital stock on the profits-to-wage ratio is ambiguous.
Namely, π varies with the capital stock depending on the value of the capital-labor elasticity of
substitution σ. If σ > 1, then countries with a high capital intensity K/AL have high profit-
to-wage ratios π. Conversely, if σ < 1, then countries with high capital intensity have low π,
as the marginal product of capital becomes very low. To identify the contribution of capital
intensity to the high reported profits-to-wage ratios of tax havens, we decompose the measured
πf of these countries into three components:

                                        K 
                                   πf =       · rf · (1 − pf )                                (2)
                                         wL f
   where rf is the measured return to capital used by foreign firms, including any abnormal
return (above the marginal product of capital) due to tax-induced profit shifting. We then
make assumptions about the value of the elasticity of substitution σ in foreign firms to infer
what fraction of the high πf of tax havens can be attributed to high capital intensities. A large
micro literature finds σ < 1, while a nascent macro literature finds σ > 1 (Karabarbounis and
Neiman, 2014; Piketty and Zucman, 2014).
   To form our central estimate of the amount of profit shifted into each tax haven, we make
two assumptions. First, we assume that the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor
σ is equal to 1 (i.e., Cobb-Douglas production). We do not assume that countries have similar
Cobb-Douglas parameters α. That is, we allow for the possibility, for instance, that tax havens
have structurally higher α than non-haven countries due, e.g., to pro-capital policies, rents
generated by specific institutional features such as financial secrecy or lax regulation, or other
deviations from perfect competition. Second, we assume that the reported profitability of local
firms in tax havens πl is not inflated by profit shifting. This assumption is supported by our
finding, described in Section 5.2, that local firms in tax havens are generally as profitable as
local firms in non-haven countries. Under these two assumptions, within a given tax haven, any
excess of πf over πl reflects inward profit shifting. In our central scenario we estimate profit
shifting by setting πf equal to πl in each tax haven.
   As we shall see in Section 5.4 below, the results we obtain will be robust to relaxing our
two assumptions. First, our estimate of the amount of profits shifted to tax havens will not
significantly depend on the assumed capital-labor elasticity of substitution σ, because it turns


                                               12
out that foreign firms in tax havens have similar capital intensity as local firms (and foreign
firms in high-tax countries). As a result, for plausible values of σ, differences in capital intensity
cannot explain more than 10% of the high πf − πl gap observed in tax havens. Second, relaxing
the assumption that the measured profitability of local firms in tax havens πl reflects their
actual profitability will lead us to find even more profit shifting than in our central scenario—
but only slightly so. Although comparing foreign and local firms in tax havens is not perfect,
our estimation procedure has the advantage that it can be implemented transparently using
readily available macro data which are much more comprehensive than the data used so far to
study global profit shifting.

3.3       How we Allocate the Shifted Profits
In the third step of our analysis, we allocate the shifted profits to the countries where they
would be booked if all countries had the same effective corporate tax rate. We proceed as fol-
lows. First, we collect all existing bilateral balance of payments data, which include in particular
bilateral service trade flows by type of service, and bilateral foreign direct investment income
(including bilateral intra-group interest payments and receipts). We then allocate the shifted
profits proportionally to the bilateral service exports and bilateral intra-group interest receipts
recorded in the balances of payments of tax havens, summing both of these items. Among ser-
vices, we only consider the specific types of services which have been found in the literature to be
most conducive of profit shifting: exports of the rights to use intellectual property (patents and
trademarks), headquarter services (administration, management and advertising), information
and communication technology services, and financial services (Hebous and Johannesen, 2016).
We disregard goods exports, which according to the existing literature seem to be quantitatively
less important than other profit shifting channels.28
       Our estimation procedure is motivated by the fact that tax havens record very large intra-
group interest receipts and exports of services found to be conducive of shifting, way above
what could be expected given the size of their economies. As shown by Appendix Figure G.1,
these flows amount to 5% of gross national income on average in non-haven European Union
countries, but are as large as 350% of GNI in Luxembourg, 78% of GNI in Puerto Rico, and
56% of GNI in Ireland. As with the excess of πf over πl in tax havens, we assume that these
excess service exports and intra-group interest receipts reflect profit shifting.
       A number of remarks about this methodology are in order. First, our procedure is con-
  28
    See Appendix Section D, where we discuss the evidence in the literature on the magnitude of profit shifting
through the mis-pricing of intra-group goods trade vs. other channels.


                                                      13
sistent with how profit shifting is perceived by policy-makers globally. Many countries have
anti-avoidance policies whereby specific cross-border transactions (such as certain royalty pay-
ments, interest, or services) are presumed to be motivated by tax avoidance and taxed accord-
ingly.29 Second, our procedure is consistent with Clausing (2009), who estimates how much of
the profits booked offshore by U.S. multinationals are shifted out of the United States by ap-
portioning the offshore profits of U.S. firms proportionally to the amount of affiliate intra-firm
transactions that occur with the United States.30 Third, our approach does not involve the
use of an apportionment formula. We keep the current international tax system of subsidiary-
by-subsidiary accounting and arm’s length pricing as is, and consider how the geography of
global profits would change if all countries applied the same effective corporate tax rate (which
would remove incentives to shift profits).31 Because many of the transactions we consider are
intra-group (not to final customers), our allocation of the shifted profits is not equivalent to a
sales-based apportionment of shifted profits. Last, and importantly, we find that the amount of
intra-group interest received by tax havens plus the amount of services (found in the literature
to be conducive of shifting) exported by tax havens (above and beyond what could be expected
given the size of their economies) matches our estimate of the amount of global profit shifting
obtained by setting πf = πl in tax havens: $646bn for the former and $616 billion for the latter
in 2015.32 That is, we have two fully independent estimates of the amount of profit shifting
that deliver consistent results: one based on foreign affiliates statistics, setting πf = πl in tax
havens; the other based on balance of payments data, tracking tax havens’ intra-group interest
receipts and service exports. This consistency of findings obtained using completely different
data and methodologies lends support to the view that $600bn–650bn is indeed the correct order
of magnitude for the amount of profits shifted to tax havens in 2015.
  29
      For example, residence countries of multinational companies typically have controlled foreign company rules
that tax certain forms of income (such as royalties and interest) reported in havens by their multinationals. In
2017, the United States introduced a “base-erosion anti-abuse tax” (BEAT) that presumes that certain services
transactions by multinational firms with related parties are motivated by tax avoidance.
   30
      We generalize this approach in three ways: (i) we apportion the profits shifted by all (not only U.S.)
multinationals; (ii) we use balance of payments data which capture all cross-border transactions (not only
transactions within divisions of multinationals); (iii) we focus on the types of transaction identified in the
literature as being particularly conducive of shifting.
   31
      Our approach differs from Guvenen et al. (2018), who apportion the worldwide profits of U.S. multina-
tionals proportionally to labor compensation and sales to unaffiliated parties in each country. Their allocation
approximates how the profits of U.S. firms would be split under a formulary apportionment system (with labor
and sales as apportionment factors). We view their benchmark (formulary apportionment) and ours (tax rate
harmonization) as both relevant. One advantage of the Guvenen et al. (2018) approach is that the adoption of
apportionment formulas by individual countries may be more politically realistic than a full tax harmonization
in the short run. One advantage of our approach is that it does not require us to model how firms would change
their behavior if countries adopted apportionment systems.
   32
      See Appendix C.


                                                       14
       In addition to our main allocation of the shifted profits, we also provide an alternative
allocation of the profits shifted offshore, in which we assign these profits to the countries where
the ultimate parents of the offshore affiliates are incorporated. This allocation makes it possible
to estimate what fraction of the globally shifted profits ultimately accrue to the shareholders of
U.S. multinationals, European multinationals, etc.33


4        Data Sources and Global Summary Statistics
Before presenting and analyzing our results (Section 5), this section describes our three main
data sources: national accounts data, foreign affiliates statistics, and balance of payments data.
All the data sources, references and step-by-step computations are described in a detailed man-
ner in Appendix A (national accounts and foreign affiliate statistics) and B (balance of payments
data); here we focus on the main conceptual and practical issues.

4.1       National Accounts Data
We compute π in all tax havens, all OECD countries, and the main developing countries using
harmonized national accounts data that follow the 2008 System of National Accounts (United
Nations, 2009). The basic data source is the OECD’s detailed national accounts by sector
(Table 14A). This source covers all OECD countries (which includes prominent corporate tax
havens: Ireland, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Belgium, and Switzerland) and a number of large
developing non-OECD countries (Brazil, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, India, Russia, and South
Africa). We extend the OECD database to non-OECD tax havens (such as Singapore, Hong
Kong, and Puerto Rico) by manually collecting the official national accounts published by tax
havens’ statistical institutes and central banks. We include all the tax havens listed by Hines
and Rice (1994) in our database.
       The OECD detailed national accounts include all the necessary inputs needed to compute
the profits-to-wage ratio π: corporate operating surplus rK, net interest payments p, and wages
paid wL, for both financial and non-financial corporations. A few countries only provide gross-
of-depreciation operating surplus series, in which case we impute depreciation based on observed
depreciation rates in similar economies.34 Some also do not isolate the corporate sector from
  33
     Yet another approach to allocate the shifted profits would involve trying to figure where production has
“truly” taken place and apportion profits accordingly. However in many cases, it is impossible to determine
where production takes place (e.g., the creation of intangibles occurs through the cooperation and interaction
of subsidiaries in various countries). See Devereux and Vella (2017) for a discussion.
  34
     See Appendix Section A.2.2. Capital depreciation amounts to around 15% of corporate gross value-added
with relatively little variation across countries, see Appendix Table A.2.


                                                     15
other sectors of the economy (government and households) official national accounts. In that
case, we impute the share of all domestic wages that are paid by corporations based on the
share observed in countries with similar level of development.35

4.2     Foreign Affiliates Statistics (FATS)
We compute profitability for foreign firms (πf ) within each country using harmonized foreign
affiliates statistics (FATS) recently released by the world’s largest economic and financial cen-
ters.36 These statistics are based on exhaustive or quasi-exhaustive census-type surveys of
multinational enterprises. There are both inward and outward FATS. The inward FATS of,
say, France record the value-added Y , operating surplus rK, compensation of employees wL
(among other indicators) of foreign firms operating in France and are tabulated by country of
the foreign parent company.37 The outward FATS of France record the value-added, profits,
compensation of employees (etc.) of the affiliates of French multinationals operating abroad and
are tabulated by country of affiliate.38 Firms report confidentially to domestic statistical author-
ities, which then publish tabulated statistics following international guidelines (Eurostat, 2012).
Value-added, operating surplus, etc., are defined and constructed like in the national accounts,
the only difference being that FATS only capture a subset of firms (e.g., foreign corporations in
the case of inward FATS) while the national accounts capture all resident corporations. FATS
are disseminated by Eurostat, the OECD, and national statistical agencies. A number of points
are worth noting about these data.


Double-counting issues. Although in most European countries the publication of foreign
affiliates statistics started only around 2010, in the United States, outward FATS—called “Ac-
tivities of US Multinational Enterprises”—have been compiled as far back as the mid-1960s
  35
     See Appendix Section A.2.1 and Appendix Table A.1. By definition all profits originate from the corporate
sector so generally speaking no imputation is required for profits (see, however, Section 4.2 below for the case
of Ireland, Netherlands, and Luxembourg).
  36
     Once we have π and πf , the profitability of local firms πl is obtained as a residual, since by definition,
π = s · πf + (1 − s) · πl , where s is the share of wages paid by foreign firms.
  37
     Other indicators include, e.g., turnover, number of employees, investments flows, R&D expenditure, and in
some countries (such as the United States) tangible capital stocks. When capital stocks are not available, we
estimate them by cumulating past investment flows; see Appendix E.
  38
     This is in contrast to direct investment income statistics that are tabulated by country of the immediate
counterpart. For instance, if a French parent owns a German affiliate through a holding company in Luxembourg,
direct investment income received by the French parent is recorded as coming from Luxembourg in the French
balance of payment (OECD 2008, Paragraph 218). FATS, by contrast, are tabulated by country of affiliates’
primary activity. In the above example, profits are recorded as made in Germany (not Luxembourg).




                                                      16
by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.39 A large literature has used these data for research
purposes.40
       A concern with some of the BEA data on the activities of US multinational enterprises is that
they double-count foreign income (Blouin and Robinson, 2019). More precisely, “net income”
as reported in the BEA Income Statement tables (D1–D13) double-counts the income of US
affiliates going through chains of holding companies. However, we do not use “net income” in
this paper. We use the BEA Value Added tables (F1–F9), which are the tables that report our
statistics of interest as defined in Section 3.1: the (net-of-depreciation) value-added Y , employee
compensation wL, (net-of-depreciation) operating surplus rK, net interest paid p·rK, and (net-
of-depreciation) pre-tax profits (1 − p) · rK of the majority-owned affiliates of US multinationals
abroad. Pre-tax profit in the BEA Value Added Tables (called “profit-type return” by the
BEA) does not double-count profits, because in contrast to “net income” it does not count
as profit equity income received.41 As shown in Appendix D.5, the total pre-tax profits made
by US multinationals in tax havens recorded in the BEA Value Added tables very closely
tracks the preferred estimate of Blouin and Robinson (2019).42 The foreign affiliates statistics
compiled internationally and used in this paper are the analogue of the BEA Value Added
Tables. Following common guidelines, pre-tax profit in these statistics always excludes equity
income received and does not-double count profits.43
  39
      Detailed tabulations starting in 1983 are available online at https://www.bea.gov/international/
di1usdop, for instance for 2015 at https://www.bea.gov/international/usdia2015r
   40
      See Section 2 above. See also Wright and Zucman (2018) for an analysis of these data back to the mid-1960s.
   41
      Consider for instance the case a US parent that owns a German affiliate through a Bermuda holding company.
Assume the German affiliate makes $100 in profit and pays $100 in dividends to the Bermuda holding. In the
Income Statement Table D1 (not used in this paper), $100 in “net income” is assigned to Germany and $100
in “net income” is also assigned to Bermuda: foreign income is counted twice. But in the Value-Added Table
F1 (used in this paper), $100 in profit is assigned to Germany and $0 profit is assigned to Bermuda. Indeed,
to the extent that it has no other activity than to act as a paper intermediary between the US and Germany,
the Bermuda affiliate has zero economic value added: for this affiliate, wL = 0, (1 − p) · rK = 0, Y = 0. In
2015, the total amount of pre-tax profits (1 − p) · rK recorded by the BEA for the majority-owned affiliates of
US multinationals operating in Bermuda was only $7.1 billion (Table F1), much less than the “net income” of
these affiliates ($72.1 billion, Table D1).
   42
      In 2016, according to the BEA Value Added tables, 48% of the pre-tax profit (1 − p) · rK of majority-owned
affiliates of US multinationals were made in tax havens. The preferred estimate of Blouin and Robinson (2019),
“adjusted pre-tax income,” is 42% in 2016 (their Figure 3, right panel). Note that the balance of payments data
used in Zucman (2014, 2015) tend to overstate the share of profits made by US multinationals in tax havens,
because in balance of payments statistics transactions are assigned to the country with which the US has an
immediate link (in the above example, $100 in income is assigned to Bermuda and $0 to Germany in the balance
of payments); see Wright and Zucman (2018) for a detailed discussion. The FATS used in this paper do not suffer
from this bias. Note also that the U.S. FATS under-estimate the share of profits made by U.S. multinationals in
tax havens because they exclude Puerto Rico (which is not treated as a foreign country in the BEA data on the
activities of US multinational enterprises). Including Puerto Rico, 54% of the pre-tax profit of majority-owned
affiliates of U.S. multinationals were made in tax havens in 2016 (Saez and Zucman, 2019).
   43
      Paragraph 1.3.4 of the Eurostat (2012) FATS manual states: “Income and expenditure classified as financial



                                                       17
Imputations for missing countries. The main OECD economies including key havens (such
as Ireland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and Switzerland) publish foreign affiliates statistics.
For these countries, we compute πf using their inward FATS. For the countries that do not
publish FATS yet (which is the case for smaller, non-OECD havens, e.g., Bermuda, the Cayman
Islands, Hong Kong), we impute the profits and wages of foreign firms in two steps.
   First, we estimate the pre-tax profits of foreign firms using the amount of inward direct
investment income reported in the balance of payments and making systematic adjustments.
Almost all countries publish direct investment statistics, which follow common international
guidelines codified in the OECD (2008) benchmark definition of direct investment. Direct
investment income is closely related to the pre-tax profits of foreign firms studied in this paper.
Direct investment income is the net-of-depreciation, net-of-corporate income tax profits of firms
that are more than 10% owned by foreign investors, pro-rated by the ownership stake of the
foreign investor. Pre-tax profits in FATS is the net-of-depreciation, gross-of-corporate-income-
tax profit of firms that are more than 50% owned by foreign investors, with no pro-rating. We
adjust direct investment income data accordingly.44
   Second, we estimate the wages paid by foreign firms by applying the wage/profit ratio seen
in the outward FATS of counterpart countries. We rely particularly on the outward FATS of
the United States which provide data on the foreign operations of US multinationals in small
tax havens in isolation, such as Barbados, Bermuda, Panama, etc. We have checked that our
procedure closely approximates the true amount of foreign profits and wages by implementing
it for the sample of tax havens that publish inward FATS, suggesting that the margin of error
involved with these imputations is limited.


Bilateral discrepancies. If foreign affiliates statistics were perfect, the inward FATS of host
countries (where affiliates are located) would be fully consistent with the mirror outwards FATS
of partner countries (where parents are headquartered). We conducted a systematic comparison
of the available data to assess the consistency of existing FATS.45 We found that while inward
and outward data are generally consistent, there is one notable discrepancy. In the inward FATS
of Ireland, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg one finds less profit made by US affiliates than
in the mirror outwards FATS of the United States. A similar gap (of $95 billion in 2015) is
in company accounts according to the 4th Accounting Directive (78/660) is excluded from value added.”
  44
     See Appendix Section A.3 for a step-by-step description of these computations. See Wright and Zucman
(2018) for a detailed reconciliation of FATS and balance of payments statistics in the U.S. case.
  45
     See Appendix A.4.1 (results summarized in Appendix Table A.8) and Appendix Section B.3.3 (results
summarized in Appendix Table B.11).


                                                   18
observed in bilateral balance of payments data, where less direct investment income is paid to
the United States by affiliates located in Ireland, Netherlands, and Luxembourg than received
by the United States from these havens.
       There are two possible reasons for this discrepancy. First, Ireland, Netherlands, and Lux-
embourg may underestimate the profits that affiliates of US firms book in their territory. In
particular, these three countries may miss some of the profits booked in special purpose entities
due to a lack of comprehensive enough corporate registries, non-response to surveys, or other
data issues (Angulo and Hierro, 2017; Damgaard and Elkjaer, 2017). Alternatively, the United
States may overestimate the profits booked by its multinationals in Ireland, Netherlands, and
Luxembourg. For example, U.S. statisticians may wrongly assign to Ireland profits that in fact
have been booked in other tax havens such as Bermuda (CSO, 2016).
       Although it is not possible to settle this issue definitively with the available data, the evidence
suggests that Ireland, Netherlands, and Luxembourg under-estimate the profits booked by US
multinationals. As shown by Appendix Figure N.4, for non-haven countries, the profits recorded
by the US abroad match the data reported by the partner country.46 It is only for tax havens
that US data exceed the estimate of partner countries, so that globally the profits of US affiliates
recorded by US statisticians in all foreign countries combined (as measured in the US balance
of payments) exceed the profits of US affiliates recorded by all foreign countries combined (as
measured in their balances of payments).47
       In our central scenario, we force global inward investment income to match global outward
investment income by upgrading the inward data of Ireland, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands
so that they match the counterpart outward data reported by the United States.48 We discuss
two alternative corrections in the Appendix. First, we consider the hypothesis that the inward
data of Ireland, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands are correct and that US statisticians over-
estimate the total amount of foreign profits made by US multinationals. Taking the Irish,
  46
      For instance, Canada reports $17.9 billion in direct investment income paid to the US in 2015, while the US
records $18.5 billion in DI income received from Canada. Japan reports $8.6 billion in DI income paid to the
US in 2015, while the US records $9.7 billion in DI income received from Japan. Australia reports $6.1 billion
in DI income paid to the US in 2015, while the US records $6.5 billion in DI income received from Australia.
   47
      See Appendix Figure A.14. This imbalance is the main driver of the imbalance in global direct investment
income recorded in the world balance of payments by the IMF. Globally, more direct investment income is
received (in the form of dividends and reinvested earnings) by the parents of multinational firms than paid by
affiliates. This direct investment income gap reaches about $200 billion in 2015 (Appendix Figure B.3b). In
Appendix B, we decompose this gap by leveraging the bilateral direct investment income data of all the world’s
countries and find that the bulk of the gap comes from missing payments made by affiliates of US multinationals.
   48
      This adds $95 billion in foreign profits to Ireland, Luxembourg and the Netherlands. We allocate the residual
inward/outward global income gap (of the order of $100 billion in 2015) by upgrading the inward data whenever
the sum of outward profits exceeds reported inward profit; see Appendix A.3.3.



                                                        19
Dutch and Luxembourg data at face value still leaves a difference of an order of magnitude
between the profitability of foreign firms (πf ) and the profitability of local firms (πl ) in these
three havens and reduces our estimate of global profit shifting by 15%.49 Second, we consider
the hypothesis that the US statistics do not over-estimate the total amount of foreign profits
made by US multinationals but wrongly assign to Ireland, Netherlands and Luxembourg profits
in fact booked in Bermuda and other havens without inward investment income data. This
correction does not affect our estimate of the amount of profits globally shifted, but only their
location (with Bermuda featuring more prominently, and Ireland less prominently).

4.3       Bilateral balances of payments
For our main allocation of the shifted profits (i.e., to source countries), we rely on the bilateral
balances of payments disseminated by the IMF and Eurostat. While balance of payments
statistics traditionally only reported transactions with all non-residents as a total, following the
adoption of the 6th edition of the IMF (2009) Balance of Payments Manual, most countries have
started publishing bilateral balances of payments. Among tax havens, the data are particularly
good for Switzerland and the European Union tax havens (Ireland, Luxembourg, Belgium,
Netherlands, Malta, and Cyprus) which must report harmonized statistics to Eurostat.
      When two estimates of the same haven-to non-haven flow are available (e.g., exports of
services from Luxembourg to Germany as recorded by Luxembourg, and imports of services
by Germany from Luxembourg as recorded by Germany), we use the statistics reported by tax
havens, because the bilateral data reported by tax havens tend to be more comprehensive than
those recorded by counterpart countries. As shown in Appendix B, the service exports recorded
by the 6 E.U. tax havens (Ireland, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Belgium, Malta, Cyprus) to the
22 non-haven E.U. countries exceed the recorded imports by more than 30% (and more than
50% for Luxembourg). One likely explanation for this gap is that importers’ data miss (at least
some of) the services that are exported by tax-haven corporations directly to foreign customers,
such as digital music subscriptions, ride-sharing services, and various Internet services (server
space, voice over IP, etc.). There is evidence that the typical business structure of digital
services multinationals involves shifting intellectual property to tax haven subsidiaries and then
directly selling services to final customers without involving any non-haven subsidiary (see, e.g.,
Pomeroy, 2016). The associated service flows seem at this stage better captured in the tax
havens’ trade statistics than in the customer countries’ statistics.50
 49
      See Appendix Figure N.1.
 50
      When a firm incorporated in Luxembourg directly exports digital services to French customers without


                                                    20
    For our alternative allocation of the shifted profits (i.e., to the countries where headquarters
are located), we use the bilateral direct investment statistics on an ultimate ownership basis
compiled by Damgaard and Elkjaer (2017), who exploit the data made available by OECD
countries following the implementation of the 6th edition of the IMF (2009) Balance of Payments
Manual.51

4.4     Global Summary Statistics
Table 1 presents our database of corporate profits by showing its global totals in 2015, our
benchmark year. In 2015, global gross value-added (i.e., global GDP) reached $75 trillion and
global net value-added (i.e., after capital depreciation) about $63 trillion. About 54% of global
net value-added was produced by corporations; the rest was produced by governments, house-
holds, and non-corporate businesses. Within corporations, the capital share of net value-added
was about 1/3 and the labor share about 2/3. Out of the $11.5 trillion in net-of-depreciation
corporate profits, close to 15% ($1.7 trillion) were made in foreign firms. This $1.7 trillion
number includes all the profits made by, say, Apple in France, Germany, Ireland, Jersey, etc.,
but not by Apple in the United States (where its headquarter is located). It is what we call
“multinational profits.” That is, multinational profits include all the profits made by multina-
tional companies outside of the country where their parent is located. Our estimate (detailed
in Section 5.4 below) is that out of these $1.7 trillion in multinational profits, about 36%, i.e.,
about $600 billion, were shifted to tax havens.52
    Table 1 also shows that corporations paid $2.15 trillion in corporate income taxes globally
in 2015.53 Thus the global effective corporate income tax rate was 19% (2.15 trillion divided by
going through a French subsidiary, French statistical authorities cannot rely on corporate income statements
to capture such flows, and have to use other—typically less comprehensive—data sources, such as household
consumption surveys. Beginning 2014, value-added taxes have started to be imposed in France (and other E.U.
countries) on direct foreign-business-to-consumer sales. In principle, VAT returns could be used as inputs to
better estimate French imports of services. Looking forward, systematically using VAT returns could help fix
the imports-exports service mismatch between havens and non-havens countries.
  51
     See Appendix Section C.2 for a detailed presentation and discussion of these data.
  52
     Our list of tax havens is the one in Hines and Rice (1994) to which we add Belgium and the Netherlands. The
Netherlands was not considered as a tax haven by Hines and Rice (1994) because U.S. multinationals reported
paying relatively high tax rates there in 1982; but as we show in Appendix Table A.11, this is not the case
anymore: the tax rate paid by affiliates of U.S. multinationals in the Netherlands was 12% in 2015. Belgium is
a borderline case that is sometimes considered a tax haven in the literature (e.g., because of the deductibility
of notional interest on equity). As shown in Figure 3 below, Belgium’s profitability ratio is only barely higher
than that of non-havens, and we estimate that only $13 billion were shifted to Belgium in 2015 (Table 2 below).
Hence excluding Belgium from our list of tax havens would not make any significant difference to our results.
  53
     Corporate income tax data also come from OECD detailed national accounts (current taxes on income and
wealth paid by non-financial and financial corporations, code D.5 in the System of National Accounts) and
individual countries’ statistical authorities and central banks. Note that some countries include central bank



                                                      21
net-of-depreciation, pre-tax global profits of $11.5 trillion). This rate is smaller than the global
GDP-weighted statutory tax rate of about 26% because the tax base in most countries is smaller
than the full economic base (e.g., due provisions such as accelerated depreciation) and because
of tax credits (e.g., for R&D expenditure). If all countries jointly adopted an effective corporate
tax rate of 19% (as a fraction of the full economic base), the taxation of global corporate income
would be unchanged, hence global investment and the global capital stock would not change,
at least to a first-order approximation.54 What would change is the location of capital and
profit—which is what we are concerned with in this paper.


5     The Level and Rise of Global Profit Shifting
We now present and analyze our results. We start by discussing our core results on global
profitability in local vs. foreign firms, before turning to the implications of this phenomenon for
non-haven countries and tax revenues (Section 6) and for macroeconomic statistics (Section 7).

5.1     Profitability in Tax Havens vs. Non-Haven Countries
Figure 3 shows how the profit-to-wage ratio π varies across countries in 2015. Among the main
non-haven countries displayed in Figure 3, π average 36% in 2015. That is, for any dollar of
wage paid, corporations made 36 cents in pre-tax profits. This corresponds to a capital share of
net corporate value-added α = 26%, and net interest paid p = -3% of net operating surplus. The
profits-to-wage ratio π does not vary much across developed, non-haven countries; for instance
it is 31% in the United States, 39% in Sweden, 42% in the United Kingdom.55 These results
are consistent with existing studies of corporate capital shares, which find net-of-depreciation
corporate capital shares α of about 25% (corresponding to profits-to-wage ratio π of 33% if net
profits under D.5; we always exclude central bank profits and our series thus only include corporate income taxes
paid (see Appendix Table A.3). Business property taxes are treated as taxes on production in the SNA (code
D2–D3).
  54
     Small changes in investment are possible if elasticities of corporate investment are not constant. In this
paper we do not attempt to compute the harmonized effective tax rate that would keep global investment
perfectly constant, but simply note that such a rate exists (and is probably close to 19%). The level of the global
harmonized tax rate that would keep global investment constant is not relevant for our purposes. Note that this
rate could in principle be higher than 19%, for instance if, at the same time they harmonized their tax rates, all
countries also increased public investment complementing private capital. Modeling the different ways in which
global profits could be kept fixed with a perfect international coordination of economic policies falls outside the
scope of this research.
  55
     As reported in Appendix Table A.2., profitability ratios are higher in developing countries. This reflects the
fact that the capital share of corporate output is typically higher in poorer countries, potentially due, e.g., to
the presence of rents generated by natural resources and to lower labor bargaining power (lower unionization
rates, low or no minimum wages).



                                                        22
interest p is zero), with modest variation across time and across countries, of the order of 5–10
percentage points (e.g., Blanchard, 1997; Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2014; Cette, Koehl and
Philippon, 2019; Gutiérrez and Piton, 2019).
       Tax havens, by contrast, are abnormally profitable. In Singapore and Hong Kong, the
macroeconomic profit-to-wage ratio exceeds 100%; in Ireland, Puerto Rico, and Luxembourg,
it exceeds 200%. That is, tax havens appear to have extraordinarily high profit-to-wage ratios
π. As shown by Appendix Table A.2, the high π of tax havens are mostly driven by their high
recorded capital shares, not by net interest.56 For instance, the net capital share of net corporate
value-added is 62% in Ireland, 68% in Puerto Rico, 66% in Panama. The main exception is
Luxembourg, where net intra-group interest receipts are the key driver of the high recorded π.
Overall, 15% of our estimated amount of profits shifted offshore comes from interest, consistent
with the literature that suggests that debt-shifting is second-order relative to transfer pricing
and the strategic location of intangibles (Heckemeyer and Overesch, 2017).57
       Next, we analyze how the profitability of tax havens has changed over time. Due to data
availability constraints, our global database is for the year 2015, and we cannot yet present time
series of π for all countries (future releases of FATS will allow us to build comprehensive time
series starting in 2015). However, we can already provide time series of π for specific tax havens.
The tax haven for which the longest and highest quality time series exist is Ireland. As shown in
the top panel of Figure 4, in Ireland π was around 25–30% in the early 1970s, a level similar to
that recorded in the United States. Profitability started rising in the 1980s and then increased
sharply in the mid-1990s and then again in the 2010s to reach 250% in 2015.58 By contrast,
in the United States π never dramatically varies. Profitability has tended to slightly increase
since the 1980s (from 18% in 1980 to 31% in 2015), driven by the rise in the capital share of
corporate value-added; but this increase is small compared to the upsurge in the profitability of
tax havens’ corporations. Trends are similar for other non-haven countries for which time series
  56
     Throughout this article, we exclude offshore mutual funds (i.e., mutual funds with mostly foreign investors
and foreign investments) from our π, πf , and πl ratios, because offshore mutual funds otherwise distort the
profitability ratios of tax havens. By convention mutual funds have an apparently high profitability as defined in
our paper (i.e., after net interest payments), but for purely accounting reasons. All income paid by mutual funds
to their shareholders is recorded as dividends in the national accounts, even for mutual funds that only invest in
bonds; as a result bond funds are large receivers of net interest. Among OECD countries offshore mutual funds
are only significant in Luxembourg, Ireland, and to a much lesser extent the Netherlands. Estimating the net
interest received by mutual funds involves a margin of error, but this uncertainty is very small compared to the
large π and πf of tax havens; see Appendix Section A.3 for a discussion.
  57
     Intra-group interest received by tax havens amount to $101 billion in 2015 (15.7%) vs. $545 billion for the
exports of services most conducive of profit shifting (84.3%); see Appendix Table C.2.
  58
     In 2015, the profits-to-wage ratios recorded by Ireland increased particularly strongly. That year, recorded
real GDP grew 26.3%—largely reflecting transfers of multinational intangible assets to the island (see e.g.,
OECD, 2016).


                                                       23
are available.59
       In the bottom panel of Figure 4, we can see that the rise in the profitability of tax havens
over time is not specific to Ireland. When we look at all the majority-owned affiliates of U.S.
multinationals throughout the world (using the outward FATS of the United States, which as
already noted have been compiled since the 1960s), a similar pattern emerges. In the early 1970s,
the haven and non-haven affiliates of U.S. multinationals were as profitable. In both cases, the
profits-to-wage ratio was around 50%. Since the 1970s, profitability for haven affiliates has
sharply increased. In 2015, the profits-to-wage ratio of US affiliates located in tax havens
exceeds 350%, while the profits-to-wage ratio of US affiliates located in high-tax countries has
stayed constant since the 1970s (45% in 2015).

5.2       Profitability in Local vs. Foreign Firms
Figure 5 displays the profits-to-wage ratios for foreign firms (πf ) and local firms (πl ) separately
within each country in 2015. By construction the aggregate profit-to-wage ratio π shown in
Figure 3 for a given country is the average of πf and πl shown in Figure 5, with πf weighted
by the share s of wages paid to workers employed by foreign firms and πl weighted by 1 − s.
A key result emerges: the high overall profits-to-wage ratios π of tax havens are entirely driven
by the high profitability of foreign firms (high πf ). Foreign firms in tax havens are an order of
magnitude more profitable than local firms in tax havens.
       There are three other main take-aways from Figure 5. First, the reported profitability of
foreign firms in tax havens is truly exceptional, with πf ratios of 800% (which corresponds to a
capital share of corporate value-added α of close to 90%) in Ireland and as high as 1,625% in
Puerto Rico (corresponding to a capital share of more than 94%, i.e., a corporate labor share
of less than 6%).60
       Second, while foreign firms are an order of magnitude more profitable than local firms in
tax havens, the opposite is true in high-tax countries: in these countries foreign firms are less
profitable than local firms. For instance, in the United Kingdom the profits-to-wage ratio is 26%
for foreign firms (πf ) vs. 48% for local firms (πl ); in Japan πf equals 24% while πl reaches 44%,
etc.61 There are several possible reasons for the low profitability of foreign firms in high-tax
  59
      See, e.g., Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) and Piketty and Zucman (2014).
  60
      Puerto Rico is a U.S. possession, but is treated as a foreign country for purposes of U.S. taxation and in
some (but not all) U.S. macroeconomic statistics. In this paper we treat it as a foreign country. Almost all the
profits shifted to Puerto Rico accrue to U.S. multinationals. See Suárez Serrato (2018) for an analysis of the
evolution of profit shifting by U.S. multinationals to Puerto Rico.
   61
      The lower profitability of foreign firms in the United Kingdom compared to local firms, by a factor of about
2, is consistent with Bilicka (2019) who finds that foreign multinational subsidiaries in the UK under-report their


                                                        24
countries (relative to local firms in these countries). For instance foreign firms may be younger,
or they could operate in less profitable industries. The fact that πf < πl in high-tax countries
while πf >> πl in tax havens (Figure 5) suggests that profit shifting is also part of the reason
why foreign firms appear unprofitable in high-tax places. That is, there is a clear trace in global
macro data of movements of profits within divisions of multinational groups, away from high-tax
affiliates and towards low-tax affiliates. Precisely quantifying the relative importance of profit
shifting (vs. other factors such as firm age) in the low πf observed in high-tax countries falls
outside the scope of this research.62
    Third, local firms in tax havens are generally as profitable as local firms in non-haven
countries. The high overall profits-to-wage ratio π of tax havens is entirely driven by the high
profitability of their foreign firms πf . Local firms in tax havens do not seem to be abnormally
profitable, which could in principle be the case if low-tax countries also had pro-capital or anti-
labor institutions (such as bans on unions or no minimum wage) or if the reported profitability
of local haven firms was inflated by inward profit shifting. This suggests that the πl ratios of
tax havens are a useful reference point to estimate what fraction of the large πf of tax havens
can be attributed to profit shifting.

5.3     Decomposing The High Profits of Haven Affiliates
What is the relative contribution of high capital intensities vs. profit shifting to the high
recorded πf of tax havens?
    As shown by the top panel of Figure 6, on aggregate firms have similar capital stocks K
(relative to wages wL) in tax havens and non-havens. Within tax havens, moreover, foreign
firms have similar capital stocks (again relative to wages) as local firms on average. For the main
tax havens (Ireland, Puerto Rico, Netherlands, Singapore, Belgium, Luxembourg, Switzerland,
and Hong Kong) the ratio of the capital stock to wages averages 274% for foreign firms and
303% for local firms. For the main non-havens countries (US, Italy, Germany, UK, Australia,
Spain, France, and Japan) the average capital-stock-to-wage ratios are similar: 291% for foreign
firms and 320% for local firms.
    These averages conceal some heterogeneity, however. In Ireland and Puerto Rico, foreign
firms have large capital stocks, while the converse appears to be true in Switzerland, Hong Kong,
and Luxembourg. This suggests that differences in capital intensities could explain some of the
taxable profits by about 50 percent relative to domestic standalone.
   62
      See, e.g., Lupo et al. (1978) and Mataloni (2000) for an analysis of the relatively low profitability of foreign
firms operating in the United States.


                                                         25
variation in πl and πf across countries. The bottom panel of Figure 6 quantifies the contribution
of differences in capital intensity to the observed differences in profits-to-wage ratios. The figure
shows how applying the capital/labor K/L ratio of foreign firms to local firms would modify the
observed profits-to-wage ratio of local firms πl , for different values of the capital/labor elasticity
of substitution σ. For plausible values of σ, differences in capital intensities can explain only a
small fraction of the πf − πl gap. For instance in Ireland, if local firms were as capital intensive
as foreign firms, then with σ = 1.3, πl would equal 100% instead of the observed value of 68%.
This would still be almost an order of magnitude less than the observed πf of 800%. The same
conclusion holds true for each other tax haven.
   We obtain similar results when we focus on the affiliates of U.S. multinationals throughout
the world (using the outward FATS of the United States). Figure 7) decomposes the profit-
to-wage ratio of the foreign affiliates of U.S. multinationals following equation 2 above. The
haven affiliates of U.S. multinationals have higher capital intensities than non-haven affiliates,
but only slightly so. For a given amount of wages paid, haven affiliates use a 1.4 times larger
stock of tangible capital than non-haven affiliates in 2015. Haven affiliates also receive slightly
more interest in 2015 (1.1 time more than non-haven affiliates, relative to operating surplus),
but the difference is not large. By contrast, haven affiliates have much higher recorded rates of
return on capital than non-haven affiliates today. In 2015, the recorded rate of return to capital
rf is close to five times higher in haven affiliates than in non-haven affiliates. The bulk of the
sevenfold difference in profits-to-wage ratios between havens and non-haven affiliates (bottom
panel of Figure 4) is thus due to higher recorded returns to capital in haven affiliates—not high
intra-group interest receipts or high capital intensities.
   The high rates of return of haven affiliates can be seen as the product of two effects. First,
multinationals book intangibles in low-tax affiliates. These intangibles are not included in our
measure of corporations’ capital stocks, for lack of data about their market value—which in
many cases is impossible to assess, given that many of these intangibles are firm-specific and
never exchanged on markets between unrelated parties. Second, for a given stock of total
capital (tangible plus intangible), haven affiliates can report high profits because of intra-group
transfer price manipulations. With the macro data at our disposal, we cannot separate the role
of intangibles vs. intra-group transfer prices in explaining the high rates of returns recorded by
haven affiliates. This distinction is not relevant for our purposes, however, since both of these
techniques have similar redistributive implications: for a given global amount of profits, both
redistribute profits across countries without affecting wages.


                                                  26
       One potential concern with our treatment of intangibles is that some of the intangibles
booked in tax havens may not have been shifted there but produced locally, by workers employed
in R&D. To shed light on this question, we use the fact that foreign affiliates statistics include
data on R&D personnel. The US outward FATS show that out of the 308,100 employees of the
majority-owned foreign affiliates of US multinationals engaged in R&D in 2014, only 8% were
employed in tax havens; 92% were employed in non-haven affiliates (primarily in Germany, the
U.K., Canada, etc.).63 The FATS of other countries show similar patterns. By and large, the
intangibles booked in low-tax countries have been produced in high-tax countries.64
       One advantage of using the outward FATS of the United States is that we can study how the
contribution of rates of return to capital vs. capital intensity vs. interest payments has changed
over time, back to 1966. The main driver of the rise in the profits-to-wage ratio of the haven
affiliates of US multinationals since the mid-1960s has been the rise in their rate of return. Up to
the late 1970s, affiliates in tax havens had roughly the same recorded rate of return to tangible
capital, same capital intensity, and same net interest receipts than other affiliates. Since the
1980s, their relative rate of return has increased by a factor of about 5. By contrast, the relative
capital intensity of these two groups of affiliates has remained close to 1, with only a mild rising
trend. Some capital has moved towards low-tax places. But what the data suggest is that, so
far, profit shifting seems to have swamped tax-driven movements of tangible capital.65

5.4       Estimates of Profits Shifted to Tax Havens
To form our estimate of the amount of profits shifted to tax havens, we set πf equal to πl in
each tax haven. That is, we assume that absent profit shifting, foreign firms in Ireland would be
as profitable as local Irish firms, foreign firms in Luxembourg as profitable as local Luxembourg
firms, etc. In total, we find that more than $616 billion in profits were shifted to tax havens
in 2015, close to 40% of multinational profits ($616 billion out of $1.7 trillion). We present our
estimate of the amount of profits shifted into each tax haven in the bottom panel of Table 2.
Ireland appears as the number one shifting destination, accounting for more than $100 billion
  63
     See BEA, “Activities of US Multinationals Abroad,” Table II-I.1. These tabulations are only made available
during benchmark-year surveys (the latest of which was in 2014).
  64
     A related issue is that high-tax countries require that intangibles be sold by the parent firm to a low-tax
subsidiary at an arm’s length price. We do not have data on the prices charged at the time of the transfer.
For our main purpose in that paper—quantifying the international mobility of profits—whether fair prices are
enforced at the time of the transfer is not relevant. To quantify the tax revenue implications of profit shifting
this issue is relevant, however; See Section 6 below.
  65
     This conclusion is consistent with the firm-level analysis of Grubert and Slemrod (1998) in the context of
US investments in Puerto Rico.



                                                       27
alone. Singapore, the Netherlands, Caribbean tax havens, and Switzerland come next. We stress
that due to the complex structures used by multinationals and to the data limitations discussed
in Section 4.2, allocating the shifted profits to specific jurisdictions involves a margin of error
(for instance, the frontier between Ireland and Bermuda is not always clear). This uncertainty,
however, does not affect our estimate of the global amount of profits shifted offshore.
       It is worth noting that our estimate of global profit shifting, $616 billion, is at the low-end
of the scale of available estimates. Using foreign direct investment data, Bolwijn et al. (2018)
estimates that $700 billion in profits where shifted in 2012. Using data from the Forbes Global
2000 list of the world’s largest corporations, Clausing (2016) finds $1,076 billion in shifted
profits, again for the year 2012. Our estimates of the implied tax revenue losses (described in
Section 6 below) are also at the low-end of the scale.66 We now discuss a number of robustness
tests.


Robustness with respect to σ. In our central scenario, the capital/labor elasticity of sub-
stitution σ is set to 1 and thus by construction differences in capital intensities explain none of
the πf − πl gap within tax havens. With σ = 1.3, 4% of the abnormal profitability of foreign
firms in tax havens (relative to local firms in tax havens) can be explained by differences in
capital intensity (and 96% by profit shifting); with σ= 1.7, the contribution of differences in
capital intensity rises to 7%. With an elasticity of substitution less than 1, profit shifting would
be even higher than our preferred estimate, for instance $660 billion in 2015 with σ = 0.7.67


Controlling for sectoral composition. One potential concern with comparing profitability
in foreign vs. local firms is that foreign firms in tax havens may be in other sectors than local
firms, and profits-to-wage ratios may vary across sectors. To address this issue, we use the fact
that in some countries, foreign affiliates statistics are available by sector of economic activity.
Appendix Figure L.1 focuses on the case of U.S. multinationals, using the outward foreign
affiliates statistics of the United States. We find that the haven affiliates of U.S. multinationals
are an order of magnitude more profitable than non-haven affiliates in the same sector. In
non-haven countries, U.S. affiliates are typically less profitable than local firms operating in the
same sector; while in tax havens they are an order of magnitude more profitable than local firms
operating in the same sector—consistent with the pattern depicted in Figure 5. Controlling for
sectoral differences in local vs. foreign firms does not quantitatively affect our findings.
  66
       See Appendix Table D.1a
  67
       See Appendix Table E.3


                                                   28
    Another take-away from Appendix Figure L.1 is that profit shifting is not limited to just a
few sectors of the economy, such as information and communication technology. Profit shifting
appears to be an across-the-board phenomenon, observable even in industries where intangibles
play a relatively minor role in the production process (such as manufacturing). There are several
potential explanations for this finding. Firms across all industries may shift profits by using
intra-group trade and borrowing. It could also be that multinationals in all sectors can create
firm-specific intangibles (such as logos), book these in low-tax places, and charge royalties to
high-tax subsidiaries for the right to use these intangibles.


Firm size. Another potential concern with our estimation procedure is that local firms in
tax havens may be smaller than foreign firms, and smaller firms may have lower profits-to-wage
ratios, leading us to over-estimate global profit shifting. Currently available foreign affiliates
statistics do not enable us to control for firm size. We note, however, that being a local firm
does not imply being small. There are many large multinationals headquartered in tax havens
(for instance, after “inverting” from the United States). In our data, such firms are treated
as local firms in tax havens, as they are not owned by foreign parents. Looking forward, our
estimation procedure could be refined by drawing on more detailed foreign affiliates statistics
(e.g., tabulated by firm size) and global micro-data on the operations of foreign firms.


Inward profit shifting by local firms in tax havens. Another concern is that by using the
local firms of tax havens as point reference, we may actually under-estimate the extent of global
profit shifting, since firms headquartered in tax havens may shift foreign profits inward, inflating
πl . This phenomenon could explain the relatively high profits-to-wage ratio of Irish local firms
reported in Figure 5, and suggests that our estimates of global profit shifting should probably
be viewed as conservative.68 We have run robustness tests where we make the profitability of
local haven firms vary and assess the impact on our results, and found only second-order effects,
however. The reason is that the bulk of our estimated $616bn in shifted profits comes from
tax havens where πf is an order of magnitude higher than πl (hence where the exact level of
πl does not matter much). Only a small fraction of our estimated $616 billion comes from tax
havens such as Netherlands and Belgium where πf is only slightly higher than πl (hence where
the exact level of πl matters more); see Table 2. If we assumed that local firms in tax havens are
  68
     Ideally we would like to be able to compare the foreign firms of tax havens to local firms of comparable size
and without foreign affiliates. Existing foreign affiliates statistics, however, do not currently make it possible to
decompose local firms into firms with affiliates abroad vs. firms with only domestic operations.



                                                         29
in reality as profitable as local firms are on average in the OECD (πl = 41%), then our estimate
of global profit shifting would rise by about 3%.69


Abnormal profitability vs. abnormal cross-border transactions. Last, we compare our
estimate of the amount of profit shifted into each tax haven based on setting πf equal to πl in each
haven to our estimate based on the abnormal level of high-risk cross-border transactions recorded
in the balances of payments of tax havens. “High-risk” transactions are service exports found in
the literature to be conducive of profit shifting plus intra-group receipts of interest; “excessive”
means that we partial out the average transaction level for countries with similar levels of GDP.
Figure 8 shows the result of this comparison. Despite being based on totally different and fully
independent data, our two methodologies deliver very consistent results. In 2015, the “above
normal profitability” methodology yields an estimate of $616 billion for the amount of profit
shifted to tax havens globally, while the “above-normal cross-border transactions” methodology
yields an estimate of $646 billion. Strikingly, the estimates also match almost perfectly at the
haven level.


6       The Redistributive Implications of Profit Shifting
6.1      Allocating the Shifted Profits Across Countries
The pink bar in the top panel of Figure 9 allocates the $616bn in excess profits in tax havens
across source countries, proportionally to the bilateral intra-group interest received by tax
havens and their bilateral exports of services conducive of profit shifting (such as rights to
use intellectual property).
      We find that about 35% of the shifted profits come from E.U. (non-haven) countries, close to
30% from developing countries, and about 25% from the United States. European countries are
particularly affected. According to our estimates, under a perfect tax harmonization scenario,
profits would be 17% higher than they currently are in France (Table 1, col. 4 divided by col.
1), 14% higher in the UK, versus close to 10% higher in the United States. Profits in the main
developing countries, by contrast, would be around 5% higher, and profits in Japan only 1%
higher. Profits would be reduced by 60% in tax havens. About 80% of the profits shifted out
of the European Union are shifted to the E.U. tax havens, primarily Ireland, Luxembourg, and
the Netherlands, while the profits shifted out of the United States are primarily shifted to the
 69
      See Appendix Table A.7.




                                                 30
non-E.U. havens.70
      We also allocate the profits shifted to tax havens to the countries where the parents of
the tax haven subsidiaries are located (blue bar in the top panel of Figure 9). Multinationals
from all countries shift profits, but we find that U.S. multinationals are the main “shifters”:
about half of all the shifted profits ultimately accrue to U.S. parents, while about 30% accrue
to E.U. parents. The higher shifting intensity of U.S. multinationals can be explained by the
specific provisions contained in the U.S. tax code before 2018 and by U.S. policies adopted in the
mid-1990s that facilitated shifting from foreign high-tax countries to tax havens (check-the-box
regulations); see Wright and Zucman (2018).

6.2      The Redistribution of Tax Revenues
Table 2 presents estimates of the losses of corporate income tax revenues in high-tax countries.
These estimates are obtained by applying the statutory income tax rate to the amount of profits
shifted outward. At the outset, it is worth stressing two caveats. First, countries attempt to
tax profits that are shifted outward through controlled foreign corporations rules. This means
that a dollar of lost profit does not necessarily translate into τ cents lost in tax revenue, if τ
is the statutory corporate tax rate. Second, it is possible that with better enforcement there
would be more real responses to taxation, such as more mobility of tangible capital to low-tax
places. Our tax revenue loss computations keep everything else constant, as is standard in the
literature on the size of tax evasion (e.g., Johns and Slemrod, 2010; Alstadsæter et al., 2019).
      With these caveats in mind, we find that profit shifting reduces the corporate tax revenue of
the European Union by around 20%. For the world as a whole, the tax revenue loss is around
10% (bottom panel of Figure 9). The revenue losses vary significantly across countries and are
positively correlated with the corporate income tax rate. Within the European Union, higher
tax countries (such as France and Italy) experience higher losses than lower tax countries (such
as Eastern European countries), consistent with the notion that higher corporate tax rates give
more incentives to shift.
      Using our estimates of the amount of profits shifted into each haven, we can compute how
much tax revenue tax havens have been able to generate by taxing these profits. Although some
havens like Bermuda have 0% corporate tax rates, most others, like Ireland, Singapore, and
Luxembourg, have low but positive rates. A striking fact, depicted on the top panel of Figure 10,
is that tax havens, although they have low statutory tax rates (and even lower effective rates)
 70
      See Appendix Figure C.1



                                                 31
generate much more revenue than non-haven countries (relative to the size of their economy).
Malta collects about 8% of its national income in corporate tax revenue, Luxembourg 7%, and
Ireland more than 5%. By contrast, in the United States, Germany, and Italy (three of the
countries with the highest statutory tax rates in 2015), corporate tax revenue amount to less
than 3% of national income. Globally, for each $1 avoided in high-tax countries, about 20 cents
in tax revenues are generated in tax havens.
       How do tax havens manage to collect so much tax revenue? As shown by the bottom panel
of Figure 10, most of their revenue derive from taxes collected on foreign firms. With source
taxation and no international coordination, tax havens can generate sizable revenue by taxing
the huge foreign profits they attract at low but positive rates. The havens that collect the largest
amount of revenue appear to be those that impose the lowest tax rate on foreign profits: the
revenue-maximizing tax rate appears to be very low, less than 5%. The low revenue-maximizing
rate of tax havens can explain the rise of the supply of tax avoidance schemes documented in
the literature—such a favorable tax rulings granted to specific multinationals—and in turn the
rise of profit shifting since the 1980s.71
       Figure 11 considers the case of Ireland, the country that by our estimates attracts the largest
amount of shifted profits (more than $100 billion in 2015). As shown in the top panel of this
Figure, until the 1990s Ireland used to collect relatively little corporate income tax revenue,
about 1.5%–2% of national income—significantly less than the United States. Then, as profit
shifting surged (Figure 4), so did tax collection: since the mid-1990s, Ireland has collected
significantly more corporate tax revenue (as a fraction of national income) than the United
States—about twice as much in 2015. Tax collection is strongly negatively correlated with the
statutory corporate tax rate (bottom panel of Figure 11): when the tax rate was high (around
50% until the late 1980s), tax collection was low; since the rate was cut to 12.5% in the 1990s,
tax collection has been high. Whenever they choose non-zero rates—even rates effectively quite
close to zero—tax havens derive clear benefits from attracting paper profits.
       It is worth noting that gains in tax revenue are not the only way tax havens benefit from
tax competition. As we have seen a number of tax havens (including Ireland) have high capital
intensities, i.e., they also attract capital-intensive industries (which can boost wages). Even
when capital intensities are not higher, foreign firms can account for a large share of employment
in tax havens and bring important economic benefits.72 Our analysis does not allow us to
  71
     See for instance the case between the E.U. Commission and Apple in Ireland. The E.U. Commission contends
that the Irish tax authorities have allowed Apple to pay particularly low rates, of as little as 0.001%, over years.
  72
     One potential explanation is that it may be easier for multinationals to shift profits into the countries where



                                                        32
quantify the complete gains that tax havens derive from international capital mobility. Such an
analysis would require an explicit model of how movements of tangible capital affect the host
economies, which we leave to future research.


7      Macro Statistics Corrected for Profit Shifting
The flip side of the high profits recorded in tax havens is that profits recorded in non-haven
countries are too low. In both cases, core macroeconomic statistics are distorted. In the coun-
tries where shifted profits are booked (i.e., tax havens), GDP, corporate profits, the capital
share of corporate value-added, and trade balances are over-estimated. In non-haven countries,
by contrast, these indicators are under-estimated. In this section, we present macroeconomic
statistics corrected for the effect of profit shifting for all OECD countries, all tax havens, and
the main emerging economies. All our estimates are available online in Appendix Tables C.5
and C.5b; in this section we focus on discussing the methodology and main results.
    To adjust the official statistics, we proceed as follows. We add the profits shifted through
transfer prices and the strategic location of intangibles (85% of the total) to the recorded
operating surplus rK of their source country. We then correct the full sequence of economic
accounts of the source countries accordingly (i.e., we increase the value-added Y of the corporate
sector, GDP, exports, and the trade balance by the same amount) and compute corrected
corporate capital shares α = rK/Y and labor shares 1 − α.73 Profits shifted through the use of
intra-group interest payments (15% of the total) do not affect recorded operating surplus rK
but only the breakdown of operating surplus into corporate profits (1 − p) · rK and net interest
payments p; we adjust corporate profits and net interest payments accordingly.
    Table 3 presents our estimates of capital shares and trade balances corrected for profit
shifting. A number of results are worth noting. First, accounting for profit shifting increases
the capital share of corporate value-added in non-haven countries significantly.74 Consistent
they also have sizable real activity. According to our estimates, foreign firms pay 24% of all wages in Ireland
(Appendix Table A.4), while they account for as much as 78% of all profits (Appendix Table A.7). Note, however,
that there are countries where foreign firms account for an even larger fraction of the total wage bill and yet there
was little profit shifting in 2015. This includes most Eastern European countries, where foreign firms account
for around 40% of both wages and profits. These countries had corporate tax rates close to 20% in 2015.
  73
     Bruner, Rassier, and Ruhl (2018) discuss how the effect of profit shifting cascades through the economic
accounts and present US macroeconomic statistics corrected for profit shifting; see also Avdjiev et al. (2018).
  74
     Note that it does not necessarily increase the capital share of national income, as the profits of the offshore
subsidiaries that belong to domestic shareholders enter national income in the form of direct investment income
received from the rest of the world. We focus here on correcting corporate factor shares (which are the focus of
most of the literature on the decline of the labor share, e.g., Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2014; Gutiérrez and
Piton, 2019).



                                                         33
with our earlier result that European countries are particularly affected, we find that the capital
share is under-estimated by about 2 to 2.5 points in the main E.U. countries (Germany, United
Kingdom, France, Italy), vs. 1.1 point in the United States. Because there was almost no
profit shifting before the 1980s (see, e.g., Figure 4) the higher level of the capital share implies
a higher rise in the capital share over the last few decades. By our estimates, the rise in the
European corporate capital share since the early 1990s is twice as large as recorded in the official
national accounts. This finding is important in light of a recent literature that suggests that
after excluding real estate, European labor shares may not have declined much since the 1970s
(Gutiérrez and Piton, 2019) relative to the United States. Whether labor shares have declined
globally (or only in a few countries) is critical for teasing out the role of technological change
(vs. country-specific policies) in driving factor shares and inequality.
      Profit shifting also has significant effect on trade balances. For instance, after accounting for
profit shifting, Japan, the U.K., France, and Greece turn out to have trade surpluses in 2015,
in contrast to the published data that record trade deficits. According to our estimates, the
true trade deficit of the United States was 2.1% of GDP in 2015, instead of 2.8% in the official
statistics—that is, a quarter of the recorded trade deficit of the United States is an illusion of
multinational corporate tax avoidance.75


8       Conclusion
What have we learned from this paper? In our view the main finding is that one can obtain
a clear picture of global profit shifting by exploiting the foreign affiliates statistics recently
made available by many countries. These data show that the capital share of corporate value-
added is extremely high in the foreign firms of tax havens, while it is low in the foreign firms
of other countries compared to the capital share of local firms. By exploiting this pattern
of differential profitability as well as new bilateral balance of payments data recently made
available by tax havens, our paper estimates how much each tax haven, each OECD country,
and the main emerging economies gain or lose in profits compared to a benchmark of global
tax harmonization. We find that the redistributive effects of tax competition are large: by our
estimates, close to 40% of multinational profits are shifted to tax havens in 2015. Non-haven
European Union countries appear to be the largest losers from this phenomenon.
      Our findings have implications for policy. First, they suggest that cutting corporate tax
rates, as the United States has done at the end of 2017, is less likely to generate quick positive
 75
      See Sandholtz (2018) for an estimation based on U.S. bilateral trade data.


                                                       34
effects on wages than textbook economic models suggest. For wages to rise, factors of production
that complement labor need to increase, which can happen fast if tangible capital flows from
abroad, less so if it is mostly paper profits that move across borders. Second, profit shifting
raises challenges in a number of policy areas. It reduces the effective rates paid by multinationals
compared to local firms, which could adversely affect competition. It reduces the taxes paid by
the wealthy—as ownership of these firms is concentrated—which might call for offsetting changes
in individual income taxation, or changes in the way multinational companies are taxed.
   We stress that our estimates of the amount of profits shifted by multinationals globally is
conservative. Our investigation has uncovered statistical gaps that limit our ability to monitor
global economic activity and constrain tax enforcement. Statistical improvements are neces-
sary. To solve the asymmetries in bilateral foreign affiliates and direct investment statistics (in
particular between the United States and European tax havens), national statistical authorities
need to be authorized to exchange micro-data. The foreign affiliates statistics that we exploited
in this paper need to be compiled by more countries and expanded to include more informa-
tion, such as interest payments, corporate income taxes paid, and capital stocks (as the United
States, for example, already does). A number of Caribbean tax havens do not currently publish
comprehensive enough national accounts. Last and maybe most importantly, many countries—
including the United States and a number of tax havens—could improve their public corporate
registries so that all firms are included and profit information is made publicly available at
the subsidiary level. Altogether, these improvements would significantly improve our ability to
study globalization and its distributional effects.
   Our analysis has focused on how tax competition redistributes tax bases across countries.
In future research, it would be good to introduce the inequality dimension in the analysis,
i.e., to quantify how much the various income and wealth groups in each country have gained
or lost from tax competition. According to our estimates, about half of the globally shifted
profits accrue to the shareholders of U.S. multinationals (a majority of which, but not all, are
Americans). Because equity ownership is concentrated (see e.g., Saez and Zucman, 2016, for
evidence on equity wealth concentration in the United States), profit shifting tends, everything
else equal, to reduce the effective tax rate of the wealthy, which may contribute to increasing
inequality. A quantitative analysis of these redistributive effects across income and wealth
groups would make it possible to make progress towards a full-fledged macro-distributional
analysis of globalization. This raises major conceptual and empirical challenges for future
research.
References
Alstadsæter, Annette, Niels Johannesen, and Gabriel Zucman. 2019. “Tax Evasion
and Inequality”. American Economic Review, 109(6): 2073–2103.
Altshuler, Rosanne and Grubert, Harry. 2005. “The Three Parties in the Race to the Bot-
tom: Host Governments, Home Governments and Multinational Companies”. CESifo Working
Paper Series No. 1613
Angulo, Emma and Alicia Hierro. 2014. “Asymmetries in the Coordinated Direct Invest-
ment Survey: What Lies Behind?”. IMF working paper.
Auerbach, Alan J. 2010. “A Modern Corporate Tax.” The Hamilton Project/Center for
American Progress, December.
Avdjiev Stefan, Mary Everett, Philip R. Lane, and Hyun Song Shin. 2018. “Tracking
the international footprints of global firms”, BIS Quarterly Review, March, p. 47-66.
Avi-Yonah, Reuven S., and Kimberly A. Clausing. 2007. “Reforming Corporate Taxa-
tion in a Global Economy: A Proposal to Adopt Formulary Apportionment”, Hamilton Paper
Discussion project 2007-08.
Becker, Johannes and Ronald B. Davies. 2014. “A Negotiation-Based Model of Tax-
Induced Transfer Pricing”. CESifo working paper #4892.
Beer, Sebastian, Ruud de Mooij and Li Liu. 2019. “International Corporate Tax Avoid-
ance: A review of the channels, magnitudes and blind spots.” IMF Working paper no. 168.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott. 2006. “Transfer
Pricing by U.S. Based Multinational Firms”. NBER working paper #12493.
Bilicka, Katarzyna Anna.. 2019. “Comparing UK Tax Returns of Foreign Multinationals to
Matched Domestic Firms,” American Economic Review, 119(8): 2921–2953.
Blanchard, Olivier.. 1997. “The Medium Run,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
1997, n2.
Blouin, Jennifer and Leslie Robinson.. 2019. “Double Trouble: How Much of U.S. Multi-
nationals’ Profits are really in Tax Havens?,” working paper.
Bolwijn Richard, Bruno Casella and Davided Rigo. 2018. “An FDI-driven approach to
measuring the scale and economic impact of BEPS.” Transnational Corporations, 25(2).
Bruner, Jennifer, Dylan G. Rassier, and Kim J. Ruhl. 2018. “Multinational Profit
Shifting and Measures throughout Economic Accounts”, working paper.
Central Statistics Office. 2016. “Explaining Ireland’s FDI Asymmetry with the United
States.” technical paper, available online at http://www.cso.ie/en/media/csoie/methods/
balanceofinternationalpayments/FDIAsymmetry.pdf
Cette, Gilbert, Lorraine Koehl, and Thomas Philippon. 2019. “Labor Shares in Some
Advanced Economies”. NBER working paper #26136.
Clausing, Kimberly A. 2003. “Tax-motivated transfer pricing and US intrafirm trade prices”.
Journal of Public Economics, 87: 2207–2223.
Clausing, Kimberly A. 2009. “Multinational firm tax avoidance and tax policy”. National
Tax Journal, 62 (4): 703–725.
Clausing, Kimberly A. 2011. “The revenue effects of multinational firm income shifting.”
Tax Notes, p.1580–1586.

                                            36
Clausing, Kimberly A. 2016. “The Effect of Profit Shifting on the Corporate Tax Base in
the United States and Beyond.” National Tax Journal, 69(4), 905–934.
Cobham, Alex and Petr Janský. 2018. “Global distribution of revenue loss from corporate
tax avoidance: reestimation and country results.” Journal of International Development, 30(2),
206–232.
Cobham, Alex and Simon Loretz. 2014. “International Distribution of the Corporate Tax
Base: Implications of Different Apportionment Factors under Unitary Taxation.” ICTD working
paper #27.
Cristea, Anca D. and Daniel X. Nguyen. 2016. “Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms:
New Evidence from Foreign Firm Ownerships.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
8(3): 170–202.
Crivelli, Ernesto, Ruud de Mooij, and Michael Keen. 2015. “Base Erosion, Profit
Shifting and Developing Countries,” IMF working paper 15/118.
Damgaard Jannick, and Thomas Elkjaer. 2017. “The Global FDI Network: Searching for
Ultimate Investors”, working paper, Danmarks Nationalbank.
de Mooij, Ruud and Sjef Ederveen. 2008. “Corporate Tax Elasticities: A Readers Guide
to Empirical Findings.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24, 680–697.
De Simone, Lisa, Lillian F. Mills, and Bridget Stomberg. 2017. “Using IRS Data to
Identify Income Shifting to Foreign Affiliates.” Working paper.
Devereux, Michael P. and John Vella. 2017. “Implications of digitalization for interna-
tional corporate tax reform.” Oxford University Center for Business Taxation Working paper
17/07.
Dharmapala, Dhammika, and Nadine Riedel. 2013. “Earnings shocks and tax-motivated
income-shifting: evidence from European multinationals.” Journal of Public Economics 97:
95–107.
Dowd, Tim, Paul Landefeld, and Anne Moore. 2017. “Profit Shifting of U.S. Multina-
tionals.” Journal of Public Economics, 148: 1–13
Eurostat. 2012. “Foreign AffiliaTes Statistics (FATS) Recommendations Manual.”
Egger, Peter, Wolfgang Eggert, and Hannes Winner. 2010. “Saving taxes through
foreign plant ownership,” Journal of International Economics, 81(1): 99–108.
Faulkender, Michael W., Kristine W. Hankins, and Mitchell A. Peterson. 2017.
“Understanding the Rise in Corporate Cash: Precautionary Savings or Foreign Taxes, NBER
working paper No. 23799
Gordon, Roger H. and John Wilson. 1986. “An Examination of Multijurisdictional Cor-
porate Income Taxes Under Formula Apportionment,” Econometrica, Nov. 1986, 1357–73.
Gravelle, Jane G. 2009. “Tax Havens: International Tax Avoidance and Evasion .” National
Tax Journal, 62(4): 727–753.
Grubert, Harry. 2013. “Foreign taxes and the growing share of U.S. multinational company
income abroad: profits, not sales, are being globalized.” National Tax Journal, 65(2): 247–281.
Grubert, Harry and Joel Slemrod. 1998. “The Effect of Taxes on Investment and Income
Shifting to Puerto Rico.” Review of Economics and Statistics 80(3): 365–73.
Guvenen, Fatih, Raymond J. Mataloni Jr., Dylan G. Rassier, and Kim J. Ruhl.
2018. “Offshore Profit Shifting and Domestic Productivity Measurement”, Federal Reserve

                                              37
Bank of Minneapolis working paper #751.
Gutiérrez, German and Sophie Piton. 2019. “Revisiting the Global Decline of the (Non-
Housing) Labor Share,” Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 811.
Heckemeyer, Jost H., and Michael Overesch. 2017. “Multinationals? Profit Response to
Tax Differentials: Effect Size and Shifting Channels.” Canadian Journal of Economics, 50(4):
965–994.
Hines, James R. Jr and Eric Rice. 1994. “Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havens and
American Business.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(1): 149-182.
Hong, Qing, and Michael Smart. 2010. “In Praise of Tax Havens: International Tax
Planning and Foreign Direct Investment.” European Economic Review, 54(1): 82–95.
Huizinga, Harry, and Luc Laeven. 2008. “International profit shifting within multination-
als: a multi- country perspective.” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 92, 1164–1182.
Huizinga, Harry, Luc Laeven, and Gaetan Nicodeme. 2008. “Capital Structure and
International Debt Shifting,” Journal of Financial Economics, 88(1), 80–118
International Monetary Fund. 2009. “Balance of Payments Manual,” 6th Edition.
Janský, Peter and Miroslav Palanský. 2019. “Estimating the scale of profit shifting and
tax revenue losses related to foreign direct investment,” International Tax and Public Finance,
26, 1048–1103.
Johannesen, Niels. 2010. “Imperfect Tax Competition for Profits, Asymmetric Equilibrium
and Beneficial Tax Havens.” Journal of International Economics, 81(2): 253–64.
Johansson, Asa, Øystein Bieltvedt Skeie, Stéphane Sorbe, and Carlo Menon. 2017.
“Tax Planning by Multinational Firms: Firm-Level Evidence from a Cross-Country Database”,
OECD Economics Department working paper 1355.
Johns, Andrew and Joel Slemrod. 2010. “The Distribution of Income Tax Noncompliance,”
National Tax Journal, 63(3), 397–418.
Kalemli-Özcan, Şebnem, Bent Sørensen, Carolina Villegas-Sanchez, Vadym Volosovych,
and Sevcan Yeşiltaş. 2015. “How to Construct Nationally Representative Firm Level Data
from the ORBIS Global Database.” NBER Working Paper No. 21558.
Kanbur, Ravi and Keen, Michael. 1993. “Jeux Sans Frontières: Tax Competition and Tax
Coordination When Countries Differ in Size.” American Economic Review, 83(4): 877–892
Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman. 2014. “The Global Decline of the Labor
Share.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(1), 61-103.
Keen, Michael, and Kai Konrad. 2013. “The Theory of International Tax Competition
and Coordination,” Handbook of Public Economics, vol. 5.
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2018. “The External Wealth of Nations
Revisited: International Financial Integration in the Aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis,”
IMF Economic Review, 66:189–222.
Langenmayr, Dominika and Franz Reiter. 2017. “Trading Offshore: Evidence on Banks’
Tax Avoidance,” CESifo Working Paper Series No. 6664.
Liu, Li, Tim Schmidt-Eisenlohr and Dongxian Guo. 2018. “International Transfer
Pricing and Tax Avoidance: Evidence from Linked Trade-Tax Statistics in the UK,” forthcoming
in Review of Economics and Statistics.


                                            38
Lohse, Theresa, and Nadine Riedel. 2013. “Do Transfer Pricing Laws Limit International
Income Shifting? Evidence from European Multinationals”, working paper.
Lupo, L., Gilbert, A., Liliestedt, M., 1978. “The relationship between age and rate of
return of foreign manufacturing affiliates of U.S. manufacturing parent companies.” Survey of
Current Business, 58, 60-66.
Markle, Kevin S. 2012. “A Comparison of Tax Motivated Income Shifting of Multinationals
in Territorial and Worldwide Countries.” Contemporary Accounting Research, 33(1): 7–43.
Mataloni Jr., Ray., 2000. “An examination of the low rates of return of foreign-owned U.S.
companies.” Survey of Current Business, 80, 55-73.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.. 2008. “OECD Benchmark
Definition of Foreign Direct Investment, Fourth Edition”, available online at https://www.
oecd.org/daf/inv/investmentstatisticsandanalysis/40193734.pdf.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.. 2015. “Base Erosion and
Profit Shifting, Final Report”,
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2016. “Irish GDP up by
26.3% in 2015?”, available online at http://www.oecd.org/sdd/na/Irish-GDP-up-in-2015-OECD.
pdf.
Piketty, Thomas, and Gabriel Zucman. 2014. “Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in
Rich Countries, 1700–2010,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1255–1310.
Pomeroy, James. 2016. “The Rise of the Digital Natives.” HSBC report, September.
Riedel, Nadine. 2018. “Quantifying International Tax Avoidance: A Review of Academic
Literature,” Review of Economics, 69(2), 169–181.
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. 2016. “Wealth Inequality in the United States
since 1913: Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
131(2), 519–578.
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. 2019. The Triumph of Injustice: How the Rich
Dodge Taxes and How to Make Them Pay, W.W. Norton.
Sandholtz, William H. 2018. “Corporate Tax Rate Differentials and Transfer Mispricing:
Evidence from Bilateral Trade Data”, working paper.
Slemrod, Joel and John D. Wilson. 2009. “Tax competition with parasitic tax havens.”
Journal of Public Economics, 93, 1261–1270.
Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos. 2018. “Unintended Consequences of Eliminating Tax Havens,”
working paper.
Tørsløv, Thomas, Ludvig Wier, and Gabriel Zucman. 2020. “The Missing Profits of
Nations: 2017 Estimates,” available online at missingprofits.world
United Nations. 2009. “System of National Accounts 2008.”
Vicard, Vincent. 2015. “Profit Shifting through Transfer Pricing: Evidence form French
Firm Level Trade Data.” Banque de France Working Paper no. 555.
Wang, Zi. 2018. “Multinational Production and Corporate Taxes: A Quantitative Assess-
ment”, working paper.
Wier, Ludvig and Hayley Reynolds. 2018. “Big and “Unprofitable”: How 10% of Multi-
national Firms Do 98% of Profit Shifting”, working paper.


                                           39
Wright, Thomas, and Gabriel Zucman. 2018. ‘The Exorbitant Tax Privilege”, NBER
working paper #24983.
Zucman, Gabriel. 2014. “Taxing Across Borders: Tracking Personal Wealth and Corporate
Profits,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(4), 121–148.
Zucman, Gabriel. 2015. The Hidden Wealth of Nations: The Scourge of Tax Havens, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.




                                          40
                Figure 1: Consolidated Global Profits vs. Observable Profits Across Subsidiaries

       € Bn.                                            Google's profits in Orbis                                                                           € Bn.                                         Apple's profits in Orbis
       25                                                                                                                                                   70
                                                                                                                                                                               True global profits
                       True global profits                                                                                                                  60
       20                                                                                                                                                                      Sum of observable profits
                       Sum of observable profits
                                                                                                                                                            50
       15
                                                                                                                                                            40


       10                                                                                                                                                   30

                                                                                                                                                            20
        5
                                                                                                                                                            10

        0                                                                                                                                                    0
                           2013                              2014                              2015                              2016                                           2013                              2014                              2015                             2016
            Note: This graph shows Google's global consolidated profits, and the sum of the profits made by Google's subsidiaries, as recorded in            Note: This graph shows Apple's global consolidated profits, and the sum of the profits made by Apple's subsidiaries, as recorded in Orbis.
            Orbis. The difference is due to the fact that the subsidiaries where Google makes the bulk of its profits are not visible in Orbis.              The difference is due to the fact that the subsidiaries where Apple makes the bulk of its profits are not visible in Orbis.

        € Bn.                                          Facebook's profits in Orbis                                                                      € Bn.                                              Nike's profits in Orbis
        12                                                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                                                                                           True global profits
        10                                                                                                                                              5
                            True global profits                                                                                                                            Sum of observable profits
                            Sum of observable profits
         8                                                                                                                                              4


         6                                                                                                                                              3


         4                                                                                                                                              2


         2                                                                                                                                              1


         0                                                                                                                                              0
                             2013                              2014                              2015                              2016                                     2013                              2014                              2015                               2016
             Note: This graph shows Facebook's global consolidated profits, and the sum of the profits made by Facebook's subsidiaries, as recorded          Note: This graph shows Nike's global consolidated profits, and the sum of the profits made by Nike's subsidiaries, as recorded in Orbis.
             in Orbis. The difference is due to the fact that the subsidiaries where Facebook makes the bulk of its profits are not visible in Orbis.        The difference is due to the fact that the subsidiaries where Nike makes the bulk of its profits are not visible in Orbis.

Notes: This graph shows the difference between Apple’s, Facebook’s, Alphabet’s, and Nike’s global consolidated profits, and the sum of the profits made
by Apple’s, Facebook’s, Alphabet’s, and Nike’s subsidiaries, as recorded in Orbis. The difference is due to the fact that the subsidiaries where these firms
make the bulk of their profits are not visible in Orbis. Source: authors’ computations using Orbis data.
                       Figure 2: Fraction of Global Profits That Can be Observed in Orbis

                                              The missing profits in Orbis
  Fraction of firms
  30%
       .3




   20%
       .2




                                                                  Weighted average: 17%



   10%
       .1




                                                           Weighted
                                                           Weightedaverage:
                                                                    average0.17
                                                                            = 0.172
     0%
       0




             0%
             0                          20%
                                        .2                 40%
                                                           .4              60%
                                                                            .6                                        80%
                                                                                                                       .8                       100%
                                                                                                                                                 1
                                               Share of global profits found inin
                                                Share    of  profits  found       2012
                                                                                2012
   Note: This graph shows the imperfect coverage in Orbis. For each multinational firm we take the sum of profits made by all subsidiaries registered in
Notes: This graph shows the density of the following ratio. For each multinational firm in Orbis, we compute the sum of the unconsolidated pre-tax profits
    Orbis and divide by the global profits of the same multinal firm. Whenever the share is lower than 1 this means that we only see part of the global
of all subsidiaries
    profits         (code
            in Orbis. . U1), and we divide this sum by the consolidated global profits of the firm (code C1). Whenever the ratio is less than 1, this means
that only part of the global profits of the firm are visible at the subsidiary level in Orbis. In 28% of the cases, no profits are visible at the subsidiary level.
The weighted average of 17% is weighed by profit. Source: authors’ computations using Orbis data.
                                          Pre-tax
                     Figure 3: Pre-tax Corporate   corporate
                                                 Profits      profits
                                                         (% Compensation of Employees)
    300%                                         (% of compensation of employees )

    250%

    200%

    150%

    100%

                                                                                                    Average among non-havens: 36%
      50%

       0%
                                      g




                         G um




                                      n
                        Si ico



                        et ong

                           Be s




                                   om




                          Au in



                          itz s
                            gK e




                                     da
                                      d




                                     ce
                           d a


                                      d
                         K aly
                                      y
                                   nd




                      Sw tate
                       ni trali
                                     r
              ur




                                   an
                      Pu lan




                                   pa




                                  lan
                                    a
                      H apo




                                 an
                                 na
                                 It




                                Sp
                                 R




                                lgi
           bo




                               gd
                               rla



                                m




                                Ja
                             Ire




                              er



                              Fr
                               S


                            Ca
                               s
                             to




                            er
                           ng




                            in
        m




                          he
                         er



                        on




                         te
      xe
    Lu




                      d
                      N




                     U
                    te
                  ni
                U




Notes: the bar shows the ratio of pre-tax corporate profits (net of interest and depreciation) to compensation of employees in 2015, as recorded in national
accounts data. Source: Appendix Table A.7.
                          Figure 4: The Rise of Profit Shifting

                                        Pre-tax corporate profits
                                    (% of compensation of employees)
   250%


   200%

                                                                 Ireland
   150%


   100%


    50%                                                                              United States


     0%
          1970     1975      1980      1985      1990          1995      2000      2005     2010     2015


                          Pre-tax profits of affiliates of U.S. multinationals
                                  (% of compensation of employees)
   350%

   300%

   250%
                                                     Tax haven affiliates
   200%

   150%

   100%
                                                                                   Non-haven affiliates
    50%

     0%
          1966    1971     1976      1981     1986      1991      1996      2001     2006    2011    2016


Notes: in the bottom panel, tax havens include: Ireland, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Switzerland, Bermuda and
Caribbean tax havens (“Other Western Hemisphere” in the BEA data), and Singapore. Non-havens include
all other countries. Sources: For top panel, national accounts of Ireland and the United States and authors’
computations; for bottom panel: BEA survey of the activities of U.S. multinationals abroad, Tables II.F.1 and
II.F.2, column “profit-type return” and “compensation of employees” .
                                   Figure 5: Profitability in Foreign vs. Local Firms


                                                      Pre-tax corporate profits
     1675%
                                                  (% of compensation of employees)
       800%


       600%


       400%
                                                                                 Foreign firms
                                                                                 Local firms
       200%


          0%
                                          um




                                            n
                   co




                                 ng d




                                 Be s



                                Au s

                                  in a
                                         om

                                          ain
                                he g




                                            y
                                itz g



                             on ore
                             xe nd




                               G ce



                                                                                                    ly
                                         nd



                                         ate

                           d trali




                                         an
                                         on
                           Sw our

                                        lan




                                         pa




                                                                                                 Ita
                                       an
               Ri

                          Lu rela




                                      Sp
                                      lgi




                                     gd
                                     ap




                                      m
                                     rla




                                      Ja
                                  gK




                                     St
                                     er




                                   Fr
                                     b




                                     s
              to




                                  er
                                 m
                                   I




                                 d
           er




                              K
                               te
                             Si



                             et
        Pu




                            ni
                           H

                          N



                         U



                         te
                      ni
                    U




Notes: data are for 2015. Source: Appendix Table A.7.
                       Figure 6: Capital Intensities in Tax Havens

                                         Tangible assets
  800%                           (% of compensation of employees)
  700%                                                            Foreign firms
                                                                  Local firms
  600%

  500%

  400%

  300%

  200%

  100%

     0%
                                          d




                                                                                               n
                           Sw urg
                                           s

                                         re




                                           s




                                                                               a
                                                                           om
                    co




                          Lu gium




                                         ng




                                                                            ain

                                                                             ce
             d




                                                                              ly

                                                                               y
                                       nd




                                                                            ali
                                       ate
                                      la n




                                                                           an




                                                                                            pa
          lan




                                                                          Ita
                                      po




                                                                          an
                  Ri




                                   Ko




                                                                         Sp
                                   bo




                                                                        str
                                                                        gd
                         rla




                                                                         m




                                                                                         Ja
                                   St
                                   er
       Ire




                                  ga




                                                                       Fr
                                    l
                 rto




                                                                      er
                               Be




                                                                      in

                                                                    Au
                                m
                       he




                               itz

                                 g

                                d
                             Sin




                                                                    G
                            on




                                                                    K
                             ite
                             xe
              e

                    et
           Pu

                   N




                                                                  d
                           H

                          Un




                                                               ite
                                                            Un



                                     Pre-tax corporate profits
   1675%
                                 (% of compensation of employees)
     800%

                                   Foreign firms
     600%
                                   Local firms (observed)
                                   Local firms (with K/L of foreign firms and σ = 1.3)
     400%                          Local firms (with K/L of foreign firms and σ = 0.7)


     200%



       0%
               on o re




                         um
                          co




                                                                                n
               xe and

                itz g




                                                                  K




                                                                      G ce



                                                                               ly
                 Be s
                 he g




                                                              a




                                                                                y
                                                     Au S
               Si nd




                                                                             ain
                         nd




                                                           ali




                                                                            an
             Sw our




            N Kon




                                                                            pa
                                                           U




                                                                           Ita
                                                                  U




                                                                           an
                      Ri




                       la




                                                                         Sp
                     lgi
                     ap




                                                       str
                       l




                                                                         m
                    rla




                                                                         Ja
                  Ire



                    er




                                                                        Fr
                    b
            to




                 ng




                                                                       er
                 m




                  g
         er




              et
      Pu




             H
            Lu




Source: Appendix Table E.1 .
                        Figure 7: The Profitability of the Affiliates of US Multinationals


                                         Ratio haven affiliates / non-haven affiliates
500%


                                                                          Operating surplus / tangible capital (r)
400%


300%


                       Net interest received (1-p)
200%
                                                                                            Tangible capital / wage (K/wL)

100%


   0%
         1966         1971         1976         1981          1986         1991         1996         2001         2006         2011         2016

Notes: see notes to the bottom panel of Figure 4. Source: BEA survey of the activities of U.S. multinationals abroad, Tables II.B 1-2 (column “Plant,
property, and equipment (net)” and II.F.1.
Figure 8: Comparing estimates of profit shifted into each haven: excess profitability vs. excessive
cross-border transactions (billions of US$)



            180
                              Excessive cross-border high-risk transactions
            160
                              Excessive profits-to-wage ratio in foreign firms
            140
            120
            100
             80
             60
             40
             20
               0




                                                                                          re
                                s
                      um




                                                                                                                        ns
                                                                                                             co
                                                             a
                                                     g
                                         d




                                                                     s




                                                                                                   g
                                                                               nd
                                 u




                                                                  nd
                                                         alt
                                                  ur




                                                                                                 on
                                      lan




                                                                                           o
                              pr




                                                                                                                     ve
                                                                                                           Ri
                                                                                la
                   lgi




                                                                                         ap
                                                bo


                                                         M


                                                                  rla




                                                                                                K
                                     Ire
                           Cy




                                                                             er




                                                                                                                   ha
                                                                                                           to
                                                                                       ng
                Be




                                                 m




                                                                he


                                                                         itz




                                                                                                 g

                                                                                                        er
                                                                                               on




                                                                                                                   er
                                              xe




                                                                                     Si
                                                             et

                                                                        Sw




                                                                                                     Pu


                                                                                                                 th
                                                                                           H
                                           Lu




                                                             N




                                                                                                                O
Source: Appendix Tables A7 and C2.
                                                       Figure 9: Allocating the Shifted Profits


                                                                 Allocating the profits shifted to tax havens

                                                 50%
      % of total profits shifted to tax havens




                                                                                           Where the shifted profits come from
                                                 40%
                                                                                           To whom the shifted profits accrue

                                                 30%


                                                 20%


                                                 10%


                                                 0%
                                                            EU                US      Developing countries     Rest of OECD




                                                                 Tax revenue lost due to profit shifting
                                                                  (% of corporate tax revenue collected)
      20%

      18%

      16%

      14%

      12%
                                                                                                 Global average: 10%
      10%

                      8%

                      6%

                      4%

                      2%

                      0%
                                                       EU                US          Developing countries     Rest of OECD



Note: Estimates are for 2015. Source: Appendix Tables C.4b, C.4c, and C.4d.
              Figure 10: Corporate Tax Revenue in Tax Havens

                                             Corporate income tax revenue
       8%                                       (% of national income)
       7%

       6%

       5%

       4%                                                                  Average among non-havens: 3.5%

       3%

       2%

       1%

       0%
                     Au pan




                     itz um


                      ng a
                      m ta


                       gK s
                                 g


                       Ire lia


                      Be ada


                         K d




               N ingd o
                     he m

                Pu Fra s

                               co

              U erm in


                                 s


                                d
                      d y
               H Cyp g




                       Ca nd




                                 e




                       to e




                        Po ly
                  on ru




                             nd




                             ate
                  Si ore




                    te an
                              or




                    er nc
                             on
                              ur




                            lan




                            lan
                   K ic




                            Ita
                  xe Mal




                    G a
                  et o
                              a




                            Ri
                            la




                          Sp
                d ex
                Sw gi
                         str




                         ap
                         bo




                            n




                         rla
                          Ja




                         St
                         er
                          l




                       M




                 ni
        Lu




              te
           ni
         U




                       Corporate tax revenue collected & tax rate on shifted profits

     100%
                                    Revenue collected on shifted profits, % of total revenue

      80%                           Tax rate on shifted profits


      60%


      40%


      20%


       0%
                 a


                          co




                                                       us




                                                                                         s


                                                                                                     nd
                                                                               g
                                               g
                                   d




                                                                   re




                                                                                       nd
              alt




                                                                             on
                                              ur
                                  lan




                                                                  po
                                                      pr
                        Ri




                                                                                                   la
                                             bo
             M




                                                                                       rla
                                                                           gK




                                                                                                er
                               Ire




                                                    Cy



                                                              ga
                        to




                                          m




                                                                                     he


                                                                                               itz
                                                               n
                     er




                                                                        on
                                        xe




                                                            Si




                                                                                   et


                                                                                             Sw
                  Pu




                                                                       H
                                        Lu




                                                                                  N




Notes: data are for 2015. Source: Appendix Tables A.3., A.6., A.7, and A.11.
  Figure 11: The Redistribution of Corporate Income Tax Revenue

                                         Corporate income tax revenue
                                            (% net national income)

     5%                                                      Ireland

     4%
                                 United States
     3%


     2%


     1%


     0%
           1970    1975       1980      1985      1990      1995        2000    2005     2010     2015




                  Corporate income tax revenue vs. tax rate in Ireland

      5%                                                                                               50


      4%                                                                                               40


      3%                                                                                               30
                        Tax revenue (left)
                        (% of national income)                             Nominal tax rate (right)
      2%                                                                                               20


      1%                                                                                               10


      0%                                                                                               0
           1970     1975     1980      1985      1990     1995      2000       2005    2010     2015


Source: national accounts of Ireland and the United States; see text.
            Table 1: Global Output, Corporate Output, and Corporate Taxes Paid (2015)


                                                                                                         % of net
                                                                                  Billions of
                                                                                                         corporate
                                                                                 current US$
                                                                                                          profits
                 Global gross output (GDP)                                           75,038
                 Depreciation                                                        11,940
                 Net output                                                          63,098
                 Net corporate output                                                34,083                 296%
                 Net corporate profits                                               11,515                 100%
                    Net profits of foreign-controlled corp.                           1,703                  15%
                        Of which: shifted to tax havens                                616                    5%
                    Net profits of local corporations                                 9,812                  85%
                 Corporate income taxes paid                                          2,154                  19%

Notes: Profits of foreign corporations include all the profits made by companies more than 50% owned by a foreign country; profits of local
corporations equal all corporate profits minus the profits of foreign corporations. Source: Appendix Tables C.5 and A.3.
   Table 2: Shifted Profits: Country-by-Country Estimates (2015)

                                                                                           Corp. tax
                                Reported                                       Effective
                                         Of which: Of which:         Shifted                revenue
                                 pre-tax                                       corporate
                                         Local firms Foreign firms   profits             loss/gain (%
                                 profits                                        tax rate
                                                                                           collected)

                                                        OECD countries
          Australia                179         151       28           12      30%            7%
          Austria                   48         37        11            4      18%            11%
          Canada                   143         96        47           17      35%            9%
          Chile                     68         58        10            5      15%            11%
          Czech Republic            34         16        17            2      20%            5%
          Denmark                   52         47         5            3      15%            8%
          Estonia                    4          3         1            0      12%            10%
          Finland                   25         21         4            3      20%            11%
          France                   188         156       32           32      27%            21%
          Germany                  553         510       43           55      11%            28%
          Greece                    23         21         1            1      19%            7%
          Hungary                   21         11        10            2      11%            21%
          Iceland                    2          2         0            0      19%            22%
          Israel                    54         48         6            1      17%            2%
          Italy                    212         199       13           23      18%            19%
          Japan                    634         602       32           28      26%            6%
          Korea                    248         246        3            4      18%            2%
          Latvia                     4          3         1            0      10%            7%
          Mexico                   325         302       23           12      12%            10%
          New Zealand               44         37         6            1      18%            5%
          Norway                    76         69         7            5      22%            8%
          Poland                    88         68        19            4      10%            8%
          Portugal                  27         22         5            3      23%            9%
          Slovakia                  12          6         5            1      25%            5%
          Slovenia                   3          2         1            0      18%            6%
          Spain                    159         138       21           14      18%            14%
          Sweden                    63         39        24            9      23%            13%
          Turkey                   213         209        4            5      6%             8%
          United Kingdom           425         353       72           61      17%            18%
          United States           1,889       1,737     153          142      21%            14%
                                                    Main developing countries
          Brazil                   274         245       30           13      20%            8%
          China                   2,069       1,906     162           55      20%            3%
          Colombia                 59          52         7            1      29%            2%
          Costa Rica                13         12         1            1      12%            19%
          India                    376         368        8            9      10%            8%
          Russia                   290         253       37           11      14%            5%
          South Africa             76          68         9            4      25%            6%
                                                            Tax havens
          Belgium                  80          48        32          -13      19%            16%
          Ireland                  174         58       116         -106      4%             58%
          Luxembourg                91         40        51          -47      3%             50%
          Malta                     14          1        13          -12      5%             90%
          Netherlands              195         106       89          -57      10%            32%
          Caribbean                102          4        98          -97      2%`           100%
          Bermuda                  25           1        25          -24      0%
          Singapore                120         30        90          -70      8%             41%
          Puerto Rico              53          10        43          -42      3%             79%
          Hong Kong                95          45        50          -39      18%            33%
          Switzerland              95          35        60          -58      21%            20%
          Other                                                      -51

Notes: amounts are in current billion US$. All data are for 2015. Source: Appendix Tables A.6., A.7,
C.4d, and C.4.
    Table 3: Macro Statistics Corrected for Profit Shifting (2015)


                                         Corrected Difference with Corrected Difference with
                                        capital share published data trade balance published data


                                                          OECD countries
          Australia                         26%          +1.1%          -1.4%         +0.8%
          Austria                           29%          +1.3%           4.1%         +0.8%
          Canada                            24%          +1.4%          -1.4%         +0.9%
          Chile                             51%          +1.5%           1.8%         +1.8%
          Czech Republic                    39%          +1.0%           6.5%         +0.7%
          Denmark                           31%          +1.2%           8.2%         +0.8%
          Estonia                           35%          +1.1%           5.0%         +0.9%
          Finland                           28%          +1.6%           0.9%         +1.0%
          France                            19%          +2.1%           0.4%         +1.1%
          Germany                           31%          +1.8%           9.2%         +1.2%
          Greece                            43%          +1.1%           0.3%         +0.5%
          Hungary                           39%          +2.3%          10.4%         +1.5%
          Iceland                           33%          +3.4%           9.5%         +2.0%
          Israel                            37%          +0.2%           3.2%         +0.2%
          Italy                             30%          +1.9%           3.9%         +1.0%
          Japan                             28%          +0.8%           0.0%         +0.5%
          Korea                             37%          +0.4%           8.0%         +0.2%
          Latvia                            31%          +0.9%          -0.5%         +0.6%
          Mexico                            71%          +0.6%          -1.2%         +0.9%
          New Zealand                       44%          +0.7%           1.4%         +0.7%
          Norway                            41%          +1.2%           6.5%         +1.0%
          Poland                            45%          +0.9%           3.7%         +0.6%
          Portugal                          33%          +1.8%           2.8%         +1.1%
          Slovakia                          35%          +1.1%           3.4%         +0.6%
          Slovenia                          18%          +0.9%           9.1%         +0.4%
          Spain                             29%          +1.6%           3.4%         +1.0%
          Sweden                            31%          +2.2%           6.3%         +1.4%
          Turkey                            55%          +0.4%          -2.3%         +0.5%
          United Kingdom                    31%          +2.5%           0.2%         +1.8%
          United States                     27%          +1.1%          -2.1%         +0.7%
                                                     Main developing countries
          Brazil                            26%          +1.0%          -0.3%         +0.5%
          China                             44%          +0.5%           3.7%         +0.4%
          Colombia                          54%          +0.5%          -5.9%         +0.4%
          Costa Rica                        45%          +1.9%           1.6%         +1.7%
          India                             56%          +0.5%          -2.6%         +0.4%
          Russia                            40%          +0.8%           8.9%         +0.7%
          South Africa                      39%          +1.4%           0.0%         +1.0%

Source: Appendix Tables C.5 and C.5b.
