                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  FEDERAL LANDS, OPPORTUNITY COSTS, AND BUREAUCRATIC MANAGEMENT

                                         Gary D. Libecap

                                       Working Paper 24705
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24705


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2018




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Gary D. Libecap. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Federal Lands, Opportunity Costs, and Bureaucratic Management
Gary D. Libecap
NBER Working Paper No. 24705
June 2018
JEL No. K11,N51,N52,Q15,Q24,Q28

                                          ABSTRACT

The federal government owns and administers 472, 892,659 acres or 21% of the land area of the
lower US, making it both the country’s largest land owner and among the largest by a central
government among western democracies. This condition is surprising, given that the US
generally is viewed as more oriented toward private property rights and markets. The land
largely is managed by the US Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management, staffed by
unelected, career civil servants who hold tenure to their positions. Access and use regulations are
administered by agency officials who have wide latitude under all-purpose legislation passed by
Congress. Their actions are influenced by bureaucratic incentives and by lobby groups seeking to
influence federal land policy. General citizens have little information about how policies are
determined and only costly recourse to challenge them. Other than the comparatively small,
27,400,000 acres in National Parks, most of the land has no important amenity values nor
apparent major externalities associated with use. These lands were to be transferred to private
claimants under 19th century land laws. This paper examines how this vast area came to be
withheld by the federal government and the role of the environmental movement in the process.
Market failure and externalities were asserted justifications, but there is no strong supportive
evidence. Although externalities were possible, the most obvious solution was to define property
rights more completely. This option was and remains rejected by politicians, agency officials, and
those lobby groups that sought permanent management and control over federal lands. Sustained-
yield was an overarching objective, but it is a biological and not an economic concept and the
human welfare outcomes of bureaucratic management may be large.


Gary D. Libecap
Bren School of Environmental Science
and Management and Economics Department
University of California, Santa Barbara
Bren Hall 4412
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131
and NBER
glibecap@bren.ucsb.edu
Introduction.

        American economic, political, and social development has been molded by
widespread ownership of land. From the colonial period through around 1900, land was
the major resource in a largely rural, agricultural economy. The Jeffersonian ideal,
enshrined in federal land laws, was to transfer the federal government’s land estate as
quickly possible to private claimants. This was viewed as in the public interest. Easy
access to land facilitated economic advance, a position in politics, and a stake in the
society. It shaped individual expectations, practices, and wellbeing. Land ownership and
trade reallocated land and generated capital gains that helped to fund the growth of
financial and other asset markets. The rapid transfer of federal government lands to
private claimants was made possible through numerous land laws, such as the Homestead
Act of 1862 that allocated 160-acre plots to individuals. These were enacted by a stable
political coalition representing potential actual settlers, developers, railroads, and an
almost universal participation among US citizens in land acquisition and sale.

        This enabling political coalition ended in the late 19th century, and federal land
policy shifted from virtually free access to retention and permanent management by
administrative agencies. Urbanization and industrialization by that time meant that fewer
citizens were directly tied to land ownership. Further, at the same time, the settlement
frontier was moving beyond the 98th meridian and encountering far different conditions
from those that had supported the small-farm distribution policies of the earlier land laws.
The land in the western US generally was more rugged and within a semi-arid climate,
where small farms were less economically viable than in the wetter, flatter East and
Midwest. Indeed, the resource endowments of the West were better suited for logging,
ranching, and mineral production than for small-farm agriculture. The land laws could
have been modified to provide for larger allocations of timber, range, mineral, and farm
lands to fit the region. But they were not. Small dryland homesteads failed and ranchers
and timber companies circumvented the size restrictions of the land laws though the use
of numerous homestead claims, often never designed for farming, adopted local informal
property rights, or exploited the land as open access.

         Potential homesteaders and their political and administrative supporters knew too
little about the limits of the region’s semi-arid climate to back much larger land
allocations that seemed to limit opportunities for further land ownership. Moreover,
ranching and lumbering had economies of scale, requiring much greater plot sizes, that
also seemed inconsistent with the Homestead ideal. While these barriers were being
encountered, a new group of land claimants appeared as part of the Progressive


                                             1
Movement of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, early conservationists. These
individuals were professionally-trained biologists and engineers who sought to manage
the remaining federal estate, rather than to distribute it to private parties. They believed
in the objective of sustained-yield management whereby harvest rates would equal the
rate of growth.

        Sustained yield was (and is) a biological/engineering concept and not an
economic one. Adherence to it would be consistent with maximizing general welfare for
current and future generations only under very limited conditions. Most resource users,
especially timber companies and ranchers who had incomplete and insecure property
rights, did not follow sustained-yield practices. Private property rights and exploitation
were discredited by early environmentalists as being driven by short-run profits, leading
to rapid depletion and waste. Retention of remaining federal lands and their permanent
supervision under sustained-yield, scientific management was the remedy. The land laws
gradually were repealed, with the government retaining 472,892,659 acres or 21% of the
land area of the continental US today. Where before private property rights to land were
viewed as essential for the public interest, government ownership and management,
instead, were asserted to be necessary for the public good, a message that is retained in
contemporary federal lands discussions.

        The same advocates for retention of federal lands became leaders of the
bureaucratic agencies that managed them. They were joined in their efforts by other
professionals with discipline-based training in engineering and forest and range
management, and plant biology who staffed the growing merit-based federal bureaucracy.
Private property rights and unconstrained decision-making did not fit within their
regulatory plans that called instead for rational, scientific management that seemed to
them to be impossible under private property rights. Further justification for government
ownership and supervision also came at about the same time from welfare economics,
where market failure was highlighted as generating externalities that were correctable by
government intervention, such as through taxes and regulation of access and use.
Progressive Era politicians who sought a wider range for their leadership and
corresponding government involvement in the economy echoed the claims of
environmentalists and supported retention of federal lands. Absent a strong political
counter, there was no effective resistance to the proposed administrative state, which has
endured and grown. Further, the general citizenry had then and today, little access to the
information needed to question whether or not government ownership of so vast an area
was (or is) in the public interest. The justifications for regulation made by early
conservationists and the management plans they implemented over time on federal lands

                                              2
became templates for the subsequent, more extensive regulation after 1960 that restricts
production in the name of preservation. The federal lands today are advertised as “the
Public Lands” to emphasize the public goods said to be provided by government
ownership and oversight.

         The historical record regarding federal lands is clear that the inability to acquire
property rights under the land laws to the remaining federal estate was a major problem.
Although there can be externalities and market failure associated with private decision-
making when property rights are incomplete, the direct remedy would be to make the
property rights more complete, and not necessarily a resort to government ownership,
regulation, or taxes. Externalities are more likely to occur with difficult to bound-and-
observe resources, such as the atmosphere or groundwater, rather than surface land. Yet,
withholding and managing federal land was the focus of early environmentalists. Despite
all of this, there is no compelling empirical evidence to support their arguments regarding
resource use decisions when rights were complete. Their assertions of inherent short-term
biases and stock depletion by private parties were based on philosophical views of the
benefits of sustained-yield management. To build a broader political coalition for
retention, potential claimants of federal land were co-opted with promises of long-term
access and subsidized use. Later, as political coalitions shifted and regulatory agency
interests changed, these promises were broken as new parties—recreationalists,
environmentalists and preservationists--were granted access under the notion of multiple
use. Multiple use grants discretion to the bureaucracy in allocation and regulatory
decisions in a manner that promotes the agency and its favored lobby groups, but does
not necessarily advance broad public welfare.

        As described below, natural resource-based production from federal lands is
declining, both absolutely and relative to private lands. More of the federal estate is set
aside for preservation, environmental, and recreational use. The opportunity costs of this
allocation may be very large, but resource users as well as general citizens have little
access to the bureaucratic process involved in a transparent manner. Costs and benefits
are not clearly weighed, certainly not on the margin. While some preservation may be
warranted, how much is in the public interest, relative to the opportunity costs of
resources not used for production? Agency officials and the lobbyists who support them
do not bear direct costs, generating a clear bias in decision making over such an
enormous resource base. Those costs are internalized by overall society, reducing
general welfare.




                                              3
        Figure 1 shows the extent of federal government lands in the US. This vast area
of central government ownership exceeds that of other western democracies. In Germany
and the UK, the federal government owns approximately 3% and 4% of the land (German
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture, and Consumer Protection, 2011; Shrubsole,
Powell-Smith, 2017). Even in Canada, the federal government owns a smaller portion of
the land outside of the Yukon and Northwest Territories. Only 4% of provincial land is
federally owned. Larger amounts are held by the individual provinces and policies vary
across them, unlike the US where centralized management occurs under the Departments
of Agriculture and the Interior (Neimanis, 2011).

       Figure 1: Federal Lands




       Source: USGS as adapted in http://meridianintl.co/us-government-land-map.html



         The paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes initial transfer of government
land to private individuals from colonial times to the end of the 19 th century. It presents
the rise of the conservation movement that halted the land transfer process and critically
examines the evidence behind it. Section III discusses sustained-yield management and
details the strict conditions under which it would be consistent with maximizing
economic rents or the economic contribution of federal lands for general citizens.
Examples of the opportunity costs of sustained-yield objectives and increased
preservation are provided in Section IV. Section V concludes with remarks about the
role of the administrative state in natural resource regulation.


II. The Transfer, then Retention of Federal Lands.

                                                4
       The Transfer of Federal Lands to Private Claimants.

        Claire Priest (forthcoming, 2019) summarizes much of the early literature and key
elements of US colonial and early federal land law. William Blackstone commented in
1766 on the implications of private ownership of land: “There is nothing which so
generally strikes the imagination, and engages the affections of mankind, as the right of
property; or that sole and despotic dominion which one man claims and exercises over
the external things of the world, in total exclusion of the right of any other individual in
the universe ....” (quoted in Ellickson, 1993, 1317). English colonization and migration
to North America were driven by these ideals (Ely 2008, 13). Those who migrated to and
occupied land eventually held it in fee simple as independent owners and not as a
dependent peasantry that generally characterized Latin American settlement (Supreme
Court Justice, Story, 1858, 160).

        Because land was the most basic resource, its widespread ownership became the
catalyst for colonial and subsequent US economic and political development. The
ownership of property made individuals special stakeholders in the society and dispersed
political and economic power from elites. Dynamic, open land markets became an
essential ingredient for the credit system and its ability to support growth of a middle
class as well as to spur investment and innovation throughout the economy (Priest,
forthcoming 2019, Chapter 1, 7). The irony, as described later, is that active involvement
in land markets, speculation, and capital gains so appreciated in early discussions of
colonial and US land policies, become negatives for advocates of government
intervention by the end of the 19th century. These wealth-creating, reallocation activities
instead were asserted as evidence of a lack of sustainable, long-term scientific
management deemed essential by conservationists in lobbying for retention of state
ownership.

        Perhaps the most famous advocate of extensive private ownership of land in small
plots was Thomas Jefferson, who saw a nation of numerous, small freeholders not only as
good economics, but good politics. The seemingly endless abundance of land in North
America provided the perfect opportunity to create a society composed of small,
independent, freeholding farmers that could support a republican form of government.
Such citizens with an attachment to the land and to the country had virtue and a common
interest in political stability and social cooperation. He notably stated that: “The earth is
given as a common stock for man to labor and live on… The small landholders are the
most precious part of a state” (quoted in Katz, 1976).


                                              5
         Even later in the 19th century, the US Public Lands Commission endorsed the
small-farm, homestead principle: ‘‘The maxim that He who tills the soil should own the
soil is accepted as a fundamental principle of political economy… Small holdings
distributed severally among the tillers of the soil is believed to be a fundamental
condition for the prosperity and happiness of an agricultural population” (US Public
Lands Commission, 1880, xxii). Frederick Jackson Turner in 1893 in his well-known
thesis about the role of the frontier in US political and social development went further,
claiming that America ultimately was shaped by small-farm frontier settlement as the
underpinning for democracy, an independent citizenry, and generalized economic
wellbeing (Turner, 1893, 203).

        There were a series of land laws enacted by Congress after the colonial period to
distribute property rights to land and minerals on the frontier, all of which lowered the
costs of acquisition. The demand for free small freeholds was incorporated into policy,
beginning with the Preemption Act of 1830 and its many amendments (Kanazawa, 1996)
to accommodate and legally recognize squatter claims and on through the Homestead Act
of 1862 and its adjustments. The Homestead Act effectively was ended by Congress in
1934 with enactment of the Taylor Grazing Act that removed relatively flat rangeland
from entry and claiming and formally in 1976 with the Federal Land Policy and
Management Act (see Table 1). Both of those laws underscored the prevailing shift
toward government ownership and management of land and other resources rather than
distribution to citizens as had been the principal aim previously.

        Under all early transfer laws, property rights to agricultural land were given out
piecemeal in plots of 40 to 160 acres (later in some limited cases, up to 640 acres) with
the requirement of occupancy and beneficial use (Hibbard, 1924; Robbins, 1942; Gates,
1968, 394). Through these land allocation laws, immense amounts were placed under
private ownership. Under the Homestead Act, for example, some 2,758,818 original
entries were made between 1863 and 1920 for 437,932,183 acres, an area larger than
Alaska (Gates 1968, 799-800).

         All in all, the settlement of the agricultural frontier through the rapid assignment
of private property rights to land was a positive for social welfare and the economic
development of the US. A vast migration was absorbed from eastern states and Europe;
stable, prosperous communities were established; and agricultural production grew.
There is no discussion, even in revisionist histories, of major environmental externalities
until late in the 19th century with the advent of the conservation movement.


                                              6
        Problems with the federal land laws were encountered when the frontier reached
the drier, more rugged region west of the 98th meridian, as shown by John Wesley
Powell’s report to Congress in 1879 and in Figure 2. It is worth summarizing the
problems faced by various potential claimants to federal lands in the region and how the
difficulty in obtaining clear property rights to land fed directly into the conservationist
paradigm of the Progressive Era.

       Figure 2: The Semi-Arid, Rough Region West of the 98th Meridian




       Potential Claimants: Homesteaders.

        By 1870 as homesteaders moved into the region beyond the 98 th meridian, neither
the climate nor the terrain allowed for feasible small farms in 160 parcels. Claims made
during wet periods failed during dry ones and farms were abandoned. If the homestead
had been fulfilled as required by the land laws and the party had title, then the failing
farm could be sold. Larger, consolidated farms took their place. If the homestead had not
been completed and the farmer lacked title, then the land reverted back to federal
ownership (Libecap and Hansen, 2002). In his Report on the Arid Lands of North
America made to Congress in 1879, John Wesley Powell called for minimum 2,560 acre
homesteads, 16 times greater than the size of standard homestead allotments to address
the problem, but nothing came of it. There were only small adjustments in allotments to
320 and 640-acre sizes authorized for some areas.




                                             7
         As Libecap and Hansen (2002) and Hansen and Libecap (2004) show, in the late
  th
19 century there was no conclusive evidence that small farms were not appropriate for
the region, especially if settlement actually increased rainfall, “rain follows the plow,” if
new dry farming techniques could offset aridity, or if sufficient irrigation networks could
be developed. In light of this, there was no concerted action by the homestead lobby for
relaxation of the small homestead requirement. The homestead lobby was made up of
potential claimants, existing land owners who sought to speculate in new lands, land and
town developers who also wanted access to federal land for subsequent sale, brokers who
specialized in linking potential buyers with newly available homestead land, and the
railroads that desired dense settlement to raise demand for transportation and to populate
the town sites that they owned. It also included local politicians who sought greater
population to justify movement from territory to statehood and thereby open new political
opportunities, as well as the General Land Office in the Department of the Interior whose
mandate was to process homestead claims (Hansen and Libecap, 2004). Adjustments in
the land laws would only have reduced the amount of land available for new homesteads.
Overall, there was a strong sentiment for maintaining the Homestead Act in its traditional
form as illustrated by Representative George W. Julian of Indiana:

       “If our institutions are to be preserved, we must insist upon the policy of small
       farms, thrifty villages, compact settlements, free schools, and equity of political
       rights, instead of large estates, slovenly agriculture, wide-scattered settlements,
       popular ignorance, and a pampered aristocracy lording it over the people.”
       (quoted in Hansen and Libecap, 2004, 107).

        Later, by the turn of the 20th century and major droughts in the northern Great
Plains, the evidence became clearer that neither the climate would change nor would dry
farming techniques save small farms (Libecap and Hansen, 2002; Hansen and Libecap,
2004). Irrigation, however, could. Provision of federally-subsidized irrigation became the
favored alternative, not revision of the land laws for both homesteaders and
environmentalists desiring to withdraw other federal lands from private claiming.

       Potential Claimants: Ranchers.

       Livestock owners also moved into the region beyond the 98th meridian, often
ahead of homesteaders. The open range was ideal for livestock, and internal and export
demands were growing (Libecap, 1992). There was, however, no provision in the land
laws for ranch or livestock-raising claims (Libecap, 2007). All homesteads allotments
were far too small for a viable ranching operation in a semi-arid region where 25 acres or
more were required annually to support one cow. One homestead would support 6 cows,
when herds were in the thousands, often requiring ranches of 10,000 acres or more for an

                                             8
economically-viable operation. Although the 1880 Public Lands Commission
recommended revision of the land laws to allow for larger grazing homesteads of 2,560
acres and cash sales of rangeland at $.125/acre, no action on the recommendation by
Congress took place. Grazing homesteads would reduce land available for homesteading.
Other than two minor adjustments made much later, in 1909 and 1916 to allow
homesteads of 320 and 640 acres, there was no legal way for ranchers to obtain formal
title to the land they used. They fenced illegally and the fences were removed by the
General Land Office (Libecap, 1981a, 151; 1981b). Fence removal, of course,
undermined efforts to define property rights and to protect the resource stock from
excessive entry. The other method of limiting entry was to overgraze to make their
informal claims less attractive (Libecap, 2007, 273). Overstocking due the lack of
property rights and drought led to depletion of the range resource. This depletion
subsequently was cited by environmentalists as evidence of the wastes of private
exploitation and the need for sustained-yield administrative management.

       Potential Claimants: Timber Companies.

         A final group that could not obtain property rights to the lands they used were
timber companies or lumber operators. Successful lumbering operations also required
larger areas than those allowed for small farms under the land laws. To circumvent the
restrictions, in the Pacific Northwest in the 1880s through the turn of the 20 th century,
timber operators hired entrymen to act as homesteaders and then to file for claims and to
purchase them under the Timber and Stone Act and other land laws. As with range lands,
the Public Lands Commission (1880) called for more liberal property rights provisions
for non-agricultural, timber lands. This recommendation was not followed, but rather the
forest lands were gradually removed from private claiming and placed under the forest
reserves.

       Alleged Market Failure and the Retention of Federal Lands.

        The withdrawal of federal lands from private claiming in the late 19 th and early
20th centuries was spear headed by the first environmental or conservation movement
(Hayes, 1959). Early conservationists and their political and bureaucratic patrons
challenged the long-standing notion that private property rights and markets were key
elements in the development of the American state, economy, and society. Whereas
earlier potential land claimants, traders, developers, and associated politicians played key
roles in molding colonial and 19th century land laws, members of the conservation
movement were quite different. They were urban political and economic elites, trained
professionally to manage land, not operate farms, ranches, or timber operations. They
                                             9
were skeptical of the efficacy of private property rights, which in any event, would
constrain their managerial latitude and administrative objectives. They saw private
markets as inherently wasteful without the remedy of government regulation. The
remaining federal lands by 1890 were the ultimate opportunity because private ownership
had not yet taken place and jurisdiction remained with the federal government, if the land
laws were revised.

        The conservation/environmental crusade was part of the Progressive Movement,
1870-1920, that ushered widespread government intervention, ranging from antitrust,
pure food and drugs, and conservation. They were driven by philosophical views that
were fundamentally different from those of the early founders of the republic and drafters
of the land laws. Nevertheless, Progressive Era reformers were well organized, they
assembled a coalition of professional groups in support of their plans, and they were
supported by key politicians who also sought to advance political agendas. Progressive
Era leaders were not only advocates, but became bureaucratic agency heads in
administering administrative reform. The claims of market failure associated with private
land use not only justified the withholding of federal lands from further private claiming
through the mid-20th century, but established the framework for subsequent 20 th and 21st
century government environmental regulation.

        The rise of the Progressive Era coincided with a shift from a rural, agrarian
economy to an urban, more industrial one. The urban share of the population, which had
been about 26% in 1870, was 40% by 1900 and over half by 1920 (US Census Bureau).
Per-capita incomes had risen generally at about 2% annually in real terms throughout
American economic development, so that by 1900 the country was not only more urban,
but wealthier, demanding a larger array of more complex consumer goods and
recreational opportunities. Most of the population did not depend on access to land for
production and income. New production processes and technologies required
professionals with training in civil, mechanical, and electrical engineering, chemistry,
botany, and biology. These demands led to expansion of academic and professional
study and the formation of professional societies, many founded during the 1870s and
1880s along with other organizations--the American Association of Civil Engineers,
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
American Chemical Society, and American Forestry Association. Increasingly many of
these professionals were employed by the federal government as both the size and scope
of the federal role in the economy expanded. Federal civilian employment was 131,208
in 1885, but had grown by 258% to 469,879 by 1913. A growing share of this
employment was in the professional, merit-based civil service that gradually developed

                                           10
an independent agenda from their political sponsors for expanded regulatory mandates,
salary growth, and provision of job tenure (Johnson and Libecap, 1994).

        Bernhard Fernow, head of the Division of Forestry in the US Department of
Agriculture from 1886-1898, and followed by Gifford Pinchot who became first Chief of
the US Forest Service, 1905-1910, were major leaders in the effort to create the National
Forest Reserves, later the National Forests. They were assisted by professional groups,
including the Society of American Foresters, the American Forestry Association,
National Forest Congress, National Board of Trade, National Irrigation Congress (Hayes,
1959, 30-39). Through their efforts and the backing of Presidents William Harrison,
Grover Cleveland, William McKinley, and Theodore Roosevelt, the Forest Reserve Act
was passed in 1891, the Forest Management Act of 1897, and the 1905 National Forest
Transfer Act that moved the forest reserves from the Department of the Interior to the US
Department of Agriculture. Under Roosevelt, the National Forests were expanded to
include 150,832,665 acres in 59 National Forests (Hayes, 1959, 39-47). Creation of
permanent forest reserves was a major reversal from early US land policy. Earlier, the
US Public Lands Commission Report (1880, xxxi) called for changes in the land laws to
allow for private property rights on timber lands, but this was not the path desired for
government management under the new administrative state. Professionally-trained
resource managers were not the land clerks of the General Land Office that had
dominated federal land policies prior to the late 19 th century. They had more ambitious
plans, driven by sustained-yield management.

        Bernhard Fernow and Gifford Pinchot were educated in Germany and France and
Gifford Pinchot returned later to endow along with his father, the Yale School of Forestry.
Both advocated “scientific” forest management, whereby harvest rates were equal to growth
rates. By the late 19th century when both studied in Europe, old-growth timber had long
been cut. Most forest lands were on large landed estates. Property rights were established.
Forests were planted and harvested on a rotational basis whereby different rotations were
planted and harvested at different times to maintain an overall stock and the economic
returns from exploiting it. They were never to be locked up for future generations.

       The conditions underlying this “rational” management of European forests could
not have more different from those of frontier North America. Scale was one factor. The
US was vast and its population was growing rapidly, generating demand for lumber for
homes and businesses in newly-emerging towns and cities, as well as railroad ties for an
expanding railroad network and ship construction (Gates, 1968, 534-535; Olson, 1971).
These demand conditions drove rising lumber and timber (stumpage) prices. Supply

                                           11
conditions were another factor of crucial difference. By the latter half of the 19 th century,
the US was endowed with three major commercial timber stands—the white pine forests
of the upper Midwest or Great Lakes, the yellow pine forests of the South, and the
Douglas Fir forests of the Pacific Northwest and Northern Rockies. The latter two
generally were inaccessible until the railroads moved into the region, largely by the
1880s, tying forest lands to eastern markets. Southern forests on government lands were
tied up with the Southern Homestead Act of 1865 that reserved land for freed blacks and
loyal whites in plots of 80 to 160 acres. Accordingly, these forests could not be easily
accessed for lumber production until the Act was repealed in 1876. For these reasons, the
major source of timber and lumber supply to meet new national demands was the upper
Great Lakes white pine forests. The lumber market was a national one and there was
little international trade in exports or imports of timber or lumber given the huge size of
the growing American market, the vast sources of domestic supply, and the high cost of
ocean shipping of heavy timber and lumber. Western Canadian exports came later. The
rapid harvests in the US at the end of the 19th century to meet growing demand and
shifting domestic supplies were instrumental in shaping the views of early advocates of
sustained-yield management and of subsequent retention of government forest lands.

        Private property rights, markets, and profit-maximizing timber harvest rates on
private lands were never understood by early conservationists, nor for that matter, by
contemporary historians or government agency officials. Private property rights to large
tracks appeared to be un-egalitarian and inconsistent with the objectives of the federal
land laws, which they were. But small farms that worked so well in the Midwest would
not in prime forest regions. Further, and perhaps more important, private ownership
assigned decision making over natural resources to private parties and not government
managers. The latter believed that they could best provide for the public interest, as
evidenced by the asserted overharvest of Great Lakes white pine stands. If uncorrected,
such harvests would lead to a timber famine (Hayes, 1959, 37; Johnson and Libecap,
1980). This was a powerful argument that fit with broader concerns about depletion and
upcoming shortages of key resources, such as lumber and coal, that were subject to
Congressional hearings in the early 20th century (Sherry Olson, 1971).

        The appeal of sustained-yield management to early conservationists and later
government managers lies in the objective of holding harvest or extraction rates to the
rate of growth of the stock. The massive government forests of the frontier US offered a
major opportunity for kinds of scientific, rational, administrative management learned by
Fernow and others in Europe. Consider the quotes below by Bernhard Fernow and
Gifford Pinchot:

                                             12
       “…the forest resource is one which, under the active competition of private
       enterprise, is apt to deteriorate…that the maintenance of continued supplies as well
       as of favorable conditions is possible only under the supervision of permanent
       institutions with whom present profit is not the only motive. It calls preeminently
       of the state to counteract the destructive tendencies of private exploitation” [italics
       added] Bernhard E. Furnow, drafter of 1891 legislation that established the National
       Forest Reserves, Chief, Division of Forestry, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1886
       (Economics of Forestry, NY: Crowell and Company, 1902, 20, quoted in Johnson
       and Libecap, 1980, 372).

       “Government control of cutting on all timberland, private as well as public, [italics
       added] is still today, as it was then, the one most indispensable step toward assuring
       a supply of forest products for the future of the United States.” Gifford Pinchot,
       Chief of the U.S. Forest Service 1890-1910, (120, New York, 1947, reprint, Seattle,
       1972, p. 120, quoted in Libecap and Johnson, 1979,129).

        Imagine what the frontier settlement process might have looked like had the
eastern hardwood forests been managed under sustained yield. These forests were cut to
make way for agriculture and the formation of small farms and communities, following
the Jeffersonian ideal, at least in the north. Later, as these farms proved uncompetitive
with those of the Midwest, and were abandoned, the forests rapidly returned and today in
rural areas cover as much as they did in earlier times. Sustained-yield management if
implemented in the early 19th century would have made the whole migration and
settlement process far more limited with negative welfare effects.

        Sustained yield has and continues to have strong logical appeal among engineers,
natural scientists, government regulatory officials, and non-government advocacy groups.
None of these groups bear the opportunity costs sustained yield imposes, while property
owners and consumers do. When it is economically justified, deviation from sustained
yield results in economic loss internalized by owners. Adherence to sustained yield,
when it is not economically justified, however, also results in economic loss internalized
by society. Bureaucratic officials with tenure and guaranteed salaries, however, do not
internalize such costs. General consumers face high information and organization costs to
counter, and if sustained-yield management is advertised as providing public goods, the
information costs for critical evaluation rise. Competitive interest groups are required to
effectively challenge such claims, but as shown below, early conservationists co-opted
the parties that might have organized against it. Accordingly, sustained yield was and
remains a driving factor in government resource management and it underlies the popular
concept of sustainability.


                                             13
        A related justification for greater government intervention in land use was the
notion of externality and market failure that also developed in the late Progressive Era
(Pigou 1920). Welfare economics, externalities, and government remedies are found in
Pigou, Baumol (1972), and Meade (1973). Although there are a variety of market
failures addressed in the literature, sustained yield is justified by the argument that private
agents systematically discount future returns, ignore current social costs, and
overestimate future supplies, all leading to over production and resource rent dissipation.
Sustained-yield management was presented as antidote to market failure. Coase (1960)
and Cheung (1972) argued for alternative approaches for addressing social cost involving
the assignment of property rights. These views, however, would be inconsistent with
administrative management and agendas.

       Empirical Examination of Conservationist Allegations of Market Failure.

         Johnson and Libecap (1980) test the claim that private timber companies were
harvesting too rapidly, ignorant of future supplies. They assemble US lumber prices
from 1870-1932 and stumpage prices from 1890-1934. They analyze price patterns to
see if major adjustments or shocks are observed once more accurate timber supply
information became available, causing re-evaluation by timber companies of their
previous myopic price expectations. The hypothesis is that had private companies
initially harvested too rapidly, overestimating supply (in the historical literature, “the
legend of inexhaustibility”), then once actual timber supply conditions became apparent,
prevailing prices that had been too low previously would jump as timber companies
sharply cut back harvest.

        Figure 3 plots time series data for lumber prices and the data do not reveal that
stumpage had been underpriced during the period, 1870-1910 when the Great Lakes was
being heavily logged and conservationists were so critical. Prices gradually rise through
1915 as domestic demand grew. The sharp rise in nominal prices between 1915-1921,
after the Great Lakes harvest largely had ended and most lumbering had moved to the
West and South, is associated with unprecedented WWI demand and subsequent, painful
macro-economic contraction after the end of the war. In real terms, however, the overall
price pattern over the entire period is much smoother, revealing no major shocks to
lumber prices in the national market that would have occurred had lumber been
underpriced because of overestimated supply by timber companies.


Figure 3: US Lumber Prices


                                              14
       Source: Johnson and Libecap, 1980, 379.

        To further examine the pattern of prices to see if there is evidence of overharvest
by private companies, Johnson and Libecap also examine stumpage (timber stocks)
prices, using western Washington data where old-growth timber dominated and stocks
remained relatively homogeneous during the time period examined, 1890-1934. As
pointed out above, there was a national timber market with Great Lakes white pine,
southern yellow pine, and Pacific Northwest Douglas fir competing directly.

        Figure 4 provides a plot of one-period real rates of return for stumpage prices by
calculating the annual change in real prices divided by the initial price. Had private
timber companies been systematically overharvesting, neglecting long-term supply
conditions as conservationists argued, then stumpage prices would have adjusted sharply
once actual supply conditions became clear to them. The annual change in price at that
time and the associated one-period real rate of return would have been greater than
before. Moreover, lumber production would have been reduced as companies lowered
timber harvest in order to save their now-more-valuable timber stands.

       The data in Figure 4, however, do not show such rate-of-return patterns. For the
most part, one period price changes are well below 2 standard deviations from the series
mean. There are two spikes, 1906-1907 and 1920-1921. The first coincides with rising
lumber demand and production, not a reduction in output as would be the case had supply
been overestimated. The second spike is due to deflating by the wholesale price series
during a time when the series took one of its greatest falls in US economic history
following the end of WWI. Further, Johnson and Libecap find that one-period nominal

                                             15
rates of return averaged 4.3%, comparable to observe rates of return on railroad bonds
and other securities at the time.

        All told, there is no evidence, then, that timber companies were overharvesting
relative to actual demand and supply conditions, neglecting future stocks, or harvesting in
a manner that was not consistent with profit maximization with secure property rights.
The two price series indicate that lumber companies were managing their timber supplies
aware of actual supply and demand as communicated through prices in a national market
for both lumber and timber. There were no unexploited private gains foregone by too
rapid cutting associated with a myopic view of supply.

        Private timber companies indeed were harvesting more rapidly than sustainable
yield would allow, and had they held to that mandate as conservationists argued, then
timber stocks would have been held artificially too high, lumber supplies would have
been held too low, and as a result, lumber prices would have been pushed higher, making
housing and other building stocks costlier for consumers. Given the importance of
lumber supplies in a rapidly growing economy and national population, sustained-yield
timber management would have reduced real incomes. Such an outcome would not
likely have been in the public interest, despite counter assertions by conservationists that
government ownership and regulation were required to advance the public interest. More
modern techniques are available for analyzing stumpage and lumber price series
movements, but they are unlikely to reverse the findings of Johnson and Libecap (1980)
that private timber companies harvested with an understanding of supply conditions.

       Figure 4: One-Period Real Rates of Return for Western Washington Timber




                                            16
       Source: Johnson and Libecap, 1980, 382.


        Additionally, conservationists and subsequent historians have repeatedly pointed
to timber theft as evidence of myopic and rapacious behavior of private timber companies
(Gates 1968, 534-550; Putter, 1907). Libecap and Johnson (1979, 141) examine timber
lands claiming in the Pacific Northwest to see why theft as compared to ownership was so
prevalent. Logging was highly capital intensive, requiring non-mobile spur railroad lines
and mobile heavy equipment to handle the large logs from the virgin forests of the region.
Moreover, economies of scale in logging required holdings in excess of 160 acres as
allowed by the land laws. Open access and theft placed all timber companies and their
non-mobile capital investments at risk as new entrants could enter at any time and harvest
adjacent plots, driving up supplies and lowering prices. Private property rights would
seemingly have been preferred by companies, especially if they sought to manage stocks
over time to maximize profits.

        Libecap and Johnson examine General Land Office Reports from 1875-1903 and
the report of the 1905 Public Lands Commission where there were extensive discussions
of illegal timber harvest. They focus on six major land offices in the timber regions of
Northern California, western Oregon and Washington, where the theft was alleged to be
greatest. Timber companies could use three land laws, the Homestead Act, the
Preemption Acts and the Timber and Stone Act to acquire lands. The first two required
actual occupancy for farming at least for 6 months with improvements. At that time, they
could commute the claim and purchase the land for $1.25/acre, but there was always the
threat of disclosure that the lands were not actually being used for farming. Timber
companies hired entrymen to act as farmers and constructed pseudo farm buildings to
appear to be in compliance with the land laws. The Timber and Stone Act allowed for
timber harvest of 160 acres of land to support farming after the land had been acquired
for $2.50 per acre. Successful timber companies would then have to assemble the 160-
acre plots into a more viable harvest or management stumpage parcels. In any case, these
actions to circumvent the agricultural land laws raised the costs of acquiring property
rights to land. Libecap and Johnson calculate that the added costs delayed titling by 6
years or more as timber companies waited for stumpage prices to rise sufficiently to make
the acquisition through circumvention of the land laws cost effective. In the meantime,
the land remained in open access, encouraging timber theft. The culprit then, was not the
inherent selfishness or myopic behavior of private timber companies as alleged by
conservationists, but rather the high costs of acquiring property rights to land. This could
have been remedied without resort to government retention and management under the
National Forests.


                                                 17
        Some timber companies, such as Weyerhaeuser, were able to acquire large tracks
of forest land in the Pacific Northwest through acquisition of railroad land grant sections.
These were alternating or checker-boarded sections and required in-lieu trades for
consolidation. Weyerhaeuser acquired 900,000 acres of Northern Pacific lands, among
other properties by 1900, and now owns some 3.7 million acres of forest land in
Washington, Oregon, and Montana (http://www.landgrant.org/history.html;
https://www.weyerhaeuser.com/timberlands/forestry/us-west/). Historians and
environmentalists (Gates, 1968, 565-576) are overwhelming critical of such purchases as
inconsistent with the land grant objectives, involving corruption, and as promoting large-
scale land holdings. But the property rights acquired allowed for long-term management
of forest lands by Weyerhaeuser in economically-viable sizes, beginning in the late 19 th
century and continuing today.

       Arguments made for the retention and management of federal forest lands, rather
than having them exploited by private parties were repeated for federal range lands.
Consider these statements by Ray Wilbur, Secretary of the Interior and the US
Department of Agriculture.

        “The adjustment of a people to its environment can take place through a
       thoughtless struggle in the survival of the fittest, or it can be a planned, quiet,
       orderly process of human organization” Annual Report, Secretary of the Interior,
       Ray Wilbur, 1930, 8, quoted in Libecap, 1981, 156).

        “There is perhaps no darker chapter nor greater tragedy in the history of land
       occupancy and use in the United States than the story of the western
       range…Unexpectedly and almost overnight it became the potential source of great
       wealth from livestock raising. And thereon lies the key to the story…the major
       finding of this report…at once the most obvious and obscure is range depletion so
       nearly universal…” (US Department of Agriculture, The Western Range, 74th
       Cong., 2nd Session, 1936, Senate Document no. 199, 3).

       As with federal timber lands, biologists and other range managers criticized
overgrazing of the federal lands as further evidence of the wastes of unregulated, private
herding and the need for administrative control and management (Hayes, 1959, 50-54;
Libecap, 1981a, 1981b). They did not acknowledge the inability of ranchers to secure
property rights to sufficient acreage for feasible herds under the land laws. There was
competition between the Departments of Agriculture and the Interior over which agency
would receive jurisdiction, but ultimately the Taylor Grazing Act of 1934 placed
administrative control under the Department of the Interior, General Land Office, which

                                             18
became the Bureau of Grazing and later, the Bureau of Land Management (Hayes, 1959,
60-67; Libecap, 1981a).

       Table 1 lists the new land laws that authorized and broadened government
administration and that removed lands from private patenting.

Table 1. Land laws Regarding the Retention and Management of Federal Lands.
       Law            Date                           Implications
     General       March 3 Repealed the Timber Culture and Preemption Acts,
   Revision Act       1891    applied stricter rules for claiming under the Desert
 (Forest Reserve              Land Act, authorized the President to set aside and
       Act)                   permanently reserve government forest lands.
 Reclamation Act    June 17 Dedicated funds from sale and disposal of federal
 (Newlands Act)       1902    lands in 16 western states and territories for irrigation
                              projects on withdrawn lands, but available at
                              subsidized rates for homesteading if lands irrigated.
                              Created the Federal Reclamation Service, separate
                              from USGS in 1907 and in 1923, the Bureau of
                              Reclamation.
   Transfer Act    February Transferred forest reserves and the duties of the Forest
                     1 1905   Service from the General Land Office in the
                              Department of the Interior to the Department of
                              Agriculture and US Forest Service.
 Mineral Leasing February Withheld mineral lands but authorized the Department
       Act          25 1920 of the Interior to issue prospecting permits and
                              production leases.
  Taylor Grazing    June 28 Set aside federal range lands, ending some homestead
       Act            1934    claiming; established the Grazing Service, created
                              grazing districts, and authorized the Department of
                              Interior to issue grazing permits. Grazing Service and
                              General Land Office form Bureau of Land
                              Management (BLM) in 1946.
   Multiple-Use     June 12 Broadened constituent access and use of National
 Sustained-Yield      1960    Forests from initial timber production to include
       Act                    outdoor recreation, range, timber, water, and fish and
                              wildlife. Ended possible privatization.
   Federal Land     October Repealed homesteading and other laws for land
    Policy and      21 1976 disposal enacted in the 19th century and required
   Management                 multiple use and sustained-yield objectives on BLM
       Act                    and other federal lands.
Source: Gates (1968). U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management (editor), 2016. The
Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, as amended. U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of
Land Management, Office of Public Affairs, Washington, DC. 106 pp.


        The Absence of a Counter Lobby to the Retention of Federal Lands.

                                                 19
        As the federal legislation withdrew lands from private claiming in sharp contrast
to a long history of transfer to private citizens, why were there no strong counter
lobbyists to resist these actions? The answer is that conservationists co-opted the very
interests that would have benefited from more flexible mechanisms for obtaining
property rights and might have organized as effective counters. Instead, timber
companies, herders, and homesteaders supported government reservation and
management. Gifford Pinchot called for multiple use of federal lands, rather than
preservation. He and other conservation leaders offered timber companies timber leases
and later, subsidized access to forest lands. For the first time, those companies could
secure legal right of entry to forests through timber harvest leases that they had not been
able to secure under the old land laws. They had only to pay for timber harvest leases and
not go through the possibly costlier process of securing title. Similarly, herders who had
been using federal range land informally, but illegally, were offered renewable grazing
permits within newly-created grazing districts. They were granted renewable grazing
permits that could attach to any titled land owned and were transferable with such
properties should they be sold. Permits were priced low, relative to private lands,
although land quality was lower, and subsequently other subsidies in fencing and brush
clearing were provided (Libecap, 1981b).

         The third group, homesteaders, were redirected, to federally-funded reclamation
sites, following enactment of the Reclamation Acts of 1902 and 1906. The National
Irrigation Congresses, the American Society of Civil Engineers, others lobbied for the
reclamation laws. Federal provision of dams and irrigation networks were argued to
provide opportunities for new homesteaders, and indeed, after 1902, both the number of
homestead entries and amount of acreage claimed to the new subsidized irrigation
projects jumped with totals greater than any earlier period (Gates, 1968, 800).
Homestead claims had to adhere to the 160-acre rule for receipt of federally-subsidized
irrigation water. Teele (1904) and Coman (1911) argued that there were network
externalities that inhibited private irrigation efforts, also justifying federal irrigation
intervention. Leonard and Libecap (2018), however, show that collective action
problems were solved privately and document that by 1920, $697,657,328
($823,236,000,000 in 2015 $) had been invested privately in 109,174 canals and ditches,
159,864 miles long, as well as in 7,538 dams and reservoirs with capacity of 21,246,436
acre feet (to scale, in 2016 California’s enormous, mostly government-invested surface
storage was just under 50,000,000 acre feet). Wahl (1989), Mirghasemi (2015) and others
have been critical of the distortions caused by ongoing federal subsidies of water to
agriculture, flood control, and power generation.


                                            20
        Even so, all three major potential competitors for federal lands failed to mount
political lobbying to keep federal lands open. Rather, they accepted what seemed to be
low-cost alternatives and sponsored federal support for their efforts. What timber
companies, herders, and later homesteaders failed to anticipate was that later, as new
demands for federal lands and subsidies emerged for species preservation, recreation, and
other environmental applications, their access, use and subsidies would become less
secure and subject continued administrative reallocation and regulation.

III. Sustained-Yield Management

        The focus of sustained yield is on preserving the stock of a renewable natural
resource, such as timber, rangeland, or fisheries. It is primarily a static concept.
Economic considerations, such as harvest costs, economic returns, present and future
prices, competitive sources of supply, time, and interest rates are not integral to the
concept. Incorporating them results in a different objective of maximum economic yield.

        The objective of holding resource stocks at sustainable levels for the future is not
obviously beneficial when human factors are considered. Of course, if the goal is to
maintain biological stocks for the long term, regardless of human considerations, then the
problem remains one of political sustainability. Ultimately the decision to preserve
stocks is a political one. The tradeoffs in terms of costs and benefits are not weighed as
deciding factors in sustainable-yield determinations by administrative agencies, but they
are relevant to populations and the politicians who respond to them. How will
populations assess tradeoffs, especially if new information arises as to opportunity costs?
If these appear to be large to influential constituents, how will politicians and the
bureaucracy react? Further, how will politicians and government officials know how
these stocks will be valued by future generations? What constraints will those
generations face and what will their demands be? Their welfare can be advanced not
only by maintaining resource stocks, but by the wealth created from current harvests and
invested in education, health, new knowledge, and infrastructure, all associated with
higher levels of per capita income and wealth generated by exploitation.

        Even under maximum sustained-yield constraints, profit-maximizing resource
harvesters with secure property rights will hold harvests at the point where marginal
harvest costs equal marginal growth rates, all else equal. Because marginal costs are
always positive, private actors will not generally harvest to the maximum sustained-yield
stock levels, where stock growth rates are zero, but rather at a stock level larger than that
where growth rates are still positive and commensurate with positive marginal costs.
                                             21
This point is referred to as maximum economic yield with secure property rights, a notion
again not understood by conservationists, nor generally by government managers. The
key for such restrained harvest is secure property rights. Without them, open-access
prevails and the too rapid harvest claimed by early conservationists would be the norm.

        Other economic factors not included in sustained-yield management that affect
human populations and resource value include expected future price patterns. If timber
prices are expected to fall, perhaps due to the arrival of new sources of supply, as was the
case for the upper Great Lakes white forest stands, then it pays to harvest more rapidly as
stock values will fall. Indeed, the Great Lakes white pine forests faced the impending
arrival of Douglas fir and yellow pine timber from the Pacific Northwest and the South
with the arrival of the railroads in the former and the opening of southern forests with the
repeal of the Southern Homestead Act in 1876 in the latter. Finally, consider interest
rates. Maximum sustainable yield is time independent, implying that interest rates are
zero in stock preservation. When they are considered, then future values are lower than
contemporary ones, and again speeding harvest rates is consistent with maximizing
welfare. Failure to adjust harvest rates in light of such economic factors would ignore the
opportunity costs faced by the generations alive in the latter part of the19th century.
Locking up the resources through widespread preservation as sought by conservationists,
by contrast, would not have been in the public interest.

IV. Opportunity Costs of Sustained-Yield, Bureaucratic Management of Federal
Lands.

         A massive resource base in the US is owned and managed by unelected, career
government employees who hold tenure to their positions. The resource stock includes
188,240,056 in the National Forests under the US Department of Agriculture and grass
lands, for a total of 225,592,659 acres
(https://www.fs.fed.us/land/staff/lar/LAR2011/LAR2011_Book_A5.pdf). An even larger
amount, 247,300,000 acres, mostly of dry rangeland is administered by the Bureau of
Land Management in the Department of the Interior http://bigthink.com/strange-
maps/291-federal-lands-in-the-us. The National Park Service in the Department of the
Interior by contrast administers a comparatively small, 27,400,000 acres. All in all, a
total of 472, 892,659 acres or 21% of the land area of lower US is owned and managed
by the federal government. Most of the lands have little amenity value and as noted
above, were subject to unsuccessful claiming efforts under the land laws.




                                             22
       Valuable lumbering, herding, and mineral production on such an enormous estate
suggests that federal lands offer major economic potential for society. Doing so would
not preclude the set-aside of smaller tracts of amenity or cultural value. Increasingly,
however, under the Multiple Use and Sustained Yield Act of 1960, the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1970, Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976,
and other legislation, more of the federal lands are placed into preservation. Some lands
are accessible as wilderness and recreation, but much is off limits to production or to
exploration for production only after extensive and time-consuming administrative
reviews.

        Multiple constituent groups, including environmental and recreational
organizations, along with traditional extractive users, appear before the agencies and
Congressional hearings to lobby for their favored policies. Agencies have long-term
interests in management policies, longer than elected politicians who last only one or two
electoral cycles. Most actual management is delegated to the administrative agency
officials. Cost-benefit analysis either is not required to assess the opportunity costs of
agency decisions or the process is not transparent, particularly for general citizens to
assess. Marginal analysis typically does not take place. Although preservation of critical
sites can be in the national interest, how much preservation? Answering this and related
questions requires a comparison on marginal benefits and costs in a way that private
rights would engage in, but that government officials do not. Accordingly, allocative and
management decisions on so large a resource base may inflict important welfare costs on
society.

         To give a sense of what might be at stake, consider the decision to withhold oil
and gas exploration and production in the Arctic National Wildlife Reserve(ANWR) in
Alaska. Beginning in 1977 there has been ongoing political debate over whether to allow
restricted development of the remote region, which is thought to hold large amounts of
economically-recoverable oil reserves as well as to have important ecological value.
Kotchen and Berger (2007) decompose the potential social benefits of oil production
among firm profits and federal and state tax revenues, less production and distribution
costs. With reserves of 7.06 billion barrels of oil, priced at $50/barrel, they estimate
opportunity costs of $ 251 billion. Divided among general adult citizens, they estimate a
per-capita opportunity cost of $1,141 of not producing. ANWR, of course, is very small
at 19,300,000 acres, relative overall federal lands, but this estimate alone indicates that
significant economic value may be lost under current administrative management, where
costs and benefits are not considered explicitly. Decisions instead are made through
political lobbying and internal agency deliberations.

                                            23
        Humphries (2016) examines oil and natural gas production on private and federal
lands over the past 10 years. While output has jumped dramatically on private lands,
partly due to better extraction technology, favorable geology, and the ease of leasing,
more than doubling daily production between fiscal year 2006 and fiscal year 2015, the
federal share has declined. Natural gas production in the US has increased each year
since 2006, while in contrast, production on federal lands declined each year from fiscal
2007 through fiscal 2014. These declines are not due to differences in reserves because
federal holdings are thought to have significant, untapped potential. Rather, it is largely
due to the high costs for companies to secure applications for permits to drill (APDs),
which averaged 307 days for the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) to process
(approve or deny) on-shore applications in fiscal 2011. Even after approval, court
challenges by other advocacy groups can cause permits to be reviewed again, delaying
exploration and development and the economic appeal of such investment.

        Similarly, timber production from National Forests has fallen sharply since 1989
to levels not observed since the 1930s, in part due to Endangered Species Act listings for
the spotted owl and other species (http://ecowest.org/2013/05/28/timber-harvest-falls-in-
national-forests/). At the same time, lumber costs are rising, contributing the higher
housing costs. The negative economic and social effects on lumbering communities are
readily observable, especially in the Pacific Northwest where outmigration has left
collapsed property values and limited economic opportunities for local populations,
especially among the young. Figure 5 details the fall in lumbering on national forests in
Washington and Oregon relative to private and state lands where lobby group litigation
and agency regulations are less restrictive.

Figure 5 Logging in Washington and Oregon by Owner Type




                                            24
       Source: United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service Pacific Northwest Research
       Station General Technical Report PNW-GTR-624 (Daniels, 2005, 41).

        Similarly, due to court challenges from environmental groups that seek to insure
that the federal forests remain in a natural state, it is also difficult to thin forests or to
remove burned and damaged timber after forest fires. This condition contributes to
further wildfires and their growing negative effects on communities and the environment,
costs of which are not born by the advocates involved or directly by agency officials.

        Finally, consider grazing which had been the major use of BLM lands that cover
85% of Nevada, 57% of Utah, 48% of Arizona, 42% of New Mexico, and large, although
smaller portions of other western states. Grazing on BLM-administered lands decreased,
beginning in the late 1950s and fell from nearly 13 million AUMs (animal unit months)
in fiscal 1970 to less than 9 million by fiscal 2012. The number of BLM grazing leases
and permits has also declined from about 31,000 in 1949 to about 18,700 in 2011
(https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/migrated/ppa/upload/Chapter-8-FY2012-Econ-
Report.pdf). As with lumbering communities, the economic vibrancy of ranching areas
has fallen. Most western ranches have small portions of titled land, often homesteads,
surrounded by government property that historically had been leased for grazing. When
those lands are not available, then ranching no longer can take place. Further, the
uncertainty associated with renewal of grazing leases lowers the economic value of
ranching properties and private returns to investment in the resource stock, a factor also
not considered by those groups critical of historical grazing on BLM lands.




                                                25
        Overall, timber, minerals, oil and gas, livestock production from federal lands has
fallen relative private and even state lands as more of the huge federally-owned area is
placed into various types of preservation. Society bears the opportunity costs, which as
the Kotchen and Berger (2007) study for the far-smaller ANWR set aside imply could be
very large on a per capita basis. Yet, individual citizens have little access to information
about the tradeoffs made by agency officials or the costs they might bear. Further, they
would bear significant collective action challenges when the returns to organizing others
are unclear. On the other hand, lobby groups favoring preservation and agency officials
generally predisposed to sustained yield and sustainability have their preferences met,
while bearing only their per capita share of the broader net social losses. This is not to
say that some areas would be preserved in the public interest. The point is that the vast
amount of lands gradually reserved would not meet most economic criteria for
preservation and would contribute more to social welfare in resource-based production.

V. Conclusion: Bureaucratic Management of Federal Lands.

        The withdrawal of federal lands from private claiming and titling began with the
General Revision Act of 1891 and continued with the Taylor Grazing Act of 1930 and
subsequent legislation. These laws assign access and use control to federal bureaucracies.
They represent a fundamental shift in the roles of private property rights and the state.
With the founding of the republic reliance was placed on individual decisions regarding
land use and allocation, decentralization, and a minimal role of the state. With the
reservation of vast amounts of land by the federal government and permanent
administrative management, reliance was transferred to an unelected, professional, and
tenured bureaucracy with centralized decision-making authority. The state was elevated
over the market. The argument made at the time was that market failure required
intervention in the public interest. This same argument drives expansion of federal and
state environmental regulation of private property rights and land use in the late 20 th and
early 21st centuries. Beginning with the initial reservations of land for the Forest Service
and Bureau of Land Management, the argument does not pass empirical test, although
more investigation of the issue would be of great value. Because the primary asset was
land and there is a clear historical record of the inability of herders and timber companies
to secure clear property rights, the solution to externality claims is straight forward—the
more complete definition of property rights. Greater private ownership, however, was
inconsistent with an objective to retain federal lands for administrative agency regulatory
control with assistance of favored lobby groups.




                                             26
         The assertion of externality is taken at face value and promoted by interest groups
and by the agencies that benefit from a greater regulatory role. While early access to
forest and range lands, as well as reclamation service projects were aimed at existing
timber companies, livestock owners, and homesteaders, new allocations are to a wider
range of interests—recreation, preservation, wilderness, watershed, wildlife, and fish,
along with traditional uses. The decision-making process in administrative management
is not transparent and generally not in the interest of individual citizens to probe deeply.
Yet, the aggregate opportunity costs of lost production from so immense a land area are
apt to be very high.

        Is there a remedy? In a generally wealthy country where interests vary, those
parties that favor preservation of enormous areas for a variety of reasons are likely to
sustain the current situation. Their objectives generally coincide with those of agency
officials whose regulatory mandates are advanced with sustained-yield approaches.
Moreover, many agency officials are trained biologists in forestry and range
management. They are only tangentially proficient in oil and gas production, minerals
output, livestock raising, and timbering. These are economic activities that compete with
preservation goals. Private decision making over resource use generally would not
coincide with broad bureaucratic discretion. Environmental lobby groups for the most
part applaud the existing arrangement. Moreover, those in communities close to federal
lands that value low-cost access for hunting, fishing and hiking on federal lands also have
their objectives met. This politically-based open access, however, can have predicted
negative results for the resource stock. Even so, a coalition of agency officials,
environmental lobby groups, and recreation interests is a formidable one, regardless of
the aggregate economic and social costs of the status quo. Only if competitive interest
groups arise to counter the coalition of bureaucratic agencies and sympathetic lobbyists,
can general citizens be made more informed to better weigh whether or not public
welfare is advanced or reduced by broader governmental regulation of private property
rights and markets in the name of the environment.

        This is not to say that externalities are not possible, but rather to argue, as Coase
(1960) did that solutions involve a variety of options, chief of which is the better
definition of property rights to internalize social costs, rather than an immediate leap to
regulation, taxes, or ownership by the state. The concept of externality is an elastic one
that can be made to justify almost any state intervention. Whether or not such actions are
justified requires assessment and evaluation, rather than uncritical acceptance of the call
for greater intrusion into the economy and society by an ostensibly benign bureaucracy.



                                             27
References


Baumol, W. J. (1972). On Taxation and the Control of Externalities. American Economic
     Review 62(3): 307-322.

Cheung, S.N (1970). The Structure of a Contract and the Theory of a Non-Exclusive
      Resource. Journal of Law and Economics 13 (1): 49-70.

Coase, R. (1960). The Problem of Social Cost. Journal of Law and Economics. 3: 1-40.

Coman, K (1911). Some Unsettled Problems of Irrigation. American Economic Review
     1: 1-19.

Dana, S.D. (1956). Forest and Range Policy: Its Development in the United States, New
       York: McGraw Hill. United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service
       Pacific Northwest

Daniels, J.M. (2005), The Rise and Fall of the Pacific Northwest Log Export Market,
       Washington D.C.: USFS Research Station General Technical Report PNW-GTR-
       624 February.

de Tocqueville, A. (1835). Democracy in America. Translated by Goldhammer, A.
       (2004). New York: Penguin Putnam.

Dixit, A. (2009). Governance Institutions and Economic Activity. American Economic
        Review 99 (1): 3-24.

Donaldson, T. (1884). The Public Domain: Its History, with Statistics. Washington D.C.:
      Government Publishing Office.

Ellickson, R.C. (1993). Property in Land. Yale Law Journal 102: 1315-1400.

Ely, J.W., Jr. (2008). The Guardian of Every Other Right: A Constitutional
        History of Property Rights. New York: Oxford University Press, 3rd Edition.

Fernow, B.E. (1902). Economics of Forestry. New York: T.Y. Crowell.

Franklin, B. (1751/1845). Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of
       Countries, etc.,” in The Literature of Political Economy: A Classified Catalogue
       of Selected Publications…with Historical, Critical, and Biographical Notices.
       McCulloch, J. Boston: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans.

Gates, P. (1968). History of Public Land Law Development. Washington D.C.: Public
       Land Law Review Commission.


                                           28
German Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture, and Consumer Protection (2011),
      “German Forests”. Accessed March 22, 2018.
      http://www.bmel.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/EN/Publications/GermanForests.pdf
      ?__blob=publicationFile.

Gordon, H. S. (1954). The Economic Theory of a Common-Property Resource: The
      Fishery. The Journal of Political Economy 62 (2): 124-142.

Gould, L.L (2001). America in the Progressive Era, 1890-1914. New York: Routledge.

Hansen, Z.K. and Libecap, G.D. (2004). The Allocation of Property Rights to Land: US
      Land Policy and Farm Failure in the Northern Great Plains. Explorations in
      Economic History 41: 103-129.

Hayes, S.P. (1959). Conservation and the Gospel of Efficiency. Cambridge: Harvard
       University Press.

Hibbard, B.H. (1924). A History of the Public Land Policies. New York: Macmillan.

Humphries, M. (6/22/2016), “US Crude Oil and Natural Gas Production in Federal and
     Non Federal Areas,” Washington D.C.: CRS, 7-5700, R42432.

Johnson, R.N. and Libecap, G.D. (1980). Efficient Markets and Great Lakes Timber: A
      Conservation Issue Reexamined. Explorations in Economic History 17: 372-385.

Johnson, R.N. and Libecap, G.D. (1994). The Federal Civil Service System and the
      Problem of Bureaucracy: The Economics and Politics of Institutional Change,
      Chicago: University of Chicago Press and NBER.

Johnson, R.N. and Libecap, G.D. (1982). Contracting Problems and Regulation: The
      Case of the Fishery. American Economic Review 72 (5): 1005-1022.

Kanazawa, M. T. (1996). Possession is Nine Points of the Law: The Political Economy of
      Early Public Land Disposal. Explorations in Economic History 33 (2): 227-249.

Katz, S.N. (1976): Thomas Jefferson and the Right to Property in Revolutionary
       America. Journal of Law and Economics. 19 (3): 467-488.

Kotchen, M.J. and Berger, N.E. (2007) “Should We Drill in the Arctic National Wildlife
      Refuge? An Economic Perspective.” Energy Policy 35: 4720–4729.

Law, M.T. and Libecap, G.D. (2006). The Determinants of Progressive Era Reform: The
      Pure Food and Drugs Act of 1906. In Glaeser, E.L. and Goldin, C. ed. Corruption
      and Reform: Lessons from America’s Economic History. Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press, NBER.


                                          29
Leonard, B. and Libecap, G.D. (2018). Collective Action by Contract: Prior
      Appropriation and the Development of Irrigation in the Western United States.
      Working paper.

Libecap, G.D., (1981a). Bureaucratic Opposition to the Assignment of Property Rights:
       Overgrazing on the Western Range, Journal of Economic History, 41 (1): 151-
       158.

Libecap, G.D. (1981b). Locking Up the Range: Federal Land Use Controls and Grazing.
       Cambridge: Ballinger Publishing, Co.

Libecap, G.D. (1992). The Rise of the Chicago Packers and the Origins of Meat
       Inspection and Antitrust. Economic Inquiry. April: 242-262.

Libecap, G. D. (2007). The Assignment of Property Rights on the Western Frontier:
       Lessons for Contemporary Environmental and Resource Policy. Journal of
       Economic History 67 (2): 257-291.

Libecap, G.D. (2008). Open-Access Losses and Delay in the Assignment of Property
       Rights. Arizona Law Review 50 (2): 379-408.

Libecap, G.D. (2016) Coasean Bargaining to Address Environmental Externalities. In
         Bertrand, E. and Menard, C. ed. The Elgar Companion to Ronald Coase.
         Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar: 97-109.

Libecap, G.D. (2018, forthcoming). Property Rights to Land and Minerals: The Frontier
       and US Exceptionalism. Diebolt, C. and Haupert, M. ed. Handbook of
       Cliometrics, 2nd ed.

Libecap, G.D. and Johnson, R.N., 1979, “Property Rights, Nineteenth-Century Federal
       Timber Policy, and the Conservation Movement,” Journal of Economic History,
       39(1): 129-142.

Libecap, G.D. and Hansen, Z.K. ( 2002). ’Rain Follows the Plow,’ Dryfarming Docrtrine,
       and the Climate Information Problem: Homestead Failure on the Upper Great
       Plains, 1890-1920, Journal of Economic History, 62(1): 86-120.

Mirghasemi, S.S. (2015), “Agriculture, Dams, and Weather,” PhD Dissertation,
      University of Arizona.

Meade, J. E. (1973). The Theory of Economic Externalities: The Control of
      Environmental Pollution. Geneva: Institut Universitaire de Hautes Etudes
      Internationales.

Merrill, T.W. and Smith, H.E. (2010). Property. New York: Oxford University Press.


                                          30
Neimanis, V.P. (2011). Crown Land. The Canadian Encyclopedia. Accessed April 15
      2018. http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.com/en/article/crown-land/

Olson, S.H., 1971, The Depletion Myth: A History of Railroad Use of Timber,
       Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective
      Action. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Peffer, E.L. (1951). The Closing of the Public Domain: Disposal and Reservation
        Policies, 1900-1950, Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.

Pigou, A. C. (1920). The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan.

Pinchot, G. (1948). Breaking New Ground, New York: Harcourt Brace and Jovanovich,
       reprint, 1972, Seattle: University of Washington Press.

Powell, J.W. (1879). Report on the Lands of the Arid Region of the United States with a
       More Detailed Account of the Land of Utah with Maps. Washington D.C. US
       Geographical and Geological Survey.

Priest, C. (Forthcoming, 2019). Credit Nation. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Robbins, R. M. (1942). Our Landed Heritage. The Public Domain 1776-1936. Princeton:
      Princeton University Press.

Shrubsole, G., Powell-Smith, A. (2017). Who Owns England? Accessed March 22 2018.
      http://map.whoownsengland.org/

Steer, H.B. (1938). Stumpage Prices of Privately Owned Timber in the United States,
        Washington D.C.: US Department of Agriculture, Technical Bulletin No. 626.

Steer, H.B. 1948, Lumber Production in the United States, 1799-1946. Washington D.C.:
        United States Department of Agriculture, Miscellaneous Publication 669.

Story, J. (1858). Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States (Vol. 2). Boston,
        Massachusetts. Little Brown.

Scott, A. (1955). The Fishery: The Objectives of Sole Ownership. Journal of Political
        Economy 63 (2): 116-124.

Teele, R. (1904). The Organization of Irrigation Companies. Journal of Political
       Economy 12 (1904), 161-178.

Turner, F.J. (1893). The Significance of the Frontier in American History. Report of the
       American Historical Association: 199-227.

                                           31
       http://www.archive.org/stream/1893annualreport00ameruoft/1893annualreport00a
       meruoft_djvu.txt.

U.S. Public Lands Commission (1880). Report of the Public Lands Commission. 46th
       Congress, 2nd Session, House Executive Document 46. Washington D.C.:
       Government Printing Office.

United States Department of Agriculture (1936). The Western Range, 74 th Congress, 2nd
       Session, Senate Document 199, Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office.

United States Federal Emergency Administration of Public Works, (1934). Report of the
       Mississippi Valley Committee of the Public Works Administration. Washington
       D.C.: Government Printing Office.

United States Senate (1905,) Report of the Public Lands Commission. 58 th Congress, 3rd
       Session, . Senate Document 189. Washington D.C. Government Printing Office.

Wahl, R.W. (1989). Markets for Federal Water: Subsidies, Property Rights, and the
       Bureau of Reclamation. Washington D.C.: Resources for the Future.




                                           32
