                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                               q5

                                          Kewei Hou
                                          Haitao Mo
                                           Chen Xue
                                           Lu Zhang

                                      Working Paper 24709
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24709


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2018




For helpful comments, we thank our discussants, Rob Ready and Partha Mohanram, as well as
other seminar participants at the 2018 Citrus Finance Conference at University of California,
Riverside, Ben Graham Centre’s 7th Symposium on Intelligent Investing at Western University,
Emory University, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Helsinki Finance Seminar, Ohio University,
PBC School of Finance at Tsinghua University, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics,
Seoul National University, The Ohio State University, University of Cincinnati, and University of
Piraeus. Some related results were reported in our prior work titled “The economics of value
investing” (no longer in circulation). All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Kewei Hou, Haitao Mo, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
q5
Kewei Hou, Haitao Mo, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 24709
June 2018
JEL No. G12,G14,G31,G32

                                        ABSTRACT

In a multiperiod investment framework, firms with high expected growth earn higher expected
returns than firms with low expected growth, holding investment and expected profitability
constant. This paper forms cross-sectional growth forecasts, and constructs an expected growth
factor that yields an average premium of 0.82% per month (t = 9.81). The q5-model, which
augments the Hou-Xue-Zhang (2015) q-factor model with the new factor, shows strong
explanatory power in the cross section, and outperforms other recently proposed factor models
such as the Fama-French (2018) six-factor model.

Kewei Hou                                     Chen Xue
Fisher College of Business                    Lindner College of Business
Ohio State University                         University of Cincinnati
820 Fisher Hall                               405 Lindner Hall
2100 Neil Avenue                              Cincinnati, OH 45221
Columbus, OH 43210                            USA
USA                                           xuecx@ucmail.uc.edu
hou.28@osu.edu
                                              Lu Zhang
Haitao Mo                                     Fisher College of Business
E. J. Ourso College of Business               The Ohio State University
Louisiana State University                    2100 Neil Avenue
2931 Business Education Complex               Columbus, OH 43210
Baton Rouge, LA 70803                         and NBER
USA                                           zhanglu@fisher.osu.edu
haitaomo@lsu.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24709
1    Introduction

Cochrane (1991) shows that in a multiperiod investment framework, firms with high expected invest-

ment growth should earn higher expected returns than firms with low expected investment growth,

holding current investment and expected profitability constant. Intuitively, the extra productive

assets next period produced from current investment, net of depreciation, are worth of the market

value (marginal q) that mostly derives from exploiting growth opportunities in subsequent periods.

The next period marginal q is then part of the expected marginal benefit of current investment.

Per the first principle of investment, the marginal q in turn equals the marginal cost of investment,

which increases with investment. High investment next period then signals high marginal q next

period. Consequently, to counteract the high expected marginal benefit of current investment, high

expected investment (relative to current investment) must imply high current discount rates.

    Motivated by this economic insight, we perform cross-sectional forecasting regressions of future

investment-to-assets changes on current Tobin’s q, operating cash flows, and the change in return

on equity. Conceptually, we motivate the instruments from the investment literature (Fazzari, Hub-

bard, and Petersen 1988; Erickson and Whited 2000; Liu, Whited, and Zhang 2009). Empirically,

we show that cash flows and the change in return on equity are reliable predictors of investment-to-

assets changes, but not Tobin’s q. An independent 2 × 3 sort on size and the expected 1-year ahead

investment-to-assets change yields an expected investment growth factor, with an average premium

of 0.82% per month (t = 9.81) from January 1967 to December 2016. The q-factor model cannot

explain the factor premium, with an alpha of 0.63% (t = 9.11). As such, the expected growth factor

represents a new dimension of the expected return variation that is missed by the q-factor model.

    We augment the q-factor model with the expected growth factor to form the q 5 -model, and then

stress-test it along with other recently proposed factor models. As testing deciles, we use a large

set of 158 significant anomalies compiled by Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2017). The competing factor

models include the q-factor model, the Fama-French (2015) five-factor model, the Stambaugh-Yuan


                                                 1
(2017) four-factor model, the Fama-French (2018) six-factor model, the alternative six-factor model

with the operating profitability factor, RMW, replaced by a cash-based profitability factor, RMWc,

as well as the Barillas-Shanken (2018) six-factor model. The Barillas-Shanken specification includes

the market factor, SMB, the investment and return on equity factors from the q-factor model, the

Asness-Frazzini (2013) monthly formed HML factor, and the momentum factor, UMD.

   Improving on the q-factor model substantially, the q 5 -model is the best performing model among

all the factor models. Across the 158 anomalies, the average magnitude of the high-minus-low al-

phas is 0.18% per month, dropping from 0.25% in the q-factor model. The number of significant

high-minus-low alphas is 19 in the q 5 -model (4 with |t| ≥ 3), dropping from 46 in the q-factor

model (17 with |t| ≥ 3). The number of rejections by the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989)

test is also smaller, 58 versus 98. The q 5 -model improves on the q-factor model across all anomaly

categories, including momentum, value-versus-growth, investment, profitability, intangibles, and

trading frictions, but especially in the investment and profitability categories.

   The q-factor model already compares well with other factor models. The average magnitude of

the high-minus-low alphas is 0.28% per month in the Fama-French six-factor model (0.25% in the

q-factor model). The numbers of significant high-minus-low six-factor alphas are 67 with |t| ≥ 1.96

and 33 with |t| ≥ 3, which are higher than 46 and 17 in the q-factor model, respectively. However,

the number of rejections by the Gibbons-Ross-Shanken test is 95, which is slightly lower than 98

in the q-factor model. Replacing RMW with RMWc improves the six-factor model’s performance.

The average magnitude of the high-minus-low alphas is the same as in the q-factor model, 0.25%.

The numbers of significant high-minus-low alphas are 55 with |t| ≥ 1.96 and 21 with |t| ≥ 3, which

are still higher than those from the q-factor model. However, the number of rejections by the

Gibbons-Ross-Shanken test is only 68, which is substantially lower than 98 in the q-factor model.

   The Stambaugh-Yuan model also performs well. The numbers of significant high-minus-low al-

phas are 57 with |t| ≥ 1.96 and 25 with |t| ≥ 3, which are higher than 46 and 17 in the q-factor model,



                                                  2
respectively. However, the number of rejections by the Gibbons-Ross-Shanken test is 87, which is

somewhat lower than 98 in the q-factor model. The Barillas-Shanken model performs poorly. The

numbers of significant high-minus-low alphas are 61 with |t| ≥ 1.96 and 34 with |t| ≥ 3, and the

number of rejections by the Gibbons-Ross-Shanken test is 147 (out of 158 sets of deciles). Finally,

we should emphasize that while the Fama-French five-factor model performs poorly overall, with

no explanatory power for momentum, it is the best performer in the value-versus-growth category.

   Our work contributes to asset pricing research in two important aspects. First, we bring the

expected growth to the front and center of inquiry. Prior work has examined investment and prof-

itability (Fama and French 2015; Hou, Xue, and Zhang 2015). However, the role of the expected

growth has been largely ignored. Guided by the investment theory, we incorporate an expected

growth factor into the q-factor model. Empirically, we show that this extension helps resolve many

empirical difficulties of the q-factor model, such as the anomalies based on R&D-to-market as well

as operating and discretionary accruals. Intuitively, R&D expenses depress current earnings, but

induce future growth. Also, given the level of earnings, high accruals imply low cash flows (internal

funds available for investments), and consequently, low expected growth going forward. By more

than halving the number of anomalies unexplained by the q-factor model from 46 to 19, with only

one extra factor, the q 5 -model furthers the important goal of dimension reduction (Cochrane 2011).

   Second, we conduct a large-scale empirical horse race of recently proposed factor models. Prior

studies use only relatively small sets of testing portfolios (Fama and French 2015, 2018; Hou, Xue,

and Zhang 2015; Stambaugh and Yuan 2017). To provide a broad perspective on relative per-

formance, we increase the number of testing anomalies drastically to 158. Barillas and Shanken

(2018) conduct Bayesian asset pricing tests with only 11 factors, and downplay the importance of

testing assets. We show that inferences on relative performance clearly depend on testing assets.

In particular, the monthly formed HML factor causes difficulties in capturing the annually formed

value-minus-growth anomalies for the Barillas-Shanken model, difficulties that are absent from the

Fama-French five-factor model and the q-factor model. As such, it is critical to use a large set of

                                                 3
testing assets to draw reliable inferences. Our extensive evidence on how a given anomaly can be ex-

plained by different factor models is also important in its own right. Finally, our work stands out in

that while we attempt to tie our factors to the first principle of real investment within an economics-

based theoretical framework, other recently proposed factor models are purely statistical in nature.1

        Our work is related to Ball, Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and Nikolaev (2016), who show that cash-

based profitability outperforms earnings-based profitability (with accruals) in forecasting returns.

We offer an economic interpretation by linking cash flows and accruals to future growth. We also

build on Penman and Zhu (2014), Lev and Gu (2016), and others, who argue that accounting conser-

vatism, such as expensing R&D and other intangible investments, makes earnings a poor indicator of

future growth. Penman and Zhu also show that several anomaly variables forecast earnings growth,

in the same direction of forecasting returns. While earnings growth has traditionally received much

attention from equity analysts and academics alike, guided by the investment theory, we instead fo-

cus on investment growth. Forward-looking in nature, investment growth is broader than earnings

growth, because investment reflects expectations of future earnings and discount rates.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 motivates the expected growth factor.

Section 3 forms cross-sectional growth forecasts, and constructs the expected growth factor. Section

4 stress-tests the q 5 -model along with other recent factor models. Finally, Section 5 concludes. A

separate Online Appendix details derivation, variable definition, and portfolio construction.


2        Motivation

We motivate the expected growth factor from the economic model of Cochrane (1991). Time is

discrete, and the horizon infinite. The economy is populated by a representative household and

heterogeneous firms, indexed by i = 1, 2, . . . , N . The household side is standard (Cochrane 2005).

On the production side, firms produce a single commodity to be consumed or invested. Firms

use capital and costlessly adjustable inputs to produce a homogeneous output. These inputs are
    1
        Hou, Mo, Xue, and Zhang (2018) study the conceptual foundations of factor models, and conduct spanning tests.


                                                           4
chosen each period to maximize operating profits (revenue minus the costs of these inputs). Taking

operating profits as given, firms choose investment to maximize the market value of equity.

   Let Πit = Xit Ait be time-t operating profits of firm i, in which Ait is productive assets, and

Xit return on assets (profitability). The next period profitability, Xit+1 , is stochastic, subject to

aggregate and firm-specific shocks. Let Iit denote investment and δ the depreciation rate of assets,

Ait+1 = Iit + (1 − δ)Ait . To adjust assets, firms incur costs, which are quadratic, (a/2)(Iit /Ait )2 Ait ,

with a > 0. We assume that firms finance investments only with internal funds and equity (no

debt), and pay no taxes. The net payout of firm i is Dit = Xit Ait − (a/2)(Iit /Ait )2 Ait − Iit . If

Dit ≥ 0, the firm distributes it to the household. A negative Dit means the external equity.

   Let Mt+1 be the representative household’s stochastic discount factor, which is correlated with

the aggregate component of Xit+1 . Firm i chooses optimal streams of investment, {Iit+s }∞
                                                                                         s=0 ,
                                                      P
to maximize the cum-dividend market equity, Vit ≡ Et [ ∞s=0 Mt+s Dit+s ]. The first principle of

                                  I
investment implies that Et [Mt+1 rit+1 ] = 1, in which the investment return is defined as:


                  I        Xit+1 + (a/2) (Iit+1 /Ait+1 )2 + (1 − δ) [1 + a (Iit+1 /Ait+1 )]
                 rit+1   ≡                                                                  .           (1)
                                                  1 + a (Iit /Ait )


   Intuitively, the investment return is the marginal benefit of investment at time t + 1 divided by
                                                                     I
the marginal cost of investment at t. The first principle, Et [Mt+1 rit+1 ] = 1, says that the marginal

cost equals the next period marginal benefit discounted to time t with the stochastic discount fac-

tor. In the numerator of the investment return, Xit+1 is the marginal profits produced by an extra

unit of assets, (a/2)(Iit+1 /Ait+1 )2 is the marginal reduction in adjustment costs, and the last term

in the numerator is the marginal continuation value of the extra unit of assets, net of depreciation.

                                                                 S
   Let Pit = Vit − Dit denote the ex-dividend equity value, and rit+1 = (Pit+1 + Dit+1 )/Pit the

stock return. Cochrane (1991) uses no-arbitrage argument to argue, and Restroy and Rockinger

(1994) prove under constant returns to scale that the stock return equals the investment return

period by period and state by state (the Online Appendix). As such, equation (1) implies that the


                                                       5
stock return equals the next period marginal benefit of investment divided by the current period

marginal cost of investment. Intuitively, firms will keep investing until the marginal cost of invest-

ment, which rises with investment, equals the present value of additional investment, which is the

next period marginal benefit of investment discounted by the discount rate (the stock return).

   In a two-period model, in which the next period investment is zero, equation (1) collapses to
 S
rit+1 = (Xit+1 + 1 − δ)/(1 + aIit /Ait ). Ceteris paribus, low investment stocks should earn higher

expected returns than high investment stocks, and high expected profitability stocks should earn

higher expected returns than low expected profitability stocks. Intuitively, given expected prof-

itability, high costs of capital are associated with low net present values of new projects and low

investment. In addition, given investment, high expected profitability is associated with high dis-

count rates, which are necessary to counteract the high expected profitability to induce low net

present values of new projects to keep investment constant. Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) build on

these insights to construct the investment and return on equity (Roe) factors in the q-factor model.

   More generally, equation (1) says that keeping investment and expected profitability constant,

the expected return is also linked to the expected investment-to-assets growth. The return in

equation (1) can be decomposed into two components, a “dividend yield” and a “capital gain.”

The “dividend yield” is [Xit+1 + (a/2)(Iit+1 /Ait+1 )2 ]/(1 + aIit /Ait ), which largely conforms to the

two-period model, as the squared term, (Iit+1 /Ait+1 )2 , is economically small. The “capital gain,”

(1−δ)(1+aIit+1 /Ait+1 )/(1+aIit /Ait ), is the growth of marginal q (the market value of an extra unit

of assets, Hayashi 1982). Although the “capital gain” involves the unobservable parameter, a, it is

roughly proportional to the investment-to-assets growth, (Iit+1 /Ait+1 )/(Iit /Ait ) (Cochrane 1991).

As such, the expected investment-to-assets growth is the third “determinant” of the expected return.

   The intuition is analogous to the intuition of the positive relation between the expected return

and the expected profitability. The term, 1 + aIit+1 /Ait+1 , is the marginal cost of investment next

period, which, per the first principle of investment, equals the marginal q next period (the present



                                                   6
value of cash flows in all future periods generated from one extra unit of assets next period). The

expected marginal q is then part of the expected marginal benefit of current investment. This

term is absent from the two-period model, which abstracts from growth in subsequent periods. As

such, in the multiperiod framework, high expected investment (relative to current investment) must

imply high discount rates to counteract the high expected marginal benefit of current investment.


3     An Expected Growth Factor

Motivated by equation (1), we construct cross-sectional forecasts of investment-to-assets growth in

Section 3.1, and form an expected growth factor in Section 3.2.

3.1     Cross-sectional Forecasts

A technical issue arises in that firm-level investment is frequently negative, making the growth rate

of investment-to-assets not well defined. As such, we forecast future investment-to-assets changes.

Forecasting changes captures the essence of the economic insight that ceteris paribus, high expected

investment-to-assets relative to current investment-to-assets must imply high discount rates.

    Our forecasting framework is based on monthly Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional (pre-

dictive) regressions. At the beginning of each month t, we measure current investment-to-assets

as total assets (Compustat annual item AT) from the most recent fiscal year ending at least four

months ago minus the total assets from one year prior, scaled by the one-year-prior total assets. The

left-hand side variables in the cross-sectional regressions are investment-to-assets changes, denoted

dτ I/A, in which τ = 1, 2, and 3. We measure d1 I/A, d2 I/A, and d3 I/A as investment-to-assets

from the first, second, and third fiscal year after the most recent fiscal year end minus the current

investment-to-assets, respectively. The sample is from July 1963 to December 2016.

3.1.1    Predictors Based on A Priori Conceptual Arguments

Which variables should one use to forecast investment-to-assets changes? Our goal is a conceptually

motivated yet empirically validated specification for the expected investment-to-assets changes. To

                                                 7
this end, we turn to the investment literature in macroeconomics and corporate finance for guidance.

    Keynes (1936) and Tobin (1969) argue that a firm should invest if the ratio of its market value

to the replacement costs of its assets (Tobin’s q) exceeds one. Lucas and Prescott (1971) and Mussa

(1977) show that optimal investment requires the marginal cost of investment to equal the marginal

q. With quadratic adjustment costs, this first-order condition of investment can be rewritten as

a linear regression of investment-to-assets on marginal q, which is unobservable, Hayashi (1982)

shows that under constant returns to scale, marginal q equals average q, which is observable.

    Although marginal q should theoretically summarize the impact of all other variables on invest-

ment, firms’ internal cash flows typically have economically large and statistically significant slopes

once included in the investment-q regression. In particular, Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988)

and Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995) show that the cash flows effect on investment is especially

strong for firms that are more financially constrained. However, the economic interpretation of

the cash flows effect is controversial.2 We remain agnostic about the exact interpretation of the

investment-cash flows relation, which is not directly related to our asset pricing question. As such,

we include both Tobin’s q and cash flows on the right-hand side of our forecasting regressions.

    Finally, both Tobin’s q and cash flows are slow-moving. To help capture the short-term dynam-

ics of investment-to-assets changes, we also include the change in return on equity over the past

four quarters, denoted dRoe, on the right-hand side of our forecasting regressions. Intuitively, firms

that experience recent increases in profitability tend to raise future investments in the short term,

and firms that experience recent decreases in profitability tend to reduce future investments.3
    2
      Using measurement error-consistent generalized methods of moments, Erickson and Whited (2000) find that
cash flows do not matter in the investment-q regression even for financially constrained firms, and interpret the cash
flows effect as indicative of measurement errors in Tobin’s q. In addition, the investment-cash flows relation can
arise theoretically even without financial constraints (Gomes 2001; Alti 2003; Abel and Eberly 2011). Finally, in a
model with financial constraints, cash flows matter only if one ignores marginal q (Gomes 2001).
   3
      Novy-Marx (2015) argues that the investment framework cannot explain the dRoe-return relation. However,
Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2009) show that firms that experience recent, positive earnings shocks have higher average
future investment growth than firms that experience recent, negative earnings shocks. Liu and Zhang (2014) show
that this future investment growth spread is temporary, converging within 12 months, and helps explain the short
duration of price and earnings momentum. The prior evidence is based on structural estimation at the portfolio
level. We form firm-level cross-sectional forecasts, on which we further construct an expected growth factor.



                                                          8
3.1.2   Measurement

Monthly returns are from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) and accounting in-

formation from the Compustat Annual and Quarterly Fundamental Files. We require CRSP share

codes to be 10 or 11. Financial firms and firms with negative book equity are excluded.

   Our measure of Tobin’s q is standard (Kaplan and Zingales 1997). At the beginning of each

month t, current Tobin’s q is the market equity (price per share times the number of shares

outstanding from CRSP) plus long-term debt (Compustat annual item DLTT) and short-term debt

(item DLC) scaled by book assets (item AT), all from the most recent fiscal year ending at least

four months ago. For firms with multiple share classes, we merge the market equity for all classes.

   We follow Ball, Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and Nikolaev (2016) in measuring operating cash flows,

denoted Cop. At the beginning of each month t, we measure current Cop as total revenue (Com-

pustat annual item REVT) minus cost of goods sold (item COGS), minus selling, general, and

administrative expenses (item XSGA), plus research and development expenditures (item XRD,

zero if missing), minus change in accounts receivable (item RECT), minus change in inventory (item

INVT), minus change in prepaid expenses (item XPP), plus change in deferred revenue (item DRC

plus item DRLT), plus change in trade accounts payable (item AP), and plus change in accrued

expenses (item XACC), scaled by book assets, all from the fiscal year ending at least four months

ago. All changes are annual changes, and the missing changes are set to zero.

   We adopt the Cop measure because it is likely a more accurate measure of cash flows. A more

popular measure of cash flows in the investment literature is earnings before extraordinary items

but after interest, depreciation, and taxes (Compustat annual item IB) plus depreciation. For in-

stance, Li and Wang (2017) use this measure, along with Tobin’s q and prior 11-month returns to

forecast capital expenditure growth. However, as argued in Ball, Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and Niko-

laev (2016), because this measure includes accruals such as changes in accounts payable, accounts

receivable, and inventory, it does not accurately capture internal funds available for investments.


                                                9
In particular, accruals tend to reduce internal funds, and dampen future investment growth. In

addition, Cop explicitly recognizes R&D expenditures as a form of investments that induce future

growth. In contrast, the more popular measure of cash flows does not.

   We follow Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2017) in measuring the change in return on equity, dRoe,

which is Roe minus the four-quarter-lagged Roe, and Roe is income before extraordinary items

(Compustat quarterly item IBQ) scaled by the one-quarter-lagged book equity (the Online Ap-

pendix). We compute dRoe with earnings from the most recent announcement dates (item RDQ),

and if not available, from the fiscal quarter ending at least four months ago. Finally, missing dRoe

values are set to zero in the cross-sectional forecasting regressions.

3.1.3   Forecasting Results

Panel A of Table 1 shows monthly cross-sectional regressions of future investment-to-assets changes

on the log of Tobin’s q, log(q), cash flows, Cop, and the change in return on equity, dRoe. We

winsorize both the left- and right-hand side variables each month at the 1–99% level. To control

for the impact of microcaps, we use weighted least squares with the market equity as weights.

   To gauge the out-of-sample performance of the cross-sectional forecasts, at the beginning of each

month t, we construct the expected τ -year-ahead investment-to-assets changes, denoted Et [dτ I/A],

in which τ = 1, 2, and 3 years, by combining the most recent winsorized predictors with the average

slopes estimated from the prior 120-month rolling window (30 months minimum). The most recent

predictors, log(q) and Cop, in calculating Et [dτ I/A] are from the most recent fiscal year ending at

least four months ago as of month t, and dRoe is computed using the latest announced earnings, and

if not available, the earnings from the most recent fiscal quarter ending at least four months ago.

   The average slopes in calculating Et [dτ I/A] are estimated from the prior rolling window regres-

sions, in which dτ I/A is from the most recent fiscal year ending at least four months ago as of month

t, and the regressors are further lagged accordingly. For instance, for τ = 1, the regressors in the

latest monthly cross-sectional regression are further lagged by 12 months relative to the most recent

                                                  10
predictors that we combine with the slopes in calculating Et [d1 I/A]. Finally, we report the time

series averages of cross-sectional Pearson and rank correlations between Et [dτ I/A] calculated at the

beginning of month t and the subsequent τ -year-ahead investment-to-assets changes after month t.

      Panel A shows that when used alone, Tobin’s q is a weak predictor of investment-to-assets

changes. At the 1-year horizon, the slope, 0.02, is economically small, albeit statistically significant.

The R2 is only 1.03%, which is perhaps not surprising in forecasting changes.4 The out-of-sample

correlations between the expected and subsequently realized investment changes are tiny. At the

2-year horizon, the slope is small, negative, and insignificant, and the R2 remains slightly above 1%.

The out-of-sample correlations remain small, below 0.05, albeit significant. Finally, at the 3-year

horizon, the slope is still small and negative, but significant, and the R2 is 1.18%. However, the out-

of-sample correlations are larger, 0.09 for Pearson and 0.10 for rank, both of which are significant.

      Cash flows perform better than Tobin’s q in forecasting investment-to-assets changes. When

used alone, Cop has significant slopes that range from 0.43 to 0.47 (t-values all above 10). The

in-sample R2 varies from 3.13% to 4.1%. More important, the out-of-sample correlations are sub-

stantially higher than those with Tobin’s q. At the 1-year horizon, for example, the Pearson and

rank correlations are 0.15 and 0.18, respectively, both of which are significant at the 1% level. At

the 3-year horizon, the Pearson and rank correlations remain large at 0.12 and 0.13, respectively.

      The change in return on equity, dRoe, also performs better than Tobin’s q, but not as well as

cash flows. When used alone, the dRoe slopes range from 0.77 to 0.97, with t-values all above seven.

The in-sample R2 starts at 2.23% at the 1-year horizon, and drops to 1.57% at the 3-year horizon.

The out-of-sample correlations are also substantially higher than those with Tobin’s q. At the 1-year

horizon, the Pearson and rank correlations are 0.07 and 0.14, and both are significant at the 1% level.

At the 3-year horizon, the correlations remain largely unchanged at 0.06 and 0.13, respectively.

      In our benchmark specification with log(q), Cop, and dRoe altogether, the slopes are similar to
  4
    For example, Chan, Karceski, and Lakonishok (2003) document a low amount of predictability for earnings
growth, even with a wide variety of predictors including valuation ratios.


                                                    11
those from univariate regressions. At the 1-year horizon, for instance, the Cop slope remains large

and significant, 0.53, the log(q) slope becomes weakly negative, −0.03, and the dRoe slope remains

significant at 0.80. The in-sample R2 increases to 6.64%. The out-of-sample Pearson and rank

correlations, which are crucial for constructing the expected growth factor, are 0.14 and 0.21, re-

spectively, and both are highly significant. At the 3-year horizon, the log(q) and Cop slopes both in-

crease in magnitude to −0.09 and 0.76, respectively, but the dRoe slope falls to 0.74. The in-sample

R2 rises to 9.18%, and the out-of-sample correlations rise slightly to 0.16 and 0.22, respectively.

3.2     The Expected Growth Premium in Portfolio Sorts

Armed with the cross-sectional forecasts of investment-to-assets changes, we study the expected

growth premium in portfolio sorts. We form the expected growth deciles, construct an expected

growth factor, and then augment the q-factor model with the new factor to form the q 5 -model.

3.2.1    Deciles

At the beginning of each month t, we form deciles based on the expected investment-to-assets

changes, Et [dτ I/A], with τ = 1, 2, and 3. As in Table 1, we calculate Et [dτ I/A] by combining

the most recent winsorized predictors with the average slopes from the prior 120-month rolling

window (30 months minimum). We sort all stocks into deciles based on the NYSE breakpoints of

the Et [dτ I/A] values, and calculate the value-weighted decile returns for the current month t. The

deciles are rebalanced at the beginning of month t + 1.

   Panel A of Table 2 shows that the expected growth premium is reliable in portfolio sorts.

The high-minus-low Et [d1 I/A] decile earns on average 1.06% per month (t = 6.25), and the high-

minus-low Et [d2 I/A] and Et [d3 I/A] deciles both earn on average 1.18%, with t-values close to seven.

From Panel B, the expected growth premium cannot be explained by the q-factor model. The high-

minus-low alphas are 0.83%, 0.92%, and 0.99% (t = 5.85, 5.31, and 5.73) over the 1-, 2-, and 3-year

horizons, respectively. The mean absolute alphas across the deciles are 0.21%, 0.2%, and 0.24%,

respectively, and the q-factor model is strongly rejected by the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989,

                                                  12
GRS) test on the null that the alphas are jointly zero across a given set of deciles (untabulated).

   Panel C reports the expected investment-to-assets changes, and Panel D the average subse-

quently realized changes across the Et [dτ I/A] deciles. Both the expected and realized changes are

value-weighted at the portfolio level, with the market equity as weights. Reassuringly, the expected

changes track the subsequently realized changes closely. In particular, at the 1-year horizon, the

expected changes rise monotonically from −15.21% per annum for decile one to 23% for decile ten,

and the average realized changes from −17.43% for decile one to 23.52% for decile ten. Except

for decile seven, the increase in the average realized changes is strictly monotonic. The time series

average of cross-sectional correlations between the expected and realized changes is 0.66, which

is highly significant. The evidence for the 2- and 3-year horizons is largely similar, with average

cross-sectional correlations of 0.72 and 0.68, respectively. The evidence indicates that our empirical

specification for the expected investment-to-assets changes is reasonable.

3.2.2   A Common Factor

In view of the expected growth premium largely unexplained by the q-factor model, we set out to

construct an expected growth factor, denoted REg . We form REg from an independent 2 × 3 sort

on the market equity and the expected 1-year ahead investment-to-assets change, Et [d1 I/A].

   At the beginning of each month t, we use the beginning-of-month median NYSE market equity

to split stocks into two groups, small and big. Independently, we split all stocks into three groups,

low, median, and high, based on the NYSE breakpoints for the low 30%, median 40%, and high

30% of the ranked Et [d1 I/A] values. Taking the intersection of the two size and three Et [d1 I/A]

groups, we form six benchmark portfolios. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated

for the current month t, and the portfolios are rebalanced at the beginning of month t + 1. De-

signed to mimic the common variation related to Et [d1 I/A], the expected growth factor, REg , is

the difference (high-minus-low), each month, between the simple average of the returns on the two

high Et [d1 I/A] portfolios and the simple average of the returns on the two low Et [d1 I/A] portfolios.


                                                  13
   Panel A of Table 3 reports properties for the six size-Et [d1 I/A] benchmark portfolios. The

small-high portfolio earns the highest average return of 1.34% per month (t = 4.92), and the

big-low portfolio earns the lowest, 0.21% (t = 0.88). The average market equity is the smallest,

0.14 billions of dollars, for the small-low portfolio, which also has the highest number of stocks on

average, 974. The average market equity is the highest, 9.03 billions of dollars, for the big-high

portfolio. The lowest number of stocks on average, 142, belongs to the big-low portfolio. The total

market equity aggregated across all firms within a portfolio as a fraction of the entire market equity

is the lowest for the small-high portfolio, 2.11%, and the highest for the big-high portfolio, 33.3%.

   The expected 1-year-ahead investment-to-assets changes, Et [d1 I/A], is the lowest, −11.43% per

annum, for the small-low portfolio, and the highest, 4.46%, for the small-high portfolio. Similarly,

the average realized 1-year changes, d1 I/A, is the lowest, −11.61%, for the small-low portfolio,

and the highest, 5.38%, for the small-high portfolio. The dispersions in Et [d1 I/A] and d1 I/A are

smaller, but remain large, 12.47% and 13.21%, respectively, among big firms. Finally, Et [d1 I/A] is

only weakly related to Tobin’s q, but its relations with Cop and dRoe are strongly positive.

   Panel B reports properties of the expected growth factor, REg . From January 1967 to December

2016, its average return is 0.82% per month (t = 9.81). The q-factor regression of REg yields an

economically large alpha of 0.63% (t = 9.11). The evidence suggests that the expected growth

factor is a new dimension of the expected return variation that is missed by the q-factor model.

   The subsequent five regressions in Panel B attempt to identify the sources behind the expected

growth premium from its components. To this end, we form factors on log(q), Cop, and dRoe, by

interacting each of them separately with the market equity in 2×3 sorts. Cop is the most important

component of the expected growth premium. Augmenting the Cop factor into the q-factor model

reduces the alpha of REg from 0.63% per month (t = 9.11) to 0.36% (t = 6.09). dRoe plays a more

limited role. Adding the dRoe factor into the q-factor model reduces the alpha only slightly to

0.59% (t = 8.06). Tobin’s q is negligible on its own, but more visible when used together with Cop



                                                 14
and dRoe. Adding the log(q), Cop, and dRoe factors into the q-factor model yields an alpha of

0.24% (t = 3.73), which is lower than 0.32% (t = 4.99) when adding only the Cop and dRoe factors.5

    Finally, Panel C shows that the expected growth factor has positive correlations of 0.38 and

0.52 with the investment and Roe factors, but negative correlations of −0.47 and −0.37 with the

market and size factors in the q-factor model. The correlations are 0.7 with the Cop factor and

0.44 with the dRoe factor. All the correlations are significantly different from zero.

3.2.3    Augmenting the q-factor Model with the Expected Growth Factor

We augment the q-factor model with the expected growth factor to form the q 5 -model. The ex-

pected excess return of an asset, denoted E[Ri − Rf ], is described by the loadings of its returns to

five factors, including the market factor, RMkt , the size factor, RMe , the investment factor, RI/A ,

the return on equity factor, RRoe , and the expected growth factor, REg . The first four factors are

identical to those in the q-factor model. Formally, the q 5 -model says that:


    E[Ri − Rf ] = β iMkt E[RMkt ] + β iMe E[RMe ] + β iI/A E[RI/A ] + β iRoe E[RRoe ] + β iEg E[REg ],             (2)


in which E[RMkt ], E[RMe ], E[RI/A ], E[RRoe ], and E[REg ] are the expected factor premiums, and

β iMkt , β iMe , β iI/A , β iRoe , and β iEg are their factor loadings, respectively.

    As its first test, in untabulated results, we use the q 5 -model to explain the expected growth

deciles from Table 2. Not surprisingly, the expected growth factor helps explain deciles formed

on the expected 1-year-ahead investment-to-assets changes, Et [d1 I/A], on which the new factor is

based. The high-minus-low decile earns a q 5 -alpha of only −0.13% per month (t = −1.28), due to

a large REg -loading of 1.52 (t = 23.97). More important, reassuringly, the expected growth factor

also largely explains the Et [d2 I/A] and Et [d3 I/A] deciles. The q 5 -alphas of the high-minus-low
    5
      We form the log(q) and Cop factors with annual sorts to facilitate comparison with the existing literature (Ball,
Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and Nikolaev 2016). In untabulated results, we have also examined the log(q) and Cop factors
with monthly sorts that are analogous to our construction of the expected growth factor, REg . Tobin’s q continues to
play a negligible role, when used alone. Adding the monthly sorted Cop factor into the q-factor model yields an alpha
of 0.26% (t = 4.9) for REg , and adding all three monthly formed factors reduces the alpha further to 0.14% (t = 2.56).




                                                          15
Et [d2 I/A] and Et [d3 I/A] deciles are only −0.02% (t = −0.18) and 0.04 (t = 0.31), respectively.

Finally, the mean absolute alphas are small, 0.07%, 0.09%, and 0.11%, and the p-values of the GRS

test are 0.42, 0.19, and 0.01 over the 1-, 2-, and 3-year horizons, respectively.


4     Stress-testing Factor Models

The most stringent test of the q 5 -model is to confront it with a vast set of testing anomaly port-

folios. We use the 158 anomalies that are significant in the 1967–2016 sample from Hou, Xue, and

Zhang (2017). We also conduct a large-scale horse race with other recently proposed factor models.

4.1     The Playing Field

We describe testing portfolios as well as all the other factor models in the horse race.

4.1.1    Testing Portfolios

For testing portfolios, we use deciles formed on each of the 158 significant anomalies. Table 4

provides the detailed list, which includes 36, 29, 28, 35, 26, and 4 across the momentum, value-

versus-growth, investment, profitability, intangibles, and trading frictions categories, respectively.

The Online Appendix details the variable definition and portfolio construction.

    The list includes 46 anomalies that the q-factor model cannot explain (Hou, Xue, and Zhang

2017). Prominent examples include cumulative abnormal stock returns around earnings announce-

ments (Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok 1996), customer momentum (Cohen and Frazzini 2008),

and segment momentum (Cohen and Lou 2012) in the momentum category; cash flow-to-price (De-

sai, Rajgopal, and Venkatachalam 2004) and net payout yield (Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson,

and Roberts 2007) in the value-versus-growth category; operating accruals (Sloan 1996), discre-

tionary accruals (Xie 2001), net operating assets (Hirshleifer, Hou, Teoh, and Zhang 2004), and net

stock issues (Pontiff and Woodgate 2008) in the investment category; operating profits-to-assets

(Ball, Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and Nikolaev 2015) and operating cash flows-to-assets (Ball et al.

2016) in the profitability category; R&D-to-market (Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis 2001) and

                                                  16
seasonalities (Heston and Sadka 2006) in the intangibles category; as well as systematic volatility

(Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang 2006) in the trading frictions category.

4.1.2     Factor Models

In addition to the q-class of models, we examine five other models, including (i) the Fama-French

(2015) five-factor model; (ii) the Fama-French (2018) six-factor model with an operating profitabil-

ity factor; (iii) the Fama-French six-factor model with a cash-based profitability factor; (iv) the

Barillas-Shanken (2018) six-factor model; and (v) the Stambaugh-Yuan (2017) four-factor model.

      Fama and French (2015) incorporate two factors that are similar to our investment and Roe fac-

tors into their original three-factor model to form a five-factor model. RMW is the high-minus-low

operating profitability factor, in which operating profitability is total revenue minus cost of goods

sold, minus selling, general, and administrative expenses, and minus interest expense, all scaled by

the book equity. CMA is the low-minus-high investment factor. RMW and CMA are formed via

independent 2 × 3 sorts by interacting operating profitability, and separately, investment-to-assets,

with size. Fama and French (2018) further add the momentum factor, UMD, from Jegadeesh and

Titman (1993) and Carhart (1997), into their five-factor model to form a six-factor model. UMD

is formed in each month t by interacting prior 11-month returns (skipping month t − 1) with size.

We obtain the data of the Fama-French five and six factors from Kenneth French’s Web site.

      Fama and French (2018) also introduce an alternative six-factor model, in which RMW is

replaced by a cash-based profitability factor, denoted RMWc.6                Their measure of cash-based

operating profitability is a variant of Ball, Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and Nikolaev’s (2016), using the

book equity (not book assets) as the denominator, and without adding back R&D expenses. The

construction of RMWc is analogous to RMW. Since the RMWc data are not provided on Kenneth
  6
    Cash-based operating profitability is revenues (Compustat annual item REVT) minus cost of goods sold (item
COGS, zero if missing), minus selling, general, and administrative expenses (item XSGA, zero if missing), minus
interest expense (item XINT, zero if missing) minus change in accounts receivable (item RECT), minus change in
inventory (item INVT), minus change in prepaid expenses (item XPP), plus change in deferred revenue (item DRC
plus item DRLT), plus change in trade accounts payable (item AP), and plus change in accrued expenses (item
XACC), scaled by the book equity. At least one of the three items (COGS, XSGA, and XINT) must be nonmissing.



                                                      17
French’s Web site, to facilitate comparison, we construct RMWc based on the same sample criterion

in Fama and French (2015, 2018). In particular, their sample includes financial firms and firms with

negative book equity, except that the positive book equity is required for HML, RMW, and RMWc.

      Barillas and Shanken (2018) also propose a six-factor model, including the market factor, SMB

from the Fama-French (2015) five-factor model, the investment and Roe factors from the q-factor

model, the Asness-Frazzini (2013) monthly sorted HML factor, denoted HMLm , and the momen-

tum factor, UMD. Barillas and Shanken argue that their six-factor model outperforms the q-factor

model and the Fama-French five-factor model in their Bayesian comparison tests. Asness and

Frazzini construct HMLm from monthly sequential sorts on, first, size, and then book-to-market,

in which the market equity is updated monthly, and the book equity is from the fiscal year ending

at least six months ago. We obtain the HMLm data directly from the AQR Web site.7

      Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) group 11 anomalies into two clusters based on pairwise cross-

sectional correlations. The first cluster, denoted MGMT (management) contains net stock issues,

composite issues, accruals, net operating assets, investment-to-assets, and the change in gross

property, plant, and equipment plus the change in inventories scaled by lagged book assets. The

second cluster, denoted PERF (performance), includes failure probability, O-score, momentum,

gross profitability, and return on assets. The variables in each cluster are realigned to yield positive

low-minus-high returns. The composite scores, MGMT and PERF, are defined as a stock’s equal-

weighted rankings across all the variables within a given cluster. Stambaugh and Yuan form their

factors from monthly independent 2×3 sorts from interacting size with each of the composite scores.

      However, as shown in Hou, Mo, Xue, and Zhang (2018), Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) deviate

from the standard factor construction (Fama and French 1993, 2015) in several important aspects.

First, the breakpoints of 20th and 80th percentiles are used, as opposed to 30th and 70th, when sort-

ing on the composite scores. Second, the NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ breakpoints are adopted,

as opposed to the NYSE breakpoints. Third, the size factor contains stocks only in the middle
  7
      https://www.aqr.com/Insights/Datasets/The-Devil-in-HMLs-Details-Factors-Monthly


                                                      18
portfolios of the composite score sorts, as opposed to stocks from all portfolios. Hou et al. show

that the Stambaugh-Yuan factors are sensitive to their factor construction, and their nonstandard

construction exaggerates their factors’ explanatory power. To level the playing field, we opt to use

the Stambaugh-Yuan factors replicated with the standard construction (the Online Appendix).

4.2   Overall Performance

Panel A of Table 5 shows the overall performance of the factor models in explaining the 158 sig-

nificant anomalies. The q 5 -model is the overall best performer. The q-factor model performs well

too, with a lower number of significant high-minus-low alphas, but a higher number of rejections by

the GRS test than the two Fama-French six-factor models and the Stambaugh-Yuan model. The

Fama-French five-factor model yields the highest number of significant high-minus-low alphas, and

the Barillas-Shanken model the highest number of the GRS rejections.

   The q-factor model leaves 46 significant high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 and 17 with

|t| ≥ 3. The average magnitude of the high-minus-low alphas is 0.25% per month. Across all the

158 sets of deciles, the mean absolute alpha is 0.11%, but the q-factor model is still rejected by the

GRS test at the 5% level in 98 sets of deciles. The q 5 -model improves on the q-factor model sub-

stantially. The average magnitude of the high-minus-low alphas is 0.18% per month. The number

of the high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 is 19, dropping from 46 in the q-factor model, and the

number with |t| ≥ 3 is only 4, dropping from 17 in the q-factor model. The mean absolute alpha

across all the deciles is 0.1%, which is slightly lower than 0.11% in the q-factor model. Finally, the

q 5 -model is rejected by the GRS test at the 5% level in only 58 sets of deciles, and this number of

GRS rejections represents a reduction of 41% from 98 in the q-factor model.

   The Fama-French five-factor model does not perform well. The model leaves 89 high-minus-low

alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 and 61 with |t| ≥ 3, both of which are the highest across all the factor

models. The average magnitude of the high-minus-low alphas is 0.38% per month. The model is

also rejected by the GRS test at the 5% level in 113 sets of deciles. The Fama-French six-factor


                                                 19
model with UMD performs better. The numbers of high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 and

|t| ≥ 3 fall to 67 and 33, respectively. The average magnitude of the high-minus-low alphas drops

to 0.28%, and the number of GRS rejections to 95. However, other than the slightly lower number

of GRS rejections (95 versus 98), even the six-factor model underperforms the q-factor model in

the average magnitude of high-minus-low alphas (0.28% versus 0.25%) as well as the number of

high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 (67 versus 46) and the number with |t| ≥ 3 (33 versus 17).

   Replacing RMW with RMWc in the Fama-French six-factor model improves its performance.

The average magnitude of high-minus-low alphas falls to 0.25% per month, which is on par with

the q-factor model. The numbers of significant high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 and |t| ≥ 3

drop to 55 and 21, but are still higher than 46 and 17 in the q-factor model, respectively. Finally,

the number of GRS rejections falls to 68, which is substantially lower than 98 in the q-factor model,

but still higher than 58 in the q 5 -model. The q 5 -model also outperforms the Fama-French six-factor

model with RMWc in terms of the metrics based on significant high-minus-low alphas.

   The Barillas-Shanken model underperforms the q-factor model. The average magnitude of the

high-minus-low alphas is 0.28% per month (0.25% in the q-factor model). The numbers of signifi-

cant high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 and |t| ≥ 3 are 61 and 34, respectively, both of which are

higher than 46 and 17 in the q-factor model. The mean absolute alpha across all the deciles is 0.14%

(0.11% in the q-factor model), and the number of GRS rejections is 147 (98 in the q-factor model).

Finally, the Stambaugh-Yuan model underperforms the q-factor model in terms of the number of

high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 (57 versus 46) and the number with |t| ≥ 3 (25 versus 17),

but outperforms in terms of the number of rejections by the GRS test (87 versus 98). However,

the q 5 -model substantially outperforms the Stambaugh-Yuan model in virtually all metrics.

4.3   Performance Across Categories

The remaining panels, B–G, of Table 5 show that the q 5 -model improves on the q-factor model

across all the six categories of anomalies, especially in the investment and profitability categories.


                                                  20
   From Panel B, the improvement in the momentum category is also noteworthy. Across the 36

significant momentum anomalies, the average magnitude of the high-minus-low q 5 -alphas is 0.19%

per month (0.26% in the q-factor model). The q 5 -model reduces the number of significant high-

minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 from 8 to 6, the mean absolute alpha from 0.1% per month slightly

to 0.09%, and the number of rejections by the GRS test from 23 to 12.

   The Fama-French five-factor model shows essentially no explanatory power for momentum, leav-

ing 34 out of 36 high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 (27 with |t| ≥ 3), as well as the GRS rejections

in 34 sets of deciles. The average magnitude of the high-minus-low alphas, 0.64% per month, and

the mean absolute alpha across all the deciles, 0.16%, are the highest among all the factor models.

   Even with UMD, the Fama-French six-factor model still leaves 18 high-minus-low alphas sig-

nificant with |t| ≥ 1.96 and 8 with |t| ≥ 3. The six-factor model is also rejected by the GRS test

in 25 sets of deciles. Changing RMW to RMWc in the six-factor model improves the metrics to

16, 5, and 18, respectively. However, the alternative six-factor model underperforms the q 5 -model

in all metrics, including the number of GRS rejections (18 versus 12), the number of significant

high-minus-low alphas (16 versus 6 with |t| ≥ 1.96 and 5 versus 1 with |t| ≥ 3).

   Other than the slightly lower average magnitude of the high-minus-low alphas, 0.25% versus

0.26% per month, the Barillas-Shanken model underperforms the q-factor model. The numbers of

high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 and |t| ≥ 3 are 12 and 5 (8 and 1 in the q-factor model),

respectively. The mean absolute alpha is 0.13%, and the number of GRS rejections 33, and both are

higher than 0.1% and 23 in the q-factor model, respectively. Finally, the Stambaugh-Yuan model

does not perform well, leaving 21 high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 and 7 with |t| ≥ 3. The

average magnitude of the high-minus-low alphas is 0.34% (0.26% in the q-factor model).

   Panel C shows that the Fama-French five-factor model is the best performer in the value-versus-

growth category. The number of high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 is only 1, and that with

|t| ≥ 3 is 0. The mean absolute alpha is 0.08% per month, and the number of GRS rejections


                                                  21
9. This performance benefits from having both CMA and HML, while giving up on momentum.

Including UMD per the six-factor model raises the number of alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 to 4 and the

number of GRS rejections to 11. The q-factor model leaves 4 high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96

and 0 with |t| ≥ 3. However, the average magnitude of the high-minus-low alphas, 0.2%, and the

number of GRS rejections, 17, are both higher than 0.16% and 11 in the six-factor model. Adopting

RMWc in the six-factor model further improves the two metrics to 0.15% and 8, respectively. The

performance of the q 5 -model is largely similar to that of the q-factor model.

   The Barillas-Shanken model does not perform well in the value-minus-growth category. The

average magnitude of high-minus-low alphas is 0.24% per month, the numbers of the alphas with

|t| ≥ 1.96 and |t| ≥ 3 are 11 and 5, respectively, the mean absolute alpha 0.13%, and the number of

GRS rejections 26. All the metrics are the highest among all the factor models. The Stambaugh-

Yuan model yields higher numbers of significant high-minus-low alphas, 6 with |t| ≥ 1.96 and 2

with |t| ≥ 3, but a lower number of GRS rejections, 15, than the q-factor model.

   Panel D shows that the q 5 -model is the best performer in the investment category. None of the

28 high-minus-low alphas have |t| ≥ 1.96 or |t| ≥ 3. The number of GRS rejections is 7. The average

magnitude of high-minus-low alphas is 0.1% per month, and the mean absolute alpha 0.08%. This

performance improves substantially on the q-factor model, which leaves 9 high-minus-low alphas

with |t| ≥ 1.96 and 4 with |t| ≥ 3, as well as 17 GRS rejections. The Fama-French six-factor model

with RMWc underperforms the q 5 -model, leaving 7 high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 and 1

with |t| ≥ 3. The average magnitude of high-minus-low alphas is 0.18% (0.1% in the q 5 -model).

   From Panel E, the q 5 -model is also the best performer in the profitability category. Out of 35,

the model leaves only 2 high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96, and 0 with |t| ≥ 3. The average

magnitude of high-minus-low alphas is 0.14% per month, the mean absolute alpha 0.09%, and the

number of GRS rejections 12. This performance improves substantially on the q-factor model,

which leaves 12 high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96, 4 with |t| ≥ 3, and 19 GRS rejections. The



                                                 22
average magnitude of high-minus-low alphas is also higher, 0.23%, in the q-factor model.

   All the other factor models underperform the q 5 -model to a large degree. In particular, the

Fama-French six-factor model with RMWc has a higher number of GRS rejections (17 versus 12), a

higher average magnitude of high-minus-low alphas (0.26% versus 0.14%), as well as higher numbers

of high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 (14 versus 2) and |t| ≥ 3 (6 versus 0) than the q 5 -model.

   Panel F shows that the q 5 -model is also the best performer in the intangibles category. Out

of 26, the model leaves 7 high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96, and 3 with |t| ≥ 3. The average

magnitude of high-minus-low alphas is 0.31% per month, the mean absolute alpha 0.13%, and the

number of GRS rejections 10. The next best performer is the Stambaugh-Yuan model, with only

slightly worse metrics than the q 5 -model. The q-factor model leaves 11 high-minus-low alphas with

|t| ≥ 1.96, and 8 with |t| ≥ 3. The average magnitude of high-minus-low alphas is 0.41% per

month, the mean absolute alpha 0.17%, and the number of GRS rejections 19. The Fama-French

and Barillas-Shanken models deliver largely similar performance as the q-factor model.

   Finally, Panel G shows the results in the trading frictions category. With only 4 anomalies, the

performance of all models is largely similar. However, the q 5 -model stands out by leaving none of

the high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 or |t| ≥ 3. The average magnitude of high-minus-low

alphas is 0.17% per month, the mean absolute alpha 0.08%, and the number of GRS rejections 2.

4.4   Individual Factor Regressions

To dig deeper into the performance of different factor models, we detail individual factor regressions

of all the 158 anomalies. Table 6 reports the average return and alphas from different models as

well as their t-values for each high-minus-low decile. We also tabulate the mean absolute alpha and

the GRS p-value testing that the alphas are jointly zero across a given set of deciles for a given

factor model. To save space, Table 7 only details the factor loadings for the q 5 -model.




                                                 23
4.4.1   Momentum

Columns 1–36 in Table 6 detail the alphas for the 36 momentum anomalies. The high-minus-low

deciles on earnings surprises (Sue1), revenue surprises (Rs1), and the number of consecutive quarters

with earnings increases (Nei1), all at the 1-month horizon, earn average returns of 0.46%, 0.32%,

and 0.33% per month (t = 3.48, 2.28, and 3.04), respectively. Their q-factor alphas are 0.06%,

0.24%, and 0.12% (t = 0.46, 1.71, and 1.2), and the q 5 -alphas −0.04%, 0.12%, and 0.02% (t = −0.3,

0.86, and 0.25), respectively. The q-factor model is rejected by the GRS test across the Sue1 and

Rs1 deciles, but not the Nei1 deciles. The q 5 -model is not rejected across any set of these deciles.

   For comparison, the Fama-French six-factor alphas for the high-minus-low Sue1, Rs1, and Nei1

deciles are 0.3%, 0.44%, and 0.27% per month (t = 2.54, 3.27, and 2.95), and the alternative

six-factor alphas with RMWc 0.25%, 0.41%, and 0.23% (t = 2.1, 3.01, and 2.33), respectively.

The Stambaugh-Yuan model performs similarly, but the Barillas-Shanken model yields somewhat

smaller and less significant alphas. However, all these models are rejected by the GRS test.

   However, all models including the q-class of models fail to explain the “Abr” anomaly at any of

the 1-, 6-, and 12-month horizons, in which “Abr” stands for cumulative abnormal returns around

earnings announcements. In particular, at the 1-month horizon, the high-minus-low decile earns

on average 0.7% per month (t = 5.45). The q-factor alpha is 0.62% (t = 4.25), and the q 5 -alpha

0.56% (t = 4). Similarly, the Fama-French six-factor alpha is 0.64% (t = 4.66).

   Except for the Fama-French five-factor model, all the models can explain price momentum

formed on prior 6-month returns (R6 ), prior 11-month returns (R11 ), prior industry returns (Im),

prior 6-month residual returns (ǫ6 ), and prior 11-month residual returns (ǫ11 ). In particular, the

Jegadeesh-Titman (1993) high-minus-low decile on prior 6-month returns at the 6-month horizon

(R6 6) earns on average 0.82% per month (t = 3.5). The q-factor alpha is 0.25% (t = 0.83), and the

q 5 -alpha −0.16% (t = −0.6). Similarly, the six-factor alpha is 0.18% (t = 1.77). However, all the

models are still rejected by the GRS test at the 5% level across the R6 6 deciles.


                                                  24
   Columns 1–36 in Table 7 detail the factor loadings from the q 5 -factor regressions of the 36

winner-minus-loser deciles. The 36 loadings on the expected growth factor, REg , are universally

positive, and 23 of them are significant with t ≥ 1.96. Intuitively, winners have higher expected

growth rates, and earn higher expected returns than losers (Johnson 2001; Liu and Zhang 2014).

4.4.2   Value-versus-growth

Columns 37–65 in Table 6 detail the alphas for the 29 value-minus-growth anomalies. Perhaps

surprisingly, the Barillas-Shanken model fails to explain annually sorted value-minus-growth

anomalies, including book-to-market (Bm), earnings-to-price (Ep), cash flow-to-price (Cp), sales-

to-price (Sp), intrinsic-to-market value (Vhp), enterprise book-to-price (Ebp), and duration (Dur).

The Barillas-Shanken alphas for these high-minus-low deciles are −0, 29%, −0.52%, −0.47%,

−0.47%, −0.48%, −0.33%, and 0.48% per month (t = −2.17, −3.05, −3.02, −3.01, −2.71, −2.65,

and 3.07), respectively. In contrast, their Fama-French six-factor alphas are −0.08%, −0.14%,

−0.18%, −0.16%, −0.15%, −0.13%, and 0.12% (t = −0.7, −1.04, −1.48, −1.22, −1.06, −1.09, and

0.91), respectively. The Barillas-Shanken model is strongly rejected by the GRS test across these 7

sets of deciles, whereas except for the Cp deciles, the six-factor model is not rejected at the 5% level.

   In untabulated results, we find that the UMD loadings in the Barillas-Shanken model are eco-

nomically large, 0.41, 0.46, 0.4, 0.2, 0.39, 0.29, and −0.43, respectively, all of which are more

than 3.5 standard errors from zero. In contrast, the UMD loadings in the Fama-French six-factor

model are economically small, −0.03, 0.05, −0.06, −0.13, 0.01, −0.12, and −0.02, respectively, all

of which, except for two, are insignificant at the 5% level. We verify that the correlation between

the monthly formed HMLm and UMD is high, −0.65, but the correlation between the annually

formed HML and UMD is only −0.19. Intuitively, the high HMLm -UMD correlation pushes up the

UMD loadings in the presence of HMLm in the Barillas-Shanken model, leading it to overshoot the

average value-minus-growth returns so as to yield economically large but negative alphas.

   The q-factor alphas of the high-minus-low Bm, Ep, Cp, Sp, Vhp, Ebp, and Dur deciles are 0.15%,


                                                   25
0.02%, 0.04%, −0.05%, 0.01%, 0.06%, and −0.03% per month (t = 0.99, 0.12, 0.2, −0.28, 0.06, 0.42

and −0.17), respectively. Similarly, their q 5 -alphas are 0.08%, −0.07%, 0.02%, 0.05%, −0.11%,

0.08%, and 0.06% (t = 0.51, −0.37, 0.1, 0.3, −0.61, 0.49, and 0.3), respectively.

   However, we should emphasize that the q-factor model and the q 5 -model both fail to explain

the monthly formed book-to-market anomaly at the 12-month horizon, Bmq 12, with alphas of

0.37% and 0.38% (t = 2.18 and 2.25), respectively. In contrast, all the other models, including the

Barillas-Shanken model, capture the Bmq 12 anomaly, with insignificant high-minus-low alphas.

   Columns 37–65 in Table 7 report the q 5 -factor loadings for the 26 value-minus-growth deciles.

The expected growth factor loadings are insignificant in all but two cases, net payout yield (Nop)

and enterprise multiple (Em). For the high-minus-low Nop decile, the q-factor alpha is 0.35% per

month (t = 2.42), and the q 5 -model reduces the alpha to 0.2% (t = 1.33). The high-minus-low

decile has an REg -loading of 0.22 (t = 1.98), indicating that high net payout yields signal high

expected growth going forward. For the high-minus-low Em decile, the q-factor alpha is −0.24%

(t = −1.4), and the q 5 -model reduces the alpha further in magnitude to −0.05% (t = −0.27).

4.4.3   Investment

Columns 66–93 in Table 6 detail the alphas for the 28 investment anomalies. The q 5 -model shines in

this category, leaving no high-minus-low alpha with |t| ≥ 1.96 or |t| ≥ 3. The high-minus-low decile

on net operating assets (Noa) has a significant q-factor alpha of −0.45% per month (t = −2.59),

but an insignificant q 5 -alpha of −0.13% (t = −0.88). Except for the Stambaugh-Yuan model, all

the other models fail to explain the Noa anomaly. The Fama-French six-factor alpha for the high-

minus-low Noa decile is −0.45% (t = −3.18), and the Barillas-Shanken alpha −0.61% (t = −4.02).

   More important, the q 5 -model explains the accruals anomaly. The high-minus-low decile on op-

erating accruals (Oa) has a large q-factor alpha of −0.56% per month (t = −4.1), and the q 5 -model

reduces the alpha in magnitude to −0.23% (t = −1.51). Another challenging anomaly for the

q-factor model is discretionary accruals (Dac). The high-minus-low Dac decile has a large q-factor

                                                 26
alpha of −0.67% (t = −4.73), and the q 5 -model reduces the alpha to −0.28% (t = −1.91). All the

other models fail to explain the Oa and Dac anomalies. In particular, the Fama-French six-factor

alphas for the high-minus-low Oa and Dac deciles are −0.47% (t = −3.42) and −0.63% (t = −4.55),

and the Barillas-Shanken alphas −0.54% (t = −3.68) and −0.72% (t = −4.94), respectively.

   The q 5 -model also improves on the q-factor model in explaining the dWc (change in net non-

cash working capital) and dFin (change in net financial assets) anomalies. The high-minus-low

dWc and dFin deciles have significant q-factor alphas of −0.51% per month (t = −3.8) and 0.43%

(t = 3), but insignificant q 5 -alphas of −0.22% (t = −1.62) and 0.12% (t = 0.81), respectively. For

comparison, the Fama-French six-factor alphas are −0.45% (t = −3.45) and 0.48% (t = 3.86), and

the Barillas-Shanken alphas −0.4% (t = −2.74) and 0.53% (t = 3.71), respectively.

   Columns 66–93 in Table 7 report the q 5 -factor loadings for the 28 investment anomalies. The

high-minus-low Noa decile has a large loading of −0.5 (t = −4.46) on the expected growth factor,

REg , in the q 5 -model. The high-minus-low Oa and Dac deciles have large REg -loadings of −0.53

(t = −5.02) and −0.61 (t = −5.65), respectively. As such, high operating and discretionary accru-

als indicate low expected growth. Intuitively, given the level of earnings, high accruals mean low

cash flows available for financing investments, giving rise to low expected growth. Similarly, the

high-minus-low dWc decile has a large REg -loading of −0.46 (t = −4.58), meaning that increases

in net noncash working capital signal low expected growth. Finally, the high-minus-low dFin decile

has a large REg -loading of 0.5 (t = 4.63). Intuitively, increases in net financial assets provide more

internal funds available for investments, stimulating expected growth going forward.

4.4.4   Profitability

Columns 94–128 in Table 6 detail the alphas for the 35 anomalies in the profitability category. The

q 5 -model again shines, leaving only 2 high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96 and 0 with |t| ≥ 3. For

example, the high-minus-low deciles on asset turnover, Atoq , have q-factor alphas of 0.35%, 0.34%,

and 0.32% per month, with t-values above 2, across the 1-, 6-, and 12-month horizons, respectively.


                                                  27
The q 5 -model reduces all the alphas to about 0.11%, with t-values below 0.7. For comparison,

except for the Stambaugh-Yuan model, all the other models fail to explain the Atoq anomaly. In

particular, the Fama-French six-factor alphas are 0.42%, 0.4%, and 0.36% (t = 2.74, 2.85, and 2.61),

and the Barillas-Shanken alphas 0.52%, 0.53%, and 0.52% (t = 3.24, 3.67, and 3.61), respectively.

   The high-minus-low deciles on operating profits-to-lagged assets, Olaq , have q-factor alphas of

0.4%, 0.26%, and 0.32% per month (t = 2.64, 1.89, and 2.49), but q 5 -alphas of −0.08%, −0.2%,

and −0.1% (t = −0.59, −1.79, and −0.92) across the 1-, 6-, and 12-month horizons, respectively.

For comparison, all the other models fail to explain the Olaq anomaly. In particular, the Fama-

French six-factor alphas with RMWc are 0.5%, 0.32%, and 0.33% (t = 2.87, 2.1, and 2.44), and the

Barillas-Shanken alphas 0.48%, 0.34%, and 0.38% (t = 3.6, 2.91, and 3.44), respectively.

   However, we should emphasize that in two cases, return on equity (Roe) and operating profits-

to-lagged book equity (Oleq ), both at the 6-month horizon, the q 5 -model overshoots, yields signifi-

cantly negative alphas, and underperforms the q-factor model as well as most of the other models.

The high-minus-low Roe6 and Oleq 6 deciles have q-factor alphas of −0.16% per month (t = −1.32)

and −0.11% (t = −0.79), but q 5 -alphas of −0.29% (t = −2.53) and −0.31% (t = −2.23), respec-

tively. For comparison, the Fama-French six-factor alphas are 0.16% (t = 1.33) and 0.02% (t = 0.2),

and the Barillas-Shanken alphas −0.2% (t = −1.55) and −0.3% (t = −2.08), respectively.

   Columns 94–128 in Table 7 report the q 5 -factor loadings for the 35 profitability anomalies. Ex-

cept for the fundamental score (Fq ) at the 1, 6-, and 12-month horizons, 32 out of 35 loadings on the

expected growth factor indicate that, sensibly, high profitability firms have higher expected growth

than low profitability firms. (Failure probability, Fpq , which is a measure of financial distress, is

inversely related to profitability.) Out of the 32 loadings, 26 are significant at the 5% level. The

high-minus-low Fq deciles have negative, but mostly insignificant, loadings on REg . Despite the

negative loadings, the q 5 -model explains the Fq anomaly. The high-minus-low Atoq deciles have

economically large REg -loadings of 0.38, 0.35, and 0.33 (t = 3.18, 3.09, and 2.9) across the 1-, 6-,



                                                 28
and 12-month horizons, and the high-minus-low Olaq deciles also have large REg -loadings of 0.81,

0.77, and 0.69 (t = 8.12, 9.12, and 7.73), respectively. These loadings propel the q 5 -model as the

best performer among all the factor models in the profitability category.

4.4.5   Intangibles and Trading Frictions

Columns 129–154 in Table 6 detail the alphas for the 26 anomalies in the intangibles category, and

the same columns in Table 7 report their high-minus-low loadings in the q 5 -model. The q 5 -model

helps explain the R&D-to-market (Rdm) anomaly. The high-minus-low decile earns a q-factor al-

pha of 0.72% per month (t = 3.11). The q 5 model reduces the alpha to 0.25% (t = 1.13) via a large

REg -loading of 0.78 (t = 4.51). Similarly, in monthly sorts, at the 1-, 6-, and 12-month horizons, the

high-minus-low Rdmq deciles have q-alphas of 1.39%, 0.95%, and 0.81% (t = 3.06, 2.87, and 3.01),

but smaller q 5 -alphas of 1.07%, 0.54%, and 0.37% (t = 2.26, 1.57, and 1.31), respectively. The

matching REg -loadings are 0.53, 0.68, and 0.75 (t = 2.05, 3.16, and 4.11), respectively. Intuitively,

R&D expenses depress current earnings due to Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, but raise

intangible capital that induces future growth opportunities. While the q-factor model misses this

economic mechanism, the q 5 -model with the expected growth factor accommodates it.

   The alternative models mostly fail to explain the R&D-to-market anomaly. In annual sorts,

the high-minus-low Rdm decile has a Fama-French six-factor alpha of 0.6% per month (t = 2.77),

a Barillas-Shanken alpha of 0.73% (t = 3.09), but a Stambaugh-Yuan alpha of 0.3% (t = 1.34). In

monthly sorts, the high-minus-low Rdmq deciles have six-factor alphas of 1.33%, 0.92%, and 0.77%

(t = 3.58, 3.05, and 3), Barillas-Shanken alphas of 1.4%, 0.96%, and 0.8% (t = 3.44, 2.89, and 2.84),

and Stambaugh-Yuan alphas of 1.14%, 0.63%, and 0.47% (t = 2.87, 2.13, and 1.84), respectively.

   We should emphasize that the q 5 -model, despite improving on the q-factor model substantially,

still leaves 7 high-minus-low alphas with |t| ≥ 1.96, including 3 with |t| ≥ 3, in the intangibles
                                                                              [2,5]      [6,10]          [11,15]
category. In particular, three Heston-Sadka (2008) seasonality variables, Ra          , Ra        , and Ra         ,

have high-minus-low q 5 -alphas of 0.85%, 0.95%, and 0.55% per month (t = 4.02, 4.74, and 3.16),


                                                  29
respectively. The REg -loadings of these high-minus-low deciles are all economically small and in-

significant. All the other factor models also fail to explain the seasonality anomalies.

    Finally, the last 4 columns in Table 6 report the alphas for the 4 anomalies in the trading fric-

tions category, and the same columns in Table 7 show their high-minus-low loadings in the q 5 -model.

The q 5 -model yields insignificant high-minus-low alphas for the two idiosyncratic skewness anoma-

lies (Isff1 and Isq1), whereas all the other models produce significant alphas. The high-minus-low

Isff1 and Isq1 deciles have positive and marginally significant REg -loadings.


5    Conclusion

In a multiperiod investment framework, firms with high expected investment growth should earn

higher expected returns than firms with low expected investment growth, holding current invest-

ment and expected profitability constant. Motivated by this theoretical prediction, we form cross-

sectional forecasts, and construct an expected growth factor, which yields an average return of 0.82%

per month (t = 9.81). We augment the q-factor model with the new factor to form the q 5 -model.

    In a large set of testing deciles formed on 158 significant anomalies, the q 5 -model improves

on the q-factor model substantially. The q 5 -model is the overall best performing model. The q-

factor model also compares well with the Fama-French six-factor model, the alternative six-factor

model with the cash-based profitability factor, and the Stambaugh-Yuan four-factor model. The

Fama-French five-factor model is the best model in the value-versus-growth category, but shows no

explanatory power for momentum. The Barillas-Shanken six-factor model performs poorly, with a

high number of significant high-minus-low alphas and a high number of rejections by the GRS test.




                                                 30
                                          References

Abarbanell, Jeffery S., and Brian J. Bushee, 1998, Abnormal returns to a fundamental analysis
   strategy, The Accounting Review 73, 19-45.

Abel, Andrew B., and Janice C. Eberly, 2011, How Q and cash flow affect investment without
    frictions: An analytical explanation, Review of Economic Studies 78, 1179–1200.

Alti, Aydogan, 2003, How sensitive is investment to cash flow when financing is frictionless?
     Journal of Finance 58, 707–722.

Anderson, Christopher W., and Luis Garcia-Feijoo, 2006, Empirical evidence on capital
   investment, growth options, and security returns, Journal of Finance 61, 171–194.

Ang, Andrew, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2006, The cross-section of
    volatility and expected returns, Journal of Finance 61, 259–299.

Asness, Clifford, and Andrea Frazzini, 2013, The devil in HML’s details, Journal of Portfolio
    Management 39, 49–68.

Balakrishnan, Karthik, Eli Bartov, and Lucile Faurel, 2010, Post loss/profit announcement drift,
    Journal of Accounting and Economics 50, 20–41.

Ball, Ray, Joseph Gerakos, Juhani Linnainmaa, and Valeri Nikolaev, 2015, Deflating profitability,
     Journal of Financial Economics 117, 225–248.

Ball, Ray, Joseph Gerakos, Juhani Linnainmaa, and Valeri Nikolaev, 2016, Accruals, cash
     flows, and operating profitability in the cross section of stock returns, Journal of Financial
     Economics 121, 28–45.

Barbee, William C., Jr., Sandip Mukherji, and Gary A. Raines, 1996, Do sales-price and debt-
    equity explain stock returns better than book-market and firm size? Financial Analysts
    Journal 52, 56-60.

Barillas, Francisco, and Jay Shanken, 2018, Comparing asset pricing models, Journal of Finance
    73, 715–754.

Barth, Mary E., John A. Elliott, and Mark W. Finn, 1999, Market rewards associated with
    patterns of increasing earnings, Journal of Accounting Research 37, 387–413.

Basu, Sanjoy, 1983, The relationship between earnings yield, market value, and return for NYSE
    common stocks: Further evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 12, 129–156.

Belo, Frederico, and Xiaoji Lin, 2011, The inventory growth spread, Review of Financial Studies
    25, 278–313.

Blitz, David, Joop Huij, and Martin Martens, 2011, Residual momentum, Journal of Empirical
     Finance 18, 506–521.

Boudoukh, Jacob, Roni Michaely, Matthew Richardson, and Michael R. Roberts, 2007, On the
   importance of measuring payout yield: Implications for empirical asset pricing, Journal of
   Finance 62, 877–915.


                                               31
Bradshaw, Mark T., Scott A. Richardson, and Richard G. Sloan, 2006, The relation between
    corporate financing activities, analysts’ forecasts and stock returns, Journal of Accounting
    and Economics 42, 53–85.

Brennan, Michael J., Tarun Chordia, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Alternative factor
    specifications, security characteristics, and the cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal
    of Financial Economics 49, 345–373.

Campbell, John Y., Jens Hilscher, and Jan Szilagyi, 2008, In search of distress risk, Journal of
   Finance 63, 2899–2939.

Carhart, Mark M. 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52,
    57–82.

Chan, Louis K. C., Jason Karceski, and Josef Lakonishok, 2003, The level and persistence of
   growth rates, Journal of Finance 58, 643-684.

Chan, Louis K. C., Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Josef Lakonishok, 1996, Momentum strategies,
   Journal of Finance 51, 1681–1713.

Chan, Louis K. C., Josef Lakonishok, and Theodore Sougiannis, 2001, The stock market valuation
   of research and development expenditures, Journal of Finance 56, 2431–2456.

Cochrane, John H., 1991, Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns and
    economic fluctuations, Journal of Finance 46, 209–237.

Cochrane, John H., 2005, Asset Pricing, Revised edition, Princeton University Press.

Cochrane, John H., 2011, Presidential address: Discount rates, Journal of Finance 66, 1047–1108.

Cohen, Lauren, and Andrea Frazzini, 2008, Economic links and predictable returns, Journal of
   Finance 63, 1977–2011.

Cohen, Lauren, and Dong Lou, 2012, Complicated firms, Journal of Financial Economics 104,
   383–400.

Cooper, Michael J., Huseyin Gulen, and Michael J. Schill, 2008, Asset growth and the cross-section
   of stock returns, Journal of Finance 63, 1609–1652.

Daniel, Kent D. and Sheridan Titman, 2006, Market reactions to tangible and intangible
    information, Journal of Finance 61, 1605–1643.

De Bondt, Werner F. M., and Richard Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact? Journal of
    Finance 40, 793–805.

Dechow, Patricia M., Richard G. Sloan, and Mark T. Soliman, 2004, Implied equity duration: A
    new measure of equity risk, Review of Accounting Studies 9, 197–228.

Desai, Hemang, Shivaram Rajgopal, and Mohan Venkatachalam, 2004, Value-glamour and
    accruals mispricing: One anomaly or two? The Accounting Review 79, 355–385.

Eisfeldt, Andrea L., and Dimitris Papanikolaou, 2013, Organizational capital and the cross-section
     of expected returns, Journal of Finance 68, 1365–1406.

                                                 32
Erickson, Timothy, and Toni M. Whited, 2000, Measurement error and the relationship between
    investment and q, Journal of Political Economy 108, 1027–1057.

Fairfield, Patricia M., J. Scott Whisenant, and Teri Lombardi Yohn, 2003, Accrued earnings and
     growth: Implications for future profitability and market mispricing, The Accounting Review
     78, 353–371.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
   and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1996, Multifactor explanation of asset pricing
   anomalies, Journal of Finance 51, 55–84.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2015, A five-factor asset pricing model, Journal of
   Financial Economics 116, 1–22.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2018, Choosing factors, Journal of Financial Economics
   128, 234–252.

Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests,
   Journal of Political Economy 81, 607–636.

Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen, 1988, Financing constraints and
    corporate investment, Brookings Papers of Economic Activity 1, 141–195.

Foster, George, Chris Olsen, and Terry Shevlin, 1984, Earnings releases, anomalies, and the
    behavior of security returns, The Accounting Review 59, 574–603.

Francis, Jennifer, Ryan LaFond, Per M. Olsson, and Katherine Schipper, 2004, Cost of equity and
    earnings attributes, The Accounting Review 79, 967–1010.

Frankel, Richard, and Charles M. C. Lee, 1998, Accounting valuation, market expectation, and
    cross-sectional stock returns, Journal of Accounting and Economics 25, 283-319.

George, Thomas J., and Chuan-Yang Hwang, 2004, The 52-week high and momentum investing,
    Journal of Finance 58, 2145–2176.

Gibbons, Michael R., Stephen A. Ross, and Jay Shanken, 1989, A test of the efficiency of a given
    portfolio, Econometrica 57, 1121–1152.

Gilchrist, Simon, and Charles P. Himmelberg, 1995, Evidence on the role of cash flow for
    investment, Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 541-572.

Gomes, Joao F., 2001, Financing investment, American Economic Review 91, 1263–1285.

Hafzalla, Nader, Russell Lundholm, and E. Matthew Van Winkle, 2011, Percent accruals, The
    Accounting Review 86, 209–236.

Hawkins, Eugene H., Stanley C. Chamberlin, and Wayne E. Daniel, 1984, Earnings expectations
   and security prices, Financial Analysts Journal 40, 24–38.

Hayashi, Fumio, 1982, Tobin’s marginal q and average q:          A neoclassical interpretation,
    Econometrica 50, 213–224.

                                              33
Heston Steven L., and Ronnie Sadka, 2008, Seasonality in the cross-section of stock returns,
    Journal of Financial Economics 87, 418–445.

Hirshleifer, David, Kewei Hou, Siew Hong Teoh, and Yinglei Zhang, 2004, Do investors overvalue
    firms with bloated balance sheets? Journal of Accounting and Economics 38, 297–331.

Hou, Kewei, 2007, Industry information diffusion and the lead-lag effect in stock returns, Review
    of Financial Studies 20, 1113–1138.

Hou, Kewei, Haitao Mo, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang, 2018, Motivating factors, working paper, The
    Ohio State University.

Hou, Kewei, and David T. Robinson, 2006, Industry concentration and average stock returns,
    Journal of Finance 61, 1927–1956.

Hou, Kewei, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang, 2015, Digesting anomalies: An investment approach,
    Review of Financial Studies 28, 650–705.

Hou, Kewei, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang, 2017, Replicating anomalies, working paper, The Ohio
    State University and University of Cincinnati.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
    Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Joshua Livnat, 2006, Revenue surprises and stock returns, Journal
    of Accounting and Economics 41, 147–171.

Johnson, Timothy C., 2001, Rational momentum effects, Journal of Finance 57, 585–608.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide useful
    measures of financing constraints? Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169-215.

Keynes, John Maynard, 1936, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, New
   York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment,
    extrapolation, and risk, Journal of Finance 49, 1541–1578.

Lev, Baruch, and Feng Gu, 2016, The End of Accounting and the Path Forward for Investors and
    Managers, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.

Li, Jun, and Huijun Wang, 2017, Expected investment growth and the cross section of stock
     returns, working paper, University of Texas at Dallas.

Liu, Laura Xiaolei, Toni M. Whited, and Lu Zhang, 2009, Investment-based expected stock
    returns, Journal of Political Economy 117, 1105–1139.

Liu, Laura Xiaolei, and Lu Zhang, 2014, A neoclassical interpretation of momentum, Journal of
     Monetary Economics 67, 109–128.

Loughran, Tim, and Jay W. Wellman, 2011, New evidence on the relation between the enterprise
    multiple and average stock returns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46, 1629–
    1650.

                                              34
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Edward C. Prescott, 1971, Investment under uncertainty, Econometrica
    39, 659–681.

Lyandres, Evgeny, Le Sun, and Lu Zhang, 2008, The new issues puzzle: Testing the investment-
    based explanation, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2825–2855.

Menzly, Lior, and Oguzhan Ozbas, 2010, Market segmentation and cross-predictability of returns,
   Journal of Finance 65, 1555–1580.

Moskowitz, Tobias J., and Mark Grinblatt, 1999, Do industries explain momentum? Journal of
   Finance 54 1249–1290.

Mussa, Michael L., 1977, External and internal adjustment costs and the theory of aggregate and
   firm investment, Economica 44, 163-178.

Novy-Marx, Robert, 2011, Operating leverage, Review of Finance 15, 103–134.

Novy-Marx, Robert, 2013, The other side of value: The gross profitability premium, Journal of
   Financial Economics 108, 1–28.

Novy-Marx, Robert, 2015, How can a q-theoretic model price momentum? NBER working paper
   no. 20985.

Penman, Stephen H., Scott A. Richardson, and Irem Tuna, 2007, The book-to-price effect in stock
   returns: Accounting for leverage, Journal of Accounting Research 45, 427–467.

Penman, Stephen H., and Julie Lei Zhu, 2014, Accounting anomalies, risk, and return, The
   Accounting Review 89, 1835–1866.

Pontiff, Jeffrey, and Artemiza Woodgate, 2008, Share issuance and cross-sectional returns, Journal
    of Finance 63, 921–945.

Restoy, Fernando, and G. Michael Rockinger, 1994, On stock market returns and returns on
    investment, Journal of Finance 49, 543–556.

Richardson, Scott A., Richard G. Sloan, Mark T. Soliman, and Irem Tuna, 2005, Accrual
    reliability, earnings persistence and stock prices, Journal of Accounting and Economics 39,
    437–485.

Rosenberg, Barr, Kenneth Reid, and Ronald Lanstein, 1985, Persuasive evidence of market
    inefficiency, Journal of Portfolio Management 11, 9–16.

Sloan, Richard G., 1996, Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows about
    future earnings? The Accounting Review 71, 289–315.

Stambaugh, Robert F., and Yu Yuan, 2017, Mispricing factors, Review of Financial Studies 30,
    1270–1315.

Thomas, Jacob K., and Huai Zhang, 2002, Inventory changes and future returns, Review of
   Accounting Studies 7, 163–187.

Titman, Sheridan, K. C. John Wei, and Feixue Xie, 2004, Capital investments and stock returns,
    Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 677–700.

                                               35
Tobin, James, 1969, A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory, Journal of Money, Credit,
    and Banking 1, 15–29.

Tuzel, Selale, 2010, Corporate real estate holdings and the cross-section of stock returns, Review
    of Financial Studies 23, 2268–2302.

Xie, Hong, 2001, The mispricing of abnormal accruals, The Accounting Review 76, 357–373.

Xing, Yuhang, 2008, Interpreting the value effect through the Q-theory:             An empirical
    investigation, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1767–1795.




                                               36
           Table 1 : Monthly Cross-sectional Regressions of Future Investment-to-assets Changes, July 1963–December 2016

     For each month, we perform cross-sectional regressions of future τ -year-ahead investment-to-assets changes, denoted dτ I/A, in which
     τ = 1, 2, 3, on the logarithm of Tobin’s q, log(q), cash flows, Cop, the change in return on equity, dRoe, as well as on all the three
     regressors together. We measure current investment-to-assets from the most recent fiscal year ending at least four months ago, and
     calculate dτ I/A as investment-to-assets from the subsequent τ -year-ahead fiscal year end minus the current investment-to-assets. All
     the cross-sectional regressions are estimated via weighted least squares with the market equity as weights. We winsorize the cross
     section of each variable each month at the 1–99% level. We report the average slopes, their t-values adjusted for heteroscedasticity
     and autocorrelations (in parentheses), and goodness-of-fit coefficients (R2 , in percent). In addition, at the beginning of each month t,
     we calculate the expected I/A changes, Et [dτ I/A], by combining the most recent winsorized predictors with the average cross-sectional
     slopes. The most recent predictors, log(q) and Cop, are from the most recent fiscal year ending at least four months ago as of month
     t, and dRoe is based on the latest announced earnings, and if not available, the earnings from the most recent fiscal quarter ending
     at least four months ago. The average slopes in calculating Et [dτ I/A] are estimated from the prior 120-month rolling window (30
     months minimum), in which the dependent variable, dτ I/A, uses data from the fiscal year ending at least four months ago as of month
     t, and the regressors are further lagged accordingly. For instance, for τ = 1, the regressors used in the latest monthly cross-sectional
     regression are further lagged by 12 months relative to the most recent predictors used in calculating Et [d1 I/A]. We report time-series
     averages of cross-sectional Pearson and rank correlations between Et [dτ I/A] calculated at the beginning of month t and the realized
     τ -year-ahead investment-to-assets changes. The p-values testing that a given correlation is zero are in brackets.
37




                         Panel A: log(q)                                            Panel B: Cop
       τ        log(q)       R2      Pearson        Rank                Cop           R2       Pearson       Rank
       1         0.021      1.03           0.014    0.002              0.427         3.13        0.146       0.180
                (4.91)                     [0.01]   [0.62]           (13.31)                     [0.00]      [0.00]
       2       −0.006       1.15           0.028    0.042              0.469         4.10        0.134       0.158
              (−1.13)                      [0.00]   [0.00]           (12.19)                     [0.00]      [0.00]
       3       −0.018       1.18           0.089    0.104              0.449         3.97        0.117       0.133
              (−3.56)                      [0.00]   [0.00]           (10.66)                     [0.00]      [0.00]
                         Panel C: dRoe                                                 Panel D: log(q), Cop, and dRoe
       τ         dRoe        R2      Pearson        Rank               log(q)        Cop          dRoe         R2       Pearson      Rank
       1         0.824      2.23           0.072    0.135             −0.031        0.530         0.802       6.64        0.142      0.213
                (7.98)                     [0.00]   [0.00]           (−5.86)      (12.82)        (7.75)                   [0.00]     [0.00]
       2         0.973      2.00           0.073    0.158             −0.076        0.722         0.930       8.88        0.156      0.226
                (9.99)                     [0.00]   [0.00]          (−10.09)      (12.58)       (10.25)                   [0.00]     [0.00]
       3         0.772      1.57           0.060    0.133             −0.093        0.760         0.743       9.18        0.158      0.221
                (8.49)                     [0.00]   [0.00]          (−12.14)      (12.20)        (8.62)                   [0.00]     [0.00]
     Table 2 : Properties of the Expected Growth Deciles, January 1967–December 2016

We use the log of Tobin’s q, log(q), cash flow, Cop, and the change in return on equity, dRoe, to
form the expected investment-to-assets changes, Et [dτ I/A], with τ ranging from 1 to 3 years. At the
beginning of each month t, we calculate Et [dτ I/A] by combining the three most recent predictors
(winsorized at the 1–99% level) with the average cross-sectional regression slopes. The most recent
predictors, log(q) and Cop, are from the most recent fiscal year ending at least four months ago as
of month t, and dRoe uses the latest announced earnings, and if not available, the earnings from
the most recent fiscal quarter ending at least four months ago. The average slopes in calculating
Et [dτ I/A] are estimated from the prior 120-month rolling window (30 months minimum), in which
the dependent variable, dτ I/A, uses data from the fiscal year ending at least four months ago as of
month t, and the regressors are further lagged accordingly. For instance, for τ = 1, the regressors
used in the latest monthly cross-sectional regression are further lagged by 12 months relative to
the most recent predictors used in calculating Et [d1 I/A]. Cross-sectional regressions are estimated
via weighted least squares with the market equity as weights. At the beginning of each month t,
we sort all stocks into deciles based on the NYSE breakpoints of the ranked Et [dτ I/A] values, and
compute value-weighted decile returns for the current month t. The deciles are rebalanced at the
beginning of month t+1. For each decile and the high-minus-low decile, we report the average excess
return, R, the q-factor alpha, αq , the expected investment-to-assets changes, Et [dτ I/A], and the
average future realized changes, dτ I/A, and their heteroscedasticity-and-autocorrelation-adjusted
t-statistics (beneath the corresponding estimates). Et [dτ I/A] and dτ I/A are value-weighted.

 τ     Low          2         3         4        5          6       7       8      9    High   H−L
                                  Panel A: Average excess returns, R
 1    −0.12      0.26      0.33       0.45    0.46       0.51    0.57    0.65    0.75   0.95    1.06
      −0.39      1.05      1.43       2.09    2.31       2.64    3.03    3.41    3.99   4.57    6.25
 2    −0.09      0.26      0.22       0.39    0.47       0.63    0.61    0.79    0.67   1.09    1.18
      −0.32      1.06      1.00       1.86    2.41       3.37    3.33    4.05    3.39   5.07    6.98
 3    −0.09      0.22      0.31       0.38    0.52       0.52    0.75    0.66    0.85   1.09    1.18
      −0.32      0.94      1.39       1.81    2.70       2.77    3.86    3.16    4.30   5.01    6.96
                                   Panel B: The q-factor alphas, αq
 1    −0.40    −0.24     −0.22      −0.08    −0.16      0.01  0.09       0.22    0.24   0.43    0.83
      −3.86    −2.35     −2.55      −0.94    −1.77      0.10  1.28       2.13    2.70   4.07    5.85
 2    −0.33    −0.14     −0.13      −0.21    −0.10      0.08 −0.01       0.18    0.24   0.59    0.92
      −3.48    −1.71     −1.32      −3.21    −1.29      0.85 −0.14       1.74    2.59   4.06    5.31
 3    −0.39    −0.12     −0.21      −0.22    −0.04     −0.10  0.20       0.15    0.32   0.61    0.99
      −3.90    −1.35     −2.50      −2.83    −0.50     −1.08  2.30       1.56    3.04   4.25    5.73
                             Panel C: The expected growth, Et [dτ I/A]
 1   −15.21    −7.70  −5.61  −4.18 −2.99                −1.92   −0.80    0.55    2.62  7.79    23.00
     −35.58   −30.23 −24.17 −19.68 −15.25              −10.44   −4.63    3.50   17.61 39.62    44.31
 2   −19.81   −10.17  −7.33  −5.44 −3.91                −2.53   −1.07    0.70    3.36  9.70    29.52
     −33.10   −25.50 −20.37 −16.18 −12.32               −8.34   −3.65    2.52   12.60 31.70    45.18
 3   −20.49   −11.17  −8.22  −6.25 −4.64                −3.17   −1.58    0.25    2.95  9.45    29.94
     −29.78   −22.35 −17.91 −14.41 −11.23               −7.96   −4.14    0.70    8.70 27.59    44.81
                         Panel D: Average future realized growth, dτ I/A
 1   −17.43   −12.37     −3.83      −3.51    −1.22     −0.35    −0.42    0.56    1.64   6.09   23.52
     −12.01    −8.33     −6.44      −5.19    −2.36     −0.73    −0.90    1.01    3.72   9.15   15.03
 2   −24.50   −12.33     −6.53      −3.87    −2.47     −1.66    −0.09    1.41    1.17   3.22   27.71
     −14.75   −11.87     −8.27      −4.75    −4.1938   −2.72    −0.20    2.44    2.12   4.93   16.34
 3   −23.56   −12.48     −7.07      −3.53    −2.28     −3.02    −1.70   −0.65    0.40   1.52   25.08
     −14.63   −13.06     −9.47      −4.99    −3.75     −4.76    −3.44   −1.15    0.65   2.11   15.30
   Table 3 : Properties of the Expected Growth Factor, REg , January 1967–December 2016

We use the log of Tobin’s q, log(q), cash flows, Cop, and change in return on equity, dRoe, to form
the expected 1-year-ahead investment-to-assets changes, Et [d1 I/A]. At the beginning of month t, we
compute Et [d1 I/A] by combining the most recent predictors (winsorized at the 1–99% level) with average
Fama-MacBeth slopes. The most recent log(q) and Cop are from the most recent fiscal year ending at
least four months ago as of month t, and dRoe uses the latest announced earnings, and if not available,
the earnings from the most recent fiscal quarter ending at least four months ago. The average slopes in
calculating Et [dτ I/A] are from the prior 120-month rolling window (30 months minimum), in which the
dependent variable, d1 I/A, uses data from the fiscal year ending at least four months ago as of month t,
and the regressors are further lagged. For instance, the regressors in the latest monthly cross-sectional
regression as of month t are further lagged by 12 months relative to the most recent predictors in calculating
Et [d1 I/A]. The regressions are estimated via weighted least squares with the market equity as weights.
  At the beginning of each month t, we use the median NYSE market equity to split all NYSE, Amex, and
NASDAQ stocks into two groups, small and big, based on the beginning-of-month market equity. Indepen-
dently, we sort all stocks into three Et [d1 I/A] groups, low, median, and high, based on the NYSE breakpoints
for the low 30%, middle 40%, and high 30% of its ranked values at the beginning of month t. Taking the inter-
sections of the two size and three expected growth groups, we form six portfolios. We calculate value-weighted
portfolio returns for the current month t, and rebalance the portfolios monthly. The expected growth factor,
REg , is the difference (high-minus-low), each month, between the simple average of the returns on the two
high Et [d1 I/A] portfolios and the simple average of the returns on the two low Et [d1 I/A] portfolios.
   Panel A reports properties of the six size-Et [d1 I/A] portfolios, including value-weighted average excess
returns, R, their t-values, tR , the volatilities of portfolio excess returns, σ R , the simple average of the
beginning-of-month market equity in billions of dollars, the average number of stocks, the average beginning-
of-month market equity as a percentage of total market equity, as well as the value-weighted averages of the
expected 1-year-ahead investment-to-assets change, Et [d1 I/A], the realized 1-year-ahead investment-to-assets
change, d1 I/A, the log of Tobin’s q, log(q), and operating cash flows-to-assets, Cop, from the fiscal year ending
at least four months ago as of month t, and the change in return on equity, dRoe, calculated with the latest
announced earnings, and if not available, earnings from the fiscal quarter ending at least four months ago.
  Panel B reports for the expected growth factor, REg , its average return, REg , and alphas, factor loadings,
and R2 s from the q-factor model, and the q-factor model augmented with an log(q) factor, a Cop factor, and
a dRoe factor, either separately or jointly. The t-values adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations
are in parentheses. To form the log(q) and Cop factors, at the end of June of year t, we use the median
NYSE market equity to split stocks into two groups, small and big. Independently, we split stocks into three
log(q) groups, low, median, and high, based on the NYSE breakpoints for the low 30%, middle 40%, and
high 30% of its ranked values from the fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1. Taking the intersections of
the two size and three log(q) groups, we form six portfolios. We calculate monthly value-weighted portfolio
returns from July of year t to June of t + 1, and rebalance the portfolios at the end of June of year t + 1.
The log(q) factor, Rlog(q) , is the difference (low-minus-high), each month, between the simple average of
the returns on the two low log(q) portfolios and the simple average of the returns on the two high log(q)
portfolios. The (high-minus-low) Cop factor, RCop , is constructed analogously. To form the dRoe factor,
at the beginning of each month t, we use the median NYSE market equity to split stocks into two groups,
small and big, based on the beginning-of-month market equity. Independently, we sort stocks into three
dRoe groups, low, median, and high, based on the NYSE breakpoints for the low 30%, middle 40%, and
high 30% of its ranked values at the beginning of month t. dRoe is calculated with the latest announced
earnings, and if not available, with the earnings from the fiscal quarter ending at least four months ago.
Taking the intersections of the two size and three dRoe groups, we form six portfolios. We calculate monthly
value-weighted portfolio returns for the current month t, and rebalance the portfolios monthly. The dRoe
factor, RdRoe , is the difference (high-minus-low), each month, between the simple average of the returns on
the two high dRoe portfolios and the simple average of the returns on the two low dRoe portfolios.
  Finally, Panel C reports the correlations of the expected growth factor, REg , with the market, size,
investment, and Roe factors in the q-factor model, as well as the log(q), Cop, and dRoe factors.



                                                       39
             Panel A: Properties of the six size-expected growth benchmark portfolios
            Low      Median        High          Low         Median      High         Low      Median       High
                       R                                      tR                                σR
Small       0.22      0.93          1.34         0.71      3.48    4.92               7.12      6.05    6.22
Big         0.21      0.44          0.73         0.88      2.38    3.99               5.57      4.44    4.52
                Average size                     # Stocks on average                   % Total market cap
Small       0.14          0.21      0.21          974            623       580        2.53        2.43      2.11
Big         4.54          6.42      9.03          142            233       202       12.27       28.46     33.30
                        1
                   Et [d I/A]                                 1
                                                             d I/A                             log(q)
Small     −11.43      −2.52         4.46       −11.61          0.08       5.38        0.24       0.07       0.22
Big        −8.54      −2.26         3.93       −10.42         −1.47       2.79        0.35       0.33       0.60
                      Cop                                    dRoe
Small       4.38       14.65       24.39        −2.26         −0.16       1.15
Big         9.82       17.44       28.27        −1.82         −0.19       0.65
                        Panel B: Properties of the expected growth factor, REg
 REg        α          β Mkt          β Me      β I/A         β Roe         R2
 0.82      0.63       −0.10          −0.09       0.25          0.30        0.48
(9.81)    (9.11)     (−6.17)        (−3.47)     (6.26)        (9.43)
            α         β Mkt           β Me       β I/A         β Roe      β log(q)     R2
           0.63       −0.11          −0.09       0.27          0.30       −0.02       0.48
          (9.15)     (−6.20)        (−3.54)     (6.00)        (9.05)     (−0.50)
            α         β Mkt           β Me       β I/A         β Roe      β Cop        R2
           0.36       −0.03          −0.02       0.32          0.15        0.57       0.66
          (6.09)     (−1.84)        (−0.70)    (10.36)        (5.07)     (10.41)
            α         β Mkt           β Me      β I/A          β Roe      β dRoe       R2
           0.59       −0.11          −0.09       0.22          0.23        0.15       0.49
          (8.06)     (−6.44)        (−3.86)     (4.81)        (5.20)      (2.43)
            α         β Mkt           β Me       β I/A         β Roe       β Cop     β dRoe      R2
           0.32       −0.03          −0.03       0.29          0.08        0.57       0.15       0.67
          (4.99)     (−2.04)        (−0.86)     (7.48)        (2.13)      (9.79)     (2.44)
            α         β Mkt           β Me       β I/A         β Roe      β log(q)    β Cop     β dRoe          R2
           0.24       −0.01          −0.01       0.08          0.05        0.22        0.69      0.21       0.71
          (3.73)     (−1.02)        (−0.52)     (1.79)        (1.66)      (8.35)     (13.69)    (3.36)
                               Panel C: Correlations of REg with other factors
   RMkt             RMe               RI/A         RRoe                Rlog(q)        RCop              RdRoe
  −0.47            −0.37              0.38          0.52                0.21           0.70              0.44



                                                        40
                       Table 4 : The List of Anomalies To Be Explained

The 158 significant anomalies are grouped into six categories: (i) momentum; (ii) value-versus-
growth; (iii) investment; (iv) profitability; (v) intangibles; and (vi) trading frictions. The number
in parenthesis in the title of a panel is the number of anomalies in that category. For each anomaly
variable, we list its symbol, brief description, and its academic source.

                                     Panel A: Momentum (36)
 Sue1     Earnings surprise                            Abr1     Cumulative abnormal returns
          (1-month holding period),                             around earnings announcements
          Foster, Olsen, and Shevlin (1984)                     (1-month holding period), Chan,
                                                                Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996)
 Abr6     Cumulative abnormal returns                  Abr12    Cumulative abnormal returns
          around earnings announcements                         around earnings announcements
          (6-month holding period), Chan,                       (12-month holding period), Chan,
          Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996)                      Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996)
 Re1      Revisions in analysts’ forecasts             Re6      Revisions in analysts’ forecasts
          (1-month holding period), Chan,                       (6-month holding period), Chan,
          Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996)                      Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996)
 R6 1     Price momentum (6-month prior                R6 6     Price momentum (6-month prior
          returns, 1-month holding period),                     returns, 6-month holding period),
          Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)                           Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)
 R6 12    Price momentum (6-month prior                R11 1    Price momentum (11-month prior
          returns, 12-month holding period),                    returns, 1-month holding period),
          Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)                           Fama and French (1996)
 R11 6    Price momentum, (11-month prior              Im1      Industry momentum,
          returns, 6-month holding period),                     (1-month holding period),
          Fama and French (1996)                                Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999)
 Im6      Industry momentum                            Im12     Industry momentum
          (6-month holding period),                             (12-month holding period),
          Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999)                        Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999)
 Rs1      Revenue surprise                             dEf1     Analysts’ forecast change
          (1-month holding period),                             (1-month hold period), Hawkins,
          Jegadeesh and Livnat (2006)                           Chamberlin, and Daniel (1984)
 dEf6     Analysts’ forecast change                    dEf12    Analysts’ forecast change
          (6-month hold period), Hawkins,                       (12-month hold period), Hawkins,
          Chamberlin, and Daniel (1984)                         Chamberlin, and Daniel (1984)
 Nei1     # of consecutive quarters with earnings      52w6     52-week high
          increases (1-month holding period),                   (6-month holding period),
          Barth, Elliott, and Finn (1999)                       George and Hwang (2004)
 ǫ6 6     Six-month residual momentum                  ǫ6 12    Six-month residual momentum
          (6-month holding period),                             (12-month holding period),
          Blitz, Huij, and Martens (2011)                       Blitz, Huij, and Martens (2011)
 ǫ11 1    11-month residual momentum                   ǫ11 6    11-month residual momentum
          (1-month holding period),                             (6-month holding period),
          Blitz, Huij, and Martens (2011)                       Blitz, Huij, and Martens (2011)
 ǫ11 12   11-month residual momentum                   Sm1      Segment momentum
          (12-month holding period),                            (1-month holding period),
          Blitz, Huij, and Martens (2011)                       Cohen and Lou (2012)

                                                 41
Ilr1     Industry lead-lag effect in prior returns        Ilr6  Industry lead-lag effect in prior returns
         (1-month holding period), Hou (2007)                   (6-month holding period), Hou (2007)
Ilr12    Industry lead-lag effect in prior returns        Ile1  Industry lead-lag effect in earnings news
         (12-month holding period), Hou (2007)                  (1-month holding period), Hou (2007)
Cm1      Customer momentum (1-month holding               Cm12 Customer momentum (12-month holding
         period), Cohen and Frazzini (2008)                     period), Cohen and Frazzini (2008)
Sim1     Supplier industries momentum (1-month            Cim1 Customer industries momentum (1-month
         holding period), Menzly and Ozbas (2010)               holding period), Menzly and Ozbas (2010)
Cim6     Customer industries momentum (6-month            Cim12 Customer industries momentum (12-month
         holding period), Menzly and Ozbas (2010)               holding period), Menzly and Ozbas (2010)
                                   Panel B: Value-versus-growth (29)
Bm       Book-to-market equity,                           Bmj     Book-to-June-end market equity,
         Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein (1985)                     Asness and Frazzini (2013)
Bmq 12   Quarterly Book-to-market equity                  Rev6    Reversal (6-month holding period),
         (12-month holding period)                                De Bondt and Thaler (1985)
Rev12    Reversal (12-month holding period)               Ep      Earnings-to-price, Basu (1983)
         De Bondt and Thaler (1985)
Epq 1    Quarterly earnings-to-price                      Epq 6 Quarterly earnings-to-price
         (1-month holding period)                               (6-month holding period)
Epq 12   Quarterly earnings-to-price                      Cp    Cash flow-to-price,
         (12-month holding period)                              Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994)
Cpq 1    Quarterly Cash flow-to-price                     Cpq 6 Quarterly Cash flow-to-price
         (1-month holding period)                               (6-month holding period)
Cpq 12   Quarterly Cash flow-to-price                     Nop   Net payout yield, Boudoukh, Michaely,
         (12-month holding period)                              Richardson, and Roberts (2007)
Em       Enterprise multiple,                                q
                                                          Em 1 Quarterly enterprise multiple
         Loughran and Wellman (2011)                            (1-month holding period)
Emq 6    Quarterly enterprise multiple                       q
                                                          Em 12 Quarterly enterprise multiple
         (6-month holding period)                               (12-month holding period)
Sp       Sales-to-price,                                  Spq 1 Quarterly sales-to-price
         Barbee, Mukherji, and Raines (1996)                    (1-month holding period)
Spq 6    Quarterly sales-to-price                           q
                                                          Sp 12 Quarterly sales-to-price
         (6-month holding period)                               (12-month holding period)
Ocp      Operating cash flow-to-price,                        q
                                                          Ocp 1 Quarterly operating cash flow-to-price
         Desai, Rajgopal, and Venkatachalam (2004)              (1-month holding period)
Ir       Intangible return,                               Vhp   Intrinsic value-to-market,
         Daniel and Titman (2006)                               Frankel and Lee (1998)
Vfp      Analysts-based intrinsic value-to-market,        Ebp   Enterprise book-to-price
         Frankel and Lee (1998)                                 Penman, Richardson, and Tuna (2007)
Dur      Equity duration,
         Dechow, Sloan, and Soliman (2004)




                                                     42
                                         Panel C: Investment (28)
Aci     Abnormal corporate investment,                 I/A   Investment-to-assets,
        Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004)                          Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008)
Iaq 6   Quarterly investment-to-assets                   q
                                                       Ia 12 Quarterly investment-to-assets
        (6-month holding period)                             (12-month holding period)
dPia    (Changes in PPE and inventory)/assets,         Noa   Net operating assets, Hirshleifer,
        Lyandres, Sun, and Zhang (2008)                      Hou, Teoh, and Zhang (2004)
dNoa    Changes in net operating assets,               dLno Change in long-term net operating assets,
        Hirshleifer, Hou, Teoh, and Zhang (2004)             Fairfield, Whisenant, and Yohn (2003)
Ig      Investment growth, Xing (2008)                 2Ig   Two-year investment growth,
                                                             Anderson and Garcia-Feijoo (2006)
Nsi     Net stock issues,                              dIi   % change in investment−% change in industry
        Pontiff and Woodgate (2008)                          investment, Abarbanell and Bushee (1998)
Cei     Composite equity issuance,                     Ivg   Inventory growth, Belo and Lin (2011)
        Daniel and Titman (2006)
Ivc     Inventory changes,                             Oa       Operating accruals, Sloan (1996)
        Thomas and Zhang (2002)
dWc     Change in net non-cash working capital,        dCoa Change in current operating assets,
        Richardson, Sloan, Soliman, and Tuna (2005)         Richardson, Sloan, Soliman, and Tuna (2005)
dNco    Change in net non-current operating assets,    dNca Change in non-current operating assets,
        Richardson, Sloan, Soliman, and Tuna (2005)         Richardson, Sloan, Soliman, and Tuna (2005)
dFin    Change in net financial assets,                dFnl Change in financial liabilities,
        Richardson, Sloan, Soliman, and Tuna (2005)         Richardson, Sloan, Soliman, and Tuna (2005)
dBe     Change in common equity,                       Dac  Discretionary accruals,
        Richardson, Sloan, Soliman, and Tuna (2005)         Xie (2001)
Poa     Percent operating accruals,                    Pta  Percent total accruals,
        Hafzalla, Lundholm, and Van Winkle (2011)           Hafzalla, Lundholm, and Van Winkle (2011)
Pda     Percent discretionary accruals                 Ndf  Net debt finance,
                                                            Bradshaw, Richardson, and Sloan (2006)
                                        Panel D: Profitability (35)
Roe1   Return on   equity (1-month holding period),    Roe6     Return on equity (6-month holding period),
       Hou, Xue,   and Zhang (2015)                             Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015)
dRoe1 Change in    Roe (1-month holding period)        dRoe6    Change in Roe (6-month holding period)
dRoe12 Change in   Roe (12-month holding period)       Roa1     Return on assets (1-month holding period),
                                                                Balakrishnan, Bartov, and Faurel (2010)
dRoa1 Change in Roa (1-month holding period)           dRoa6    Change in Roa (6-month holding period)
Rnaq 1 Quarterly return on net operating assets        Rnaq 6   Quarterly return on net operating assets
       (1-month holding period)                                 (6-month holding period)
   q
Ato 1 Quarterly asset turnover                         Atoq 6   Quarterly asset turnover
       (1-month holding period)                                 (6-month holding period)
   q
Ato 12 Quarterly asset turnover                        Ctoq 1   Quarterly capital turnover
       (12-month holding period)                                (1-month holding period)



                                                      43
Ctoq 6    Quarterly capital turnover                       Ctoq 12 Quarterly capital turnover
          (6-month holding period)                                 (12-month holding period)
Gpa       Gross profits-to-assets, Novy-Marx (2013)            q
                                                           Gla 1 Gross profits-to-lagged assets
                                                                   (1-month holding period)
Glaq 6    Gross profits-to-lagged assets                       q
                                                           Gla 12 Gross profits-to-lagged assets
          (6-month holding period)                                 (12-month holding period)
Oleq 1    Operating profits-to-lagged equity               Oleq 6 Operating profits-to-lagged equity
          (1-month holding period)                                 (6-month holding period)
Opa       Operating profits-to-assets, Ball, Gerakos,          q
                                                           Ola 1 Operating profits-to-lagged assets
          Linnainmaa, and Nikolaev (2015)                          (1-month holding period)
Olaq 6    Operating profits-to-lagged assets                   q
                                                           Ola 12 Operating profits-to-lagged assets
          (6-month holding period)                                 (12-month holding period)
Cop       Cash-based operating profitability, Ball,        Cla     Cash-based operating profits-to-lagged
          Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and Nikolaev (2016)                 assets
Claq 1    Cash-based operating profits-to-lagged           Claq 6 Cash-based operating profits-to-lagged
          assets (1-month holding period)                          assets (6-month holding period)
Claq 12   Cash-based operating profits-to-lagged            q
                                                           F 1     Quarterly F-score
          assets (12-month holding period)                         (1-month holding period)
Fq 6      Quarterly F-score (6-month holding period)        q
                                                           F 12    Quarterly F-score (12-month holding period)
Fpq 6     Failure probability (6-month holding period),
          Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008)
                                           Panel E: Intangibles (26)
Oca     Organizational capital/assets,                     Ioca   Industry-adjusted organizational capital
        Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013)                          /assets, Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013)
Adm     Advertising expense-to-market,                     Rdm    R&D-to-market,
        Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis (2001)                   Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis (2001)
Rdmq 1 Quarterly R&D-to-market                             Rdmq 6 Quarterly R&D-to-market
        (1-month holding period)                                  (6-month holding period)
      q
Rdm 12 Quarterly R&D-to-market                             Ol     Operating leverage, Novy-Marx (2011)
        (12-month holding period)
  q
Ol 1    Quarterly operating leverage                       Olq 6   Quarterly operating leverage
        (1-month holding period)                                   (6-month holding period)
Olq 12  Quarterly operating leverage                       Hs      Industry concentration (sales),
        (12-month holding period)                                  Hou and Robinson (2006)
Etr     Effective tax rate,                                Rer     Real estate ratio, Tuzel (2010)
        Abarbanell and Bushee (1998)
Eprd    Earnings predictability, Francis, Lafond,          Etl    Earnings timeliness, Francis, Lafond,
        Olsson, and Schipper (2004)                               Olsson, and Schipper (2004)
Almq 1 Quarterly asset liquidity (market assets)           Almq 6 Quarterly asset liquidity (market assets)
        (1-month holding period)                                  (6-month holding period)
     q
Alm 12 Quarterly asset liquidity (market assets)            1
                                                           Ra     12-month-lagged return,
        (12-month holding period)                                 Heston and Sadka (2008)




                                                      44
  [2,5]                                               [2,5]
Ra          Years 2–5 lagged returns, annual        Rn          Years 2–5 lagged returns, nonannual
            Heston and Sadka (2008)                             Heston and Sadka (2008)
  [6,10]                                              [6,10]
Ra          Years 6–10 lagged returns, annual       Rn          Years 6–10 lagged returns, nonannual
            Heston and Sadka (2008)                             Heston and Sadka (2008)
  [11,15]                                             [16,20]
Ra          Years 11–15 lagged returns, annual      Ra          Years 16–20 lagged returns, annual
            Heston and Sadka (2008)                             Heston and Sadka (2008)
                                        Panel F: Trading frictions (4)
Sv1         Systematic volatility risk              Dtv12 Dollar trading volume
            (1-month holding period),                     (12-month holding period),
            Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006)          Brennan, Chordia, and Subrahmanyam (1998)
Isff1       Idiosyncratic skewness                  Isq1  Idiosyncratic skewness
            per the FF 3-factor model,                    per the q-factor model,
            (1-month holding period)                      (1-month holding period)




                                                     45
                                     Table 5 : Overall Performance of Factor Models in Explaining Anomalies

     For each model, |αH−L | is the average magnitude of the high-minus-low alphas, #|t|≥1.96 the number of the high-minus-low alphas with
     absolute t-values greater than or equal to 1.96, #|t|≥3 the number of the high-minus-low alphas with absolute t-values greater than
     or equal to three, |α| the mean absolute alpha across the anomaly deciles within a given category, and #p<5% the number of sets of
     deciles within a given category, with which the factor model is rejected by the GRS test at the 5% level. We report the results for the
     q-factor model (q), the q 5 -model (q 5 , the q-factor model augmented with the expected growth factor, REg ), the Fama-French (2015)
     five-factor model (FF5), the Fama-French (2018) six-factor model with RMW (FF6), the Fama-French alternative six-factor model
     with RMWc (FF6c), the Barillas-Shanken (2018) six-factor model (BS6), and the Stambaugh-Yuan (2017) model (SY4).

            |αH−L | #|t|≥1.96 #|t|≥3 |α| #p<5% |αH−L | #|t|≥1.96 #|t|≥3 |α| #p<5% |αH−L | #|t|≥1.96 #|t|≥3 |α| #p<5% |αH−L | #|t|≥1.96 #|t|≥3 |α| #p<5%
                    Panel A: All (158)             Panel B: Momentum (36)           Panel C: Value-versus-growth (29)      Panel D: Investment (28)
     q       0.25     46      17   0.11 98      0.26      8       1   0.10     23    0.20      4      0   0.11   17     0.20     9      4   0.10   17
     q5      0.18     19      4    0.10 58      0.19      6       1   0.09     12    0.19      4      0   0.13   15     0.10     0      0   0.08    7
46




     FF5     0.38     89      61   0.12 113     0.64     34      27   0.16     34    0.14      1      0   0.08    9     0.23    11      6   0.09   17
     FF6     0.28     67      33   0.11 95      0.29     18       8   0.10     25    0.16      4      1   0.09   11     0.21    10      5   0.09   17
     FF6c    0.25     55      21   0.10 68      0.27     16       5   0.10     18    0.15      4      0   0.09    8     0.18     7      1   0.08    7
     BS6     0.28     61      34   0.14 147     0.25     12       5   0.13     33    0.24     11      5   0.13   26     0.20    7       4   0.11   26
     SY4     0.27     57      25   0.10 87      0.34     21       7   0.10     22    0.20      6      2   0.11   15     0.17     5      3   0.08   17
               Panel E: Profitability (35)         Panel F: Intangibles (26)          Panel G: Trading frictions (4)
     q       0.23     12      4    0.10   19    0.41     11      8    0.17     19    0.23     2       0   0.09    3
     q5      0.14      2       0   0.09   12    0.31      7      3    0.13     10    0.17     0       0   0.08    2
     FF5     0.45     28      21   0.12   30    0.41     13      6    0.15     20    0.22     2       1   0.08    3
     FF6     0.32     22      11   0.10   21    0.42     11      8    0.16     18    0.20     2       0   0.08    3
     FF6c    0.26     14      6    0.10   17    0.43     12      9    0.16     17    0.19     2       0   0.07    1
     BS6     0.28     16      11   0.13   34    0.42     13      7    0.19     25    0.21     2       2   0.10    3
     SY4     0.29     15      7    0.09   21    0.33      8      6    0.14     10    0.19     2       0   0.08    2
                                            Table 6 : Explaining the 158 Anomalies with Factor Models

     For each high-minus-low decile we report the average return, R, the q-factor alpha, αq , the q 5 -alpha, αq5 , the Fama-French (2015)
     five-factor alpha, αFF5 , the Fama-French (2018) six-factor alpha, αFF6 , the alpha from the alternative six-factor model with RMW
     replaced by RMWc, αFF6c , the Barillas-Shanken (2018) six-factor alpha, αBS6 , and the Stambaugh-Yuan (2017) alpha, αSY4 , as well as
     their heteroscedasticity-and-autocorrelation-consistent t-statistics, denoted by tR , tq , tq5 , tFF5 , tFF6 , tFF6c , tBS6 , and tSY4 , respectively.
     Also, for all the ten deciles formed on a given anomaly variable, we report the mean absolute alphas from the q-factor model, |αq |, the
47




     q 5 -model, |αq5 |, the five-factor model, |αFF5 |, the six-factor model, |αFF6 |, the alternative six-factor model, |αFF6c |, the Barillas-Shanken
     six-factor model, |αBS6 |, and the Stambaugh-Yuan model, |αSY4 |, as well as the p-values from the GRS test on the null hypothesis
     that all the alphas across a given set of deciles are jointly zero. The p-values are denoted by pq , pq5 , pFF5 , pFF6 , pFF6c , pBS6 , and pSY4 ,
     respectively. Table 4 describes the anomaly symbols, and the Online Appendix details variable definition and portfolio construction.
                1    2    3     4   5           6        7      8     9   10    11     12    13   14 15    16   17    18 19     20
             Sue1 Abr1 Abr6 Abr12 Re1         Re6     R6 1   R6 6 R6 12 R11 1 R11 6   Im1   Im6 Im12 Rs1 dEf1 dEf6 dEf12 Nei1 52w6
     R        0.46 0.70 0.33   0.23   0.75    0.47    0.60 0.82 0.55 1.16 0.80 0.68 0.60 0.63 0.32 0.94 0.56         0.33   0.33    0.56
     tR       3.48 5.45 3.41   2.99   3.18    2.24    2.08 3.50 2.91 3.99 3.13 2.86 3.01 3.57 2.28 4.33 3.19         2.37   3.04    2.01
     αq       0.06 0.62 0.30   0.24   0.09   −0.02   −0.03 0.25 0.16 0.31 0.14 0.28 0.07 0.32 0.24 0.55 0.18         0.07   0.12    0.01
     αq5     −0.04 0.56 0.25   0.20   0.08   −0.08   −0.44 −0.16 −0.06 −0.20 −0.17 −0.10 −0.33 0.03 0.12 0.48 0.16   0.06   0.02   −0.34
     αFF5     0.52 0.82 0.46   0.40   0.78    0.59    0.74 1.00 0.80 1.29 1.06 0.74 0.66 0.84 0.56 1.08 0.72         0.50   0.41    0.77
     αFF6     0.30 0.64 0.30   0.26   0.37    0.21   −0.21 0.18 0.20 0.21 0.20 0.09 −0.01 0.30 0.44 0.74 0.40        0.27   0.27    0.03
     αFF6c    0.25 0.65 0.30   0.25   0.38    0.21   −0.18 0.16 0.13 0.20 0.13 0.09 −0.05 0.22 0.41 0.64 0.37        0.22   0.23    0.02
     αBS6     0.14 0.67 0.30   0.25   0.08   −0.01   −0.16 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.08 0.20 −0.07 0.23 0.40 0.55 0.20        0.11   0.17   −0.14
     αSY4     0.29 0.71 0.36   0.31   0.58    0.35   −0.05 0.28 0.33 0.30 0.33 0.18 0.08 0.37 0.37 0.90 0.49         0.34   0.27    0.07
     tq       0.46 4.25 2.61   2.79   0.38   −0.08   −0.08 0.83 0.81 0.81 0.49 0.93 0.30 1.45 1.71 2.49 1.08         0.60   1.20    0.02
     tq 5    −0.30 4.00 2.26   2.24   0.31   −0.38   −1.31 −0.60 −0.31 −0.59 −0.63 −0.34 −1.37 0.13 0.86 2.07 0.92   0.49   0.25   −1.47
     tFF5     3.92 5.81 4.58   5.37   3.16    2.73    2.20 3.65 4.16 3.73 3.88 2.67 2.81 4.30 4.06 4.68 4.07         3.89   4.28    3.09
     tFF6     2.54 4.66 3.30   4.10   1.89    1.26   −1.10 1.77 1.83 1.74 1.57 0.43 −0.10 1.99 3.27 3.75 3.14        2.60   2.95    0.26
     tFF6c    2.10 4.50 3.12   3.69   1.96    1.28   −0.90 1.44 1.19 1.63 1.03 0.46 −0.35 1.44 3.01 3.06 2.77        2.13   2.33    0.14
48




     tBS6     1.25 4.48 2.93   3.29   0.43   −0.04   −0.76 1.00 0.86 1.01 0.52 0.91 −0.44 1.32 3.15 2.80 1.51        1.05   1.82   −1.08
     tSY4     2.42 5.11 3.61   4.19   2.59    1.92   −0.17 1.38 2.10 1.22 1.55 0.72 0.43 2.08 2.81 4.42 3.31         3.14   2.65    0.42
     |αq |    0.10 0.12 0.07   0.07   0.11    0.11    0.17 0.08 0.06 0.12 0.10 0.12 0.11 0.12 0.07 0.16 0.11         0.11   0.08    0.05
     |αq5 |   0.09 0.12 0.07   0.06   0.10    0.10    0.22 0.13 0.09 0.17 0.14 0.07 0.09 0.07 0.07 0.17 0.13         0.11   0.08    0.13
     |αFF5 |  0.19 0.16 0.08   0.08   0.19    0.16    0.14 0.16 0.15 0.23 0.21 0.21 0.20 0.21 0.14 0.26 0.17         0.15   0.15    0.15
     |αFF6 |  0.13 0.12 0.07   0.06   0.09    0.08    0.20 0.10 0.06 0.14 0.08 0.09 0.09 0.11 0.10 0.18 0.11         0.08   0.10    0.08
     |αFF6c | 0.12 0.12 0.05   0.04   0.08    0.07    0.21 0.11 0.07 0.14 0.10 0.09 0.09 0.10 0.10 0.16 0.10         0.07   0.09    0.07
     |αBS6 |  0.12 0.13 0.09   0.09   0.11    0.11    0.22 0.13 0.09 0.17 0.13 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.10 0.17 0.13         0.13   0.10    0.08
     |αSY4 |  0.12 0.12 0.08   0.07   0.10    0.10    0.19 0.10 0.07 0.12 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.10 0.09 0.21 0.13         0.10   0.11    0.08
     pq       0.01 0.00 0.00   0.00   0.08    0.02    0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.46 0.05 0.11 0.01 0.00 0.00         0.01   0.07    0.33
     pq 5     0.13 0.00 0.00   0.02   0.34    0.12    0.00 0.00 0.06 0.01 0.01 0.85 0.21 0.37 0.08 0.01 0.00         0.03   0.23    0.13
     pFF5     0.00 0.00 0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00         0.00   0.00    0.01
     pFF6     0.00 0.00 0.00   0.00   0.05    0.03    0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.38 0.05 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00         0.00   0.01    0.10
     pFF6c    0.00 0.00 0.01   0.01   0.15    0.19    0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.52 0.23 0.17 0.04 0.01 0.00         0.02   0.10    0.24
     pBS6     0.00 0.00 0.00   0.00   0.01    0.00    0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00         0.00   0.01    0.04
     pSY4     0.00 0.00 0.00   0.00   0.01    0.02    0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.82 0.17 0.09 0.01 0.00 0.00         0.00   0.00    0.17
                 21 22 23 24               25 26 27 28         29 30    31   32   33   34   35    36                          37    38     39   40
                ǫ6 6 ǫ6 12 ǫ11 1 ǫ11 6 ǫ11 12 Sm1 Ilr1 Ilr6 Ilr12 Ile1 Cm1 Cm12 Sim1 Cim1 Cim6 Cim12                         Bm    Bmj Bmq 12 Rev6
     R          0.45   0.37   0.61   0.50   0.33   0.53   0.69   0.34   0.35   0.58   0.78 0.15 0.79    0.75    0.29  0.27 0.54 0.46      0.48   −0.42
     tR         3.74   3.85   3.72   3.82   2.88   2.36   3.33   3.35   4.27   3.48   3.85 2.22 3.65    3.35    2.76  3.41 2.61 2.12      2.21   −2.01
     αq         0.26   0.20   0.26   0.22   0.12   0.59   0.73   0.19   0.19   0.32   0.70 0.05 0.57    0.64    0.06  0.08 0.15 0.28      0.37   −0.21
     αq 5       0.06   0.05   0.02   0.05   0.01   0.40   0.50   0.01   0.02   0.11   0.68 −0.02 0.25   0.36   −0.17 −0.12 0.08 0.30      0.38   −0.07
     αFF5       0.47   0.43   0.57   0.56   0.42   0.66   0.80   0.37   0.39   0.70   0.75 0.13 0.75    0.74    0.25  0.29 −0.10 −0.13   −0.12   −0.01
     αFF6       0.20   0.19   0.21   0.23   0.16   0.58   0.66   0.10   0.12   0.49   0.74 0.02 0.60    0.62   −0.01  0.04 −0.08 0.07     0.16   −0.10
     αFF6c      0.18   0.17   0.22   0.21   0.14   0.55   0.65   0.09   0.10   0.44   0.72 0.02 0.56    0.54    0.02  0.03 −0.08 0.10     0.18   −0.15
     αBS6       0.17   0.18   0.14   0.16   0.12   0.64   0.77   0.15   0.13   0.43   0.74 0.03 0.57    0.66    0.02  0.03 −0.29 −0.11   −0.04   −0.06
     αSY4       0.27   0.25   0.28   0.31   0.22   0.64   0.67   0.17   0.17   0.45   0.75 0.03 0.56    0.57    0.01  0.05 0.03 0.08      0.23    0.10
     tq         1.64   1.57   1.25   1.31   0.82   2.15   2.94   1.45   1.80   1.84   2.84 0.55 1.87    2.36    0.35  0.65 0.99 1.59      2.18   −1.20
     tq 5       0.38   0.35   0.08   0.29   0.08   1.37   2.03   0.04   0.22   0.59   2.70 −0.23 0.82   1.25   −1.05 −1.03 0.51 1.77      2.25   −0.37
     tFF5       3.45   3.78   3.03   3.62   3.16   2.77   3.41   3.11   3.83   4.21   3.38 1.45 2.72    3.02    1.76  2.48 −0.88 −0.95   −0.84   −0.04
     tFF6       1.76   2.16   1.32   1.90   1.51   2.43   3.03   1.22   2.06   2.92   3.00 0.23 2.36    2.66   −0.07  0.56 −0.70 0.54     1.35   −0.59
     tFF6c      1.54   1.76   1.37   1.73   1.30   2.10   2.74   1.01   1.57   2.53   2.84 0.19 2.11    2.32    0.20  0.38 −0.63 0.79     1.47   −0.85
49




     tBS6       1.36   1.85   0.84   1.23   1.08   2.55   3.30   1.59   2.04   2.38   3.09 0.38 2.11    2.66    0.16  0.32 −2.17 −0.80   −0.37   −0.30
     tSY4       1.91   2.27   1.53   2.11   1.84   2.41   2.94   1.62   2.04   2.64   3.05 0.33 2.07    2.35    0.05  0.52 0.20 0.48      1.77    0.59
     |αq |      0.06   0.06   0.09   0.06   0.06   0.12   0.19   0.09   0.09   0.11   0.21 0.12 0.14    0.18    0.07  0.06 0.09 0.12      0.13    0.07
     |αq5 |     0.06   0.06   0.07   0.05   0.04   0.11   0.11   0.04   0.03   0.06   0.18 0.10 0.08    0.12    0.06  0.05 0.10 0.15      0.15    0.06
     |αFF5 |    0.08   0.08   0.15   0.12   0.09   0.15   0.21   0.14   0.14   0.18   0.23 0.11 0.18    0.20    0.07  0.08 0.05 0.07      0.08    0.04
     |αFF6 |    0.05   0.05   0.08   0.06   0.05   0.13   0.18   0.08   0.08   0.12   0.22 0.12 0.14    0.17    0.06  0.05 0.06 0.09      0.09    0.05
     |αFF6c |   0.04   0.04   0.08   0.04   0.03   0.13   0.18   0.08   0.08   0.12   0.23 0.12 0.15    0.17    0.05  0.05 0.06 0.10      0.11    0.05
     |αBS6 |    0.07   0.07   0.09   0.07   0.07   0.13   0.22   0.14   0.13   0.15   0.27 0.20 0.15    0.19    0.08  0.07 0.11 0.11      0.12    0.09
     |αSY4 |    0.05   0.06   0.09   0.07   0.06   0.13   0.16   0.06   0.06   0.10   0.20 0.08 0.14    0.16    0.07  0.06 0.07 0.11      0.11    0.05
     pq         0.00   0.00   0.01   0.01   0.08   0.17   0.04   0.20   0.12   0.18   0.06 0.04 0.49    0.02    0.05  0.01 0.11 0.02      0.00    0.08
     pq 5       0.04   0.00   0.32   0.16   0.36   0.48   0.65   0.26   0.50   0.75   0.06 0.15 0.98    0.29    0.18  0.25 0.17 0.00      0.00    0.46
     pFF5       0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.02   0.00   0.01   0.00   0.00   0.03 0.02 0.10    0.01    0.09  0.01 0.42 0.12      0.08    0.40
     pFF6       0.00   0.00   0.02   0.02   0.10   0.10   0.03   0.29   0.10   0.03   0.03 0.06 0.39    0.02    0.17  0.18 0.35 0.10      0.03    0.22
     pFF6c      0.02   0.00   0.16   0.19   0.35   0.05   0.04   0.49   0.19   0.10   0.03 0.02 0.35    0.06    0.29  0.28 0.50 0.17      0.04    0.30
     pBS6       0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.02   0.06   0.00   0.02   0.01   0.02   0.01 0.01 0.40    0.01    0.02  0.01 0.00 0.01      0.00    0.01
     pSY4       0.00   0.00   0.01   0.02   0.06   0.24   0.18   0.16   0.12   0.13   0.03 0.22 0.44    0.04    0.09  0.07 0.48 0.03      0.01    0.10
                   41     42   43    44      45       46   47    48      49 50               51  52    53      54           55   56    57      58           59    60
                Rev12     Ep Epq 1 Epq 6 Epq 12       Cp Cpq 1 Cpq 6 Cpq 12 Nop             Em Emq 1 Emq 6 Emq 12           Sp Spq 1 Spq 6 Spq 12          Ocp Ocpq 1
     R          −0.39    0.44 0.93 0.59      0.43    0.43   0.62    0.48    0.40   0.63   −0.54   −0.71   −0.43   −0.43    0.50    0.59    0.56    0.53    0.70   0.64
     tR         −1.99    2.26 4.94 3.42      2.60    2.14   2.93    2.42    2.12   3.40   −2.86   −3.21   −2.05   −2.15    2.37    2.39    2.43    2.47    3.14   2.28
     αq         −0.13    0.02 0.41 0.09     −0.04    0.04   0.42    0.31    0.16   0.35   −0.24   −0.48   −0.21   −0.19   −0.05    0.20    0.14    0.05    0.36   0.48
     αq5        −0.01   −0.07 0.52 0.10     −0.04    0.02   0.53    0.37    0.21   0.20   −0.05   −0.45   −0.15   −0.12    0.05    0.36    0.28    0.18    0.24   0.43
     αFF5       −0.02   −0.10 0.41 0.08     −0.07   −0.22   0.05   −0.05   −0.15   0.22   −0.05   −0.33   −0.04   −0.03   −0.26   −0.21   −0.23   −0.24   −0.02   0.12
     αFF6       −0.06   −0.14 0.55 0.17     −0.03   −0.18   0.40    0.23    0.02   0.24   −0.01   −0.45   −0.14   −0.08   −0.16    0.13    0.05   −0.04    0.06   0.41
     αFF6c      −0.09   −0.21 0.47 0.10     −0.09   −0.25   0.37    0.19   −0.01   0.16    0.13   −0.31   −0.01    0.05   −0.18    0.10    0.03   −0.06    0.01   0.40
     αBS6       −0.00   −0.52 −0.04 −0.32   −0.46   −0.47   0.01   −0.09   −0.26   0.12    0.17   −0.17    0.07    0.12   −0.47   −0.25   −0.28   −0.36   −0.15   0.31
     αSY4        0.11    0.04 0.70 0.32      0.13    0.07   0.48    0.32    0.18   0.17   −0.16   −0.55   −0.27   −0.23   −0.09    0.16    0.10    0.02    0.30   0.60
     tq         −0.78    0.12 1.74 0.46     −0.25    0.20   1.96    1.65    0.95   2.42   −1.40   −2.00   −0.99   −1.03   −0.28    0.70    0.59    0.23    1.98   1.62
     tq 5       −0.08   −0.37 2.25 0.58     −0.25    0.10   2.59    2.11    1.36   1.33   −0.27   −1.91   −0.72   −0.65    0.30    1.44    1.33    1.00    1.28   1.66
     tFF5       −0.14   −0.81 2.38 0.56     −0.57   −1.74   0.28   −0.31   −1.23   1.83   −0.35   −1.70   −0.20   −0.21   −1.82   −1.04   −1.38   −1.60   −0.12   0.53
     tFF6       −0.41   −1.04 3.21 1.23     −0.21   −1.48   2.91    1.81    0.18   1.92   −0.06   −2.55   −0.87   −0.51   −1.22    0.70    0.33   −0.33    0.47   2.59
     tFF6c      −0.56   −1.59 2.85 0.69     −0.68   −2.08   2.69    1.51   −0.07   1.22    0.94   −1.77   −0.05    0.34   −1.33    0.55    0.22   −0.48    0.07   2.46
50




     tBS6       −0.01   −3.05 −0.23 −2.27   −3.66   −3.02   0.06   −0.69   −2.13   0.83    1.07   −1.01    0.43    0.75   −3.01   −1.27   −1.73   −2.38   −0.92   1.81
     tSY4        0.66    0.19 3.77 1.99      0.90    0.39   2.97    2.18    1.27   1.35   −0.94   −2.79   −1.47   −1.37   −0.57    0.78    0.60    0.13    1.70   3.04
     |αq |       0.05    0.10 0.16 0.13      0.10    0.11   0.18    0.14    0.11   0.11    0.11    0.20    0.12    0.11    0.06    0.07    0.06    0.06    0.11   0.18
     |αq5 |      0.05    0.13 0.20 0.16      0.13    0.14   0.23    0.18    0.16   0.11    0.12    0.22    0.14    0.14    0.06    0.10    0.07    0.06    0.12   0.18
     |αFF5 |     0.03    0.07 0.13 0.09      0.07    0.11   0.10    0.08    0.07   0.10    0.09    0.17    0.10    0.09    0.09    0.08    0.09    0.10    0.06   0.10
     |αFF6 |     0.04    0.07 0.17 0.11      0.08    0.09   0.15    0.10    0.07   0.09    0.09    0.18    0.09    0.09    0.07    0.06    0.05    0.07    0.08   0.16
     |αFF6c |    0.04    0.07 0.16 0.10      0.07    0.11   0.16    0.11    0.09   0.09    0.08    0.17    0.10    0.10    0.09    0.06    0.06    0.07    0.08   0.16
     |αBS6 |     0.08    0.14 0.13 0.14      0.13    0.17   0.13    0.14    0.14   0.14    0.13    0.17    0.13    0.13    0.16    0.10    0.12    0.15    0.13   0.15
     |αSY4 |     0.04    0.10 0.20 0.15      0.11    0.11   0.20    0.14    0.12   0.12    0.11    0.20    0.12    0.11    0.05    0.06    0.05    0.05    0.11   0.22
     pq          0.33    0.07 0.00 0.00      0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00    0.01   0.01    0.00    0.00    0.02    0.02    0.28    0.43    0.39    0.15    0.04   0.23
     pq 5        0.58    0.05 0.00 0.00      0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00   0.07    0.02    0.00    0.02    0.02    0.59    0.44    0.56    0.44    0.09   0.17
     pFF5        0.72    0.22 0.01 0.00      0.08    0.01   0.13    0.14    0.26   0.00    0.02    0.00    0.06    0.03    0.05    0.48    0.24    0.04    0.41   0.62
     pFF6        0.59    0.28 0.00 0.00      0.03    0.03   0.00    0.02    0.27   0.00    0.04    0.00    0.10    0.07    0.11    0.59    0.45    0.10    0.33   0.03
     pFF6c       0.63    0.58 0.00 0.00      0.19    0.02   0.00    0.03    0.26   0.03    0.08    0.01    0.22    0.20    0.32    0.73    0.72    0.37    0.31   0.10
     pBS6        0.05    0.00 0.02 0.00      0.00    0.00   0.05    0.00    0.01   0.00    0.00    0.00    0.02    0.00    0.00    0.01    0.00    0.00    0.02   0.16
     pSY4        0.31    0.06 0.00 0.00      0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00   0.01    0.02    0.00    0.04    0.02    0.55    0.78    0.77    0.27    0.11   0.05
                   61   62      63    64    65    66     67      68      69   70        71   72   73             74      75      76   77     78    79    80
                    Ir Vhp     Vfp   Ebp   Dur   Aci   I/A     Iaq 6 Iaq 12 dPia       Noa dNoa dLno             Ig     2Ig     Nsi   dIi   Cei   Ivg   Ivc
     R          −0.47    0.38 0.47 0.41 −0.42 −0.30 −0.44     −0.50   −0.48   −0.48   −0.44   −0.55   −0.39   −0.46   −0.33   −0.64 −0.29 −0.57 −0.33 −0.44
     tR         −2.22    2.05 2.18 2.00 −2.19 −2.13 −2.89     −3.00   −3.11   −3.64   −3.25   −4.14   −2.99   −3.76   −2.52   −4.46 −2.61 −3.32 −2.44 −3.33
     αq         −0.16    0.01 0.12 0.06 −0.03 −0.16 0.07      −0.11    0.00   −0.18   −0.45   −0.15    0.03   −0.07    0.06   −0.29 0.11 −0.29 0.01 −0.28
     αq5        −0.02   −0.11 0.11 0.08 0.06 −0.16 0.08        0.00    0.09   −0.11   −0.13   −0.10    0.13   −0.12    0.06   −0.12 0.10 −0.04 0.10 0.01
     αFF5        0.13   −0.15 0.09 −0.22 0.11 −0.30 0.02       0.01    0.03   −0.30   −0.53   −0.26   −0.09   −0.18   −0.07   −0.30 0.00 −0.30 −0.08 −0.36
     αFF6        0.05   −0.15 0.08 −0.13 0.12 −0.21 0.02      −0.06    0.02   −0.26   −0.45   −0.23   −0.04   −0.15    0.01   −0.28 0.09 −0.26 −0.03 −0.30
     αFF6c       0.03   −0.22 0.02 −0.11 0.14 −0.20 0.00      −0.12   −0.04   −0.29   −0.44   −0.22   −0.12   −0.19   −0.03   −0.20 0.09 −0.17 −0.01 −0.24
     αBS6        0.18   −0.48 −0.25 −0.33 0.48 −0.17 0.14      0.00    0.10   −0.18   −0.61   −0.07    0.01   −0.02    0.09   −0.22 0.27 −0.08 0.09 −0.25
     αSY4        0.02    0.05 0.28 −0.03 −0.02 −0.19 0.16      0.14    0.19   −0.05   −0.17   −0.09    0.19   −0.04    0.08   −0.15 0.09 −0.22 0.03 −0.19
     tq         −1.05    0.06 0.55 0.42 −0.17 −1.02 0.62      −1.09    0.03   −1.47   −2.59   −1.04    0.19   −0.59    0.49   −2.32 1.06 −2.25 0.09 −2.08
     tq 5       −0.12   −0.61 0.49 0.49 0.30 −1.07 0.63        0.02    0.77   −0.91   −0.88   −0.66    0.79   −0.90    0.44   −0.89 0.83 −0.31 0.75 0.08
     tFF5        0.96   −1.06 0.50 −1.70 0.80 −2.05 0.17       0.10    0.36   −2.61   −3.37   −1.81   −0.62   −1.65   −0.59   −2.58 −0.01 −2.92 −0.66 −2.97
     tFF6        0.39   −1.06 0.42 −1.09 0.91 −1.37 0.22      −0.56    0.18   −2.26   −3.18   −1.64   −0.28   −1.37    0.08   −2.39 0.89 −2.33 −0.26 −2.44
     tFF6c       0.21   −1.48 0.09 −0.86 0.99 −1.29 −0.02     −1.23   −0.46   −2.29   −2.88   −1.64   −0.82   −1.57   −0.23   −1.60 0.86 −1.56 −0.06 −1.89
51




     tBS6        1.20   −2.71 −1.23 −2.65 3.07 −1.00 1.28      0.01    0.92   −1.42   −4.02   −0.53    0.05   −0.13    0.71   −1.65 2.37 −0.55 0.69 −1.78
     tSY4        0.14    0.29 1.31 −0.18 −0.09 −1.31 1.30      1.30    1.83   −0.43   −1.21   −0.66    1.36   −0.37    0.69   −1.36 0.79 −1.91 0.27 −1.45
     |αq |       0.07    0.13 0.14 0.11 0.08 0.12 0.08         0.07    0.06    0.11    0.11    0.08    0.04    0.09    0.08    0.12 0.06 0.12 0.10 0.07
     |αq5 |      0.05    0.15 0.18 0.09 0.09 0.12 0.09         0.05    0.05    0.11    0.09    0.05    0.08    0.11    0.08    0.10 0.06 0.07 0.09 0.09
     |αFF5 |     0.06    0.09 0.12 0.08 0.05 0.14 0.09         0.05    0.04    0.10    0.11    0.09    0.05    0.08    0.06    0.12 0.05 0.11 0.09 0.08
     |αFF6 |     0.05    0.08 0.12 0.08 0.05 0.12 0.08         0.06    0.05    0.10    0.10    0.08    0.06    0.08    0.06    0.12 0.05 0.11 0.08 0.08
     |αFF6c |    0.06    0.09 0.13 0.09 0.05 0.11 0.08         0.06    0.04    0.08    0.09    0.07    0.06    0.07    0.06    0.10 0.04 0.08 0.10 0.08
     |αBS6 |     0.09    0.14 0.15 0.14 0.13 0.13 0.10         0.08    0.07    0.13    0.13    0.08    0.06    0.11    0.10    0.13 0.09 0.13 0.13 0.10
     |αSY4 |     0.04    0.12 0.12 0.07 0.07 0.11 0.09         0.07    0.06    0.10    0.08    0.06    0.06    0.08    0.07    0.12 0.06 0.11 0.10 0.06
     pq          0.37    0.01 0.05 0.00 0.18 0.00 0.00         0.08    0.18    0.01    0.00    0.13    0.76    0.00    0.06    0.00 0.41 0.00 0.06 0.28
     pq 5        0.80    0.01 0.04 0.15 0.18 0.07 0.01         0.33    0.58    0.00    0.01    0.47    0.40    0.01    0.15    0.09 0.77 0.44 0.02 0.24
     pFF5        0.18    0.06 0.11 0.03 0.41 0.00 0.00         0.21    0.24    0.01    0.00    0.02    0.84    0.02    0.21    0.00 0.35 0.00 0.07 0.09
     pFF6        0.45    0.14 0.12 0.06 0.58 0.00 0.01         0.14    0.20    0.02    0.00    0.05    0.77    0.02    0.16    0.00 0.48 0.00 0.09 0.09
     pFF6c       0.29    0.23 0.19 0.12 0.57 0.03 0.04         0.36    0.53    0.14    0.04    0.28    0.77    0.11    0.42    0.00 0.75 0.08 0.03 0.08
     pBS6        0.29    0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00         0.01    0.01    0.00    0.00    0.03    0.51    0.00    0.00    0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.03
     pSY4        0.51    0.04 0.16 0.30 0.45 0.01 0.01         0.03    0.03    0.01    0.01    0.27    0.69    0.01    0.11    0.00 0.63 0.02 0.01 0.50
              81  82   83   84   85 86     87            88    89    90    91    92    93   94   95    96    97     98   99   100
              Oa dWc dCoa dNco dNca dFin dFnl           dBe   Dac   Poa   Pta   Pda   Ndf Roe1 Roe6 dRoe1 dRoe6 dRoe12 Roa1 dRoa1
     R       −0.27 −0.42 −0.31 −0.41 −0.42   0.28 −0.32 −0.32 −0.39 −0.39 −0.42 −0.48 −0.30 0.68 0.42   0.75    0.36    0.24 0.57 0.56
     tR      −2.19 −3.25 −2.28 −3.52 −3.47   2.39 −3.09 −2.03 −2.95 −2.89 −3.14 −3.91 −2.45 3.12 1.98   5.53    3.16    2.39 2.63 3.76
     αq      −0.56 −0.51 0.08 −0.06 −0.02    0.43 −0.07 0.12 −0.67 −0.13 −0.19 −0.39 0.01 −0.03 −0.16   0.34   −0.03   −0.10 0.04 0.06
     αq 5    −0.23 −0.22 0.20 0.05 0.03      0.12 0.01 0.17 −0.28 −0.01 −0.04 −0.12 0.10 −0.17 −0.29    0.10   −0.21   −0.18 −0.20 −0.13
     αFF5 −0.52 −0.50 0.05 −0.20 −0.15       0.50 −0.17 0.13 −0.64 −0.13 −0.16 −0.42 −0.07 0.53 0.32    0.79    0.40    0.26 0.53 0.53
     αFF6 −0.47 −0.45 0.06 −0.17 −0.14       0.48 −0.15 0.13 −0.63 −0.10 −0.16 −0.37 −0.06 0.35 0.16    0.56    0.21    0.11 0.30 0.31
     αFF6c −0.31 −0.30 0.09 −0.17 −0.17      0.36 −0.13 0.07 −0.53 0.01 −0.13 −0.34 −0.03 0.23 0.04     0.56    0.19    0.09 0.16 0.28
     αBS6 −0.54 −0.40 0.18 −0.08 −0.05       0.53 −0.12 0.19 −0.72 −0.04 −0.08 −0.40 0.01 −0.07 −0.20   0.35   −0.05   −0.11 −0.02 0.11
     αSY4 −0.44 −0.43 0.13 0.00 0.01         0.38 −0.06 0.28 −0.50 −0.15 −0.07 −0.26 −0.03 0.35 0.16    0.55    0.18    0.10 0.31 0.35
     tq      −4.10 −3.80 0.78 −0.50 −0.21    3.00 −0.62 0.97 −4.73 −1.00 −1.42 −2.60 0.11 −0.28 −1.32   2.37   −0.31   −1.11 0.34 0.37
     tq 5    −1.51 −1.62 1.66 0.41 0.24      0.81 0.12 1.19 −1.91 −0.05 −0.34 −0.78 0.84 −1.40 −2.53    0.68   −1.76   −1.93 −1.75 −0.72
     tFF5 −4.20 −3.90 0.55 −1.62 −1.26       4.17 −1.63 1.17 −4.90 −1.13 −1.32 −3.01 −0.67 3.98 2.49    5.54    3.31    2.58 3.80 3.41
     tFF6 −3.42 −3.45 0.56 −1.39 −1.18       3.86 −1.39 1.18 −4.55 −0.88 −1.32 −2.57 −0.58 2.86 1.33    4.36    1.98    1.28 2.51 2.01
     tFF6c −2.04 −2.14 0.76 −1.38 −1.37      2.65 −1.19 0.67 −3.63 0.05 −1.04 −2.28 −0.23 1.45 0.24     4.24    1.77    0.93 1.10 1.84
52




     tBS6    −3.68 −2.74 1.55 −0.71 −0.43    3.71 −1.06 1.44 −4.94 −0.32 −0.54 −2.54 0.11 −0.56 −1.55   2.61   −0.46   −1.25 −0.19 0.62
     tSY4 −3.23 −3.33 1.14 −0.02 0.11        2.90 −0.60 2.19 −3.45 −1.19 −0.61 −1.92 −0.27 2.20 0.98    3.93    1.62    1.11 2.01 2.18
     |αq |    0.13 0.13 0.08 0.10 0.10       0.08 0.09 0.08 0.15 0.11 0.08 0.17 0.08 0.09 0.08          0.09    0.07    0.08 0.07 0.10
     |αq5 |   0.06 0.09 0.09 0.07 0.04       0.06 0.06 0.07 0.06 0.09 0.10 0.09 0.05 0.10 0.09          0.07    0.09    0.09 0.08 0.07
     |αFF5 | 0.12 0.12 0.07 0.09 0.09        0.10 0.09 0.07 0.14 0.11 0.07 0.16 0.05 0.12 0.09          0.16    0.09    0.06 0.14 0.16
     |αFF6 | 0.11 0.11 0.07 0.09 0.09        0.09 0.09 0.06 0.14 0.11 0.07 0.15 0.06 0.08 0.05          0.10    0.06    0.05 0.07 0.11
     |αFF6c | 0.07 0.08 0.07 0.07 0.07       0.08 0.07 0.07 0.12 0.08 0.07 0.12 0.07 0.06 0.04          0.09    0.05    0.04 0.06 0.11
     |αBS6 | 0.14 0.15 0.11 0.10 0.12        0.10 0.10 0.13 0.17 0.11 0.10 0.18 0.08 0.10 0.10          0.10    0.09    0.09 0.10 0.13
     |αSY4 | 0.11 0.11 0.07 0.08 0.07        0.08 0.07 0.07 0.11 0.10 0.09 0.12 0.04 0.09 0.06          0.10    0.06    0.05 0.07 0.11
     pq       0.00 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.01       0.02 0.04 0.09 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.32 0.00 0.04          0.04    0.06    0.01 0.74 0.39
     pq 5     0.49 0.12 0.10 0.46 0.82       0.57 0.42 0.53 0.52 0.05 0.01 0.19 0.92 0.00 0.01          0.37    0.07    0.05 0.64 0.58
     pFF5     0.00 0.00 0.13 0.01 0.01       0.00 0.01 0.19 0.00 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.75 0.00 0.01          0.00    0.01    0.04 0.02 0.00
     pFF6     0.01 0.00 0.18 0.02 0.02       0.00 0.01 0.33 0.00 0.01 0.06 0.00 0.58 0.04 0.15          0.00    0.11    0.07 0.42 0.11
     pFF6c    0.21 0.18 0.13 0.24 0.29       0.12 0.31 0.44 0.01 0.09 0.17 0.01 0.69 0.60 0.60          0.01    0.38    0.46 0.80 0.11
     pBS6     0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00       0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.19 0.00 0.00          0.01    0.01    0.00 0.04 0.04
     pSY4     0.01 0.01 0.14 0.07 0.11       0.02 0.13 0.18 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.83 0.05 0.22          0.01    0.12    0.10 0.37 0.13
                  101   102    103 104 105           106 107 108           109 110 111 112           113 114 115 116 117 118                 119 120
                dRoa6 Rnaq 1 Rnaq 6 Atoq 1 Atoq 6 Atoq 12 Ctoq 1 Ctoq 6 Ctoq 12 Gpa Glaq 1 Glaq 6 Glaq 12 Oleq 1 Oleq 6 Opa Olaq 1 Olaq 6 Olaq 12 Cop
     R           0.27 0.64 0.43       0.62   0.53    0.42 0.44 0.40      0.36   0.37   0.51 0.33    0.28 0.71 0.48 0.41 0.75 0.52       0.46 0.63
     tR          1.99 2.77 2.01       3.44   3.07    2.56 2.44 2.34      2.14   2.63   3.48 2.46    2.18 3.40 2.39 2.09 3.53 2.59       2.46 3.57
     αq         −0.19 0.19 0.10       0.35   0.34    0.32 −0.10 −0.08   −0.06   0.17   0.21 0.11    0.14 0.03 −0.11 0.46 0.40 0.26      0.32 0.69
     αq 5       −0.27 −0.04 −0.15     0.11   0.11    0.11 −0.16 −0.14   −0.11   0.04   0.04 −0.04   0.00 −0.17 −0.31 −0.04 −0.08 −0.20 −0.10 0.10
     αFF5        0.25 0.57 0.38       0.52   0.50    0.45 0.07 0.07      0.08   0.26   0.41 0.28    0.26 0.32 0.12 0.57 0.74 0.54       0.54 0.82
     αFF6        0.05 0.42 0.28       0.42   0.40    0.36 0.03 0.02      0.04   0.24   0.33 0.22    0.22 0.18 0.02 0.52 0.58 0.41       0.43 0.73
     αFF6c       0.05 0.30 0.14       0.37   0.34    0.29 −0.09 −0.10   −0.09   0.17   0.25 0.13    0.13 0.04 −0.14 0.41 0.50 0.32      0.33 0.51
     αBS6       −0.19 0.19 0.11       0.52   0.53    0.52 −0.04 −0.02    0.03   0.31   0.31 0.20    0.22 −0.20 −0.30 0.58 0.48 0.34     0.38 0.82
     αSY4        0.08 0.44 0.30       0.25   0.24    0.20 −0.11 −0.10   −0.08   0.05   0.23 0.14    0.16 0.21 0.06 0.39 0.55 0.41       0.45 0.58
     tq         −1.38 1.41 0.79       2.06   2.09    2.03 −0.60 −0.50   −0.35   1.24   1.59 0.93    1.17 0.18 −0.79 2.96 2.64 1.89      2.49 5.04
     tq 5       −1.77 −0.29 −1.24     0.62   0.69    0.67 −0.95 −0.81   −0.66   0.29   0.31 −0.28   0.01 −1.17 −2.23 −0.28 −0.59 −1.79 −0.92 0.89
     tFF5        1.83 4.08 3.02       3.17   3.41    3.19 0.47 0.50      0.58   2.06   3.01 2.34    2.27 2.35 0.99 3.60 4.47 3.85       4.24 6.53
     tFF6        0.42 3.22 2.37       2.74   2.85    2.61 0.21 0.15      0.29   1.86   2.51 1.90    1.97 1.35 0.20 3.67 3.89 3.25       3.75 6.15
     tFF6c       0.35 1.96 1.04       2.28   2.23    1.97 −0.50 −0.62   −0.58   1.24   1.80 1.08    1.06 0.23 −0.89 2.55 2.87 2.10      2.44 4.28
53




     tBS6       −1.42 1.39 0.83       3.24   3.67    3.61 −0.25 −0.10    0.16   2.14   2.20 1.63    1.78 −1.33 −2.08 3.57 3.23 2.52     3.01 5.93
     tSY4        0.58 2.58 1.90       1.65   1.67    1.42 −0.69 −0.69   −0.51   0.35   1.66 1.12    1.30 1.23 0.40 2.44 3.60 2.91       3.44 4.51
     |αq |       0.08 0.06 0.06       0.11   0.07    0.07 0.08 0.08      0.08   0.12   0.10 0.10    0.09 0.07 0.08 0.13 0.13 0.07       0.07 0.17
     |αq5 |      0.08 0.06 0.05       0.13   0.12    0.12 0.12 0.12      0.11   0.06   0.09 0.09    0.06 0.09 0.11 0.08 0.07 0.07       0.06 0.08
     |αFF5 |     0.09 0.15 0.11       0.14   0.11    0.10 0.07 0.08      0.07   0.12   0.13 0.13    0.12 0.09 0.06 0.16 0.22 0.16       0.14 0.20
     |αFF6 |     0.05 0.11 0.07       0.11   0.08    0.08 0.07 0.07      0.07   0.12   0.12 0.13    0.12 0.08 0.06 0.14 0.17 0.12       0.11 0.18
     |αFF6c |    0.06 0.10 0.08       0.13   0.09    0.09 0.07 0.07      0.06   0.13   0.15 0.15    0.14 0.06 0.06 0.12 0.17 0.11       0.11 0.14
     |αBS6 |     0.10 0.12 0.12       0.12   0.10    0.11 0.10 0.09      0.10   0.19   0.17 0.18    0.17 0.11 0.12 0.17 0.15 0.11       0.11 0.20
     |αSY4 |     0.06 0.10 0.06       0.12   0.09    0.08 0.09 0.10      0.09   0.07   0.08 0.07    0.06 0.09 0.07 0.11 0.15 0.10       0.09 0.14
     pq          0.04 0.20 0.46       0.01   0.08    0.07 0.41 0.05      0.02   0.13   0.14 0.16    0.34 0.11 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.05       0.05 0.00
     pq 5        0.10 0.53 0.72       0.01   0.02    0.01 0.03 0.01      0.01   0.63   0.19 0.08    0.30 0.40 0.04 0.10 0.51 0.18       0.29 0.32
     pFF5        0.03 0.00 0.02       0.00   0.00    0.00 0.52 0.06      0.04   0.02   0.01 0.02    0.07 0.07 0.19 0.00 0.00 0.00       0.00 0.00
     pFF6        0.25 0.01 0.07       0.00   0.01    0.01 0.48 0.09      0.08   0.03   0.01 0.02    0.07 0.13 0.09 0.00 0.00 0.00       0.00 0.00
     pFF6c       0.15 0.14 0.30       0.00   0.02    0.03 0.59 0.20      0.26   0.08   0.00 0.00    0.02 0.50 0.49 0.00 0.00 0.02       0.03 0.00
     pBS6        0.01 0.00 0.00       0.00   0.00    0.00 0.06 0.00      0.00   0.00   0.00 0.00    0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00       0.00 0.00
     pSY4        0.19 0.04 0.46       0.00   0.02    0.02 0.15 0.02      0.02   0.14   0.16 0.11    0.30 0.17 0.11 0.00 0.00 0.01       0.01 0.00
                121 122 123          124 125 126 127 128               129    130 131 132   133    134     135    136 137 138 139            140
                Cla Claq 1 Claq 6 Claq 12 Fq 1 Fq 6 Fq 12 Fpq 6        Oca   Ioca Adm Rdm Rdmq 1 Rdmq 6 Rdmq 12    Ol Olq 1 Olq 6 Olq 12      Hs
     R          0.55 0.52 0.49      0.46   0.52   0.48   0.38   −0.62 0.54 0.53 0.66 0.70     1.11   0.80   0.82 0.44 0.49 0.48    0.48    −0.31
     tR         3.23 3.26 3.60      3.63   2.32   2.39   2.05   −1.99 2.67 4.31 2.71 2.75     2.91   2.18   2.43 2.62 2.60 2.62    2.77    −2.12
     αq         0.75 0.46 0.41      0.45   0.13   0.14   0.05   −0.18 0.13 0.07 0.09 0.72     1.39   0.95   0.81 0.01 0.08 0.10    0.12    −0.30
     αq5        0.17 −0.02 −0.03    0.04   0.24   0.28   0.18    0.33 −0.13 −0.02 0.06 0.25   1.07   0.54   0.37 0.06 0.11 0.04    0.04    −0.12
     αFF5       0.85 0.63 0.57      0.60   0.37   0.37   0.26   −0.86 0.36 0.30 −0.09 0.57    0.89   0.63   0.60 0.14 0.26 0.25    0.29    −0.41
     αFF6       0.78 0.54 0.47      0.51   0.23   0.26   0.18   −0.35 0.34 0.17 0.04 0.60     1.33   0.92   0.77 0.13 0.26 0.25    0.27    −0.34
     αFF6c      0.56 0.45 0.37      0.40   0.25   0.24   0.12   −0.32 0.43 0.16 0.03 0.76     1.36   1.01   0.88 0.13 0.24 0.24    0.26    −0.32
     αBS6       0.89 0.53 0.46      0.51   0.05   0.09   0.00   −0.24 0.27 0.03 −0.26 0.73    1.40   0.96   0.80 −0.02 0.10 0.09   0.11    −0.46
     αSY4       0.66 0.41 0.40      0.43   0.33   0.38   0.28   −0.28 0.00 0.09 0.08 0.30     1.14   0.63   0.47 0.02 0.15 0.14    0.14    −0.26
     tq         5.23 3.02 2.97      3.63   0.58   0.85   0.36   −0.68 0.69 0.57 0.35 3.11     3.06   2.87   3.01 0.06 0.48 0.61    0.77    −1.56
     tq 5       1.40 −0.13 −0.28    0.41   1.21   1.67   1.28    1.39 −0.63 −0.16 0.27 1.13   2.26   1.57   1.31 0.33 0.61 0.21    0.25    −0.55
     tFF5       6.82 4.28 4.35      5.07   1.78   2.23   1.94   −3.18 1.80 2.40 −0.50 2.55    2.26   1.98   2.22 0.94 1.51 1.54    1.81    −2.50
     tFF6       6.36 3.93 4.10      4.84   1.15   1.53   1.30   −2.17 1.71 1.41 0.21 2.77     3.58   3.05   3.00 0.88 1.56 1.57    1.71    −1.96
     tFF6c      4.68 3.16 3.06      3.71   1.20   1.33   0.82   −1.85 1.90 1.21 0.13 3.34     3.65   3.36   3.51 0.81 1.29 1.35    1.52    −1.85
54




     tBS6       6.22 3.69 3.70      4.63   0.27   0.53   0.02   −1.40 1.39 0.25 −1.14 3.09    3.44   2.89   2.84 −0.10 0.59 0.53   0.64    −2.46
     tSY4       4.87 2.97 3.44      4.23   1.59   2.24   1.85   −1.93 −0.01 0.72 0.35 1.34    2.87   2.13   1.84 0.17 0.93 0.86    0.96    −1.44
     |αq |      0.14 0.19 0.10      0.11   0.09   0.14   0.10    0.12 0.12 0.09 0.06 0.27     0.52   0.46   0.45 0.09 0.09 0.09    0.09     0.14
     |αq5 |     0.06 0.08 0.05      0.04   0.09   0.12   0.09    0.17 0.09 0.08 0.09 0.12     0.36   0.27   0.23 0.10 0.11 0.11    0.10     0.13
     |αFF5 |    0.17 0.21 0.14      0.15   0.14   0.12   0.08    0.11 0.14 0.10 0.07 0.24     0.40   0.37   0.38 0.07 0.09 0.09    0.08     0.15
     |αFF6 |    0.14 0.19 0.11      0.12   0.11   0.11   0.08    0.11 0.14 0.09 0.07 0.25     0.49   0.43   0.42 0.07 0.09 0.09    0.08     0.13
     |αFF6c |   0.12 0.17 0.10      0.12   0.10   0.10   0.06    0.11 0.16 0.07 0.06 0.26     0.46   0.41   0.40 0.06 0.10 0.09    0.08     0.13
     |αBS6 |    0.18 0.20 0.12      0.13   0.10   0.15   0.11    0.11 0.18 0.14 0.11 0.35     0.58   0.52   0.51 0.11 0.12 0.12    0.11     0.19
     |αSY4 |    0.11 0.18 0.10      0.11   0.13   0.13   0.10    0.12 0.08 0.07 0.07 0.17     0.44   0.34   0.32 0.06 0.07 0.07    0.08     0.12
     pq         0.00 0.00 0.02      0.00   0.08   0.00   0.00    0.00 0.05 0.02 0.72 0.00     0.00   0.00   0.00 0.05 0.11 0.01    0.01     0.03
     pq 5       0.51 0.55 0.82      0.39   0.21   0.00   0.00    0.01 0.21 0.53 0.40 0.21     0.01   0.04   0.04 0.10 0.11 0.04    0.03     0.12
     pFF5       0.00 0.00 0.00      0.00   0.03   0.00   0.00    0.00 0.04 0.00 0.82 0.00     0.01   0.01   0.00 0.05 0.10 0.02    0.01     0.00
     pFF6       0.00 0.00 0.00      0.00   0.08   0.00   0.01    0.00 0.04 0.02 0.66 0.00     0.00   0.00   0.00 0.04 0.08 0.02    0.02     0.01
     pFF6c      0.00 0.00 0.13      0.00   0.17   0.00   0.06    0.00 0.03 0.25 0.74 0.00     0.00   0.00   0.00 0.38 0.05 0.02    0.02     0.04
     pBS6       0.00 0.00 0.00      0.00   0.04   0.00   0.00    0.00 0.00 0.00 0.26 0.00     0.00   0.00   0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00    0.00     0.00
     pSY4       0.00 0.00 0.02      0.00   0.03   0.00   0.00    0.00 0.23 0.17 0.67 0.04     0.00   0.03   0.03 0.33 0.40 0.06    0.08     0.19
                141 142        143 144   145   146    147 148 149    150     151     152      153      154           155   156 157 158
                                          q     q     q     1 [2,5]  [2,5]  [6,10]  [6,10]  [11,15]  [16,20]
                Etr Rer       Eprd Etl Alm 1 Alm 6 Alm 12 Ra Ra     Rn     Ra      Rn      Ra       Ra               Sv1 Dtv12 Isff1 Isq1
     R          0.24   0.34   −0.53   0.34  0.58  0.60    0.54   0.67   0.69   −0.50   0.83   −0.46   0.62   0.54   −0.49   −0.40   0.28   0.25
     tR         2.29   2.44   −2.96   2.79  2.75  3.05    2.84   3.43   4.11   −2.22   5.06   −2.38   4.46   3.26   −2.23   −2.23   3.11   2.80
     αq         0.09   0.34   −0.55   0.27  0.25  0.24    0.14   0.58   0.81   −0.20   1.11    0.03   0.60   0.62   −0.22   −0.13   0.27   0.29
     αq 5       0.11   0.18   −0.43   0.18  0.24  0.22    0.17   0.50   0.85   −0.09   0.95    0.05   0.55   0.61   −0.16   −0.15   0.20   0.19
     αFF5       0.20   0.29   −0.91   0.36  0.02  0.09    0.05   0.67   0.73    0.05   1.05   −0.08   0.68   0.60   −0.26   −0.06   0.30   0.28
     αFF6       0.17   0.27   −0.81   0.26  0.09  0.10    0.03   0.48   0.74   −0.05   1.11    0.00   0.65   0.60   −0.25   −0.06   0.26   0.24
     αFF6c      0.23   0.25   −0.85   0.33  0.09  0.10    0.02   0.41   0.66   −0.05   1.11   −0.03   0.66   0.63   −0.18   −0.09   0.27   0.24
     αBS6       0.13   0.35   −0.81   0.35 −0.03 −0.03   −0.12   0.47   0.78    0.12   1.11    0.33   0.58   0.59   −0.21   −0.01   0.31   0.33
     αSY4       0.13   0.20   −0.58   0.18  0.15  0.17    0.12   0.59   0.83    0.05   1.01   −0.09   0.59   0.56   −0.24   −0.03   0.24   0.25
     tq         0.75   2.05   −3.02   1.56  1.68  1.78    1.01   2.75   4.06   −1.06   5.05    0.15   3.48   3.22   −0.90   −1.72   2.56   2.84
     tq 5       0.82   1.14   −2.49   1.10  1.61  1.62    1.22   2.25   4.02   −0.42   4.74    0.24   3.16   2.83   −0.59   −1.94   1.73   1.76
     tFF5       1.83   1.86   −5.56   2.48  0.18  0.76    0.44   3.58   4.03    0.27   5.37   −0.47   3.91   3.72   −1.15   −0.77   3.05   2.89
     tFF6       1.51   1.73   −4.97   1.90  0.71  0.93    0.28   2.67   3.80   −0.31   5.69   −0.02   4.13   3.43   −1.08   −0.79   2.76   2.54
     tFF6c      2.03   1.59   −5.08   2.41  0.72  0.90    0.21   2.12   3.24   −0.28   5.25   −0.19   3.76   3.30   −0.75   −1.13   2.63   2.35
55




     tBS6       0.97   2.08   −4.64   2.23 −0.20 −0.28   −0.93   2.23   3.73    0.69   4.73    1.70   3.16   3.32   −0.84   −0.11   3.12   3.14
     tSY4       1.10   1.23   −3.71   1.30  1.06  1.28    0.90   3.16   4.21    0.29   4.97   −0.50   3.85   3.01   −0.98   −0.35   2.36   2.39
     |αq |      0.09   0.14    0.16   0.08  0.09  0.09    0.07   0.14   0.16    0.12   0.24    0.15   0.17   0.15    0.09    0.09   0.09   0.10
     |αq5 |     0.09   0.13    0.16   0.08  0.09  0.07    0.06   0.13   0.17    0.11   0.20    0.10   0.17   0.15    0.09    0.09   0.07   0.09
     |αFF5 |    0.08   0.12    0.23   0.08  0.07  0.06    0.05   0.17   0.15    0.09   0.22    0.16   0.18   0.15    0.10    0.06   0.09   0.09
     |αFF6 |    0.08   0.13    0.20   0.07  0.07  0.07    0.05   0.13   0.15    0.11   0.24    0.14   0.18   0.16    0.08    0.06   0.08   0.09
     |αFF6c |   0.07   0.13    0.22   0.08  0.09  0.07    0.07   0.12   0.14    0.11   0.24    0.15   0.19   0.17    0.07    0.06   0.07   0.08
     |αBS6 |    0.10   0.21    0.23   0.09  0.09  0.08    0.07   0.13   0.16    0.14   0.23    0.15   0.18   0.15    0.10    0.06   0.11   0.13
     |αSY4 |    0.08   0.09    0.15   0.07  0.08  0.09    0.07   0.15   0.16    0.10   0.22    0.13   0.16   0.14    0.08    0.07   0.08   0.10
     pq         0.02   0.02    0.01   0.12  0.06  0.05    0.22   0.07   0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.01    0.23    0.00   0.00   0.00
     pq 5       0.13   0.06    0.02   0.26  0.10  0.13    0.21   0.34   0.00    0.01   0.00    0.29   0.00   0.06    0.41    0.06   0.04   0.04
     pFF5       0.06   0.02    0.00   0.05  0.17  0.11    0.23   0.04   0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.01    0.37    0.01   0.00   0.00
     pFF6       0.09   0.01    0.00   0.24  0.08  0.09    0.21   0.15   0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.01    0.53    0.03   0.01   0.00
     pFF6c      0.20   0.01    0.00   0.26  0.13  0.16    0.30   0.30   0.00    0.00   0.00    0.01   0.00   0.01    0.74    0.13   0.06   0.04
     pBS6       0.01   0.00    0.00   0.04  0.03  0.03    0.05   0.02   0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.01    0.13    0.00   0.00   0.00
     pSY4       0.12   0.27    0.01   0.36  0.20  0.18    0.17   0.11   0.00    0.00   0.00    0.02   0.00   0.06    0.34    0.19   0.01   0.00
                                                           Table 7 : The q 5 -model Factor Loadings

     For each of the significant 158 anomalies, we report for the high-minus-low decile the loadings on the market, size, investment-to-
     assets, Roe, and expected growth factors (denoted β Mkt , β Me , β I/A , β Roe , and β Eg , respectively) in the q 5 -regression, as well as their
     heteroscedasticity-and-autocorrelation-consistent t-statistics (denoted tMkt , tMe , tI/A , tRoe , and tEg , respectively). Table 4 describes
     the anomaly symbols, and the Online Appendix details variable definition and portfolio construction.

                1    2    3     4              5       6     7      8       9      10      11     12    13   14    15   16   17    18      19    20
             Sue1 Abr1 Abr6 Abr12            Re1     Re6   R6 1   R6 6   R6 12   R11 1   R11 6   Im1   Im6 Im12   Rs1 dEf1 dEf6 dEf12     Nei1 52w6
     β Mkt −0.02 −0.05 −0.03       −0.01 −0.05 −0.05 −0.15 −0.02 0.01 −0.06 −0.01 −0.14 −0.01 0.00 −0.03              0.02 0.07 0.03      0.03 −0.39
     β Me −0.01 0.07 0.09           0.07 −0.17 −0.15 0.29 0.28 0.09 0.38 0.18 0.20 0.29 0.17 −0.11                   −0.05 −0.02 −0.08   −0.05 −0.32
     β I/A −0.13 −0.15 −0.19       −0.28 0.07 −0.13 −0.12 −0.21 −0.32 −0.16 −0.29 −0.09 −0.10 −0.31 −0.49            −0.18 −0.32 −0.35   −0.34 0.32
     β Roe 0.80 0.24 0.16           0.15 1.24 1.02 0.99 0.84 0.75 1.23 1.16 0.60 0.65 0.56 0.53                       0.74 0.77 0.67      0.60 1.13
     β Eg   0.16 0.09 0.06          0.05 0.03 0.10 0.65 0.64 0.36 0.80 0.49 0.60 0.64 0.45 0.19                       0.12 0.04 0.02      0.15 0.54
     tMkt −0.58 −1.26 −0.96        −0.44 −0.92 −1.02 −1.64 −0.31 0.23 −0.62 −0.09 −1.77 −0.14 0.03 −0.58              0.41 1.47 0.82      1.17 −5.75
     tMe −0.20 0.71 1.87            1.90 −1.96 −1.70 1.43 1.64 0.67 1.84 1.03 1.04 1.90 1.28 −2.06                   −0.56 −0.21 −1.19   −1.33 −1.97
     tI/A −1.43 −1.44 −2.72        −4.83 0.41 −0.86 −0.37 −0.95 −1.90 −0.52 −1.35 −0.33 −0.49 −1.70 −5.77            −1.27 −2.68 −3.82   −4.74 1.56
56




     tRoe 10.06 2.50 2.38           3.26 8.72 7.79 3.11 4.01 5.19 4.39 5.57 2.73 3.60 3.65 6.15                       6.67 7.57 8.87      9.34 5.37
     tEg    1.57 0.81 0.76          0.85 0.16 0.69 2.49 3.05 2.08 2.96 2.20 2.87 3.55 2.65 1.97                       0.73 0.32 0.15      1.98 3.06
               21    22      23       24       25     26     27     28    29        30  31   32   33   34   35    36         37 38     39  40
               6   6
              ǫ 6 ǫ 12     ǫ11 1    ǫ11 6   ǫ11 12   Sm1   Ilr1   Ilr6 Ilr12      Ile1 Cm1 Cm12 Sim1 Cim1 Cim6 Cim12                 q
                                                                                                                            Bm Bmj Bm 12 Rev6
     β Mkt   0.00 0.01    0.05      0.03 0.02 0.01 −0.14 −0.08 −0.03 0.00 0.08 0.03 0.08 0.03 −0.02 0.00 0.02 −0.05 0.03 0.05
     β Me    0.12 0.07    0.15      0.13 0.05 −0.19 −0.08 0.09 0.09 0.03 −0.15 0.10 0.10 −0.14 0.16 0.13 0.42 0.32 0.32 −0.60
     β I/A   0.04 −0.04   0.14      0.04 −0.01 0.10 0.01 −0.07 −0.11 −0.25 0.25 −0.03 0.15 0.06 0.05 −0.06 1.33 1.36 1.25 −1.02
     β Roe   0.14 0.21    0.27      0.29 0.29 −0.19 −0.05 0.24 0.25 0.53 −0.07 0.08 −0.02 0.07 0.20 0.20 −0.60 −0.81 −0.95 0.73
     β Eg    0.31 0.25    0.39      0.27 0.17 0.33 0.37 0.29 0.27 0.33 0.04 0.12 0.51 0.43 0.36 0.32 0.12 −0.04 −0.02 −0.21
     tMkt    0.10 0.15    0.77      0.52 0.49 0.13 −2.06 −2.44 −1.01 −0.06 1.03 1.00 1.09 0.42 −0.77 0.12 0.41 −1.25 0.60 0.93
     tMe     1.88 1.05    2.21      1.58 0.60 −1.96 −0.80 1.26 1.60 0.33 −1.73 1.60 0.78 −1.48 2.19 2.49 5.18 3.36 3.00 −7.73
     tI/A    0.43 −0.47   1.06      0.37 −0.09 0.53 0.04 −0.61 −1.33 −1.96 1.42 −0.40 0.62 0.32 0.34 −0.52 12.85 11.01 9.50 −9.76
     tRoe    1.40 2.70    2.07      2.74 3.10 −1.09 −0.34 2.65 3.43 4.88 −0.40 1.36 −0.09 0.50 2.03 2.72 −6.45 −8.69 −8.07 7.39
     tEg     2.62 2.43    2.21      1.80 1.36 1.63 2.08 2.91 3.63 2.55 0.22 2.16 2.62 2.48 3.51 4.50 1.02 −0.34 −0.17 −1.50
                41   42   43    44      45   46      47      48      49  50    51  52    53      54   55   56    57      58      59    60
             Rev12   Ep Epq 1 Epq 6 Epq 12   Cp    Cpq 1   Cpq 6 Cpq 12 Nop   Em Emq 1 Emq 6 Emq 12   Sp Spq 1 Spq 6 Spq 12     Ocp Ocpq 1
     β Mkt    0.06 −0.07 −0.01 −0.03 −0.05 0.02 0.06 0.00 −0.03 −0.14 0.08 0.05 0.07          0.09 0.07 0.10 0.07        0.05 0.02 0.12
     β Me    −0.60 0.29 0.28 0.25 0.27 0.23 0.18 0.17 0.22 −0.32 −0.20 0.04 0.01             −0.04 0.62 0.57 0.61        0.64 0.18 0.13
     β I/A   −0.93 0.98 0.86 0.84 0.83 1.29 1.05 1.01 1.05 1.00 −0.90 −0.69 −0.68            −0.70 1.17 1.12 1.15        1.13 1.37 1.18
     β Roe    0.57 −0.13 0.21 0.18 0.14 −0.42 −0.53 −0.52 −0.43 −0.01 0.27 −0.02 0.00        −0.01 −0.23 −0.45 −0.42    −0.30 −0.60 −0.62
     β Eg    −0.18 0.15 −0.17 −0.03 0.00 0.03 −0.17 −0.09 −0.08 0.22 −0.31 −0.05 −0.10       −0.12 −0.17 −0.26 −0.22    −0.22 0.20 0.09
     tMkt     1.12 −1.19 −0.19 −0.50 −1.05 0.39 1.08 0.00 −0.64 −3.04 1.48 0.87 1.44          2.00 1.51 1.55 1.13        0.96 0.35 1.43
     tMe     −8.41 2.43 2.12 2.04 2.37 1.92 1.29 1.36 1.96 −3.96 −2.44 0.43 0.06             −0.50 4.48 3.35 3.93        4.49 1.56 0.61
     tI/A    −9.02 6.17 5.01 5.92 6.17 8.91 6.29 6.63 7.47 9.64 −6.90 −4.61 −5.60            −6.20 9.02 6.03 7.02        7.83 9.27 5.59
     tRoe     5.14 −0.89 1.28 1.33 1.19 −3.05 −3.40 −3.83 −3.47 −0.05 2.07 −0.19 0.03        −0.13 −1.85 −2.29 −2.45    −2.15 −4.56 −2.77
     tEg     −1.30 1.05 −1.13 −0.19 −0.03 0.23 −1.10 −0.60 −0.62 1.98 −2.43 −0.30 −0.71      −0.93 −1.26 −1.57 −1.49    −1.60 1.42 0.42
                61   62    63  64      65     66      67     68     69  70  71   72   73        74     75    76   77       78    79      80
                 Ir Vhp   Vfp Ebp     Dur    Aci    I/A      q    q
                                                           Ia 6 Ia 12 dPia Noa dNoa dLno        Ig    2Ig   Nsi   dIi     Cei   Ivg     Ivc
     β Mkt −0.06 −0.02 −0.04 0.05    0.04 0.01 0.03 0.05 0.03 0.03 −0.06 −0.01 −0.09 0.00 0.06 0.01 0.03 0.18 −0.03                   −0.01
57




     β Me −0.58 0.25 0.18 0.51      −0.24 −0.29 −0.13 −0.19 −0.21 −0.11 0.07 0.03 −0.17 −0.15 −0.29 0.13 −0.16 0.25 0.06              −0.05
     β I/A −1.13 0.85 0.53 1.24     −1.00 0.12 −1.37 −1.31 −1.33 −0.82 0.09 −1.01 −0.76 −0.77 −0.74 −0.59 −0.65 −0.91 −0.90           −0.56
     β Roe  0.75 −0.18 0.22 −0.63    0.18 −0.18 0.15 0.40 0.25 0.13 0.15 0.05 0.04 −0.08 −0.05 −0.19 −0.19 0.00 0.10                   0.32
     β Eg −0.23 0.20 0.03 −0.03     −0.14 −0.01 −0.01 −0.18 −0.13 −0.11 −0.50 −0.08 −0.15 0.07 0.00 −0.28 0.02 −0.39 −0.14            −0.46
     tMkt −1.34 −0.26 −0.69 1.11     0.73 0.18 1.16 1.67 0.99 0.77 −1.52 −0.37 −1.81 −0.16 1.84 0.20 1.03 5.19 −0.99                  −0.31
     tMe −8.40 2.06 1.74 6.39       −1.79 −4.94 −2.34 −3.60 −4.58 −2.23 0.74 0.54 −2.51 −2.60 −4.56 1.84 −3.55 3.84 1.36              −1.01
     tI/A −10.66 5.18 3.27 12.27    −6.81 0.94 −17.50 −13.14 −14.46 −8.70 0.59 −8.89 −7.11 −10.02 −8.80 −7.33 −7.88 −12.01 −11.87     −5.21
     tRoe   7.55 −1.21 1.55 −7.17    1.34 −1.86 2.13 5.13 3.59 1.55 1.49 0.63 0.35 −1.23 −0.74 −2.80 −2.67 −0.06 1.21                  3.51
     tEg   −1.75 1.38 0.15 −0.26    −1.10 −0.05 −0.10 −2.15 −1.62 −1.29 −4.46 −1.04 −1.41 0.80 0.05 −3.57 0.24 −4.47 −1.38            −4.64
                81  82   83   84   85             86   87     88      89    90    91  92         93   94   95    96    97    98   99 100
                Oa dWc dCoa dNco dNca           dFin dFnl    dBe     Dac   Poa   Pta Pda        Ndf Roe1 Roe6 dRoe1 dRoe6dRoe12 Roa1 dRoa1
     β Mkt 0.01 −0.03 0.02 −0.04 −0.06          0.02 0.02 0.02      −0.05 −0.03 0.04 −0.03     0.05 −0.06 −0.09 0.06     0.06    0.02   −0.09    0.12
     β Me  0.27 0.33 −0.05 −0.09 −0.10         −0.07 −0.08 −0.14     0.13 0.14 0.16 0.02      −0.12 −0.35 −0.41 −0.02    0.00    0.00   −0.35    0.13
     β I/A 0.12 −0.18 −1.10 −0.73 −0.84        −0.42 −0.38 −1.34     0.42 −0.84 −0.79 −0.15   −0.39 0.09 0.00 0.12       0.13    0.10   −0.15    0.16
     β Roe 0.45 0.30 0.18 0.04 0.05            −0.12 −0.11 0.28      0.37 0.16 0.13 0.11      −0.21 1.43 1.30 0.49       0.48    0.47    1.24    0.51
     β Eg −0.53 −0.46 −0.18 −0.17 −0.09         0.50 −0.13 −0.07    −0.61 −0.19 −0.24 −0.43   −0.14 0.21 0.21 0.38       0.28    0.13    0.36    0.31
     tMkt 0.24 −0.59 0.93 −1.06 −1.62           0.61 0.78 0.63      −1.50 −0.82 0.99 −0.81     1.39 −1.59 −2.58 1.42     1.64    0.69   −3.05    2.87
     tMe   4.84 3.96 −1.04 −1.73 −2.01         −1.49 −1.87 −2.05     2.53 3.26 2.39 0.35      −2.40 −5.75 −6.32 −0.25    0.07    0.09   −6.12    1.83
     tI/A  1.21 −1.76 −17.09 −10.88 −12.40     −3.46 −5.45 −12.49    4.48 −8.53 −7.04 −1.30   −5.38 1.01 0.01 1.46       1.73    1.91   −2.11    1.45
     tRoe  6.28 3.95 2.91 0.55 0.69            −1.38 −1.52 3.06      5.49 2.43 1.46 1.30      −2.81 18.46 16.18 5.25     5.40    7.30   15.81    4.57
     tEg −5.02 −4.58 −2.02 −2.12 −1.05          4.63 −1.50 −0.76    −5.65 −1.93 −2.11 −4.44   −1.45 2.09 2.19 3.30       2.71    1.85    4.10    2.47
               101 102    103   104   105    106 107     108   109 110 111 112       113 114 115                 116 117     118    119          120
             dRoa6Rna 1 Rna 6 Ato 1 Ato 6 Ato 12 Cto 1 Cto 6Cto 12 Gpa Gla 1 Gla 6Glaq 12 Oleq 1 Oleq 6
                     q     q     q     q     q      q     q    q          q     q                                Opa Ola 1 Ola 6 Olaq 12
                                                                                                                        q     q                  Cop
     β Mkt     0.09   −0.10 −0.11 0.14 0.12 0.11 0.12 0.12 0.11 0.06 0.02 0.04 0.02 −0.02 −0.03                −0.17    −0.04   −0.04   −0.07   −0.13
58




     β Me      0.13   −0.42 −0.46 0.45 0.40 0.35 0.34 0.33 0.31 0.06 0.13 0.07 0.06 −0.23 −0.28                −0.39    −0.27   −0.32   −0.32   −0.53
     β I/A     0.13   −0.21 −0.29 −0.61 −0.71 −0.78 −0.17 −0.24 −0.30 −0.36 −0.35 −0.44 −0.51 0.32 0.27        −0.56    −0.42   −0.47   −0.56   −0.30
     β Roe     0.56    1.17 1.02 0.45 0.43 0.38 0.80 0.75 0.70 0.49 0.57 0.52 0.45 1.06 0.96                    0.42     0.83    0.74    0.66    0.21
     β Eg      0.12    0.38 0.42 0.38 0.35 0.33 0.10 0.09 0.09 0.20 0.28 0.25 0.23 0.31 0.30                    0.79     0.81    0.77    0.69    0.94
     tMkt      2.11   −2.58 −3.14 2.53 2.33 2.13 2.22 2.40 2.16 1.46 0.43 1.29 0.74 −0.55 −0.86                −4.55    −0.99   −1.32   −2.60   −3.71
     tMe       1.78   −8.55 −10.51 5.79 5.84 6.10 3.08 3.41 3.56 1.11 2.64 1.59 1.47 −2.10 −3.16               −4.68    −3.59   −5.59   −5.59   −7.84
     tI/A      1.57   −2.29 −3.32 −6.25 −7.42 −8.32 −1.65 −2.47 −3.10 −4.14 −4.12 −5.66 −6.26 2.41 2.32        −6.54    −4.45   −6.03   −7.49   −3.96
     tRoe      5.25   15.50 13.39 4.51 5.43 5.04 9.22 9.52 9.15 6.40 8.77 8.20 6.63 9.80 8.81                   6.08    10.52   11.32    9.12    3.74
     tEg       1.03    4.45 5.21 3.18 3.09 2.90 0.81 0.75 0.77 1.86 2.85 2.65 2.58 2.53 2.44                    7.29     8.12    9.12    7.73   10.77
            121 122 123          124     125     126     127 128      129 130 131 132    133    134     135                136 137 138 139          140
            Cla Claq 1 Claq 6 Claq 12    Fq 1    Fq 6   Fq 12 Fpq 6   Oca Ioca Adm Rdm Rdmq 1 Rdmq 6 Rdmq 12                Ol Olq 1 Olq 6 Olq 12    Hs
     β Mkt −0.11 −0.01 0.03    −0.01    −0.10   −0.07   −0.07 0.34 −0.12 −0.05 0.06 0.23   0.07  0.01             0.02   −0.05 −0.11 −0.13 −0.13 −0.19
     β Me −0.55 −0.27 −0.27    −0.27    −0.37   −0.44   −0.44 0.37 0.26 0.26 0.48 0.68     0.21  0.59             0.69    0.31 0.27 0.34 0.33 −0.09
     β I/A −0.55 −0.31 −0.28   −0.32     0.45    0.36    0.35 0.33 0.14 0.33 1.32 −0.03    0.49  0.53             0.66    0.12 0.04 0.00 −0.01 0.36
     β Roe 0.13 0.22 0.22       0.18     0.77    0.72    0.70 −1.31 0.47 0.44 −0.30 −0.85 −1.16 −1.07            −0.89    0.59 0.68 0.59 0.56 0.06
     β Eg   0.93 0.80 0.73      0.67    −0.19   −0.25   −0.22 −0.84 0.41 0.15 0.04 0.78    0.53  0.68             0.75   −0.07 −0.04 0.10 0.13 −0.30
     tMkt −3.01 −0.30 1.08     −0.34    −1.63   −1.54   −1.64 5.31 −1.92 −1.44 0.77 3.84   0.58  0.08             0.21   −1.13 −2.06 −2.62 −2.72 −3.73
     tMe −8.94 −4.53 −5.74     −6.07    −3.55   −5.06   −5.48 2.02 3.28 5.54 2.77 7.43     1.05  4.22             5.75    3.21 3.37 3.72 4.13 −1.13
     tI/A −6.64 −3.26 −3.30    −4.33     3.01    3.16    3.62 1.36 1.24 3.55 5.84 −0.22    1.61  2.48             3.71    1.18 0.36 0.04 −0.09 2.32
     tRoe 1.96 3.05 4.22        3.68     6.71    7.67    7.31 −6.96 3.84 6.36 −1.31 −5.60 −4.05 −6.03            −6.09    5.42 6.50 5.40 5.29 0.45
     tEg 11.45 6.85 9.25        9.94    −1.30   −1.84   −2.34 −5.04 2.62 1.37 0.22 4.51    2.05  3.16             4.11   −0.55 −0.28 0.76 1.02 −2.56
            141   142 143        144   145   146    147        148 149 150 151 152               153     154      155   156 157 158
                                                                    [2,5]  [2,5] [6,10] [6,10] [11,15] [16,20]
            Etr   Rer Eprd       Etl Alm 1 Alm 6 Almq 12
                                        q     q                  1
                                                                Ra Ra     Rn Ra        Rn     Ra      Ra          Sv1 Dtv12 Isff1 Isq1
     β Mkt 0.01 0.09 0.10 0.03 0.08 0.08      0.08 0.23 0.06 0.16 −0.01 0.16                    0.00   −0.06      0.01 0.14 0.00 −0.01
59




     β Me 0.11 −0.10 0.34 0.31 0.67 0.70      0.71 −0.14 −0.18 −0.26 0.05 −0.30                −0.06   −0.08      0.30 −1.13 0.15 0.21
     β I/A 0.06 −0.13 0.50 −0.18 0.85 0.78    0.73 −0.20 −0.27 −1.28 −0.43 −0.80               −0.04   −0.05     −0.19 −0.36 −0.03 −0.08
     β Roe 0.16 −0.03 −0.57 0.00 −0.45 −0.35 −0.23 0.14 0.05 0.47 −0.30 −0.27                   0.07   −0.02     −0.50 0.28 −0.08 −0.17
     β Eg −0.04 0.25 −0.18 0.15 0.02 0.03 −0.05 0.12 −0.06 −0.18 0.25 −0.03                     0.08    0.01     −0.10 0.03 0.12 0.15
     tMkt 0.35 1.68 1.67 0.69 2.29 2.52       2.43 4.21 1.06 2.41 −0.14 2.82                   −0.05   −1.31      0.07 5.51 −0.04 −0.18
     tMe   1.97 −0.96 4.36 3.32 7.69 10.60 11.53 −1.28 −1.71 −1.97 0.50 −3.37                  −0.66   −1.41      2.41 −31.69 4.03 2.89
     tI/A 0.56 −1.06 4.03 −1.10 8.24 9.29     8.77 −1.35 −2.29 −9.00 −2.51 −5.78               −0.25   −0.36     −1.21 −7.20 −0.44 −1.09
     tRoe 1.98 −0.30 −4.90 0.00 −5.12 −4.84 −3.00 1.00 0.46 3.17 −2.28 −1.91                    0.63   −0.16     −3.73 6.73 −1.32 −2.77
     tEg −0.38 1.92 −1.41 1.14 0.18 0.30 −0.55 0.79 −0.40 −1.16 1.70 −0.22                      0.61    0.12     −0.63 0.57 1.52 1.96
