                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PLATFORMS, PROMOTION, AND PRODUCT DISCOVERY:
                       EVIDENCE FROM SPOTIFY PLAYLISTS

                                           Luis Aguiar
                                          Joel Waldfogel

                                       Working Paper 24713
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24713


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2018




The authors thank seminar participants at Minnesota, Tel Aviv, Georgia State, Georgia Tech, and
the European Commission’s Joint Research Center in Seville. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official opinion of the European
Commission, the EC Joint Research Center, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24713.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Luis Aguiar and Joel Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Platforms, Promotion, and Product Discovery: Evidence from Spotify Playlists
Luis Aguiar and Joel Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 24713
June 2018
JEL No. L82

                                          ABSTRACT

Digitization has vastly increased the amount of new music produced and available directly to
consumers. While this has levelled the playing field between already-prominent and new artists,
creators may now be dependent on platform decisions about which songs and artist to promote.
With Spotify emerging as a major interactive streaming platform, this paper explores the effect of
Spotify’s playlists on both the promotion of songs and the discovery of music by new artists,
using four approaches. First, we examine songs’ streaming volumes before and after their
addition to, and removal from, major global playlists. Second, we compare streaming volumes for
songs just on, and just off, algorithmic top 50 playlists. Third, we make use of cross-country
differences in inclusion on New Music Friday lists, using song fixed effects to explain differences
in streaming. Fourth, we develop an instrumental variables approach to explaining cross-country
New Music Friday rank differentials based on home bias. Being added to Today’s Top Hits, a list
with 18.5 million followers during the sample period, raises streams by almost 20 million and is
worth between $116,000 and $163,000. Inclusion on New Music Friday lists substantially raises
the probability of song success, including for new artists.


Luis Aguiar
Digital Economy Unit
European Commission – Joint Research Center
Edificio EXPO - Calle Inca Garcilaso 3
41092 Sevilla (Spain)
luis.aguiar@ec.europa.eu

Joel Waldfogel
Frederick R. Kappel Chair in Applied Economics
3-177 Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
jwaldfog@umn.edu
1       Introduction

Digitization has stimulated substantial growth in new song production and has, with the
development of online music streaming, also broken the traditional promotion and distribu-
tion bottlenecks inherent in terrestrial radio and traditional music retailing.1 During 2016,
Spotify added over half a million (567,693) songs to its catalog and during 2017 nearly an
additional million (934,265).2 As a result, Spotify users have access to 35 million tracks via
any Internet-connected device.3 Consumers’ access to large catalogs, and the converse - that
creators, not just those from established record labels, have access to large audiences - are
on their face a substantial levelling of the playing field, holding out the promise of decon-
centrating consumption toward a long tail of products hailing from diverse sources such as
independent record labels and foreign producers.4

Access to an increasingly large catalog creates a daunting problem of product discovery, how-
ever. Beyond getting consumers access to a large catalog, a major value-creating function
of a platform is helping consumers to discover music that they like. Broadly speaking, plat-
forms do this in two ways. First, they create personalized music suggestions, via individual
playlists such as Spotify’s Discover Weekly, or Pandora’s song- or artist-seeded individual
stations. These systems have been the subject of much research on recommender systems
and music taxonomy (see, for example, Adomavicius and Tuzhilin, 2005). Second, platforms
promote discovery via general, i.e. one-to-many, playlists. Some of these lists - like Spotify’s
Today’s Top Hits - are curated using human discretion and are often used to promote songs
and artists that are already widely known. Other curated lists - like Spotify’s New Music
Friday - are more specifically dedicated to the discovery of new songs and artists. Algorith-
mic playlists - like the Global Top 50 or the U.S. Viral Top 50 - are, on the other hand,
based algorithmically on streaming charts rather than human curators.

The interactive music streaming market has a number of major participants, including Spo-
tify as well as services from Apple Music and Google.5 Spotify is growing quickly, and in
2017 Spotify was reported to have a 37 percent share of the subscription streaming market.6
    1
     See, for example, Waldfogel, 2017.
    2
     See http://everynoise.com/sorting_hat_closet/ for weekly lists of songs added to Spotify.
   3
     See United States Securities and Exchange Commission (2018).
   4
     See, for example, Zentner et al. (2013) showing that video consumption deconcentrates when consumers
have access to an online selection.
   5
     See http://www.businessinsider.com/google-reshuffles-its-music-products-2017-2.
   6
     See https://www.statista.com/statistics/653926/music-streaming-service-subscriber-sha


                                                   1
With Spotify emerging as the leading interactive streaming service, it is interesting to explore
whether Spotify influences consumption choices through its general playlists, which function
in two ways. First, playlists are potentially informative lists of songs that can simply make
users aware of particular songs. Second, playlists are utilities for listening to music: a user
who subscribes to a playlist can select it, then automatically play its songs in either rank
or random order. Users opt into playlists by subscribing to them at no cost, and the most
popular playlists have nearly 20 million subscribers. These developments raise questions
about how and whether playlists affect consumption choices and promote the discovery of
new songs and artists.

Growing concentration in the streaming market puts streaming platforms among the handful
of online platforms that have come to dominate, or nearly dominate, their respective markets
in search advertising (Google), social networking (Facebook), online retailing (Amazon), and
others. Some observers warn of a new era of “Internet monopoly” and call for heightened
antitrust enforcement.7 The usual concern about market dominance is that firms with market
power will harm consumers by charging high prices. While the major platforms do not
charge consumers high prices - and in many cases do not charge consumers at all - dominant
platforms warrant attention even if they do not deliver high prices to consumers.8 Platforms
are sometimes alleged to affect the fortunes of their suppliers, and in the music context,
platforms can play important roles in determining song and artist success, including the
determination of which songs and artists are discovered in the first place.9 While Spotify is
not a music producer, the major record labels have substantial ownership stakes in Spotify.
Sony BMG owns 5.8 percent, Universal owns 4.8 percent, Warner Music owns 3.8 percent,
and EMI has 1.9 percent. Merlin, which represents many independent record labels, owns
1 percent.10 It is therefore of interest to understand the extent of a prominent platform’s
ability to influence which songs and artists succeed.

Against this backdrop, this paper explores whether Spotify has the ability to influence users’
re/.
   7
      For example the Open Markets Institute argues that “Online intermediaries have emerged as the railroad
monopolies of the 21st century, controlling access to market and increasingly determining who wins and who
loses in today’s economy.” See https://openmarketsinstitute.org/issues/tech-platforms/. George
Soros has argued that the “fact that they are near-monopoly distributors makes them public utilities and
should subject them to more stringent regulations, aimed at preserving competition, innovation, and fair
and open universal access.” See Porzecanski (2018).
    8
      See Ip (2018).
    9
      See Edelman (2011) and Zhu and Liu (2016).
   10
      See Lindvall (2009) and Arrington (2009).



                                                     2
listening decisions. First, we ask whether playlist inclusion affects the number of streams
that songs receive. Second, we ask the related but distinct question of whether playlist
inclusion decisions affect consumers’ discovery of new songs and artists. These questions
recall the traditional question of whether promotion on radio stimulates music sales, one that
is empirically challenging to address because playlist and airplay decisions are endogenous:
curators choose songs they expect will be popular. We employ four empirical approaches to
measure the impact of playlist inclusion on song performance. (1) We use the discontinuous
jumps in the number of songs’ playlists followers when widely followed lists add a song. (2)
For algorithmic playlists where we know the inclusion criterion, we compare streams of songs
just making the list with songs just off the list to measure the impact of list inclusion on
streams. (3) We exploit differential song rankings on equivalent (New Music Friday) playlists
across countries to measure the impact of list rankings on product discovery and streams.
(4) We develop an instrumental variables approach to explain cross-country differences in
New Music Friday rankings based on home bias in New Music Friday lists, along with the
size of domestic music markets. Larger markets have more domestic music, giving rise to
worse ranks for foreign songs in larger markets. Finally, we also explore who benefits from
Spotify playlists, i.e. the sorts of songs - according to label type and artist national origin -
that are included on playlists.

We have three broad findings. First, the major platform-operated playlists have large and
significant causal impacts on streaming, so the platform has power to influence consumption
decisions, even among songs and artists that are already widely known. Appearing on
Today’s Top Hits, a list with 18.5 million followers during the sample period, raises a song’s
eventual streams by almost 20 million, which is almost a quarter of the average value of
streams for songs that make that playlist. Being on the Global Top 50 list raises a song’s
streams by about 3 million, or by about 3.3 percent of the average streams for songs that
make the Global Top 50. Second, Spotify also has substantial effects on which new artists
and songs become discovered. Being ranked #1 on the U.S. New Music Friday list raises
a song’s streams by about 14 million. Third, most of the benefit of the global lists accrues
to US-origin major-label songs, while the New Music Friday lists have larger representation
from domestic and independent-label music.

This paper proceeds in 6 sections after the introduction. Section 2 provides background on
the various types of playlists as well as their functions; and the section discusses the literature


                                                3
related to our study. Section 3 describes our data sources. Section 4 presents estimates of
the effects of inclusion on Spotify’s major global playlists on streams. Section 5 describes
our various identification strategies for measuring the effects of the New Music Friday lists
on product and artist discovery and discusses estimation results. Section 6 descriptively
explores the types of songs - by label type and national origin - that are included in various
playlists. Section 7 concludes.




2         Background on Playlists

2.1         The Types and Functions of Playlists

Playlists have two broad functions. They are both potentially informative lists of songs,
as well as utilities for playing the songs on those lists. Anyone is free to create and share
playlists, and many individuals do so. For example, Napster co-founder and early Face-
book investor Sean Parker maintains an influential list called “Hipster International,” which
is widely credited with making New Zealand-based artist Lorde into an international su-
perstar.11 In addition to independent individuals, various other kinds of entities main-
tain playlists. For example, the major record labels, Warner, Universal, and Sony, operate
playlists through Digster, Topsify, and Filtr brands respectively.

Spotify itself maintains both curated and chart-based algorithmic general playlists, as well
as playlists that are customized to each user. These different playlists work in different ways.
Among the lists that are not tailored to individual users, lists vary along two dimensions:
whether they are algorithmic or curated by humans and whether they are global or country-
specific. These dimensions in turn determine the empirical strategy that we use to identify
the causal effects of list inclusion.

Playlists like Today’s Top Hits, RapCaviar, Baila Reggaeton, and Viva Latino are all global
lists that are curated by Spotify employees, who choose songs for inclusion on the lists. These
lists generally add songs that have been streamed on Spotify for some period of time and
include songs and artists that are already widely known. These playlists are therefore likely
to be used as utilities for listening to the songs that they include, rather than as sources
    11
         See Bertoni (2013).



                                               4
of information revealing heretofore obscure songs or artists. (The fact that songs appearing
on these lists have already been streamed on Spotify nevertheless has the advantage that
one may be able to measure the impact of appearing on one of these lists from the changes
in streams right around the time that the song appears on the list.) Spotify tests songs on
playlists with smaller followings, then promotes promising songs to the major global lists
with wide followings. “By the time a song lands on Today’s Top Hits or other equally
popular sets, Spotify has so relentlessly tested it that it almost can’t fail.”12 The day that a
song appears on a particular playlist, the list’s followers now can see the song on a playlist
to which they subscribe. Hence, the number of the song’s followers rises by the number of
playlist follower when the add occurs. Other playlists, too, can add the song at or around
the same date, so the number of playlist followers that a song has can jump by more than
the number of followers of the list in question.

The New Music Friday playlists are also curated by Spotify but are country-specific and are
updated every Friday, when 50 new songs are added to the list for each country. Because
songs are added to the New Music Friday list for only a week - and because the added
songs are generally added when they are literally new to Spotify - these playlists bring new
information in addition to functioning as utilities for listening to the new music that they
present. From that perspective, the New Music Friday lists have the possibility of promoting
the discovery of new songs and artists. The drawback is that there is generally no streaming
history for dates prior to the songs’ inclusion on the lists, which makes it impossible to
measure the impact of list inclusion from examining how streams change as the songs move
to these lists.

Spotify has a widely followed Global Top 50 list, which algorithmically includes the top 50
songs of the previous day according to streams. Spotify also maintains the corresponding
Top 50 lists for each country, which are based on the country-specific streams from the
previous day. Because the inclusion criteria for these lists is transparent, one can compare
streams of songs just making the list to identify the effect of inclusion on the Top 50 lists.
  12
       See https://www.wired.com/2017/05/secret-hit-making-power-spotify-playlist/.




                                               5
2.2      Challenges in Getting on Lists

Music from diverse sources such as independent recording labels has little difficulty getting
included in the catalogs of streaming services carrying tens of millions of songs. But getting
noticed by a wide audience is harder, and getting a song onto a major playlist may be
subject to the same pressures traditionally surrounding radio airplay. As the Guardian puts
it, “Getting songs on to popular playlists is increasingly important to labels, but there may
be potential for shenanigans.”13 According to Vulture, “The most influential playlist in
music is Spotify’s RapCaviar, which turns mixtape rappers into megastars. And it’s all
curated by one man.”14 The curator, Tuma Basa, was born in Zaire and raised in Iowa. A
2017 Billboard article described its curator, Tuma Basa as “one popular dude.”15

Radio regulation in the U.S. has traditionally frowned upon content owners’ influence on
programming choices. When labels’ payments to disc jockeys came to light in the late
1950s, Congressional hearings ensued, Alan Freed’s career was ruined, and Dick Clark’s was
tarnished.16 Decisions about which songs to promote are instead viewed like editorial content
decisions at journalistic outlets, with an expectation that these decisions be unbiased. Critics
of payola argue that listeners “want to know that the music they hear on the radio is chosen
because of its artistic merit or popularity.”17 Under U.S. law, “When a broadcast licensee
has received or been promised payment for airing program material, then the station must
disclose that fact at the time material is aired and identify who is paying for it.”18 These
laws do not apply to streaming services, although Spotify has pledged not to take payola.19
Pandora has negotiated an agreement with Merlin to pay lower royalties in exchange for
more frequent streams, which some observers have likened to payola (Peoples, 2016).

Spotify operates in multiple countries and is not constrained by national borders. While
many countries, including Canada, France, and Australia, have traditionally mandated do-
   13
      See https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/10/things-we-learned-indie-labels
-digital.
   14
      See http://www.vulture.com/2017/09/spotify-rapcaviar-most-influential-playlist-in-mus
ic.html.
   15
      See https://www.billboard.com/articles/business/7865934/spotify-tuma-basa-curating-ra
pcaviar-pitching-playlists.
   16
      See Nayman (2012).
   17
      See http://futureofmusic.org/blog/2015/05/13/music-community-unites-against-radio-pay
ola.
   18
      See https://www.fcc.gov/consumers/guides/fccs-payola-rules.
   19
      Spotify claims to be “absolutely against any kind of ‘pay to playlist’, or sale of playlists . . . It’s bad for
artists and it’s bad for fans.” See Cookson (2015).



                                                         6
mestic content shares on radio, no such regulations exist for Spotify (see Richardson and Wilkie,
2015). To the extent that playlists are influential in determining which countries’ repertoires
are consumed, playlist decisions will be of some interest to those concerned about cultural
trade.



2.3      Playlist Concentration

Thousands of playlists are available to users at Spotify. While we will discuss data in detail
below, we note here that we have obtained the names, owners, and number of playlists
followers for the top 1,000 lists at Spotontrack.com, a website that tracks Spotify playlists.
The top list is Today’s Top Hits, a curated list maintained by Spotify with 18.5 million
followers as of December 2017. The next-most followed list is the algorithmic Global Top
50, with 11.5 million followers. Next are RapCaviar with 8.6 million, Viva Latino with 6.9
million, and Baila Reggaeton with 6.3 million. A few things are noteworthy. First, all of the
25 most-followed playlists are maintained by Spotify, and all but one of them (Global Top
50) are curated and therefore discretionary rather than algorithmic. Second, the number of
followers drops off fairly quickly, particularly after the top 25: The 200th list has 166,000
followers. The 500th has 43,000, and the 1000th has under 11,000, fewer than one percent of
the top list’s followers.

By list owner, the concentration is large. Spotify’s curated lists have over three quarters of
the followers of the top 1,000 playlists; Spotify’s algorithmic lists have another 9.3 percent.
The lists operated by the major record labels, Filtr, Digster, and Topsify, have 3.1, 2.7, and
0.9 percent of the top 1000’s cumulative followers. The remaining list owners have negligible
shares. It is clear that Spotify dominates playlists at Spotify. If playlists influence listening
choices, then Spotify’s curated lists are well-positioned to wield influence.



2.4      Relationship to Existing Literature

Our questions - how do playlists affect song success and artist discovery, as well as whether
platform operators have preferences and biases - have antecedents in a number of exist-
ing literatures. There is a large theoretical literature on platforms (see Rysman, 2009
for a summary) and a growing body of theoretical work on platform incentives to bias


                                               7
(Hagiu and Jullien, 2011; Cornière and Taylor, 2014), but empirical work on the question
of whether platforms are biased in their treatment of suppliers is less common. Some ex-
amples include Edelman (2011) on whether Google biases its search results in favor of its
own properties and Zhu and Liu (2016) on whether Amazon enters the markets for products
established by its marketplace vendors.

While we are aware of no existing work on playlists per se, the questions raised here resemble
the question in a number of existing literatures. There is some work on music discovery at
Spotify (Datta et al., 2017) and Deezer (Aguiar, 2017). Moreover, curated playlists contain
critics’ assessments, so studying the impact of playlists on subsequent streams resembles work
like Reinstein and Snyder (2005) on the impact of critical assessments on movie box office
revenue. Playlists are in some ways like radio stations, and playlist inclusion resembles a radio
station’s decision to air a song, so the study of playlist impacts on streaming resembles the
question addressed in studies of the impact of airplay on recorded music sales (Liebowitz,
2004; Dertouzos, 2008; McBride, 2014). Algorithmic playlists are literally most-streamed
lists, so measuring their impact on streams is very related to existing work on the impact
of best-seller lists on sales and product variety (Sorensen, 2007). Salganik et al. (2006) find
evidence that signals of popularity such as best-seller lists lead to a “self-fulfilling prophecy.”

Playlists resemble advertising, and some of the empirical challenges in measuring their
impact recalls the challenges described in the new literature on advertising effectiveness
(see, e.g. Lewis et al., 2015). The question of whether playlists at a streaming service
partially owned by some of the underlying rights holders would favor certain kinds of
repertoires in its playlists echoes some questions pursued in the literature on media bias
(Reuter and Zitzewitz, 2006; DellaVigna and Hermle, 2017).




3        Data

The underlying data for this study come from three separate sources and consist of two
distinct datasets. The first dataset includes streaming data at Spotify. In particular, we
observe the daily top 200 songs on Spotify, by country, for 26 countries, during 2016 and
2017.20 The 2017 country-specific streaming data are available directly from Spotify, which
    20
     We include these 26 countries because we can obtain the New Music Friday lists for these countries.
See below.


                                                   8
provides daily streaming totals for each of the top 200 songs by country, back to the start of
2017.21 The 2016 streaming data are from Spotontrack.com, which tracks streams, playlists,
and followers on Spotify.22 The 2017 country-level streaming data contain 1,847,615 daily
song observations and a total of 48,731 song-countries and 19,055 distinct tracks.23 In
addition to country-specific top 200 daily streams, we also have the daily global top 200
streams, which cover all countries where Spotify operates and include 1,764 distinct songs
during 2017. Table 1 reports the total number of streams, by country, in the 2017 country-
level data.

Our second dataset also comes from Spotontrack.com and corresponds to the songs that
appear on various playlists, including their ranks and the dates the songs enter and leave
the lists. We focus on the five most-followed Spotify-owned global playlists, as well as three
country-specific Spotify-owned playlists. The global lists are the four global curated lists (To-
day’s Top Hits, RapCaviar, Viva Latino, and Baila Reggaeton) and the algorithmic Global
Top 50. The country-specific list is New Music Friday, which is available separately for each
country. The New Music Friday playlists for 2017 include 52,851 distinct song-countries and
20,621 distinct songs (because many songs appear on multiple countries’ recommendation
lists). While we have New Music Friday playlists for all of 2017, our data on the global
curated playlists begins at different dates during 2017, with the latest in May, 2017. Table
2 summarizes the information, with both the number of followers for the lists, as well as the
dates we start observing the lists.

We also obtain song and artist characteristics for each song streaming in the country-level
and global streaming sample in 2017, as well as for each song on the playlists we study.
In particular, we observe the record label and the International Standard Recording Code
(ISRC) for each song.24

The label identity allows us to create of measure of whether songs are released by major
or independent record labels. There is a total of 6,577 distinct labels in our combined
datasets, and no clear way of classifying them into major and independent. Using their
  21
     See https://spotifycharts.com/regional.
  22
     See Seehttp://www.spotontrack.com.
  23
     Countries included in the sample are Brazil, Canada, Switzerland, Colombia, Germany, Denmark,
Spain, Finland, France, Great Britain, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Iceland, Italy, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands,
Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Sweden, Singapore, Turkey, Taiwan, and the United States.
  24
     The ISRC is the internationally recognized identification tool for sound and music video recordings. See
https://www.usisrc.org/.



                                                     9
names, however, we are able to identify some of the obvious major labels.25 While this
method guarantees that all the labels that we classify in the major category are indeed
majors, some of the non-obvious majors may end up being identified as independent labels.
Since the main goal of this classification is to make comparisons, for instance, between the
major composition of different playlists, our measure nevertheless remains informative.

The ISRC code provides us with measures of the national origin of each song, as well as its
release vintage. We are also interested in separately studying the new artists on the New
Music Friday lists. To determine which artists are new among those whose songs are in the
2017 country-level streaming data, we start with artists whose songs are on the 2017 New
Music Friday playlists, then remove the artists with songs observed streaming during the
previous year 2016. For each of the remaining artists, we obtain recording release histories
from Musicbrainz, an open music encyclopedia that collects music metadata and makes it
available to the public.26 Using these histories, we discard artists whose first release predates
2017. This leaves us with a set of 670 new artists whose songs appear on the New Music
Friday playlists during 2017.

We use these underlying datasets to create our main analysis samples, which consist of the
songs from a playlist, merged with the streaming data. With this sort of dataset we can do
two broad things. For songs already appearing on the streaming charts when they appear on
a playlist - from the global curated playlists - we can construct time series on their streaming,
before and after their chart appearance. We also observe when the songs leave the chart, so
we can also examine the evolution of their daily streaming before and after they leave the
chart.

The second broad dataset, for the New Music Friday playlists, resembles the first, except
that we lack any pre-listing streaming data. We link dates and ranks for appearances on a
country’s New Music Friday lists with subsequent daily appearances on the country’s daily
top 200 streaming chart. Because songs remain on the New Music Friday lists for 7 days,
there is no variation in the timing of removal.

We use a different approach for the analysis of the impact of inclusion in the Global Top
  25
      We classify as major any record label containing the following names: Asylum, Atlantic, Capitol, Epic,
Interscope, Warner, Motown, Virgin, Parlophone, Republic, Big Machine, Sony, Polydor, Big Beat, Def Jam,
MCA, Universal, Astralwerks, WM, Trinidad & Tobago, RCA, Columbia.
   26
      See https://musicbrainz.org/.



                                                    10
50 algorithmic playlist. Because we observe the top 200 streaming songs in each day of
our sample - and because the Global Top 50 playlist is based on the song’s past streaming
ranking - we can replicate the Global Top 50 playlist and additionally observe the level of
streams for songs that are ranked 51st and lower. We can therefore pay particular attention
to a possible discontinuity in streams around the 51st ranked song. In empirically exploring
the determinants of the Global Top 50, we noticed that playlist matched the previous day’s
streaming ranking for 133 days during 2017 and matched the streaming ranking of two days
earlier for 218 days. We use only these 351 of 365 days in our estimation, where we know
not only the Global Top 50 but also which songs would have been listed next had the Global
Top 50 list been longer.

For calculating the effect of playlist inclusion on streaming, we will ultimately be interested
in the time that songs spend on the playlists. Measuring this is complicated by two facts.
First, songs can enter and leave the playlists more than once. This is rare, except for the
Global Top 50, where songs can enter and leave the playlist according to the vagaries of the
streaming charts. Songs on this list have an average of 1.38 spells. Table 2 describes the
duration of the song spells on various Spotify lists in our data. For example, the mean spell
on Today’s Top Hits is 54.2 days, and the average number of spells per song is 1.004. The
mean spell on RapCaviar is 39 days (with an average of 1.07 spells per song), and the mean
spell for Viva Latino is 111 days (with 1.03 spells per song). A second complication arises
from the fact that some songs are already on the list when our playlist data begin, and some
are still on the lists as our data end, so our duration measures are censored. We can use
censored regression to estimate the underlying mean spell length. Table 2 reports these, and
as expected they are longer than the raw averages. Finally, we multiply the underlying mean
spell lengths by the number of spells per song.




4    Effect of List Inclusion on Streams

This section examines the effects of the Spotify’s largest global curated playlists, which tend
to include already-established songs and artists, on the volumes of streaming experienced
by included songs. We turn in Section 5 to effects of the New Music Friday playlists on the
performance of new songs, or product discovery.



                                              11
4.1    Effect of Inclusion on Global Playlists

Before turning to regression approaches, a simple look at some data is instructive. Figure 1
shows the evolution of playlist followers and U.S. daily streams for a song added to Today’s
Top Hits during 2017. The song “What Ifs” by Kane Brown was added to the Today’s Top
Hits playlist on October 5, 2017. On or about that date, the number of playlist followers for
the song jumped from 11.6 to 29.2 million. The number of playlist followers then fluctuated
about 30 million for about a month. On November 2, the song was removed from Today’s
Top Hits, and its number of followers fell from 30.8 million to just 10.8 million. In subse-
quent months the number of followers continued to generally decline, sometimes rapidly as
particular playlists removed the song.

The large and discontinuous jumps in followers for the Kane Brown song above, which
was added then removed from the most followed playlist on Spotify, suggest a method for
measuring the impact of playlist inclusion on streams for the global playlists. We can look at
the streams in countries where the song was already observable among the streaming songs
(among the top 200 daily songs for the country) prior to the song’s inclusion on the list. We
can then examine whether the streams change with the discontinuous change in followers.

The idea here borrows from the regression discontinuity approach (Lee and Lemieux, 2010).
Our assumption here is that a song’s underlying popularity evolves smoothly after release as
people hear of the song, and some little-followed playlists add the song. But when a list with
many followers adds the song, the song is “treated,” and the number of users exposed to the
song via playlists jumps discontinuously. Figure 1, which overlays U.S. daily streams against
the number of the song’s daily followers, provides much of the answer for this song. In June
2017, the song has nearly 200,000 daily streams, and the number rises steadily (around day
of the week fluctuations) to October. On October 5, when the number of followers jumps
from about 12 to nearly 30 million, the number of daily streams rises by roughly 100,000.
Later, on November 2, when the number of followers falls by almost 20 million, the number
of daily streams falls by about 100,000.

Approaching this systematically, we can pool song-countries and flexibly characterize streams




                                             12
around the event via the following model:



                                    sict = γτ + µic + πd + εict                                 (1)


Here, sict is a measure of streaming for song i in country c on day t, πd is a day of the week
effect, µic is a country-specific song fixed effect, and εict is an error term. Finally, τ refers to
the days since the event (or until the event when τ < 0). We can then plot the coefficients
γτ against τ .

Before turning to estimates, we need to clarify the designation of the event day. We observe
the date that a song enters a playlist, but we do not know what time the song entered. This
creates some challenges in defining the last untreated and first treated days, i.e. the last
full day in which the song is not on the playlist and the first day in which the song is on
the playlist all day. Our data are updated every 24 hours, so the appearance of a song on a
playlist on a particular day means that the song may have entered the list any time during
the previous 24 hours. This in turn leaves two possibilities. One is that the song entered
today, so that the apparent entry day is actually partially treated, while the day before its
appearance was fully untreated. The second possibility is that the song entered the list the
previous day. In that case, the entry day would be fully treated, while the previous day
would be partially treated. We cannot distinguish these two cases. We can be confident,
however, that two days before the entry day is fully untreated, while the day after the entry
day is fully treated. Hence, our shortest window for effect estimation compares two days
prior to the entry day to one day after. In our estimation below we set γτ = 0 on the last
definitely fully untreated day and τ = 3 for the first definitely fully treated day. We define
the drop window analogously.

The left panel of Figure 2 reports the results of this estimation for the event of addition
to Today’s Top Hits. A few things are clear. First, there is a pre-event trend: streams are
rising when songs are added to the playlist, although streams fall on the last pre-treatment
day. Second, while there is no apparent effect on the first potentially partially treated day
(the day prior to the song’s appearance on the list, with τ = 1), streaming rises somewhat
on the (potentially partially treated) entry day (τ = 2) and substantially by the first fully
treated day (τ = 3). Streams continue to rise for two more days, then begin rising at a
steady rate. The right panel of Figure 2 reports the analogous model for the removal events

                                                13
from Today’s Top Hits.

We estimate the effect as the coefficient on the first fully treated day relative to the level
of the last fully untreated day. (This may be conservative, as streams seem to be rising
relative to trend for a few days after the add event). We use data from countries that differ
substantially in size and therefore streaming volumes. To make the data comparable across
countries, we normalize streams by the countries’ annual total streams in our data. We then
multiply these figures by a million to put them in convenient units. We refer to this measure
as “normalized streams.”

Table 3 reports effects of additions and removals from the four curated global playlists.
We estimate that appearing on Today’s Top Hits daily raises streams by 3.346 normalized
streams (standard error=0.28). We estimate that removal from Today’s Top Hits reduces
normalized streams by 2.757 (0.09). What is the size of the benefit of being included among
Today’s Top Hits? Songs remain on Today’s Top Hits for an average of 74.4 days (see Table
2). If we assume that the effect evolves linearly, then the average daily effect is 3.052, the
                                                      3.346+2.757
average of the add and removal effects (=                  2
                                                                  ).   Today’s Top Hits is a global list,
so to calculate its effect on streams we multiply the average daily effect estimate by the
average spell length of its songs, by the average spell per song entering the playlist, and by
the global number of streams in millions. This is (3.052 streams per million) × (74.4 days)
× (1.004 spells) × (85,047 million streams).27 This yields 19.4 million additional streams,
which - given Spotify’s ostensible payments of $6 to $8.4 per thousand streams - translates
to between $116,397 and $162,956 in payments from Spotify alone. See Table 4, which also
presents estimates for the other global lists. The low end of these estimates vary between
$60,265 for RapCaviar and $303,047 for Viva Latino. The high end of the estimates varies
between $84,372 at RapCaviar and $424,265 at Viva Latino. We defer further discussion of
magnitudes until we discuss the effect of appearing on the Global Top 50 playlist.



4.2     Effect of the Global Top 50 Playlist

If we knew the algorithm underlying algorithmic lists, then we could use a discontinuity
approach to measure the impact of list inclusion on streams, comparing songs that just
   27
     While some songs appear more than once on Today’s Top Hits, the songs included in the sample used
in Table 3 only enter the list once. In the above calculations, we therefore assume that the effect of entering
and exiting the playlist is the same for songs that would enter the playlist more than once.


                                                      14
made the list to those that just missed inclusion. We do not know the list algorithms
generally, with the important exception of the most-played lists, such as the Global Top 50,
which shows the top 50 songs according to a previous day’s streams. Because we observe the
streams for the top 200 songs each day, we know which song would have been listed as the
Global Top 51st through 200th if the Global Top 50 list were longer, or if it were a Global
Top N.28 This allows us to ask whether the dropoff in streams is larger for the previous
day’s 51st song than for songs at nearby ranks. The effect of list inclusion will then show
up as a discontinuity in the relationship between streaming and the previous day’s ranks
between the ranks of 50 and 51.

To implement this flexibly, we estimate the relationship between the change in log streams
across sequential ranks and the rank, with the following model, estimated on the global data:


                                                         
                                                  srt
                                       log                     = θr + εrt ,                            (2)
                                                 sr−1,t

where srt is global streams at rank r on day t, θr is an estimated parameter, and εrt is
an error term. This delivers a sequence of coefficients θr showing the percent reduction in
streams as we move from the (r − 1)th ranked song to the r th ranked song. If we plot these
θr coefficients in the neighborhood of θ51 , is there a jump?

Figure 3 reports the result of estimating equation (2) using the daily global top 200 Spotify
streaming data. The decline in streams is roughly steady at just under 2 percent for ranks
40-50. The decline from 50 to 51 jumps to 6 percent, then returns to the roughly 2 percent
for ranks 52-60, and the difference is large relative to the confidence interval. Thus, being
                                                                            
                                                                         srt
on the list adds about 4 percent to streams, and a regression of log sr−1,t    on rank and an
indicator variable equal to one for the 51st rank gives a coefficient of -.047 (standard error
of .008).

How big is the overall effect of being on the Global Top 50? The average global streams for a
song at the 50th position on the Global Top 50 (and therefore ranked 50th the previous day)
is 1,242,513. Multiplying this by 0.047 gives 59,000 streams per day. The average duration
  28
     In our data, we observe that the Global Top 50 is based on either the streams from the previous day or
from two days ago. The Global Top 50 playlist matched the previous day’s streaming ranking for 133 days
and the streaming ranking of two days earlier for 218 days during 2017. We therefore observe the songs that
would have been ranked 51st through 200th for 351 days in 2017 (out of the 365).




                                                          15
on the Global Top 50 chart (correcting for censoring and the number of spells per song) is
51.24 days. If the effect of being on the list were the same across ranks - and therefore the
same for each day spent on the list - then we can calculate the overall effect of appearing on
the Global Top 50 as (0.047) × (1, 242, 513) × (51.24) = 3, 021, 867 streams. Songs on the
Global Top 50 playlist have an average of 92.8 million global streams, suggesting that 3.3
percent of their streams arise from being on the Global Top 50 chart.



4.3       Magnitudes and Mechanical Effects

To gauge the size of the effect estimates, it is useful to compare them to the effects that
would arise mechanically if streaming users spent all of their time using a playlist to which
they had subscribed. Take Today’s Top Hits, a playlist with 50 songs with 18.5 million
followers during the sample period. If followers did all of their listening through the playlist
and listened to all 50 songs per day, then entering the list would add 18.5 million daily
streams to each song on the list. With a bit of detective work we can estimate that Spotify
users listen to an average of roughly 7 songs per day. In 2016 Spotify reported paying $1.813
billion to rights holders.29 Spotify also reported paying between $6 and $8.4 per thousand
streams. This suggests between 216 and 302 billion worldwide Spotify streams during 2016,
or a midpoint of 259 billion streams. Spotify reported 100 million active users during 2016.30
Given 365 days in the year, this suggests that users listened to an average of 7.1 songs per
day.

Applying this average listening propensity, if Today’s Top Hits users spent their listening
time only with the list, then daily streams for listed songs would rise by about 2.6 million
     18.5
(=   ( 50 )
            )   streams per day. Our econometric estimate of the daily streams effect of being
        7

added to Today’s Top Hits is 259,531, which is 10 percent of the maximum mechanical effect
(see Table 4). For the other global curated lists, the share varies between 15 and 22 percent.
  29
       See https://www.statista.com/statistics/487332/spotify-royalty-payment-costs/.
  30
       See https://www.statista.com/statistics/367739/spotify-global-mau/.




                                                 16
4.4         Effects Outside of Spotify

We would like to know whether Spotify playlist inclusion has an impact outside of Spotify
streaming. One measure of sales we can obtain is the daily U.S. iTunes top 100 ranking
based on the volume of permanent downloads. We obtain these rankings for April 1-Dec 31,
2017, then match tracks with those added to Today’s Top Hits.31

We are able to match 82 tracks we observe added to Today’s Top Hits. Using the matching
tracks, we regress iTunes sales ranks on a track fixed effect and an indicator for the period
after the track is added to the playlist. We perform the estimation using windows from 2 to
10 days around the add date. If being added to the playlists stimulated sales of the track
at iTunes, we would expect a negative coefficient, reflecting an improving rank. Instead,
the coefficients are all positive. They are also significant, beginning with the specifications
including 3 days on either side of the add event. This indicates that sales are dropping,
relative to other songs, on iTunes even as songs are added to Today’s Top Hits. Hence,
we do not find any evidence of an impact of Spotify playlist decisions on popularity - and
therefore revenue generation - outside of Spotify.




5         New Music Friday Playlists and Product and Artist
          Discovery

Above we documented large and significant impacts of Spotify’s playlist decisions on the
success of songs added to major global curated playlists. As reflected in the fact that those
songs had streaming histories prior to their addition to playlists, the songs added to the
major global playlists are widely known prior to their addition to those playlists. “Product
discovery” is an elastic term. Even a song well known to some people must be “discovered”
before being adopted by others. Hence, even the major global playlists promote discovery
of songs and artists. That said, the promotion of new music stands as a potentially different
sort of product discovery, at least in degree if not also in kind. Moreover, the promotion
of music that is not only new but is also by artists who are themselves new to the market
offers a greater degree of product discovery that the promotion of widely known or even new
    31
         The iTunes rankings are from itunescharts.net/us/charts/songs/2017/.



                                                   17
songs by known artists. With these distinctions in mind, we turn now to analyses of Spotify
playlists that explicitly promote new music, the New Music Friday lists.

Each week, Spotify constructs a rank-ordered list of 50 new songs for each country in which
it operates. These New Music Friday lists differ across country, albeit with overlap, so that
across our 26 countries, Spotify recommended an average of 397 distinct songs per week
during 2017. Of these songs, about 17 percent become successful in the sense of appearing
in at least one country’s top 200. This dwarfs the unconditional success rate. Of the 934,265
songs entering Spotify in 2017, only 19,055, or 2 percent, entered the daily streaming top 200
in at least one of our sample countries. This, in turn, suggests a benefit of the New Music
Friday lists in reducing the costs consumers face in discovering which music to sample.

Some of the New Music Friday recommendations are for songs by already-known and suc-
cessful artists, with whom listeners are already acquainted. Other recommendations are for
songs by new and previously unknown artists, raising the possibility that these lists help
with artist discovery. Songs almost always arrive on the New Music Friday list the day they
are released, so we cannot use the before and after approach employed for the global lists
above. Instead, we can ask how eventual streaming varies with songs’ New Music Friday
ranks. As a way to introduce our approach, we begin by showing the share of songs at each
New Music Friday rank that ultimately appear in the recommended countries’ top 200 daily
streaming charts. Figure 4 summarizes these relationships for the top 20 recommended songs
using all of the country-weeks in the sample.

Songs with better ranks on the New Music Friday playlists are more likely to appear on the
daily Spotify top 200 streaming charts. Close to 85 percent of the songs ranked #1 on a
country’s New Music Friday lists appear on the country’s streaming chart, as do over 80
percent of those ranked #2. The share charting declines monotonically in rank, reaching
about 10 percent for songs ranked 20 (or, not shown, lower). We observe a similar relationship
between recommendation rank and the share of songs appearing in the top 100, as well as in
the top 50, 25, or 10 (not shown). In short, songs with top 10 recommendations have some
chance of appearing in the top 200 or even the top 100, while songs recommended outside
the top 20 are rather unlikely to achieve even the top 200.

Figure 4 shows that songs with higher-ranked recommendations tend to achieve higher
streaming ranks. This is suggestive that high recommendation ranks matter for performance.


                                             18
But whether higher-ranked recommendations actually cause better streaming performance
is another matter requiring different evidence. That is, the relationships in Figure 4 reflect
some combination of a causal impact of New Music Friday list rank choices and the ability
of list curators to predict which songs are headed for success regardless of the New Music
Friday playlist ranks.



5.1    Song Fixed Effect Approach

The New Music Friday lists differ across countries, and this creates a possible empirical
strategy for measuring the impact of New Music Friday ranks on success. Figure 5 provides
an illustration of the cross-country variation in New Music Friday rankings, comparing the
U.S. and Canadian New Music Friday lists released on December 10, 2017. The rankings are
positively correlated, but they are substantially different. If we take the view that countries
have similar tastes but are treated with different rankings, then we can measure the effects
of New Music Friday rankings by comparing the streaming performance of the same songs
in different countries where they have received different New Music Friday rankings.

Figure 6 shows the U.S.-Canada rank differential distribution for the entire year. Of the
songs appearing on both lists, the mean and median differential is roughly zero, but there
is variation. The question asked by this measurement approach is whether the songs ranked
higher in, say, the U.S. than Canada perform systematically better in the U.S. than Canada.
Using a binary measure of whether a song (eventually) appears in the country’s daily top 200
streaming chart as the outcome, the song-specific differential can take one of three values:
1, 0, and -1. Figure 7 shows the relationship between the rank differential on the horizontal
axis and the smoothed outcome measure. Songs with a better rank in the U.S. are more
likely to make the Spotify streaming charts in the U.S. than Canada. This is preliminary
evidence that differential New Music Friday rankings give rise to differential stream success.

                                                                       200
To implement this approach for all countries via a regression, define Dic  to be a binary
measure of whether song i appears among the daily top 200 streaming songs in country c at
                                                                       r
some point after entering the New Music Friday playlist. Next, define δic as a dummy that
is 1 when song i in country c is ranked r th on the country’s New Music Friday list.

                                                               200         r
As noted above in the discussion of Figure 4, a regression of Dic  on the δic terms does


                                              19
not indicate the effect of rank on streaming. The unobserved quality of the song - to the
econometrician - affects both rank and streams. Presumably, songs that are good will have
both high placements on the list and high streaming. If we had a measure of each song’s
quality, then we could control for this directly, and then measure the impact of the New
Music Friday ranks on streaming. While we do not observe song quality, we do observe
whether the song appears in the Spotify top 200 streaming charts as well as the song’s New
Music Friday rank in different countries. Hence, we can include a song fixed effect to control
for its quality, then ask whether the song is more likely to appear in the streaming charts in
countries where it has a more favorable recommendation. That is, we can estimate



                                  200
                                 Dic  = αr δic
                                            r
                                               + µc + ηi + εic .                             (3)


In this setup ηi is the unobserved quality of song i. Under the assumption that songs have
similar appeal in different countries, or that ηi is the same across countries, the coefficients
αr show how ultimate streaming success varies with position on the New Music Friday list.
That is, αr provides evidence on the causal impact of higher recommendation ranks.

Figure 8 reports the estimated parameters αr (with α50 normalized to 0) from two specifica-
tions, with and without song fixed effects. The line labelled “OLS,” from the specification
without song fixed effects, echoes the “top 200” bars in Figure 4. The “Song Fixed Effects”
line comes from a specification including song fixed effects, and the size of the effect of a
top ranking is smaller with the song FE included. Songs with a number 1 rank are over
80 percentage points more likely to appear on the streaming charts than songs ranked 50th .
After including song fixed effects, this differential shrinks to just below 50 percentage points.
This finding is consistent with the idea that some part of the raw relationship between ranks
and streams arises because curators give favorable ranks to songs they expect consumers
will like, rather than a causal impact of the New Music Friday playlist ranking on streams.
The effect falls sharply with rank, to about 18 percentage points at rank 10 and to about
4 percentage points at rank 20. (We provide evidence on statistical significance in Table 5
below).

Even controlling for song quality with song fixed effects, two main threats to identification
remain. The first is that countries have different tastes, in which case perceived song quality
would differ across countries, and a single song fixed effect that is common across countries

                                               20
would not control for song quality. A second challenge is that country-specific New Music
Friday lists will differ across countries for endogenous reasons. We explore these in turn.

The song fixed effects approach assumes that unobserved song quality is the same across
places where the song receives different ranks. This puts some burden on places having
similar preferences. We deal with this by grouping countries with a common language, with
an English-speaking group consisting of the US, Canada, and Great Britain and a Spanish-
speaking group consisting of Spain, Mexico, and Colombia. We can verify the similarity of
these countries’ musical tastes, based on Spotify listening. Using the 2017 streaming data
to create a vector for each country with the share of streams for each artist, we see that
the correlations between linguistically similar countries’ vectors are among the highest. The
correlation for the US and Canada is 0.95, and the correlation for Mexico and Spain is 0.93.
We then re-estimate (3) using only similar countries.

Rather than report a proliferation of figures, we summarize our results by estimating (3) with
three rank dummy variables (ranks 1-5, ranks 6-10, and ranks 11-30) rather than 49. Table
5 reports these results, starting with OLS and the baseline song fixed effects approaches in
columns (1) and (2). Columns (3) and (4) report specifications using English (US, Canada,
and Great Britain) and Spanish-language (Spain, Mexico, and Colombia) country groups,
respectively, and results are quite similar to the baseline.32 Effects for ranks 1-5 are large,
effects for ranks 6-10 are smaller but significant, and effects for ranks 11-30 are small and
insignificant.

This still leaves a concern that ranks are endogenously different across countries. Perhaps
the most salient concern arises from domestic music, which one might expect to be both
better-ranked on its home-county New Music Friday list, as well as better-performing on its
domestic streaming chart but not because the better ranking causes the better performance.
The New Music Friday lists have elevated ranks for domestic music: on average domestic
music makes up 15 percent more of the New Music Friday listings at home than abroad. To
avoid this problem, we re-estimate the model excluding domestic music. Results, in column
(5) of Table 5, are very similar to the baseline results.
  32
       We also obtain very similar results using only the US and Canada, and Spain and Mexico, respectively.




                                                     21
5.2    New Songs and Artists

While all of the songs entering the New Music Friday lists are new, many are by established
artists. While the popularization of a new song, even if by an established artist, requires
product discovery on the part of curators and consumers, ascertaining whether the New
Music Friday list can promote discovery of works by new artists is of separate interest.
In order to study artist discovery we would like to estimate the New Music Friday effect
separately for artists who are not already widely known to consumers. To this end we re-
estimate the model including only songs by less-well-known artists. Column (6) of Table
5 includes only independent-label artists without streams in the 2016 data, and results are
similar. Column (7) includes only the demonstrably new artists, those who not only have
no streams in 2016 but whose first recording appears in 2017. This reduces the sample size
sharply, to 2,221. Still, results remain quite similar, although standard errors rise. Column
(8) uses only the new artists and excludes domestic music. Results are again quite similar.
Finally, column (9) uses new independent artists, again with similar results. We conclude
that the New Music Friday playlists aid in the discovery of new artists.



5.3    Instrumental Variables Approach

Even with domestic music excluded, one can be concerned that the differential rankings of,
say, French songs in the US and Germany may endogenously reflect differential curatorial
expectations about tastes in the two countries. To get around this we would require a source
of variation in the rank of particular songs across countries that is unrelated to the appeal
of the song.

Home bias, along with different-sized home markets, gives us a possible strategy. Suppose
there is home bias in the New Music Friday lists, so that a disproportionate share of the songs
on the New Music Friday lists are domestic in each country. Suppose further that because
of differences in market size, there are different amounts of domestic music in each market.
Then non-domestic music would receive worse ranks in larger markets, simply because it
was more likely to be pushed down the ranking by domestic music. For our purpose, this
would give us a reason why particular songs would achieve different New Music Friday ranks
in different countries that is unrelated to the appeal of the song in the two countries.


                                              22
To explore this strategy, we use the total Spotify streams (among the top 200) as a measure
of market size for each country. Using only the non-domestic songs, we then run a first-stage
regression of the songs’ New Music Friday ranks on song fixed effects and the music market
size variable (total streams in the country). The coefficient on the market size variable
indicates whether a given song has a worse (higher) rank in a country with a larger market,
and the coefficient is large and significant (see Table 6).

We then implement this directly in a regression of our streaming measure (whether a song
appears in the top 200 on song fixed effects as well as its New Music Friday rank, instru-
menting the rank with the market size measure. We have only one instrument, so we can
only use one measure of New Music Friday rank. We explore both the level and the log of
the New Music Friday rank.

Columns (1) and (5) of Table 6 report OLS regressions of the streaming measure on the
level and the log of the New Music Friday rank, respectively, without fixed effects. The
resulting coefficients reflect both the determinants of ranks and their effects. Columns (2)
and (6) then include song fixed effects, and - as in our earlier exercises - the coefficient on
rank falls by roughly half. Columns (3) and (7) report the first stage regressions of the
level and the log of the New Music Friday rank on song fixed effects as well as market
size, estimated with robust standard errors. The market size measure is positively and
significantly related to rank, indicating that non-domestic songs have worse (higher) ranks
in countries with larger music markets. Columns (4) and (8) continue to include song fixed
effects and also instrument the rank measures using market size. Robust standard errors
are reported. Coefficients are similar to the song FE estimates, although standard errors
are much larger, and the coefficients are slightly smaller in absolute value. We take the
similarity of the IV estimates to the FE estimates to indicate that our basic estimates do
not arise from endogenous New Music Friday ranks.



5.4    Effects over Time

Songs remain on the New Music Friday lists for only seven days. To the extent that listeners
use the New Music Friday playlists as a utility for playing recommended songs, we would
expect a clear effect during the week that songs remain on the list. Effects could continue
past the time on the list, for example via the information communicated by list inclusion.

                                               23
Here we explore whether New Music Friday effects are persistent. We adapt the estimation
                                                                          200
framework of equation (3) slightly to estimate effects over time. Define Dicτ as a binary
measure that is 1 if song i appears in the streaming top 200 in country c τ days after
appearance on country c’s New Music Friday list:



                                 200
                                Dicτ = ατr δic
                                            r
                                               + µc + ηi + εicτ .                          (4)


Then the parameter ατr indicates the additional propensity to be among the top 200 streaming
songs τ days after being added to the list.

Figures 9 and 10 reports three sets of estimates for different groups of ranks. Figure 9 covers
only the first 14 days after the appearance of the New Music Friday list. The leftmost figure
shows how the effect of appearing in the top 5 varies across days since appearance. The
center figure repeats the analysis for songs ranked 6-10, and the rightmost left figure reports
it for songs ranked 11-30.

As Figure 9 shows, there are large and immediate effects of songs appearing on the New
Music Friday lists. These effects rise for the first four days, then decline. There is no sharp
decline after day 7, when the songs leave the lists. And indeed, as Figure 10 shows, the
effects persist for 100 days after appearance on the list, indicating that the effects of the
New Music Friday lists are not merely mechanical. In short, there are large, persistent, and
significant effects for songs in the top 5 and large but smaller effects for songs ranked 6-10.
Effects for songs ranked 11-30 are small.



5.5    Aggregate Effects on Streams

We are interested in impacts of list inclusion on the total number of streams. We can
construct measures of country-level streams for each song, subject to the caveat that we only
observe streams when a song is among the daily top 200. Hence, our measure understates
streaming, particularly for lower-ranked songs that are more commonly outside the top 200.

Figure 11 aggregates the effect over time, reporting the aggregate result by rank. A number
1 ranking adds about 550 normalized streams (corresponding to about 14,000,000 additional
streams for a song ranked #1 on the U.S. chart). A song ranked #5 gets over 80 additional

                                               24
normalized streams, or about 2.1 million additional U.S. streams for a #5 ranking on the
U.S. New Music Friday playlist. The effects peak within a few days after appearance on the
New Music Friday list.

With Spotify’s ostensible payments of $6 and $8.4 per thousand streams, the benefit of being
ranked #1 on the U.S. New Music Friday playlist is worth between $83,600 and $117,100,
including only the direct benefits arising from Spotify payments.




6    Which Types of Songs Do Spotify Playlists Promote?



Rights holders in the independent record label community have long lamented their limited
access to radio airplay (Thomson, 2009). Even in the streaming era, with its relaxed distri-
bution bottlenecks, concerns remain. It is not uncommon to read assertions that playlists are
“controlled by three major labels: Universal Music Group, Sony Music Entertainment, and
Warner Music Group, a group that collectively owns a very substantial ownership share of
not just Spotify, but other platforms like VEVO.” In this section we descriptively explore a
few questions relevant to these ostensible concerns, asking which sorts of songs, by label type
and national origin, are available and commonly streamed at Spotify. Further, which sorts
of songs appear on the global curated and the country-specific New Music Friday playlists?

As Table 7 shows, among the 19,055 songs that we observe streaming in the 2017 country-
specific sample, just under half (measured by either listings or distinct songs) are from
independent record labels. The independent share of streams, however, is much smaller,
at just over a quarter. U.S. origin songs make up a quarter of listings and songs in the
country-level sample but account for 59 percent of streams. Domestic songs make up just
over a quarter of listings, distinct songs, and streams in the country-level data on average.

The song sample made up of the global daily top 200 includes only 1,764 songs. Of these,
independent songs account for a quarter of the tracks and just under a fifth of streams. U.S.
origin songs account for 68 percent of these tracks and 71 percent of streams.

How about the playlists? Independent-label songs account for well under half of the listings
and distinct songs at the global curated lists, while US-origin tracks account for roughly

                                              25
three quarters or more of the listings and songs, as well as streams, appearing on the global
curated lists.

The New Music Friday lists have different coverage. First, they include greater independent
music representation, just over half of the tracks overall. Second, they include less US-
origin representation, accounting for roughly a third of listings and songs. Finally, domestic
music makes up just under a fifth of the New Music Friday listings and songs. Given the
large number of origin countries in the world, this average reflects a substantial amount of
home bias. On average, origin repertoires make up 15 percentage points more of the New
Music Friday lists in their home countries, relative to their origin shares outside of the home
country.




7     Conclusion

Streaming has emerged as an important channel for music consumption, and Spotify is the
most prominent platform, with a higher market share than was held by retailers or radio
stations in the digital era. This paper has measured the power of Spotify to influence
song success with its general playlists, and we find clear evidence that Spotify has power to
influence consumption decisions. We document large and statistically significant effects. The
major global playlists raise streams for prominent songs substantially. Getting on Today’s
Top Hits is worth almost 20 million additional streams, which translates to $116,000 and
$163,000 in additional revenue from Spotify alone. Playlists also affect the success of new
songs and new artists. Getting on the top of the New Music Friday playlist in the U.S. is
worth roughly 14 million streams ($84,000-$117,000). Making the Global Top 50 chart raises
streams by about 59,000 per day, or by about 3 million overall. Playlists have important
impacts on which songs are heavily streamed. The major global lists tend to promote
major-label and US-origin music, while the New Music Friday lists provide heavier coverage
of independent and domestic music.

The fact that playlists have substantial impacts on song success should be of interest for
both music industry participants and observers of platforms more generally. Growing con-
centration in the streaming market, as well as other markets dominated by one or a few
players, may create a need for scrutiny of how platforms exercise their power.


                                              26
References
Adomavicius, G. and A. Tuzhilin (2005): “Toward the next generation of recommender
 systems: A survey of the state-of-the-art and possible extensions,” IEEE transactions on
 knowledge and data engineering, 17, 734–749.

Aguiar, L. (2017): “Let the music play? Free streaming and its effects on digital music
 consumption,” Information Economics and Policy, 41, 1–14.

Arrington, M. (2009):      “This Is Quite Possibly The Spotify Cap Table.”
 Techcrunch, https://techcrunch.com/2009/08/07/this-is-quite-possibly-the-sp
 otify-cap-table/, August 7.

Bertoni, S. (2013): “How Spotify Made Lorde A Pop Superstar,” Forbes, https://www.f
 orbes.com/sites/stevenbertoni/2013/11/26/how-spotify-made-lorde-a-pop-sup
 erstar/, November 26.

Cookson, R. (2015): “Spotify bans ‘payola’ on playlists,” Financial Times, https://www
 .ft.com/content/af1728ca-4740-11e5-af2f-4d6e0e5eda22, August 20.

Cornière, A. and G. Taylor (2014): “Integration and search engine bias,” The RAND
 Journal of Economics, 45, 576–597.

Datta, H., G. Knox, and B. J. Bronnenberg (2017): “Changing their tune: How con-
 sumers’ adoption of online streaming affects music consumption and discovery,” Marketing
 Science.

DellaVigna, S. and J. Hermle (2017): “Does Conflict of Interest Lead to Biased Cov-
 erage? Evidence from Movie Reviews,” Review of Economic Studies, 84, 1510–1550.

Dertouzos, J. N. (2008): “Radio Airplay and the Record Industry: An Economic Analy-
 sis,” National Association of Broadcasters, USA.

Edelman, B. (2011): “Bias in search results: Diagnosis and response,” Indian JL & Tech.,
 7, 16.

Hagiu, A. and B. Jullien (2011): “Why do intermediaries divert search?” The RAND
 Journal of Economics, 42, 337–362.

Ip, G. (2018): “The Antitrust Case Against Facebook, Google and Amazon,” Wall Street
  Journal, https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-antitrust-case-against-facebook-g
  oogle-amazon-and-apple-1516121561, January 16.

Lee, D. S. and T. Lemieux (2010): “Regression discontinuity designs in economics,”
  Journal of economic literature, 48, 281–355.

Lewis, R., J. M. Rao, and D. H. Reiley (2015): “Measuring the effects of advertising:
  The digital frontier,” in Economic Analysis of the Digital Economy, University of Chicago
  Press, 191–218.

Liebowitz, S. J. (2004): “The elusive symbiosis: The impact of radio on the record
  industry,” Review of Economic Research on Copyright Issues, 93–118.




                                            27
Lindvall, H. (2009): “Behind the music: The real reason why the major labels love Spo-
  tify,” The Guardian, https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/aug/17/
  major-labels-spotify, August 17.

McBride, S. (2014): “WRITTEN DIRECT TESTIMONY OF STEPHAN MCBRIDE
 (On behalf of Pandora Media, Inc),” http://www.loc.gov/crb/rate/14-CRB-0001-WR
 /statements/Pandora/13_Written_Direct_Testimony_of_Stephan_McBride_with_F
 igures_and_Tables_and_Appendices_PUBLIC_pdf.pdf, Filed with Copyright Royalty
 Board, Washington, DC.

Nayman, L. (2012): “Rock ‘n’ Roll Payola: Dick Clark and Alan Freed.” In These
 Times, http://inthesetimes.com/article/13100/rock_n_roll_payola_dick_clark
 _and_alan_freed, April 24.

Peoples, G. (2016): “How a Licensing Deal Between Merlin and Pandora Cast a Tall
 Shadow Over New Webcasting Rates.” Billboard, https://www.billboard.com/articl
 es/business/6889363/merlin-pandora-webcasting-iv-copyright-royalty-board-
 warner-iheartradio, February 25.

Porzecanski, K. (2018): “Soros Says Google, Facebook Are Near-Monopolies That Spur
 Addiction.” Bloomberg Business Week, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/
 2018-01-25/soros-says-google-facebook-are-near-monopolies-spur-addiction,
 January 25.

Reinstein, D. A. and C. M. Snyder (2005): “The influence of expert reviews on con-
 sumer demand for experience goods: A case study of movie critics,” The journal of indus-
 trial economics, 53, 27–51.

Reuter, J. and E. Zitzewitz (2006): “Do ads influence editors? Advertising and bias
 in the financial media,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 197–227.

Richardson, M. and S. Wilkie (2015): “Faddists, enthusiasts and Canadian divas:
  broadcasting quotas and the supply response,” Review of International Economics, 23,
  404–424.

Rysman, M. (2009): “The economics of two-sided markets,” Journal of Economic Perspec-
 tives, 23, 125–43.

Salganik, M. J., P. S. Dodds, and D. J. Watts (2006): “Experimental study of
  inequality and unpredictability in an artificial cultural market,” science, 311, 854–856.

Sorensen, A. T. (2007): “Bestseller lists and product variety,” The journal of industrial
  economics, 55, 715–738.

Thomson, K. (2009): “Same Old Song,” Future of Music Coalition, https://futureofmu
 sic.org/article/research/same-old-song, April 29.

United States Securities and Exchange Commission (2018): “Form F-1 Registra-
 tion Statement, Spotify Technology, S.A.” https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/dat
 a/1639920/000119312518063434/d494294df1.htm#rom494294_14.

Waldfogel, J. (2017): “How Digitization Has Created a Golden Age of Music, Movies,
 Books, and Television,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31, 195–214.


                                            28
Zentner, A., M. Smith, and C. Kaya (2013): “How video rental patterns change as
  consumers move online,” Management Science, 59, 2622–2634.

Zhu, F. and Q. Liu (2016): “Competing with complementors: An empirical look at
  amazon.com,” .




                                      29
A    Figures and Tables

                  Followers and Streams After Inclusion on Today’s Top Hits
                                                                                What Ifs by Kane Brown
                              .5
                                                                                                                                                                             30
                          .45
                                                                                                                                                                             25




                                                                                                                                                                                  Followers (millions)
         Streams (millions)




                              .4

                          .35                                                                                                                                                20

                              .3
                                                                                                                                                                             15
                          .25
                                                                                                                                                                             10
                              .2

                          .15                                                                                                                                                5
                               17

                                         7

                                                  7

                                                            7

                                                                      7

                                                                               7

                                                                                        7

                                                                                                 7

                                                                                                          7

                                                                                                                   7

                                                                                                                            7

                                                                                                                                     7

                                                                                                                                              7

                                                                                                                                                       7

                                                                                                                                                                7

                                                                                                                                                                         7
                                        01

                                              01

                                                        01

                                                                  01

                                                                           01

                                                                                    01

                                                                                             01

                                                                                                      01

                                                                                                               01

                                                                                                                        01

                                                                                                                                 01

                                                                                                                                          01

                                                                                                                                                   01

                                                                                                                                                            01

                                                                                                                                                                     01
                              20

                                    n2

                                             n2

                                                       l2

                                                                 l2

                                                                          g2

                                                                                   g2

                                                                                            p2

                                                                                                     p2

                                                                                                              t2

                                                                                                                       t2

                                                                                                                                t2

                                                                                                                                         v2

                                                                                                                                                  v2

                                                                                                                                                           c2

                                                                                                                                                                    c2
                ay




                                                   ju

                                                             ju




                                                                                                          oc

                                                                                                                   oc

                                                                                                                            oc

                                                                                                                                     no

                                                                                                                                              no

                                                                                                                                                       de

                                                                                                                                                                de
                                   ju

                                         ju




                                                                      au

                                                                               au

                                                                                        se

                                                                                                 se
                                                  09

                                                            23
         m

                               11

                                        25




                                                                                                      01

                                                                                                               15

                                                                                                                        29
                                                                                    03

                                                                                             17




                                                                                                                                 12

                                                                                                                                          26

                                                                                                                                                   10

                                                                                                                                                            24
                                                                  06

                                                                           20
        28




                                                                                                     Date

                                                        Streams                                   Followers                                   Playlist Inclusion



    Figure 1: Daily Followers and US Streams for a Song added to Today’s Top Hits.




                                                                                                      30
                                                                          Today’s Top Hits Events
                                                                     Add                                                                           Drop
                                          7




                                                                                                                          4
                                          6




                                                                                                                          3
                                          5




                                                                                                                          2
                                          4




                                                                                                                          1
                                          3
                     normalized streams




                                                                                                     normalized streams
                                                                                                                          0
                                          2




                                                                                                                          −1
                                          1
                                          0




                                                                                                                          −2
                                          −1




                                                                                                                          −3
                                          −2




                                                                                                                          −4
                                          −3




                                                                                                                          −5
                                          −4




                                                                                                                          −6
                                          −5




                                                                                                                          −7
                                          −6




                                                                                                                          −3 −8
                                          −20
                                          −28
                                          −26
                                          −24
                                          −22
                                          −10
                                          −18
                                          −16
                                          −14
                                          −12
                                           −80
                                           −6
                                           −4
                                           −2
                                             0
                                             2
                                             4
                                             6
                                           108
                                           12
                                           14
                                           16
                                           18
                                           20
                                           22
                                           24
                                           26
                                           28
                                           30




                                                                                                                          −20
                                                                                                                          −28
                                                                                                                          −26
                                                                                                                          −24
                                                                                                                          −22
                                                                                                                          −10
                                                                                                                          −18
                                                                                                                          −16
                                                                                                                          −14
                                                                                                                          −12
                                                                                                                           −80
                                                                                                                           −6
                                                                                                                           −4
                                                                                                                           −2
                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                           108
                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                           18
                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                           22
                                                                                                                           24
                                                                                                                           26
                                                                                                                           28
                                                                                                                           30
                                          −3




                                                            days around add                                                                   days around drop

          Note: 0 days around the event date corresponds to the last fully untreated day. 3 days after the event date
          corresponds to the first fully treated day. Observations within the gray bands therefore correspond to partially
          treated days.



Figure 2: Normalized streams before and after add and removal events at Today’s Top Hits.




                                                            Global Top 50 and Rank Streaming Gradient
                                                .02
           log(streams(r)/streams(r−1))




                                                 0


                                               −.02


                                               −.04


                                               −.06


                                               −.08


                                                −.1
                                                      40
                                                           41
                                                                42
                                                                     43
                                                                           44
                                                                                45
                                                                                     46
                                                                                          47
                                                                                               48
                                                                                                    49
                                                                                                                          50
                                                                                                                               51
                                                                                                                                    52
                                                                                                                                         53
                                                                                                                                              54
                                                                                                                                                   55
                                                                                                                                                        56
                                                                                                                                                             57
                                                                                                                                                                  58
                                                                                                                                                                       59
                                                                                                                                                                            60




                                                                                          Global Top 50 Ranking

                                                                       estimate                                                               Upper 95% confidence limit
                                                                       Upper 95% confidence limit




                                                                                          Figure 3:




                                                                                                31
                                                    New Music Friday Rank and Spotify Chart Appearance
                                               .9
Share Appearing in Daily Spotify Charts
                                               .8


                                               .7


                                               .6


                                               .5


                                               .4


                                               .3


                                               .2


                                               .1


                                               0
                                                            1      2    3       4     5      6        7   8     9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

                                                                                                          top 200                           top 100



Figure 4: New Music Friday Ranking and Spotify Chart Appearance.




                                                                  New Music Friday Ranks in US and Canada
                                                                                                             Dec 10, 2017
                                          60
New Music Friday Rank in the U.S.




                                          50
                                          45
                                          40
                                                                                                  The Wombats
                                          35                                                                                       Glades
                                                                                                                                                      Moose Blood
                                          30
                                          25                                              Ty Dolla
                                                                                                                              Aaron Carter
                                                                                                Lost Kings
                                                                 Delaney Jane
                                          20                                                                    Russ

                                          15                                                                  Moon Taxi
                                                         Eminem
                                                                                    R3HAB
                                          10                                                  6ix9ine
                                                                            Tove Lo
                                                                                                          The Neighbourhood
                                           5                     Migos
                                                                      G−Eazy
                                                        Camila Cabello
                                           1                           Camila Cabello

                                                    1        5         10           15           20        25          30     35       40       45    50            60
                                                                                          New Music Friday Rank in Canada
                                                Note: 60 indicates not ranked.




                                                        Figure 5: New Music Friday Ranks in US and Canada.




                                                                                                                32
                                                              US−Canada New Music same−song rank differentials

                                                       .08
                                                       .06
          Density
           .04                                         .02
                                                       0




                                                              −40                 −20             0               20               40
                                                                                          New Music rank difference



                         Figure 6: New Music Friday Rank Differentials for US and Canada.




                                                                        US−Canada New Music Friday Rank
                                                                            and Top 200 Differentials
          Differential Prob. of appearing in top 200




                                                         1                                                                                  .2
                                                                                                                                                  Smoothed Differential Prob(top 200)




                                                        .5                                                                                  .1




                                                         0                                                                                  0




                                                       −.5                                                                                  −.1




                                                        −1                                                                                  −.2
                                                             −50     −40    −30     −20    −10    0     10     20       30   40        50
                                                                                  New Music Friday rank difference

                                                                    Differential prob(top 200)               Smoothed        −50, 50



Figure 7: US-Canada New Music Friday Rank Differentials and Probability of Appearing in
Top 200.




                                                                                                 33
                                                                                     NM rank effects − Overall
                                                 .9
              Share Appearing in Daily Top 200
                                                 .8


                                                 .7


                                                 .6


                                                 .5


                                                 .4


                                                 .3


                                                 .2


                                                 .1


                                                  0
                                                       1
                                                       2
                                                       3
                                                       4
                                                       5
                                                       6
                                                       7
                                                       8
                                                       9
                                                      10
                                                      11
                                                      12
                                                      13
                                                      14
                                                      15
                                                      16
                                                      17
                                                      18
                                                      19
                                                      20
                                                      21
                                                      22
                                                      23
                                                      24
                                                      25
                                                      26
                                                      27
                                                      28
                                                      29
                                                      30
                                                      31
                                                      32
                                                      33
                                                      34
                                                      35
                                                      36
                                                      37
                                                      38
                                                      39
                                                      40
                                                      41
                                                      42
                                                      43
                                                      44
                                                      45
                                                      46
                                                      47
                                                      48
                                                      49
                                                                                                   New Music rank

                                                                                           OLS                      Song Fixed Effects



Figure 8: Effect of Appearing in New Music Friday on Top 200 Streaming Chart Appearance.




                                    Effect of Appearing in New Music Friday on Top 200 Charts
                                                                                          by Rank − First 14 Days
                                                                        Top 5                           Top 6−10                            Top 11−30
                                                      .35
          Share in Daily Top 200




                                                       .3


                                                      .25


                                                       .2


                                                      .15


                                                       .1


                                                      .05


                                                       0
                                                            0
                                                                2
                                                                    4
                                                                        6
                                                                            8
                                                                                10
                                                                                     12
                                                                                          14

                                                                                               0
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                               14

                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                  14




                                                                                           Days since appearance
                                                                    Parameter Estimate                                        Upper 95% Confidence Interval
                                                                    Lower 95% Confidence Interval

                                                 Graphs by Rank




     Figure 9: Effect Over Time of Appearing in New Music Friday - First 14 Days.




                                                                                                       34
                       Effect of Appearing in New Music Friday on Top 200 Charts
                                                                       by Rank
                                             Top 5                       Top 6−10                  Top 11−30
                             .35


                              .3
   Share in Daily Top 200




                             .25


                              .2


                             .15


                              .1


                             .05


                                  0


                            −.05
                                         0
                                       10
                                       20
                                       30
                                       40
                                       50
                                       60
                                       70
                                       80
                                       90
                                         0

                                                                     0
                                                                   10
                                                                   20
                                                                   30
                                                                   40
                                                                   50
                                                                   60
                                                                   70
                                                                   80
                                                                   90
                                                                     0

                                                                                              0
                                                                                            10
                                                                                            20
                                                                                            30
                                                                                            40
                                                                                            50
                                                                                            60
                                                                                            70
                                                                                            80
                                                                                            90
                                                                                              0
                                      10




                                                                  10




                                                                                           10
                                                               Days since appearance
                                             Parameter Estimate                       Upper 95% Confidence Interval
                                             Lower 95% Confidence Interval

                            Graphs by Rank



                            Figure 10: Effect Over Time of Appearing in New Music Friday.




                                      New music rank and cumulative additional streams
                            650

                            600

                            550

                            500
       Normalized streams




                            450

                            400

                            350

                            300

                            250

                            200

                            150

                            100

                             50

                              0

                            −50
                                       1
                                       2
                                       3
                                       4
                                       5
                                       6
                                       7
                                       8
                                       9
                                      10
                                      11
                                      12
                                      13
                                      14
                                      15
                                      16
                                      17
                                      18
                                      19
                                      20
                                      21
                                      22
                                      23
                                      24
                                      25
                                      26
                                      27
                                      28
                                      29
                                      30
                                      31
                                      32
                                      33
                                      34
                                      35
                                      36
                                      37
                                      38
                                      39
                                      40
                                      41
                                      42
                                      43
                                      44
                                      45
                                      46
                                      47
                                      48
                                      49




                                                                     New Music Rank

                                              Parameter estimate                       Upper 95% confidence limit
                                              Lower 95% confidence limit



Figure 11: Effect of Appearing in New Music Friday on Normalized Streams.




                                                                         35
Table 1: Total Sample
Streams during 2017.†


Country              Streams

Brazil         6,663.5
Canada         3,107.3
Switzerland     475.0
Colombia        815.8
Germany        5,931.7
Denmark        1,486.5
Spain          3,671.8
Finland        1,223.8
France         3,060.8
Great Britain 7,018.6
Hong Kong       289.8
Indonesia      1,253.4
Iceland         79.4
Italy          2,322.6
Mexico         6,186.0
Malaysia        637.4
Netherlands    3,390.9
Norway         1,967.5
Philippines    3,253.6
Poland          764.4
Portugal        431.6
Sweden         3,316.2
Singapore       744.5
Turkey          899.2
Taiwan          435.8
United States 25,620.5

Total                85,047.3
 †
     All figures are expressed in
     millions of streams.




               36
                                                                  Table 2: Playlists Characteristics.†

                              Nb. of                 Songs not               Followers        Mean Spell      Adjusted Mean        Mean Spell      Median        Mean
     Playlist Name     Start  Songs                  Streaming      Listings (millions)        Duration       Spell Duration        Per Song       Streams      Streams
     Today’s Top Hits 5/3/17   226                       26          12,152    18.5              54.2               74.4             1.004           29.9         86.0
     Global Top 50    1/1/17   434                       0           18,250    11.5              30.2               37.1             1.383           37.5         92.8
     RapCaviar        3/3/17   458                      165          15,242     8.6              39.1               49.8             1.074            6.1         34.3
37




     Viva Latino      5/3/17   111                       13          12,158     6.9             111.0              227.9             1.027           36.1         58.6
     Baila Reggaeton  4/16/17  141                       21          12,980     6.3              96.9              181.8             1.000            7.8         38.5
     New Music Friday 1/1/17 20,621                                  52,851     6.4
     †
         Note: Streaming volumes and durations refer to songs that we observe streaming at some point during the 2017 sample period, across all 26 sample countries.
         For the Global Top 50 playlist, streaming volumes and durations refer to songs that are included in the final estimation sample as explained in the text. Adjusted
         mean spell durations are derived from a censored regression of spell duration on a constant. Songs already on the list at the start of the respective playlists
         sample, or still on the list at the end, are treated as censored. New Music Friday followers are across 26 countries. Followers as of December 31, 2017.
                                      Table 3: Effect Estimates - Normalized Streams.†

                       Today’s Top Hits                 RapCaviar                    Viva Latino               Baila Reggaeton
                      (add)      (drop)     (add)      (drop)     (add)      (drop)     (add)                              (drop)
                     Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.                         Coef./s.e.
     Add              3.346∗∗∗              3.047∗∗∗              3.211∗∗∗              2.152∗∗
                      (0.28)                (0.60)                (0.75)                (1.03)
     Drop                        -2.757∗∗∗             -1.371∗∗∗             -1.863∗∗∗                                       -1.390∗∗
                                 (0.09)                (0.15)                (0.37)                                          (0.66)
38




     R2               0.901       0.944     0.862       0.804     0.791       0.763     0.901                                0.859
     No. of Obs.      65650      85961      28896      35622       9807      13123       8428                                11635
     †
        The dependent variable is the total normalized streams defined as daily song streams in a country divided by the (country’s
        total 2017 streams/1,000,000). The sample includes song-country observations that fall within a 30 day window around the
        add (drop) date. For the add specifications, the table reports the coefficient on an indicator variable equal to 1 one day after
        inclusion on the list, as explained in the text. For the drop specifications, the table reports the coefficient on an indicator
        variable equal to 1 two days after exclusion from the list, as explained in the text. All specifications include song-country
        fixed effects and day of the week fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered on the song-country level and are in parenthesis.
     ∗∗
         Significant at the 5% level.
     ∗∗∗
          Significant at the 1% level.
                                         Table 4: Per-Song Value of Appearance on Global Lists.†

                                                                                                                 Maximum         List Usage as
                              Worldwide      Worldwide                 Daily Daily       Overall     Overall    Mechanical        a percent of
     Playlist                Daily Streams Overall Streams             Low High           Low         High      Daily Effect       Listening

     Today’s Top Hits            259,532            19,399,550         1,557    2,180    116,397 162,956          2,594,627          10.00%
     RapCaviar                   187,862            10,044,227         1,127    1,578    60,265 84,372            1,197,496          15.69%
39




     Viva Latino                 215,777            50,507,751         1,295    1,813    303,047 424,265           972,487           22.19%
     Baila Reggaeton             150,615            27,384,199          904     1,265    164,305 230,027           882,922           17.06%

     †
         The Worldwide Daily Streams column corresponds to the average daily effect (calculated as the average of the add and removal effects
         estimated in Table 3) times the total number of global streams in 2017 (85,047 million streams, see Table 1). The figures in the Worldwide
         Overall Streams column are obtained by multiplying the worldwide daily streams by the average spell length and by the number of spells
         per song. The daily (overall) low columns correspond to the worldwide daily (overall) streams multiplied by the lower bound on the
         Spotify payment per stream ($0.006). The daily (overall) high columns correspond to the worldwide daily (overall) streams multiplied by
         the upper bound on the Spotify payment per stream ($0.0084). The maximum mechanical effect is calculated as explained in the text.
                                                        Table 5: New Music Friday Rank Effects.†

                                 (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)           (5)              (6)           (7)            (8)              (9)
                                                          US,GB         CO,ES          No           Indie w/o        New          New Artist       New Indie
                                OLS        Song FE         CA            MX          Domestic      ’16 streams       Artist      No Domestic        Artist
                             Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.                 Coef./s.e.     Coef./s.e.      Coef./s.e.      Coef./s.e.
     NM Rank: 1-5             0.674∗∗∗   0.401∗∗∗   0.396∗∗∗   0.266∗∗∗   0.349∗∗∗                   0.329∗∗∗       0.459∗∗∗        0.384∗∗∗        0.334∗∗∗
                              (0.05)     (0.03)     (0.06)     (0.07)     (0.03)                     (0.06)         (0.09)          (0.12)          (0.09)
                                    ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗
     NM Rank: 6-10            0.351      0.221      0.240      0.093      0.194∗∗∗                   0.140∗∗∗       0.145∗∗∗        0.129∗∗         0.169∗∗
                              (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.05)     (0.04)     (0.03)                     (0.04)         (0.05)          (0.05)          (0.07)
40




                                    ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
     NM Rank: 11-30           0.080      0.048      0.036      0.001      0.043∗∗∗                   0.020∗∗∗       0.015           0.022∗          0.001
                              (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.03)     (0.02)     (0.01)                     (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)
     Song Fixed Effects           ✗            X             X             X             X               X              X               X               X
     R2                        0.349         0.763         0.917         0.904         0.728          0.709           0.729           0.644           0.707
     No. of Obs.               46184         46184         6373          5033          37507          19259           2221            1745            1528
     †
        The dependent variable is an indicator for whether a song appears in the daily top 200 Spotify streaming charts. All specifications include country fixed
        effects. Standard errors are clustered at the rank level and reported in parenthesis. The sample includes only the weekly top 50 New Music Friday
        recommendations, as the lists usually but do not always include 50 songs.
     ∗
        Significant at the 10% level.
     ∗∗
         Significant at the 5% level.
     ∗∗∗
          Significant at the 1% level.
                                          Table 6: IV Approach to New Music Friday Rank Effects.†

                                         (1)           (2)             (3)       (4)               (5)           (6)             (7)          (8)
                                         OLS           FE          FirstStage    IV                OLS           FE          FirstStage        IV
                                       Coef./s.e.    Coef./s.e.    Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.         Coef./s.e.    Coef./s.e.    Coef./s.e.     Coef./s.e.
     Log(Country streams)                                            0.561∗∗∗                                                  0.028∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.06)                                                    (0.00)
     New Music Rank                      -0.012∗∗∗     -0.006∗∗∗               -0.005∗∗
                                         (0.00)        (0.00)                  (0.00)
     Log(New Music Rank)                                                                           -0.232∗∗∗     -0.128∗∗∗                    -0.098∗∗
                                                                                                   (0.00)        (0.00)                       (0.05)
41




     Constant                            0.446∗∗∗                                                  0.842∗∗∗
                                         (0.00)                                                    (0.01)
     Song Fixed Effects                     ✗             X             X              X             ✗             X              X             X
     R2                                   0.214         0.054                        0.052         0.322         0.094                        0.089
     F-Stat excluded instrument                                      102.609                                                   70.340
     P-value                                                          0.000                                                    0.000
     No. of Obs.                         37507          37418         30885          30885         37507         37418         30885          30885
     †
        In columns (1), (2), (4), (5), (6), and (8), the dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if a song appears in the Top 200 Spotify streaming
        charts. For columns (3) and (7) the dependent variable is the New Music Friday rank and the log of the New Music Friday rank, respectively.
        Regressions exclude domestic songs. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis.
     ∗∗
         Significant at the 5% level.
     ∗∗∗
          Significant at the 1% level.
                                          Table 7: Characteristics of Streamed and Playlisted Songs.†

                                                Country        Global     Today’s   Rap                      Viva    Baila   New Music
                                            Streaming Data Streaming Data Top Hits Caviar                   Latino Reggaeton   Friday

     Indie percentage of Listings                 46.6%               21.9%            25.6%      28.7%     28.2%       41.2%          53.3%
     Indie percentage of Songs                    47.5%               24.1%            24.3%      33.8%     31.3%       43.3%          65.2%
     Indie percentage of Streams                  27.4%               19.0%            22.2%      17.9%     14.7%       15.0%            -
42




     US percentage of Listings                    26.1%               72.5%            71.3%      96.6%     78.0%       78.7%          37.7%
     US percentage of Songs                       25.5%               71.1%            72.1%      95.4%     74.1%       76.6%          29.9%
     US percentage of Streams                     59.2%               71.2%            72.9%      98.3%     82.8%       81.9%            -

     Domestic percentage of Listings              27.0%                  -                -          -         -           -           18.0%
     Domestic percentage of Songs                 25.0%                  -                -          -         -           -           18.0%
     Domestic percentage of Streams               25.2%                  -                -          -         -           -             -
     †
         For the country streaming data and the New Music Friday data, the domestic percentages reported correspond to the average of the country-
         specific shares of domestic songs (as well as listings and streams).
