NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

XX>XY?: THE CHANGING FEMALE ADVANTAGE IN LIFE EXPECTANCY
Claudia Goldin
Adriana Lleras-Muney
Working Paper 24716
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24716

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018, Revised October 2018

The authors thank the research assistants who helped assemble and analyze the data and check
copy. In Cambridge, the group included: Elizabeth Engle, Celena Huo, Namrata Narain, Dev
Patel, and Cesia Sanchez. In Los Angeles, the group included: Carolina Arteaga, Keyoung Lee,
and Weijia Zhao. This paper was presented at the NBER Cohort Studies conference honoring the
contributions of Robert W. Fogel, May 11-12, 2018. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Claudia Goldin and Adriana Lleras-Muney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

XX>XY?: The Changing Female Advantage in Life Expectancy
Claudia Goldin and Adriana Lleras-Muney
NBER Working Paper No. 24716
June 2018, Revised October 2018
JEL No. J1,J16,N0
ABSTRACT
Females live longer than males in most parts of the world today. Among OECD nations in recent
years, the difference in life expectancy at birth is around four to six years (seven in Japan). But
have women always lived so much longer than men? They have not. We ask when and why the
female advantage emerged. We show that reductions in maternal mortality and fertility are not the
reasons. Rather, we argue that the sharp reduction in infectious disease in the early twentieth
century played a role. The primary reason is that those who survive most infectious diseases carry
a health burden that affects organs, such as the heart, as well as impacting general well-being. We
use new data from Massachusetts containing information on causes of death from 1887 to show
that infectious diseases disproportionately affected females between the ages of 5 and 25. Both
males and females lived longer as the burden of infectious disease fell, but women were more
greatly impacted. Our explanation does not tell us why women live longer than men, but it does
help understand the timing of their relative increase.

Claudia Goldin
Department of Economics
229 Littauer
Harvard University
Cambridge MA 02138
and NBER
cgoldin@harvard.edu
Adriana Lleras-Muney
Department of Economics
9373 Bunche Hall
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
alleras@ECON.UCLA.EDU

Women live longer than men in most parts of the world today.1 In many places, they
live a lot longer. Among OECD nations in recent years, the difference in life expectancy at
birth is around four to six years (seven in Japan). But have women always lived so much
longer than men? The answer provided in recent studies is that they have not.2
Many hypotheses have been put forward to explain the so called “female advantage”
in life expectancy. Most of the reasons why women live longer than men can be found by
understanding the difference between having two X chromosomes, as opposed to having an
X and a Y, and the resulting impact on hormones.3 Whereas genetic factors are at play, the
fact that the advantage increased greatly in the latter half of the twentieth century, suggests
that environmental factors, particularly those that interact with specific genetic elements,
have disproportionately benefited women. In this paper, we examine when the female
advantage started growing, to understand what caused the advantage to widen.
A complete answer concerning why there was a large increase in the female
advantage still eludes us. But we argue that the reduction in infectious diseases played a
role in extending longevity primarily through its impact on survivors and not because of
the reduction in deaths directly from disease. To document this we collected data from
Massachusetts containing information on causes of death from 1887 to around 1930 to
show that people dying from infectious disease between the ages of 5 and 25 were
See, for example, Barford et al. (2006), although the data are not entirely reliable for certain
developing countries (and are dismal for some, particularly in Africa). On the possible reasons why
women live longer, see Austad (2006) and Cullen et al. (2016).
2 See, for example, Beltran-Sanchez et al. (2015), which uses birth cohorts for 13 nations in the
Human Mortality Database. The female longevity advantage at age 40 and beyond appears
consistently with cohorts born in the late nineteenth century. In France, for example, in the early
nineteenth century women’s life expectancy was only about one year greater than that of men.
3 Mouse experiments have allowed reseachers to separate the impacts of chromosomes from
hormones. See, for example, Arnold, et al. (2012), Chen, et al. (2012), and Du, et al., (2014).
Cardiovascular disease differs between males and females for both reasons. Males have more
visceral fat whereas women have more subcutaneous fat, a difference determined by estrogen and
also by the presence of the second X chromosome in females. Visceral fat stored in the abdomen
predicts cardiovascular disease. Males, it has been shown in mouse models, are also more likely to
suffer from hypertension even in the absence of different hormones. Sex differences exist in the
incidence of autism-spectrum disorders, from which males are four to ten times more likely to be
affected. Females are more likely to get auto-immune diseases, but their extra X chromosome
protects them from more rapid degeneration once affected.
1

-1-

disproportionately female. As infectious disease was reduced for all, females therefore
reaped more benefits than did males. Though our explanation does not tell us why women
were disproportionately affected by infectious disesase, it helps us understand the timing of the
onset of the female advantage.
We should be clear at the outset regarding the impact of infectious disease and its
decline on the female life expectancy advantage. The direct effect will be small. It is the
indirect effect among the survivors that we, and others, believe greatly explains the
increase in longevity in general and the greatly widening advantage of females. As
mortality from infectious disease fell, the fraction who were the survivors and who thus
carried with them the markers of past illness, also decreased. A healthier population
resulted, and females were disproportionately impacted.
Male mortality rates have always been higher for infants (Drevenstedt et al. 2008).
But any advantage that females had at birth, or even those they had conditional on
surviving to year one, were slight until some time in the twentieth century.4 Gender gaps in
longevity greatly increased starting early in the twentieth century, reaching a maximum of
eight years in the US by the 1970s. The differences then narrowed, but have remained
substantial (Cullen et al. 2016).
The reasons that women began to live much longer than men have been studied by
many. But existing explanations are incomplete. The reduction in maternal mortality as
well as the decrease in the total fertility rate, for example, have been shown to explain at
most one-seventh of the growing female advantage in longevity.5 Our estimates are within
that range. Increased smoking by men in the early twentieth century, which greatly

Using the metric of life expectation at one year old or, say, at 15 years of age, females lived only
about as long as males in many of today’s rich nations prior to 1850, and even later in some.
According to the Human Mortality database, life expectancy at age one was about equal for males
and females in France in 1850 and only slightly higher for males in the UK. In Sweden, females
appear to have lived longer than males ever since records have been kept.
5 Retherford (1972), for example, showed that in the US the male-female gap at birth increased by
3.43 years in favor of girls between 1900 and 1960 and that decreased maternal mortality accounts
for about half a year or 14 percent of the gap leaving a substantial unexplained portion. Our
calculation, see Appendix Table 1, is around 15 percent.
4

-2-

expanded around WWII, is part of the reason that women began to live longer than men.
But smoking was later taken up by women as well and that is one explanation for the
narrowing of death rate differences by sex that has occurred since the 1970s.6 Because
smokers are affected with a 20- to 30-year delay, the full effect of the diffusion of tobacco
use will not be apparent for some time. But even with this caveat, smoking alone cannot
fully account for the rise and fall in longevity gender gaps (Cullen et al. 2016; Preston and
Wang 2006).
Our contribution is to explore the reasons behind the initial appearance and early
widening of the female longevity advantage that started well before maternal mortality
declined and prior to the mortality impact of the smoking upsurge. In the US, as well as in
England (including Wales), France, and Sweden, a noticeable female advantage among
those aged five to twenty years old emerged at the end of the nineteenth and beginning of
the twentieth centuries. We connect our findings on this understudied phenomenon to the
expansion of the female advantage that appeared later in the twentieth century.
Young females before the turn of the twentieth century had a small but clear
disadvantage in mortality from infectious diseases. That disadvantage disappeared when
infectious disease prevalence fell, largely due to public health interventions. We examine
various explanations for why girls had greater infectious disease mortality rates, but find
no evidence that differential mortality was due to differential nutrition by sex or neglect.
We argue that, because infectious disease in early childhood can be linked to chronic
diseases in adulthood, the decline in infectious disease in the early part of the twentieth
century generated a female advantage in childhood that later appeared as an even greater
female mortality advantage among adults in the second part of the twentieth century.
Most of the evidence we present is for the US and comes from our analysis of the
vital statistics records for Massachusetts, the first US state to collect these data. These data

Beltran-Sanchez et al. (2015) show that smoking can explain about one-third of the difference
between male and female mortality rates at ages 50 to 70 for cohorts born in the early part of the
twentieth century. Others have found similar or larger contributions to smoking in explaining
mortality gender gaps (Preston and Wang 2006).
6

-3-

are mainly in period, not cohort, form, but our work informs a cohort analysis. We conclude
that the decrease in infectious disease as a cause of death for a cohort meant a decrease in
the later-life burden of infectious disease on other causes of death for that cohort.
Our paper has four parts and proceeds as follows. In part I we review the long-run
history of life expectancy for males and females in the US and Europe. Part II examines sex
differences in mortality among the young and presents our findings about female excess
mortality during periods of high infectious disease. Part III confronts why girls died at
higher rates than did boys in the era of infectious disease. Part IV concludes with evidence
on the relationship between the early disease environment and later-life mortality.
I.

Life Expectancy for Males and Females: The Long Run
A. The US: 1795 to 2015
Life expectancy at birth (e0) increased greatly from the late nineteenth century—

when it was around 50 for females—to the mid-twentieth century—when it was around 70
years for females. Much of that increase was due to the reduction in infant and child
mortality. These facts are well known. Of greater interest, here, is that a female advantage
appeared in the US sometime in the late nineteenth century.7
In each of the three life expectancy series for the US in Figure 1.1, the female
advantage emerges and expands after the 1890s. The widening intensified in the first third
to first half of the twentieth century, and particularly in the post WWII period, when
growth in male life expectancy decelerated considerably. These trends reversed course in
the 1970s when male life expectancy grew faster than that for females, and again in the
1990s when female life expectancy growth decelerated. The longevity gender gap at birth
reached a maximum of eight years in the early 1970s and is about five years today.
The first of the Figure 1.1 graphs (part A) gives life expectancy at birth. Until the
1890s life expectancy at birth was almost equal by sex. Part B, giving expectancy at age 15,
shows a slight male advantage until the 1890s. The final graph (part C), giving life
7

We ignore, here, the far greater impact on male mortality of the American Civil War.

-4-

expectancy conditional on reaching age 45, shows a female advantage throughout the
period, albeit initially quite small. (It should be noted that in parts B and C longevity is
expressed as the expected age at death, not as years left to live.) Based on this information
it would appear that the female advantage at birth emerged in the US around 1890.
The shaded portion in each of the Figure 1.1 graphs shows the period when the two
series are connected: that from J. David Hacker (2010) for the period to 1900; and that
from the US Social Security Administration (SSA) for the years after. The Hacker series is
always a bit higher than SSA’s probably because the Hacker series is for whites only.
Another important feature of the graphs is the sudden and short-lived disadvantage for
males around 1865, due to excess male mortality from the US Civil War.
Trends in the female survival advantage can be seen better in Figure 1.2, which
gives the difference (male minus female) in life expectancy for the three ages, e0, e15, and
e45. Two large deviations from the story of an evolving female advantage can be seen. One
is the US Civil War, which is responsible for the large sudden increase in male mortality
around 1865.8 The other is the relative decrease in male longevity in the 1910s due to
World War I. The opposite impact around 1920 is due to the 1918 influenza pandemic.
Although we will show that the flu pandemic of 1918 produced a mortality disparity that
relatively disadvantaged females, male war casualties overwhelmed it early on.
The conclusions from Figures 1.1 and 1.2 are that the female advantage conditional
on surviving to age 15 appeared around the turn of the twentieth century. That at birth and
conditional on surviving to age 45 were present to some degree before. That said, the
advantage widened considerably in all three cases after 1930 and then narrowed after
1970.
Males who survived to age 15 did better than females who survived to age 15 until
the late nineteenth century. But females who survived to age 45 did a bit better than males
who survived to age 45 throughout the nineteenth century. The mortality consequences of

-5-

childbirth, either due to maternal mortality or the subsequent mortality consequences of
maternal morbidity, may have caused the small differences between e15 and e45. But we will
show that there are other reasons why women began to live a lot longer than men starting
in the late nineteenth century. We also show that maternal mortality declines explain only
a small faction of the emerging female longevity advanage.
B. Europe: Early-Nineteenth Century to 2000s
We provide similar life expectancy data and differences by sex at various ages for
England (including Wales), France, and Sweden. These countries share some, but not all, of
the features just described for the US. When measured by life expectancy at birth, females
in these nations had an advantage earlier than in the US. Recall that in the US, the female
advantage emerged in the 1890s.
For the European data we use the Human Mortality Database (HMD) and present
the data in Figure 1.3 as the difference between male and female life expectancy at birth
and conditional on surviving to ages 15 and 45 (e0, e15 and e45), as we did in Figure 1.2 for
the US.9 Females in England (part A) and France (part B) had a significant edge on males
from birth from the mid- to late-nineteenth century and the advantage then greatly
expanded as it did in the US.10 Sweden (part C) is different. A female mortality advantage is
apparent at all ages and as far back as the data will allow us to go.11 But these differences
shrink up to 1930. In all the countries considered, including the US, the female advantage
greatly expanded after WWII and then started to shrink after the 1970s.

England and Wales, France, and Sweden are the most populous European nations with high
quality vital statistics data from at least 1850. There are several other countries with early
nineteeth century data in the HMD back to 1850, including Belgium, Denmark, Iceland, the
Netherlands and Norway. But these countries are not as populous and, in consequence, the data are
noisy. The HMD data are available online at http://www.mortality.org/. We will refer to England
and Wales as England going forward.
10 Cullen et al. (2016) report that male life expectancy exceeded female life expectancy at birth in
1900 in England and France also using the Human Mortality Database. The database has been
updated and extended, and the data revisions account for the differences between our figures and
theirs (personal communication).
11 We only plot years with population censuses.
9

-6-

The reason for “Swedish exceptionalism” is not entirely clear but may stem from the
low prevalence of infectious disease in nineteenth century Sweden. Swedish infant
mortality rates were also low through the nineteenth century. They started their decline
around 1810, far earlier than in England and France (Lynch and Greenhouse 1994).
Because infant mortality rates were largely due to infectious diseases, these patterns
suggest that the female advantage emerged earlier in Sweden because the infectious
disease environment was lower.12 But no data on mortality by cause of death exist to
confirm the hypothesis.
Our discussion of the European mortality data has ignored the role of war largely
because our figures include only years when census data was collected (and thus when we
have accurate population counts), and censuses are generally not taken during conflict. But
large prolonged wars sharply increase death rates among young adults, significantly more
so for men than women. Male deaths skyrocketed beginning in 1914 and returned to their
previous levels only after 1919. In England, among 20 to 30 year olds, ten times more men
than women died during 1914-1919. (Fifteen times more men than women in France in
the same period).13 Although women also died more during the war than at other times, the
increase in their deaths was largely confined to the flu pandemic years.
II.

Sex Differences in Mortality among Children and Young Adults
A. Relative Deaths by Sex: Massachusetts
Historical evidence on deaths by age and cause of death for the state of

Massachusetts (MA) allow us to better understand aggregate US trends. MA has the longest
and highest quality vital statistics data among all US states.14 Death counts broken down by
sex, age-group, and cause are available annually starting in 1885. Identical data for the
entire US population are available only from 1933, well after the female advantage

An added question is why gaps in life expectancy shrank in Sweden before 1930 when they were
expanding elsewhere. Cullen et al. (2016) suggest that gender gaps evolve with demographic and
epidemiological transitions, and Sweden appears to have transitioned earliest.
13 Results not shown but available upon request.
14 Massachusetts, in 1842, was the first state to pass a state registration law.
12

-7-

appeared.
Figure 2.1, parts A to D give the mortality series for males and females from 1887 to
1940 for four age groups: 5<10, 10<15, 15<20, and 20<30 years.15 Because of the relatively
small number of annual deaths in some of these age brackets, the data are expressed as a
three-year centered moving average. We exclude 1918 from the three-year average, due to
the large number of deaths from the pandemic, and include those deaths separately for that
year.
There are three lines in each graph. Two give the number of male and female deaths
in each year for the relevant age group. The dashed line gives the ratio (Males/Females) of
the two series and is mapped on to the right axis. Equality of the ratio is given by a thicker
line and an arrow.
Male deaths exceeded female deaths to around 1900 for all four age groups.16 Also
important is the sharp decrease in the male to female death ratio in 1918 for 10<15 year
olds as well as a smaller decrease for the 5<10 year olds. Females between 10 and 15 years
old were dying at higher rates than males in 1918. It is possible that these differences
extend to the 15<20 year group, but deaths of young men in World War I are a confounding
factor and could mask the effect of the flu. Interestingly, the gender death ratio was less
than one for 20<30 year olds from 1918 to 1935.17
The main conclusion is that female children, especially those between 10 and 15
years old, died at higher rates in 1918 from the flu than did males. Relative deaths after the
flu pandemic resumed the previous trend of an increasing number of male than female
deaths, thus widening the female advantage.
The fact that more females 10<15 died from the virulent flu of 1918, suggests that
We begin the series with 1887 because the probable cause of death was aggregated in some
meaningful manner beginning in that year.
16 These are the absolute number of deaths in all of Massachusetts, by gender, in each year.
17 Noymer and Garenne (2000) attribute the temporary decline in the female advantage among
adults to the delayed effects of the influenza pandemic. The pandemic, according to them, may have
killed weaker males thus lowering mortality rates in subsequent years among male survivors.
15

-8-

young females may have also died at higher rates from other infectious diseases, at least
after age one.18 That is what we found. Public health interventions that reduced the burden
of infectious disease, therefore, disproportionately decreased female (non-infant) deaths
and increased female life expectancy relative to male.19
Of equal interest is that the 20<30 year old group in MA shows a distinct break
around 1920. Previously, women had died at lower rates than men in that age group. But
after 1920 both men and women in that age group died at significantly lower rates than
before. The reason for the decrease for both sexes, we will soon demonstrate, is that deaths
from infectious diseases of all types, but particularly from water-borne diseases, decreased
substantially around 1900. Deaths in childbirth, however, had not yet decreased and
therefore the remaining deaths in the 20<30 year old group tilted relatively toward
women.
B. Relative Deaths by Sex: England and France
The female advantage among youth 10<15 appears later in England and France than
in MA. Recall that life expectancy at various ages demonstrated an earlier female advantage
than in the US. But as can be seen in Figure 2.2, deaths among male youths 10<15 in
England systematically started to exceed deaths of female youths 10<15 only sometime
around 1925, and they never exceeded female deaths in France.

Young women (under 25 years) succumbed to pulmonary tuberculosis at higher rates than did
young men (Hacker 2010; Henry 1989; Madigan 1957). The opposite is true among adults older
than 25 years—males appear to have been more susceptible to TB in the early twentieth century
(Noymer and Garenne 2000, figure 7). Note that the greater infant mortality rate for males than
females is attributed to a greater susceptibility to infectious diseases among male infants (see, e.g.,
Drevenstadt et al. 2008). But after around age five, females appear to be more susceptible to
infectious diseases.
19 On public health measures that began in the late nineteenth century and gained greater
importance in the early twentieth century, see Cutler and Miller (2005) on the role of filtration and
chlorination of water, and Alsan and Goldin (2018) on water and sewerage systems. Omran (2005)
discusses the notion that the overall epidemiologic transition from infectious to chronic disease
favored women. Beltran-Sanchez et al. (2015) note that females may have some inherent
vulnerability to infectious disease relative to males after infancy, but that they have various genetic
protections against chronic diseases, except those in the autoimmune category.
18

-9-

Figure 2.2 has been drawn in a manner similar to that of Figure 2.1 for MA.20 In a
parallel manner to the MA case, girls suffered greater losses than boys during the flu
pandemic years in England and France, resulting in a sharp decline in the ratio of male to
female deaths. As in the MA case, by looking at the evolution of mortality by sex for 10<15
year olds, we can remove some of the direct effect of the war because males would have
been too young to serve. Since the pattern is similar to that for MA, it is probably due to a
greater susceptibility of young females to the flu, though we cannot fully separate the effect
of the war in Europe from that of the flu.
C. Death Rates by Sex: MA and Europe
The main finding from Figure 2.1 is that deaths of young males and females in the
US became equal around 1895 for the age groups given. These data are suggestive of an
emerging female advantage. But the evidence is not definitive because the data have not
been expressed as a fraction of the population. In fact, the population of males and females
by age deviated from equality in MA in the 1920s. Textile production in the US shifted from
the northeast to the south and the manufacturing economy of the Commonwealth took a
dive. In consequence, young men left the state in greater numbers than did women.21 We
now present data for census years that divides by population and expresses these numbers
as rates for census years, not as raw numbers as we did before.
We use population data at census intervals to create death rates for the four age
groups 5<10, 10<15, 15<20, and 20<30 years.22 In between census years accurate
population estimates can only be computed with information on migration, which does not
To mirror what we do for MA, we construct three-year moving averages, except for the war years,
which are not part of any average. Sweden is omitted because of its much smaller population.
21 The ratio of males to females in the 20<30 year group declined in the 1910s and 1920s and then
recovered in the 1930s. Source: US Census of Population, Massachusetts.
20

Age Group
15<20
20<25
25<30
22

1910
0.97
0.93
0.97

1920
0.96
0.89
0.94

1930
0.98
0.89
0.90

1940
1.00
0.95
0.94

Death rates are estimated at decade intervals because of the need for accurate population data.

-10-

exist at high enough frequency by age and sex.
Figure 2.3 provides the rates for males relative to females. The relative rates show
that the female advantage did not exist in 1890 for any of the four age groups, but that it
did exist for three of them by 1900 and for all by 1910. In the case of the three younger
groups shown, the trajectory from 1890 to 1940 shows that the relative gains made by
females continued to 1940 at least.
For the two age groups 15<20 and 20<30, the flu pandemic and WWI break the
trend. Furthermore, by 1930 the burden of infectious disease had become sufficiently low,
as noted before, that only persistent maternal mortality prevented the female death rate
from continuing its relative descent. But after 1937, with the introduction of sulfa drugs
and soon after with the innovation and diffusion of antibiotics, the female death rate in the
prime reproductive ages became substantially less than that for men.23
Figure 2.4 (drawn to the same scale as Figure 2.3) shows similar mortality rate data
for England from roughly 1880 to 1930. The female advantage for these four ages groups
also appears sometime around the turn of the century (except for the 10<15 group). But
the advantage in MA, when it appeared, was considerably greater for all ages. By 1930 and
1940, the ratio of male to female mortality below age 20 in MA was about 1.2 or higher, but
the ratio never exceeded 1.2 in England.
D. Cause of Death by Sex
The female longevity advantage, as we have shown, appeared in the US and in MA
around the 1890s. We now demonstrate that infectious disease as a cause of death declined
significantly after 1890, as public health measures, such as clean water and sewerage
systems, spread across municipalities and states (Alsan and Goldin 2018).
Various problems arise in categorizing cause of death in the past. The most

On the role of sulfa drugs in reducing maternal deaths in the US, see Jayachandran, Lleras-Muney,
and Smith (2010).
23

-11-

important is that cause of death was not always known (occasionally not even today) and
diseases can be manifested in a variety of ways. As knowledge advanced, cause of death
categories became more accurate. In the MA data, cause of death categories increased from
six major groups starting in 1850, to 14 in 1901, 15 in 1921 and 18 in 1931.
A far greater fraction of deaths of females than of males in the 10<15 year group
were due to infectious disease throughout the period, as can be seen in Figure 2.5, part A.
But more males than females died from external and violent causes. Therefore, we must
also show that deaths from infectious disease were greater for females than males even if
we exclude the violent and external death category. Except for the years after 1925 and for
those with significant infectious disease epidemics, the fraction of non-violent deaths from
infectious disease was higher for females than for males, as can be seen in Figure 2.5, part
B. Another important factor is the fraction of all deaths (including or excluding those
caused by violent factors) from infectious disease greatly decreased with time and
decreased more for females than males. 24
The data in Figure 2.5, like those in Figure 2.1, are not expressed as rates. To
demonstrate the decreasing importance of infectious disease as a cause of death, we must
divide by the appropriate population. In Figure 2.6 we express deaths as a fraction of the
age and sex of the relevant population groups for census years, and use only deaths from
non-violent factors for the 10<15 year group.25 A clear decrease in the death rate can be
observed for both males and females during the 1890 to 1940 period, although the
decrease is larger for females. Because infectious disease was a greater factor in female
than male deaths, as it declined as a cause of death, females were disproportionately
advantaged.

Johansson (1984) notes that tuberculosis hit young females harder than it did young males. Smith
(2008), in her in-depth study of four western Massachusetts rural towns, finds that females 10 to
19 and 30 to 39 years old had a clear mortality disadvantage with respect to TB until around 1885.
25 Given the imprecise nature of cause of death, we chose to use all deaths due to non-violent
causes. For ages 10<15 the majority were due to infection, although some may have been described
as due to diseases of certain organs.
24

-12-

E. Role of Decreased Maternal Mortality in the Female Advantage
We noted before that infectious disease decreased for much of the period but that
maternal mortality in the US and MA did not decrease greatly until the mid-1930s with the
advent of sulfa drugs. The maternal mortality series for the US begins in 1915, but the MA
series can start in the 1870s because the Commonwealth’s vital statistics provide sufficient
detail on cause of death.
Our maternal mortality series for MA, given in Figure 2.7, is defined as the number
of deaths from maternal causes per 100,000 live births.26 We also include the standard US
series from its start in 1915 to 1990. In late nineteenth century MA there were 400
maternal deaths per 100,000 births. But the rate rose in the early twentieth century to a
peak during the flu pandemic period, after which it declined beginning in the early 1930s.
The MA series is generally lower than that of the US, but it is still far higher than those of
England and Sweden in 1930.27
As infectious disease began to wane, the general death rate decreased in the 1890s.
But maternal mortality did not decrease until much later and rose for some of the period.
Thus, the fraction of female deaths due to maternal causes increased, as shown in Figure
2.8. The fraction of all deaths of women 20<30 years old from maternal causes was less
than 6 percent in 1888, but was almost 18 percent—three times more—in 1930. (See the
dotted line graphed to the right axis.) After the introduction of sulfa drugs, deaths due to
maternal causes fell, and the fraction due to those causes began its descent, as can be seen
at the end of the series.
Given the large decrease in maternal mortality across the twentieth century, as well
as the decrease in the number of births per woman, one might have thought that the

See Figure 2.8 for the list of deaths due to maternal causes. Our time series is identical to that in
Loudon (1992, p. 381, fig. 22.6). Loudon did not provide the underlying series for the numerator
and denominator separately, but because we use the same vital statistics series as he did for births
and deaths by cause, we can replicate his series.
27 Loudon (1992) attributes the lower maternal mortality in Europe to their greater use of
midwives than in the US, as well as to fewer interventionist practices in childbirth.
26

-13-

decrease in each separately or together was responsible for a major part of the increasing
female advantage, particularly after the 1930s. Even though maternal mortality fell sharply,
only about one-seventh of the rising female advantage was due to the decrease in maternal
mortality. Even for this fertile age group, TB, not maternal mortality, was the leading cause
of death for females in 1930 (Enterline 1961).28
The finding that just one-seventh of the change can be explained by decreased
maternal mortality is made clear in the following hypothetical exercise. If the maternal
mortality rate in 1900 were decreased to the rate that existed in 1990—almost zero—life
expectancy for women in the US would only have increased by about 0.6 years at birth and
0.7 years at age 20. (See Appendix Table 1.) The gain from eliminating maternal mortality
pales in comparison with the actual increase in life expectancy from 1900 to 1990 (see
Figure 1.1): 29 years at birth (50 to 79 years), 18 years at age 15 (62 to 80), and 11 years at
age 45 (70 to 81).29
More to the point of explaining the growing female advantage, the gap in life
expectancy between males and females at birth was about three years in 1900 but was
seven years in 1990. Thus the decrease in maternal mortality of around 0.6 years explains
15 percent of the increased female advantage at birth. That is certainly an overestimate
because the medical advances that greatly reduced maternal mortality—antibiotics, blood
transfusions, antiseptic operating, and advanced surgical techniques—would also have
increased male life expectancy. And they would have improved the life expectancy for
females in general.
III.

Why Girls Died at Higher Rates from Infectious Disease before c.1890 in the US
An important finding from our work is that that life expectancy at birth was not

more favorable for females in the US until the 1890s. Aside from maternal mortality, a
primary reason is that female children died from infectious disease at higher rates than did
male children. One possibility is that daughters were less well fed than were sons, and may
28
29

Moreover TB killed more females than males in the US for those 5 to 25 years old (Doege 1965).
Preston (1976) does a similar calculation (see his table 3.3 and related discussion).

-14-

have disproportionately succumbed to infectious disease in the pre-public health era. If
that was the case, the changing mortality position of females would have been due to rising
income levels that freed the constraints on families. But it appears from our analyses, as
well as those of others, that this was not the case.
Two other possibilities remain. One is that female children had a greater role taking
care of sick family members whereas the boys were out of the house more, possibly at
work. Another is that female children had a greater inherent susceptibility to infectious
disease and, possibly, were less able to fight the worst of the infectious maladies. In both
cases, the difference between males and females would have greatly declined as the
environmental burden of infectious disease fell overall.
We should note that others have also pointed to the greater mortality of young
females in the period when infectious disease was a major killer. The distinguished
demographer George Stolnitz (1956), for example, noted that prior to the 1920s females
died at higher rates than males from childhood to mid-life. Stolnitz correctly emphasized
several misconceptions about gender differences in mortality. The first was that females
always outlived males. And the second was that the only period in which females did not
have an advantage was during their child bearing ages.30 Both were incorrect statements.
Pinnelli and Mancini (1997) produce similar findings to ours for Italy, except that
excess female mortality in Italy did not disappear in the relevant age group until the 1920s
to 1930s. They do not definitively say why there was excess mortality among young
females, and downplay relative deprivation. They attribute excess female mortality to the
fact that girls were more likely to be at home with sick family members.
The evidence to negate the hypothesis that female children suffered from relative
deprivation comes from several sources and methodologies. One source is sex ratios across

According to Stolnitz (1956, p. 24): “Among nineteenth-century Western populations, for
example, the highest frequency [of lower male mortality rates]—well over 50%—is encountered in
the pre-reproductive age interval of about 7 to 12; the next highest percentage is for 12 to 17, when
fertility is very much lower than at subsequent ages.”
30

-15-

the US and the sex of the last child. Another is expenditures on female versus male children.
Yet another is inferred from anthropometric data on heights and weights, in our case from
a comparison of native-born and Irish parentage school children in 1872 Boston. The
weight of the evidence is that US girls in the nineteenth century were not relatively
disadvantaged nutritionally or otherwise.
The literature on sex ratios has some detractors but it appears that support for male
(or son) preference in the nineteeth century US—that parents want to have boys rather
than girls—is weak. Hammel, Johansson, and Ginsberg (1983) claim that differences in sex
ratios by place show that girls were more valued where their wages were higher. But
Courtwright (1990) argues that the slight imbalance of sex ratios (western states having
more male children than eastern states) was mainly due to selective migration and that
there is no evidence to support the contention that it is indicative of poorer treatment of
girls in places that did not value their production as much as in more industrial areas.
We use the 1850 to 1900 US population censuses to help resolve the issue of son
preference. To assess whether parents have son preference, we follow the intuition from
Barcellos et al. (2014) and investigate the sex ratio by age among the youngest in the
family. If parents continue to have children until they have a boy (or a certain number of
boys), we will observe that the youngest child in the family will tend to be a boy and the sex
ratio among the youngest will rise with age. The test is imperfect because the sex ratio
would also rise with age if girls died at higher rates for biological reasons. But we can
assess that directly by comparing the sex ratio by age in the overall population with the sex
ratio among the youngest in the family.
Figure 3.1 shows sex ratios (the number of males divided by the number of females)
by age for different subsets of children ages 0 to 14 years. A sex ratio at birth of around 105
males per 100 females is considered normal by demographers. Although the data are noisy,
the sex ratio does not systematically increase with age and, most importantly, does not rise

-16-

among the youngest.31 The highest sex ratio we observe is 107. By comparison, the sex
ratio in India among the youngest is 138 by age four (Barcellos et al. 2014).
Another test of son preference is given by sex-ratios at birth, by birth order of the
child. If parents prefer sons, infanticide and abandonment of infant girls should be more
common at higher-order births. We do not observe sex by birth order at the time of birth,
but we can infer birth order within households using children’s ages. The inference would
be incorrect if children died or moved away, but it provides a useful approximation. Table
3.2 shows sex ratios by observed birth order among all children to 20 years old, and also
among infants, for the combined population censuses of 1850 to 1900 and for 1850 alone.
In the nineteenth century US, sex ratios did not greatly or systematically increase with
birth order.32
We also investigate other indicators of son preference and find no evidence for it in
the US data. 33 In countries with son preference, girls are abandoned at a greater rate than
are boys. In the US we see no statistically significant difference in the fraction of males and
females living in households in 1850, and when we pool censuses from 1850 to 1900, we
find that males were more likely to be living in group quarters, such as institutions for the
poor, and less likely to be living in households compared with girls. (See Appendix Table 2.)
Another indirect test of son preference is whether girls live in larger, poorer families
compared with boys. As argued by Jensen (2002), if families continue to have children until

Data on fertility histories for every woman would be required to properly conduct the test, but
that information is not available in the census. Instead we focus on biological children of household
heads who live in one-family households, and infer birth order using their ages. We then plot the
sex ratio among the youngest. We restrict attention to children under 14 years living in household
quarters, who are listed as a “child” of the household head. Then we order children by age and
identify the youngest in the family.
32 We also estimated regressions to assess whether the family’s fertility depended on the sex
composition of their existing children. In India and China, if the first born is female, families are far
more likely to have a second birth. If the two first-born are female, parents are again more likely to
continue to have children. In the US in the 1850s, we find the opposite pattern. Families that have
boys are more likely (rather than less likely) to have more children. Zeng et al. (1993) shows that in
modern China, sex ratios rise to 131 for the fourth-born child.
33 We find that fathers are more likely to remain if the first born is a daughter, which is inconsistent
with the more recent findings in Dahl and Moretti (2008) that mainly concern shot-gun marriages.
31

-17-

they reach their desired number of boys, then on average girls will have more siblings, and
these families will tend to have fewer resources per child. We do not find confirming
evidence of that effect and find the opposite result for 1850. (See Appendix Table 2.)
Even in the absence of son preference, parents could treat boys and girls differently,
and potentially discriminate against girls, causing them to be less healthy and increasing
their death rates. The historical evidence on differences in family expenditures on sons and
daughters is weaker, and we have found none on food allocations.34 Logan (2007) uses the
1900/01 consumer expenditure study to show that there does not appear to have been
gender bias in the allocation of parental expenditures to children by gender.
In terms of schooling, an important investment parents and societies make, there
were no statistically significant differences in the rate at which boys and girls (ages 5 to 14)
attended school in 1850 and 1880. In the early part of the twentieth century, girls attended
and graduated from high schools at a far greater rate than did boys.35
To evaluate the proposition that female children experienced relative nutritional
deprivation in poor households, we use anthropometric evidence from Bowditch (1877), a
study of 24,500 Boston public school children in 1872. The children were weighed and
measured. Height was taken without shoes and allowance was made for the weight of
clothing. Nationality and race were recorded, although there were too few blacks to have
been reported separately. There were a large number of Irish. The study was motivated by
interest in the growth of girls relative to boys at the time of puberty, to discover reasons for
“the alleged inferiority in physique of American women” (p. 4).
We have chosen to use the white native-born children with native-born parents as
the “control,” or standard, and the (mainly native-born) children of Irish-born parents as
The development literature has considerably more direct evidence on son preference (e.g.,
Jayachandran and Pande, 2017). On adult female mortality and deprivation historically, see Klasen
(1998) on Germany, which uses indirect evidence on remarriage and value of women’s work.
35 On the schooling of 5 to 14 years olds in 1850 and 1880, see Goldin and Katz (2008, figure 4.2,
153). On attendance and graduation from high school, see Goldin and Katz (2008, figure 6.5, 231).
Appendix Table 2 also presents results for the 1850 Censuses alone and for 1850-1900, showing no
economically or statistically significant differences by gender in school attendance.
34

-18-

the “treatment.” The Irish, being poorer than the white native-born, would have faced
greater resource constraints. Because they also had more children, they would have had
greater difficulty providing for their families. But did their lower incomes lead to relative
deprivation for their daughters? Were Irish girls shorter and thinner relative to Irish boys
in comparison with native-born girls relative to native-born boys?
To find the answer to that difference-in-difference question, we run the regression
below, where i = sex and j = nativity and k = age. We assess whether the coefficent 𝛿 on
(female × Irish) is significant and of substantial enough magnitude. The outcomes, y, are
either height or weight. Each is expressed three ways: absolutely, in logs, and as Z-scores
by age for each sex.36 Since the Irish sample is small at older ages—probably because many
of the older Irish children did not attend school—only children five to ten years old can be
analyzed. Age dummies, 𝜃, are included. We provide the results in Table 3.3.
𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑘 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 𝐹𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑖 + 𝛾 𝐼𝑟𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑗 + 𝛿 (𝐹𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑖 × 𝐼𝑟𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑗 ) + 𝜃𝑘 + 𝜖𝑖𝑗𝑘
We should note that all the children in the Bowditch sample were short and thin by
modern standards (the means of the Z-scores are negative, indicating the children were
below the modern CDC standard). For each of the three height and weight measures the
Irish are shorter and lighter—consistent with our sense that they were less well nourished
than native-born children. But the girls of Irish parentage were not much shorter or lighter
relative to native-born girls. Although the coefficients on the interaction terms are negative,
the standard errors are large and the magnitudes are small. Girls, in the entire sample,
were not significantly shorter than males relative to modern standards (see col. 3, Z-score),
although they were somewhat lighter in weight.
We find, therefore, no compelling evidence of relative deprivation of girls among
poorer households, using the Irish as the treatment and the native-born parentage group as
We use the LMS method as implemented by the zanthro command in Stata to estimate Z-scores
relative to the modern standard, as given by the 2000 CDC growth charts. The LMS method has
become the standard for use with anthropometric data because usual Z-scores assume normality.
The CDC modern height and weight standards can be found at:
https://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/percentile_data_files.htm
36

-19-

the control. And we find no evidence that girls, overall, were relatively deprived in the
1870s compared with those today.
IV. Conclusion: Relationship between Early Infectious Disease and Later Death Rates
We have demonstrated that young females in the US died more from infectious
disease than did young males before the early twentieth century. Exactly why that was the
case is not yet clear, although it does not seem to have been caused by relative deprivation.
Although we have no direct evidence for this, young females must also have had greater
exposure to infectious disease than young males—i.e., a greater morbidity rate—and
carried with them, through life, the scarring effects of early illnesses. As infectious diseases
were reduced, females gained more years of life as children and also as adults. We view this
as a potentially important factor in the growing female life expectancy advantage. 37
Early infectious disease can impact the mortality risk of a cohort in several ways.
One is a positive selection effect: early disease culls the weak. The other is a negative
scarring effect: infectious disease early in life leaves the cohort with a variety of frailties
and susceptibilities. Although we do not have the incidence and prevalence of infectious
disease in the cohorts we are studying, it is likely that the higher the death rate from a
disease early in a cohort’s life, the higher the burden of that disease is among the living. (On
the 1918 flu pandemic, see Almond 2006.)
The scarring effect probably dominated the two, at least historically (Hatton 2011).
It has been demonstrated that cohorts exhibit a “morbidity phenotype.” According to Finch
and Crimmins (2004), who use data for Swedish cohorts born during 1750 to 1940, higher
levels of mortality early in life are related to higher levels of mortality later in life. In a
related paper, Crimmins and Finch (2006) show that cohorts with a presumably lesser
burden of infectious disease at younger ages had lower levels of adult mortality and were

Preston (1976), in an extensive volume on cause of death, devotes a chapter to sex differences
and shows that at higher levels of mortality the female advantage disappears and females die more
from almost all causes. Preston also notes the higher death rates of females than males from
infectious disease from ages 1 to 30 in places of high infectious disease.
37

-20-

also taller. 38 Thus, cohorts born in times of lower infectious disease burdens are healthier,
despite the fact that more survive.
Why the burden of prior infectious disease decreases longevity measures for a
cohort is likely due to two effects on the survivors. The first is the long-run impact of
certain infectious diseases that weaken various organs. The best known of these diseases is
rheumatic fever, which damages the valves of the heart and often leads to rheumatic heart
disease later in life (Elo and Preston 1992). For some infectious diseases, the virus that
sickened the person remains in the body and reappears later to trigger another disorder.
Such is the case of the herpes chickenpox virus and its later-life form, shingles. There are, in
addition, a host of later-life disorders that have been linked to early infections in a direct
manner, such as those that weaken respiratory organs.
Associations also exist that are not as obviously connected to a damaged organ or to
an infectious agent that remains dormant for some time.39 Inflammatory indicators provide
the second effect on survivors and have been related to vascular and other diseases of
older age. Thus a mechanism for later disease and disability is the inflammatory response
of infectious disease early in life (Crimmins and Finch 2006; Finch and Crimmins 2004).40
The relationship between infectious disease in early life and later-life health seems
clear, but there are few estimates of the impact at the population level. More important
with regard to our question, we know of none that distinguishes the impact on morbidity

We say “presumably” because they use the death rate among children at various ages rather than
the death rate from infectious disease. The period they use is for cohorts born in 1900, in the era of
high infectious disease.
39 We should also mention the “Barker hypothesis” and the huge literature that it has spawned.
According to Barker and others, nutrition in early childhood and in utero, as well as the varous
environmental and infectious insults experienced by the mother during the various stages of
pregnancy, may contribute to increased mortality in childhood and old age (Barker et al. 2002).
These shocks are hypothesized to affect the development of various organs in utero.
40 Blackwell, Hayward, and Crimmins (2001) use self-reported data on childhood illness from the
Health and Retirement Study and find strong associations between illness and poor health in
middle age controlling for socio-economic status. The associations, moreover, are stronger when
the childhood illness was an infectious disease. They do not explore mortality differentials.
38

-21-

and mortality by gender, and few by the type of infectious agents.41 Demographic
historians, Bengtsson and Lindstrom (2000, 2003), show for Sweden that a higher disease
burden in infancy, mainly from whopping cough and small pox as proxied by the infant
mortality rate, is associated with greater mortality at ages 55 to 80, especially from
airborne infectious disease. Costa (2003), using the rich Union Army data, shows that
reductions in childhood infectious disease rates account for 13 percent of the increase in
survival rates among 50 to 64 year old men across the twentieth century.
Our paper has uncovered (or rediscovered) an important change in the health of
females in their childhood and teen years. The precise relationship between that
improvement and the female longevity advantage is not yet known. But there is good
reason to believe that females, more so than males, were greatly advantaged as children
and as adults by the sharp reduction in infectious disease in the early twentieth century.

Almond, Currie, and Duque (2017) review the literature relating infectious diseases to later
outcomes and show impacts on test scores, income, educational attainment, welfare take-up, and
chronic conditions, but not mortality directly. Haas (2007) reviews existing work that links
childhood illness and adult morbidity.
41

-22-

References
Almond, Douglas. 2006. “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-Term Effects of InUtero Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population,” Journal of Political
Economy 114(4): 672-712.
Almond, Douglas, Janet Currie, and Valentina Duque. 2017. “Childhood Circumstances and
Adult Outcomes: Act II.” NBER Working Paper w23017, (January).
Alsan, Marcella, and Claudia Goldin. 2018. “Watersheds in Child Mortality: The Role of
Effective Water and Sewerage Infrastructure, 1880 to 1915,” Journal of Political
Economy, forthcoming.
Arnold, A. P., X. Chen, and W. Itoh. 2012. “What Difference an X or Y Makes: Sex
Chromosomes, Gene Dose, and Epigenetics in Sexual Differentiation.” Handbook of
Experimental Pharmacology (214): 67-88.
Austad, Steven N. 2006. “Why Women Live Longer than Men: Sex Differences in Longevity,”
Gender Medicine 3(2): 79-92.
Barcellos, Silvia Helena, Leandro S. Carvalho, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2014. “Child
Gender and Parental Investments in India: Are Boys and Girls Treated Differently?,”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6(1): 157-89.
Barford, Anna, Danny Dorling, and George Davey Smith. 2006. “Life Expectancy: Women
Now on Top Everywhere during 2006. Even in the Poorest Countries, Women Can
Expect to Outlive Men,” BMJ: British Medical Journal 332.7545: 808.
Barker, D.J., J.G. Eriksson, T. Forsen, and C. Osmond. 2002. “Fetal Origins of Adult Disease:
Strength of Effects and Biological Basis,” International Journal of Epidemiology 31(6):
1235-39.
Beltran-Sanchez, Hiram, Caleb E. Finch, and Eileen M. Crimmins. 2015. “Twentieth Century
Surge of Excess Adult Male Mortality,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
112(29): 8993-98.
Bengtsson, Tommy, and Martin Lindstrom. 2000. “Childhood Misery and Disease in Later
Life: The Effects on Mortality in Old Age of Hazards Experienced in Early Life, Southern
Sweden, 1760-1894,” Population Studies 54(3): 263-77.

-23-

Bengtsson, Tommy, and Martin Lindstrom. 2003. “Airborne Infectious Diseases during
Infancy and Mortality in Later Life in Southern Sweden, 1766-1894,” International
Journal of Epidemiology 32(2): 286-94.
Blackwell, Debra L., Mark D. Hayward, and Eileen M. Crimmins. 2001. Does Childhood
Health Affect Chronic Morbidity in Later Life? Social Science and Medicine 52(8): 126984.
Bowditch, Henry Pickering. 1877. The Growth of Children. Boston: Albert J. White State
Printer.
Chen, X., R. McClusky, J. Chen, S. W. Beaven, P. Tontonoz, A. P. Arnold, and K. Reue. 2012.
“The Number of X Chromosomes Causes Sex Differences in Adiposity in Mice,”
PLoSGenetics 8(5): e1002709.
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 1887 to 1940. Annual Report on the Vital Statistics of
Massachusetts for the Year Ending December 31 [Year]. Boston: Wright and Potter
Printing Co., State Printers.
Costa, Dora. 2003. “Understanding Mid-Life and Older Age Mortality Declines: Evidence
from Union Army Veterans,” Journal of Econometrics 112(1): 175-92.
Courtwright, David T. 1990. “The Neglect of Female Children and Childhood Sex Ratios in
Nineteenth-Century America: A Review of the Evidence,” Journal of Family History
15(3): 313-23.
Crimmins, Eileen M., and Caleb E. Finch. 2006. “Infection, Inflammation, Height, and
Longevity,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103(2): 498-503.
Cullen, Mark R., Michael Baiocchi, Karen Eggleston, Pooja Loftus, and Victor Fuchs. 2016.
“The Weaker Sex? Vulnerable Men and Women’s Resilience to Socio-Economic
Disadvantage,” SSM – Population Health 2: 512-24.
Cutler, David, and Grant Miller. 2005. “The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health
Advances: The Twentieth-Century United States,” Demography 42(1): 1-22.
Dahl, Gordon B., and Enrico Moretti. 2008. “The Demand for Sons,” Review of Economic
Studies 75: 1085–120.
Davenport, R. 2011. Annual Deaths by Cause, Age and Sex in England and Wales, 1848-1900.
[data collection]. 2nd Edition. UK Data Service. SN: 5705,
http://doi.org/10.5255/UKDA-SN-5705-1
-24-

Drevenstedt, Greg L., Eileen Crimmins M., Sarinnapha Vasunilashorn, and Caleb E. Finch.
2008. “The Rise and Fall of Excess Male Infant Mortality, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 105(13): 5016-21.
Du, S., N. Itoh, S. Askarinam, H. Hill, A. Arnold, and R. Voskuhl. 2014. “XY Sex Chromosome
Complement, Compared with XX, in the CNS Confers Greater Neurodegeneration
during Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 111(7): 2806-11.
Elo, Irma T., and Samuel H. Preston. 1992. “Effects of Early-Life Conditions on Adult
Mortality: A Review,” Population Index 58(2): 186-212.
Finch, Caleb E., and Eileen M. Crimmins. 2004. “Inflammatory Exposure and Historical
Changes in Human Life-Spans,” Science 305: 1736-39.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Technology.
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Hacker, J. David. 2010. “Decennial Life Tables for the White Population of the United States,
1790-1900,” Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History
43(2): 45-79.
Haines, Michael. 1998. “Estimated Life Tables for the United States, 1850–1910,” Historical
Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History 31(4): 149-69.
Hammel, E.A., Sheila R. Johansson, and Caren A. Ginsberg. 1983. “The Value of Children
during Industrialization: Sex Ratios in Childhood in Nineteenth-Century America,”
Journal of Family History 8(4): 346-66.
Harris, Bernard. 1998. “Gender, Height and Mortality in Nineteenth- and Twentieth Century
Britain: Some Preliminary Reflections.” In J. Komlos and J. Baten (eds.), The Biological
Standards of Living in Comparative Perspective. Stuttgart: Steiner: 413-48.
Haas, Steven A. 2007. “The Long-Term Effects of Poor Childhood Health: An Assessment
and Application of Retrospective Reports,” Demography 44(1): 113-35.
Hatton, Timothy J. 2001. “Infant mortality and the health of survivors: Britain, 1910-50,”
The Economic History Review 64(3): 951-72.
Henry, Louis. 1989. “Men’s and Women’s Mortality in the Past,” Population: An English
Selection 44(1): 177-201.
Historical Statistics of the United States, Millenial Edition. 2006.
-25-

Human Mortality Database. University of California, Berkeley (USA), and Max Planck
Institute for Demographic Research (Germany). Available at
www.mortality.org or www.humanmortality.de (data downloaded 8/24/2017).
Jayachandran, Seema, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Kimberly V. Smith. 2010. “Modern
Medicine and the Twentieth Century Decline in Mortality: New Evidence on the Impact
of Sulfa Drugs,” American Economic Journal: Applied 2(2):118-46.
Jayachandran, Seema, and Rohini Pande. 2017. “Why Are Indian Children So Short? The
Role of Birth Order and Son Preference,” American Economic Review 107(9): 2600-29.
Jensen, Robert. 2002. “Fertility Preferences and Female Disadvantage: Equal Treatment,
Unequal Outcomes?” Mimeo.
Johansson, Sheila Ryan. 1984. “Deferred Infanticide: Excess Female Mortality in Childhood.”
In Glenn Hausfatter and Sarah Blaffer Hrdy, eds., Infanticide: Comparative and
Evolutionary Perspectives. New York: Aldine Press.
Klasen, Steven. 1998. “Marriage, Bargaining, and Intrahousehold Resource Allocation:
Excess Female Mortality among Adults during Early German Development 1740–
1860,” Journal of Economic History 58(2): 432-67.
Logan, Trevon. 2007. “On Family Allocation Strategy in the Late Nineteenth Century.” Ohio
State Working Paper.
Loudon, Irvine. 1992. Death in Childbirth: An International Study of Maternal Care and
Maternal Mortality 1800-1950. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lynch, Katherine A., and Joel B. Greenhouse. 1994. “Risk Factors for Infant Mortality in
Nineteenth-Century Sweden,” Population Studies 48(1): 117-33.
Madigan, Francis C. 1957. “Are Sex Mortality Differentials Biologically Caused?” The
Millbank Memorial Fund Quarterly 35(2): 202-23.
Noymer, Andrew, and Michel Garenne. 2000. “The 1918 influenza Epidemic’s Effects on Sex
Differentials in Mortality in the United States,” Population and Development Review
26(3): 565-81.
Omran, Abdel R. 2005. “The Epidemiologic Transition: A Theory of the Epidemiology of
Population Change,” The Milbank Quarterly 83(4): 731-57.
Pinnelli, Antonella, and Paola Mancini. 1997. “Gender Mortality Differences from Birth to
Puberty in Italy, 1887-1940.” In The Decline of Infant and Child Mortality: The European
-26-

Experience, 1750-1990, Carlo A. Corsini, Pier Paolo Viazzo, eds. The Hague: Klewer Law
International.
Preston, Samuel. H. 1976. Mortality Patterns in National Populations: With Special Reference
to Recorded Causes of Death. New York: Academic Press.
Preston, Samuel H., and Haidong Wang. 2006. “Sex Mortality Differences in the United
States: The Role of Cohort Smoking Patterns,” Demography 43(4): 631-46.
Retherford, Robert D. 1972. “Tobacco Smoking and the Sex Mortality Differential,”
Demography 9(2): 203-15.
Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek. Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series: Version 7.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota, 2017.
Smith, Nicole L. 2008. “The Problem of Excess Female Mortality: Tuberculosis in Western
Massachusetts, 1850-1910.” Unpublished Masters Thesis. University of Massachusetts,
Amherst.
Stolnitz, George. 1956. “A Century of International Mortality Trends: II,” Population Studies
10(1): 17-42
U.S. Social Security Administration. 2005. “Life Tables for the Social Security Area, 19002100.” Actuarial Study No. 120 by Felicitie C. Bell and Michael L. Miller (August).
https://www.ssa.gov/oact/NOTES/as120/LifeTables_Tbl_6_1900.html
U.S. Social Security Administration. 2017. Period Life Tables. On-line data updating
Actuarial Study No. 120.
https://www.ssa.gov/oact/HistEst/PerLifeTables/2017/PerLifeTables2017.html
Xu, Jiaquan, Sherry L. Murphy, Kenneth D. Kochanek, and Elizabeth Arias. 2016. “Mortality
in the United States, 2015,” NCHS Data Brief, no. 267. Hyattsville, MD: National Center
for Health Statistics.
Zeng, Yi, Tu Ping, Gu Baochang, Xu Yi, Li Bohua, and Li Yongpiing. 1993. “Causes and
Implications of the Recent Increase in the Reported Sex Ratio at Birth in China,”
Population and Development Review 19(2): 283-302.

-27-

Figure 1.1: Life Expectancy by Sex at Ages 0 (Birth), 15 and 45: United States, 1795 to 2014
A. Life Expectancy by Sex at Age 0 (Birth)
90

Females

80

70

Males

60
50
40
30
1790

1810

1830

1850

1870

1890

1910

M e0

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

F e0

B. Life Expectancy by Sex at Age 15
90

Females

80

Males

70

60

50

40

30
1790

1810

1830

1850

1870

1890

M e15 + 15

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

F e15 + 15

-28-

C. Life Expectancy by Sex at Age 45
90

Females
80

Males

70
60
50
40
30
1790

1810

1830

1850

1870

1890

M e45 + 45

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

F e45 + 45

Sources: J.D. Hacker (2010) for the white population; U.S. Social Security Administration
(2005, 2017) for the entire population.
Notes: Shaded region gives the linkage points for the two series: Hacker for whites only and
SSA for the entire population. No attempt has been made to link the series. The SSA data
are used for 1900 and annual data after to 2015; the Hacker data are used for 1895 (18901900) and data on the quinquennial years prior. (e15 + 15), (e45 + 45) means that we add
15 or 45 years to obtain life expectation at birth rather than at the age given for consistency
across the graphs.

-29-

Figure 1.2: Male Minus Female Life Expectancy: US, 1795 to 2014
2
1
0
1790
-1

1810

1830

1850

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

-2
-3
-4
-5
-6

-7
-8
-9
(M - F) e0

(M - F) e15

(M - F) e45

Sources: See Figure 1.1.
Notes: Shaded region gives the linkage points for the two series: Hacker for whites only and
SSA for the entire population. No attempt has been made to link the series. The SSA data
are used for 1900 and annual data after to 2015; the Hacker data are used for 1895 (18901900) and data on the quinquennial year prior. The large relative decrease in male life
expectation in 1865 is due to Civil War deaths and that just before 1920 is due to WWI
casualties. The opposite impact around 1920 is due to the 1918 influenza pandemic. The
main outlines of the graph do not change if it is expressed in relative terms (e.g., as a
fraction of the male or female life expectation for each age).

-30-

Figure 1.3: Male Minus Female Life Expectancy (Period Rates): England and Wales, France
and Sweden, on Census Years
A. England and Wales
0
1840

1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020

-1
-2
-3
-4

-5
-6
-7
(M - F) e0

(M - F) e15

(M - F) e45

B. France
1
0
1830
-1

1850

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
-8

-9
(M - F) e0

(M - F) e15

(M - F) e45

-31-

C. Sweden
0
1840

1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

-1
-2

-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
(M - F) e0

(M - F) e15

(M - F) e45

Source: Human Mortality Database, period tables. We only plot years for which censuses
were conducted and thus population data by age are accurate. Census data are available
every ten years starting in 1841 for England, and every ten years starting in 1860 for
Sweden. For France they occured every 5 years between 1836 and 1936 (except for 1871
which was held in 1872, and for 1916 which was cancelled) and then for 1946, 1962, 1968,
1975, 1982, 1990 and 1999.

-32-

Figure 2.1: Deaths by Sex and Age: Massachusetts, 1887 to 1940
A. Male and Female Deaths, 5 < 10 Years Old and Male to Female Death Ratio (Right Axis)
1000

1.6

800

1.4

600

1.2

400

1

200

0.8

0
1885

0.6
1895

1905

Males 5<10 years

1915

1925

Females 5<10 years

1935

Ratio M/F

B. Male and Female Deaths, 10 < 15 Years Old and Male to Female Death Ratio (Right Axis)
700

1.6

600

1.4

500

1.2

400

1

300

0.8

200

0.6

100
1885

0.4
1895

1905

Males 10<15 years

1915
Females 10<15 years

1925

1935
Ratio M/F

-33-

C. Male and Female Deaths, 15 < 20 Years Old and Male to Female Death Ratio (Right Axis)
1300

1.8

1100

1.6

900

1.4

700

1.2

500

1

300

0.8

100
1885

0.6
1895

1905

Males 15-20 years

1915

1925

Females 15-20 years

1935
Ratio M/F

D. Male and Female Deaths, 20 < 30 Years Old and Male to Female Death Ratio (Right Axis)
6000

1.6

5000

1.4

4000

1.2

3000

1

2000

0.8

1000

0.6

0
1885

0.4
1895

1905

Males 20<30 years

1915
Females 20<30 years

1925

1935
Ratio M/F

Sources: Commonwealth of Massachusetts (1887 to 1940).
Notes: Data are a three-year moving average of deaths for the age group except that 1918,
the year of the influenza pandemic is not part of any average. The two years before and
after 1918 are averaged together.
-34-

Figure 2.2: Male and Female Deaths, 10<15 Years Old and Male to Female Death Ratio
(Right Axis): England and France, 1880s to 1930
A. England
8000

1.2

7000
6000

1.1

5000
4000

1

3000
2000

0.9

1000
0
1885

1890

1895

1900

1905

Males 10<15 years

1910

1915

1920

Females 10<15 years

1925

1930

0.8
1935

Ratio M/F

B. France
9000

1

8000
7000
6000

0.9

5000
4000
3000

0.8

2000
1000
0
1885

1890

1895

1900

Males 10<15 years

1905

1910

1915

1920

Females 10<15 years

1925

1930

0.7
1935

Ratio M/F

Source: Human Mortality Database, period tables.

-35-

Figure 2.3: Ratio of Male to Female Death Rates for Various Age Groups (5<10 to 20<30):
Massachusetts 1890 to 1940
1.7

1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
5<10 years

10<15 years
1890

1900

15<20 years
1910

1920

1930

20<30 years

1940

Sources: Commonwealth of Massachusetts (1887 to 1940). U.S. Census of Population, 1890
to 1940.
Notes: Three-year centered moving averages for the death rates are used for data from
1887 to 1941. Relative death rates are given by: (Male deaths in interval/Male population
in interval)/ (Female deaths in interval/Female population in interval)

-36-

Figure 2.4: Ratio of Male to Female Death Rates for Various Age Groups (5<10 to 20<30),
England: 1881 to 1931
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
5<10

10<15
1881

1891

15<20
1901

1911

1921

20<30
1931

Source: Human Mortality Database.

-37-

Figure 2.5: Fraction of Deaths of Males and Females 10<15 Years Old Due to Infectious
Diseases: Massachusetts, 1887 to 1940
A. Fraction of All Deaths due to Infectious Diseases
0.8
0.7

Female

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

Male

0.2
0.1
0.0
1885

1895

1905

1915

1925

1935

B. Fraction of Non-violent Deaths due to Infectious Diseases
0.8
0.7

Female
0.6
0.5
0.4

Male

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1885

1895

1905

1915

1925

1935

-38-

Sources: Commonwealth of Massachusetts (1887 to 1940).
Notes: The blue lines are (infectious diseases/all deaths); the orange lines are (infectious
diseases/all non-violent deaths). Infectious diseases are defined as: 1887-1900: Zymotic
and Constitutional; 1901-1920: General and Respiratory; 1921-1930: Infectious, General
and Respiratory; 1931-1940: Infectious and Parasitic; Respiratory. Actual population
values are used rather than three-year moving averages.

-39-

Figure 2.6: Death Rate from Non-Violent Deaths: 10<15 Years Old: Massachusetts 1890 to
1930, by Sex

0.004
0.0035

Non-Violent Death Rate

0.003
0.0025
0.002
0.0015
0.001
0.0005
0
1890

1900

1910

Non Violent Male Rate

1920

1930

1940

Non Violent Female Rate

Sources: Commonwealth of Massachusetts (1887 to 1940); U.S. Census of Population, 1890
to 1940.
Notes: Three-year centered moving averages are used for non-violent deaths where the
centers are chosen as 1890, 1902, 1910, 1922, and 1930 to aggregate within cause of death
aggregates.

-40-

Figure 2.7: Maternal Mortality Rate in Massachusetts: Maternal Deaths/100,000 Live
Births, 1887 to 1941

1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
1875

1885

1895

1905

1915

1925

per 100,000 live births, MA

1935

1945

1955

1965

1975

1985

1995

per 100,000 live births, US

Sources: Commonwealth of Massachusetts (1887 to 1940); Historical Statistics (2006),
series Ab924.
Notes: For cause of death categories, see notes to Figure 2.8. This figure almost perfectly
matches one in Loudon (1992, p. 381, fig. 22.6), although Loudon does not give the
underlying series. The one year when the series do not match (1890) stems from a copying
error by Loudon due to poor original print quality.

-41-

6000

0.20

5000

0.17

4000

0.14

3000

0.11

2000

0.08

1000

0.05

0
1885

Fraction of Deaths from Maternal Causes

Female Deaths 20<30 Years

Figure 2.8: Female Deaths, 20<30 Years Old, Deaths due to Maternal Causes, and the
Fraction of All Deaths due to Maternal Causes: Massachusetts, 1887 to 1940

0.02
1895

1905

Females deaths 20<30 years

1915

1925

MM 3-year average

1935
% MM

Sources: Commonwealth of Massachusetts (1887 to 1940).
Notes: “Female deaths 20<30 years” is a three-year centered moving average, except for 1918. The
two years around 1918 are expressed as a two-year moving average and 1918 is not averaged. “MM
3-year average” is the number of deaths to women 20<30 years old attributed to childbirth
expressed as a three-year moving average. The year 1918 is excluded from the three-year average.
Cause of death aggregates changed in the Massachusetts vital statistics three times in the period
examined: 1901, 1921, and 1931. “% MM” is the fraction of all deaths attributed to maternal causes.
Cause of death subcategories attributed to maternal causes:
1887-1900: Abortion, childbirth, miscarriage, puerperal convulsions.
1901-1920: Accidents of pregnancy; hemorrhage, puerperal; other accidents of labor; septicemia,
puerperal; albuminuria and puerperal eclampsia; phlegmasia alba dolens, puerperal; other
puerperal accidents, sudden death.
1921-1930: Accidents of pregnancy (e.g., abortion, ectopic gestation); puerperal hemorrhage; other
accidents of labor (e.g., Caesarean section, other surgical operations and instrumental
delivery); puerperal septicemia; puerperal phlegmasia alba dolens, embolus, sudden death;
puerperal albuminuria and convulsions following childbirth; puerperal diseases of the breast.
1931-1940: Abortion; ectopic gestation; puerperal hemorrhage; puerperal septicemia and pyemia;
puerperal tetanus; puerperal albuminuria and eclampsia; other toxemias of pregnancy;
puerperal phlegmasia alba dolens, embolus, sudden death; other accidents of childbirth (e.g.,
Caesarean operation); other and unspecified conditions of the puerperal state.

-42-

Figure 3.1: Child Sex Ratios (Males/Females) in US Families: 1850 to 1900

108

Males/Females

106

104

102

100

98

96
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

Child Age
All

Youngest in one-family HH

Source: 1850, 1860, 1870, 1880 and 1900 Censuses, 1 percent random samples.
Notes: To determine the youngest in the family we restrict the sample to individuals living
in one-family households who are the biological children of the household head (we drop
minors who are adopted, spouses, and those having another relationship to the household
head). The line labeled “all” includes all children in all types of families.

-43-

Table 3.2: Sex Ratios in the US: 1850 to 1900

Observed Birth Order of child
1
2
3
4+

N

Part A: Sex ratios among Census population in US 1850-1900
Ages 0 to 20
1.065 1.041 1.037 1.023
Less than age 2
1.006 1.019 1.043 1.023

751,403
86,562

Part B: US 1850 census only
Ages 0 to 20
1.053
Less than age 2
0.946

73,407
8,070

1.054
1.038

1.044
1.065

1.051
1.009

Sources: 1850, 1860, 1870, 1880 and 1900 Censuses, 1 percent samples.
Notes: Unweighted ratios are reported. To compute birth order, we restrict attention to
individuals living in one-family households who are the biological children of the
household head (we drop minors who are adopted, spouses or have another relationship to
the household head). We then assign birth order based on age of the existing children in the
household. Birth order is therefore likely to be measured with error because of child deaths
and also because older children may not have been living in the household—this should
make the pattern across ages stronger since gender preferences become more pronounced
with higher order births.

-44-

Table 3.3: Heights and Weights of School Children, 5 to 10 years old: Boston, 1872
(1)
Height
Dependent
Variable Mean

Heights (in inches)
(2)
(3)
Log(Height)
Z-Score

(4)
Weight

Weights (in pounds)
(5)
(6)
Log(Weight)
Z-Score

46.78

3.84

-1.196

50.81

3.91

-0.681

-0.278***
(0.0692)
-0.460***
(0.0599)
-0.0356
(0.0901)

-0.00595***
(0.00148)
-0.00958***
(0.00128)
-0.000928
(0.00193)

0.0425
(0.0318)
-0.207***
(0.0276)
-0.0183
(0.0415)

-1.780***
(0.212)
-0.568***
(0.184)
-0.395
(0.276)

-0.0362***
(0.00399)
-0.00862**
(0.00345)
-0.00754
(0.00519)

-0.180***
(0.0280)
-0.0506**
(0.0242)
-0.0384
(0.0364)

Number of
observations

9,250

9,250

9,250

9,250

9,250

9,250

R2

0.700

0.704

0.0362

0.589

0.612

0.0446

Female
Irish
Female  Irish

*** p<0.01 ** p<0.05
Source: Bowditch (1877).
Notes: Z-scores are computed relative to the modern standard using the LMS method, as
incorporated in the zanthro command in Stata. The modern standard for each (sex  age) comes
from the 2000 CDC Growth Charts. A full set of age dummies is included in each regression. The
Bowditch tables give the physical weights in five-pound bins (e.g., 50 to 54). We used the lower
bound in these calculations.

-45-

Appendix Table 1: Maternal Mortality Calculation
The calculation was done for 1880 to 1990, but substituting 1900 for 1880 does not change
the results since maternal mortality was about the same in the two years. The calculation
assumes that the fertility rate in 1880 by age is that in 1990 US and also that the maternal
mortality rate (deaths from maternal causes/100,000 live births) is reduced from that in
1880 to that in 1990. The resulting decrease in deaths by age group is:

Age Group
15 < 20
20 < 25
25 < 30
30 < 35
35 < 40
40 < 45

Percentage Decrease in
Deaths if Fertility and
Maternal Mortality
Decrease to 1990 Levels
9%
17%
14%
9%
6%
2%

The decrease in deaths is then applied to these age groups in computing life expectations in
1900 from data for native born whites in Haines (1998):

Age

0
1
2
3
4
5 < 10
10 < 15
15 < 20
20 < 25
25 < 30
30 < 35
35 < 40
40 < 45

Life Expectation: Additional Years Left
1900
1900 with
Difference in
maternal
years
mortality
decrease
51.93
57.46
58.30
58.16
57.73
57.15
53.29
48.94
44.96
41.35
37.81
34.24
30.57

52.51
58.10
58.96
58.83
58.40
57.84
53.98
49.65
45.68
42.06
38.50
34.89
31.15

0.58
0.64
0.66
0.67
0.67
0.69
0.69
0.71
0.72
0.71
0.69
0.65
0.58

-46-

Appendix Table 2: Gender Differences among Children in the Nineteenth Century US
Dependent variables

Constant
(Female mean)

Male = 1

N

Part A: 1850-1900 US Censuses
All children under 14
% not living in households

0.009***

[0.000]

0.001**

[0.000]

792,846

% abandoneda

0.003***

[0.000]

0.001***

[0.000]

792,846

% children ages 5-14 in school

0.587***

[0.001]

-0.002

[0.001]

505,501

All children under 14 living in household quarters
% children ages 5-14 in school
Family size (own-family members
in household)

0.586***

[0.001]

-0.002

[0.001]

499,939

6.44***

[0.004]

0.006

[0.005]

785,495

Number of siblings in household
Property value of father (18501870)b
Property value of mother (18501870)b

3.19***

[0.004]

0.007

[0.005]

785,495

1,780***

[18.81]

-12.495

[26.4]

295,372

95.72***

[5.548]

-6.365

[7.79]

311,466

[0.001]
[0.000]
[0.003]

0.000
0.001**
0.006

[0.001]
[0.000]
[0.004]

80,960
80,960
51,918

[0.003]

0.006

[0.004]

51,207

[0.013]
[0.012]
[39.27]
[4.712]

0.036**
0.035**
-34.25
-0.521

[0.018]
[0.017]
[55.0]
[6.60]

79,977
79,977
70,541
73,399

Part B: 1850 US Census
All children under 14
% not living in households
0.012***
a
% abandoned
0.002***
% children ages 5-14 in school
0.599***
All children under 14 living in household quarters
% children ages 5-14 in school
0.598***
Family size (own-family members
in household)
Number of siblings
Property value of father
Property value of mother

6.802***
3.488***
1,292***
44.020***

Sources: 1850, 1860, 1870, 1880 and 1900 Censuses. 1% samples.
Notes: Each line is a separate equation. Unweighted regressions are reported. Other than a male
dummy, no other covariates are included in the regressions. Standard errors are in brackets.
a Abandoned

refers to children living in correctional institutions, mental institutions or in
institutions for the handicapped and poor.
b These variables were collected only in 1850, 1860 and 1870.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

-47-

