                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            VARIABLE PRICING AND THE COST OF RENEWABLE ENERGY

                                            Imelda
                                        Matthias Fripp
                                       Michael J. Roberts

                                      Working Paper 24712
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24712


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2018




Parts of this work were funded by grants from the US Department of Transportation’s University
Transportation Centers Program (PO#291166), the National Science Foundation (#1310634), the
Ulupono Initiative, University of Hawai’i Economic Research Organization, and University of
Hawai’i Sea Grant College Program. Maximillian Auffhammer, Dennice Gayme, Stephen
Holland, Pierre Mérel, Carla Peterman, Aaron Smith, Rob Williams, and seminar participants at
UC Davis, University of Hawai’i, University of Maryland, UC Berkeley Energy Institute’s Power
Conference, and NBER’s Future of Energy Distribution have all provided valuable feedback.
Views expressed, and any remaining errors, are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Imelda , Matthias Fripp, and Michael J. Roberts. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Variable Pricing and the Cost of Renewable Energy
Imelda , Matthias Fripp, and Michael J. Roberts
NBER Working Paper No. 24712
June 2018
JEL No. Q41,Q42,Q53

                                           ABSTRACT

On a levelized-cost basis, solar and wind power generation are now competitive with fossil fuels.
But supply of these renewable resources is variable and intermittent, unlike traditional power
plants. As a result, the cost of using flat retail pricing instead of dynamic, marginal-cost pricing—
long advocated by economists—will grow. We evaluate the potential gains from dynamic pricing
in high-renewable systems using a novel model of power supply and demand in Hawai’i. The
model breaks new ground in integrating investment in generation and storage capacity with
chronological operation of the system, including an account of reserves, a demand system with
different interhour elasticities for different uses, and substitution between power and other goods
and services. The model is open source and fully adaptable to other settings. Consistent with
earlier studies, we find that dynamic pricing provides little social benefit in fossil-fuel-dominated
power systems, only 2.6 to 4.6 percent of baseline annual expenditure. But dynamic pricing leads
to a much greater social benefit of 8.5 to 23.4 percent in a 100 percent renewable power system
with otherwise similar assumptions. High renewable systems, including 100 percent renewable,
are remarkably affordable. The welfare maximizing (unconstrained) generation portfolio under
the utility’s projected 2045 technology and pessimistic interhour demand flexibility uses 79
percent renewable energy, without even accounting for pollution externalities. If overall demand
for electricity is more elastic than our baseline (0.1), renewable energy is even cheaper and
variable pricing can improve welfare by as much as 47 percent of baseline expenditure.

Imelda                                            Michael J. Roberts
University of Hawaii                              Department of Economics
Imelda9@hawaii.edu                                Saunders 542
                                                  2424 Maile Way
Matthias Fripp                                    Honolulu, HI 96822
University of Hawaii                              mjrobert@hawaii.edu
mfripp@hawaii.edu
1    Introduction
How much will it cost to eliminate use of fossil fuels? There is reason for optimism. Tech-
nological progress has lowered the cost of wind and solar power to make them increasingly
competitive with coal and natural gas on a levelized basis. Battery storage costs are also
falling, which should grow electric vehicle use and could help electric grids absorb intermittent
renewable energy when it happens to be plentiful. Increasing integration of markets across
regions and countries could further facilitate adoption of wind and solar, as they allow more
flexible trading of power from times and locations with relatively high supply to those with
relatively little. Nevertheless, recent research indicates that intermittency combined with the
high cost of storage greatly increases the cost of renewable energy from a system perspective
(Gowrisankaran, Reynolds and Samano 2016).
    A key challenge is that modern infrastructure has been built around electricity systems
with centralized and easily controllable generation. Electric grids operate through balancing
authorities that adjust electricity generation on timescales ranging from seconds to years, to
perfectly balance presumably inelastic, time-varying demand (Figure 1, panel A). Although
marginal generation costs vary over time in a conventional system, regulated retail prices tend
to be flat, giving rise to well-known inefficiencies. But since incremental costs only spike
during rare peak loads, the inefficiencies from flat rates are thought to be small, with most
concern centered on market power as demand approaches capacity constraints (Borenstein and
Holland 2005, Borenstein 2005, Blonz 2016). Utilities and generating companies have little in-
centive to change the current system, possibly because too few are aware of the possibilities
associated with variable prices, or because it may not benefit them under cost-of-service regula-
tory structures that currently predominate at the distribution level. Customers have also been
unenthusiastic about dynamic marginal-cost pricing, possibly because they lack confidence
that they would individually benefit from it. The smoothing of costs when setting retail rates
makes demand highly inflexible (inelastic) with respect to generation cost on a day-to-day,
hour-to-hour basis, and current system planning and operation reflect this inflexibility.
    Balancing almost entirely on the supply side and foregoing potential demand response
creates some deadweight loss in existing power systems, but the loss will be much greater
in power systems with a large share of intermittent renewables. Solar and wind power are
the most cost-effective renewables, but the supply varies with sunlight and windspeed. When
intermittent renewables make up a small to moderate share of total generation, the existing
infrastructure can accommodate their variability in much the same way it has always managed
variable demand. Variations in renewable energy are counterbalanced with directed variation in
generation from fossil fuel plants. But as larger shares of renewable energy are accommodated
using this conventional model, system-level costs may rise significantly above the levelized costs
from any particular source. Controllable generation must be built or retained to compensate
for periods of low renewable power production, and these plants may burn either polluting
fossil fuels or high-cost biofuels. Providing spinning reserves from thermal power plants —


                                                2
 ramping them up and down to compensate for short-term variations in demand or renewable
 production — requires running these plants at inefficient fractional load levels. Moreover, as
 more intermittent renewable power is added to the grid, eventually supply begins to exceed
 demand and storage capacity at certain times, and renewable energy must be curtailed (i.e.,
 discarded). This creates diminishing returns for renewable power and raises average costs.
 In Hawai’i, Texas, Ireland and perhaps other places, a considerable amount of electricity is
 already curtailed, even while utility customers may simultaneously pay 30 cents per kWh or
 more for electricity. With retail prices far above the incremental cost of generation (zero
 or negative during curtailment), there appears to be inefficiency in the current system, even
 with renewable energy penetration far below the eventual goals in state renewable portfolio
 standards. Resolving this inefficiency would help to slow climate change.

                      Figure 1: Conventional Utility and Utility of the Future




Notes: Intermittent renewables change the nature of the utility. The horizontal axis is power generated or consumed at a
point in time, and the vertical axis is incremental willingness to pay (Demand) or incremental cost of generation (Supply).
A stylized frequency distribution of load is shown at the bottom. Panel A shows a conventional utility with flexible supply
that can ramp generation up and down with varying demand without greatly changing the incremental cost of power,
except for rare peaking loads, so prices are typically low (Pl ). Welfare gains have been gleaned from curbing peak loads
with critical-peak pricing and demand charges for commercial users, which tie each firm’s incremental price to its historical
peak. Panel B shows a hypothetical utility of the future, with generation coming mainly from inflexible, time-varying
intermittent renewables and real-time pricing. With highly volatile time-varying prices, storage and shiftable loads cause
demand to become more flexible, especially in the lower price range, but prices can spike very high during unusual periods
when supply is low and demand high.




                                                             3
   To economists, the obvious solution to intermittency is real-time retail pricing that reflects
the incremental cost and marginal willingness to pay for electricity. If electricity were priced at
its incremental value and cost there would be new, powerful incentives to efficiently store energy
on a distributed basis or otherwise shift consumption from times and places of relatively scarce
renewable supply to times and places of plenty. Chemical storage of electricity in batteries or
hydrogen remains expensive. However, critically, and potentially transformationally, electricity
consumers already have access to many low-cost systems that store energy in different forms.
By carefully timing water heating, electric vehicle charging and water pumping, using ice
storage for cooling systems, making micro-adjustments for some kinds of refrigeration, or
perhaps other means, electricity use can be shifted from seconds to many hours at low cost.
Such mechanisms would need to be automated by smart devices acting on customers’ behalf.
These existing technologies can make electricity demand highly substitutable over time, at least
over horizons up to a day or so. In addition to shifting the timing of electricity consumption
within the day, customers facing dynamic prices can also adjust the total amount of power they
consume each day, reducing total consumption during extended periods when power is scarce,
or increasing it when power is abundant. We conceptualize this substitutability and overall
elasticity with a more elastic demand in panel B of figure 1. While demand-side flexibilities
would make intermittent renewable energy more cost effective from a system perspective, they
will only be brought to market and adopted if pricing mechanisms incentivize them.
   In this paper we develop a novel model of power supply and demand to examine the extent
to which variable pricing could plausibly increase the social benefits of renewable energy. The
model is novel in the way it integrates investment in generation and storage capacity with real-
time operation of the system, including an account of reserves, a demand system with different
interhour elasticities for different end uses, as well as substitution between electric power and
other goods and services. Both supply and demand sides of the model can also provide reserves.
The model, an extension of Switch (Fripp 2012, Johnston, Maluenda, Henrı́quez and Fripp
2017), is open source and adaptable to other settings. Earlier versions of the model (lacking
reserves and demand-side integration) have been implemented for California, the Western
United States, and other areas (Fripp 2012, Nelson, Johnston, Mileva, Fripp, Hoffman, Petros-
Good, Blanco and Kammen 2012, Mileva, Nelson, Johnston and Kammen 2013, Wei, Nelson,
Greenblatt, Mileva, Johnston, Ting, Yang, Jones, McMahon and Kammen 2013, Ponce de
Leon Barido, Johnston, Moncada, Callaway and Kammen 2015, Sanchez, Nelson, Johnston,
Mileva and Kammen 2015, He, Avrin, Nelson, Johnston, Mileva, Tian and Kammen 2016).
   Our study considers the island of Oahu, the most populous island (about 1 million) and
county of Hawai’i, which comprises roughly two thirds of the state’s population and consumes
over three quarters of the state’s power. The island supports a large urban city (Honolulu),
plus a substantial tourist industry and several large military bases. Hawai’i is a particularly
interesting focus for several reasons. First, its scale is large enough to be emblematic of larger,
more complex systems, but small enough to be holistically modeled. Second, given Oahu’s


                                                4
isolation and lack of connectivity to other Hawaiian islands, intermittency is an especially
acute problem, since connectivity and trade with other regions is not economically feasible.
Third, Hawai’i has the nation’s, and perhaps the world’s, most ambitious renewable portfolio
standard – 100 percent renewable by 2045 – which makes our analysis especially relevant to
actual policy implementation. Fourth, Hawai’i depends on oil for its power production, making
wind and solar power cheaper than fossil fuels today, so it is first to face an economic crossover
that other regions will face in the future, as wind and solar move toward undercutting natural
gas and coal.
       We use the model to: (1) estimate the cost, benefits and optimal generation mix of a
100 percent renewable energy system that accords with Hawai’i’s renewable portfolio stan-
dard (RPS) as compared to a conventional fossil-fuel power system (Fossil) and a least-cost
system with no constraints on the generation mix (Unconstrained); (2) evaluate the welfare
improvement of having dynamic marginal-cost pricing as compared to flat price for each kind
of system (RPS, Fossil, and Unconstrained); (3) evaluate how much those with high interhour
substitutability of demand gain from dynamic pricing as compared to those with very little
interhour substitutability.
       Cost assumptions for a wide range of power generation and storage alternatives, from which
an optimal portfolio is selected by the model, are based on those in the most recent (December,
2016) Power Supply Improvement Plan (PSIP) of the local utility, Hawaiian Electric Company
(HECO).1 We consider scenarios for which costs equal current-day assumptions, as well as
scenarios that use the lower costs projected for renewable and battery technologies in 2045
in the PSIP. The analysis we perform here is a single-stage analysis in the sense that each
scenario assumes the optimized system is built at one point in time, although pre-existing
assets can be retained. We do this to make clear comparisons of highly-renewable and fossil
systems in flat and dynamic pricing contexts, and to show how much renewable power would
be selected in optimized systems with fixed versus dynamic marginal-cost pricing. In practice,
an optimal plan would make investments gradually over time; Switch does have the capacity
to formulate such a plan, even though we do not consider it in this paper. Such a model would
be considerably slower to solve.
       Consistent with earlier studies, we find that dynamic pricing of power provides little social
benefit in fossil-fuel systems, only 2.6 to 4.6 % of baseline annual expenditure depending on
cost and interhour substitutability. But dynamic pricing leads to a much greater social benefit
of 8.5 to 23.4% in a 100% renewable system with otherwise similar assumptions. The other key
finding is that high penetration renewable systems, including 100% renewable, are remarkably
affordable. Indeed, the welfare maximizing (unconstrained) generation portfolio under the
utility’s projected 2045 costs and pessimistic interhour demand flexibility uses 79% renewable
energy and improves welfare by 34.6% of baseline expenditure. With dynamic pricing, even a


1
    See https://www.hawaiianelectric.com/about-us/our-vision.


                                                   5
100% renewable system is welfare improving over a fossil system, excluding gains from reduced
pollution externalities. These results all derive from an assumed outer demand elasticity of
just 0.1, and cost assumptions for renewable energy and batteries that some may regard as
pessimistic. In other scenarios the benefits of real time pricing paired with renewable energy
can be far greater.
      The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 characterizes the demand system
and how we calibrate it; Section 3 reviews the Switch model that optimizes investment and
operations, as well as a Dantzig-Wolf algorithm used to equilibrate supply and demand and
thereby optimize the joint system; Section 4 summarizes capital and input cost assumptions
and the wide range of scenarios we consider; Section 5 summarizes the results; and Section 6
concludes.

2      Demand
The main novelty of this paper is the integration of a fully-specified interhour demand system
with Switch, a state-of-the-art planning model that jointly optimizes investment and chrono-
logical, hourly operation of a power system. We therefore begin by describing the structure of
the demand system and how we calibrate it.

2.1     A Nested-CES Demand System
The demand system is comprised as the sum of three nested, constant elasticity of substi-
tution (CES) utility functions that represent different types of demand. The outer layer of
each utility function assumes just two goods, electricity and all other goods, with a constant
elasticity of substitution θ, which represents a demand elasticity. The nested layer considers
electricity demand in each hour within each 24-hour day, with an interhourly elasticity of sub-
stitution σ. Aggregate demand in any given day is comprised as the weighted sum of three
representative pseudo-customers with different σ values. Each pseudo-customer is assumed
to maximize utility U (x1 , x2 , . . . , xh , . . . , x24 , Y |σ, θ, α, β1 , β2 , . . . , xh , . . . , β24 ) subject to their
budget constraint, 24
                   P
                     h=1 ph xh + Y = M , where xh is electricity consumed in hour h, Y repre-
sents expenditure on all other goods with a constant price equal to 1 (i.e., money), α and βh
are share parameters that weight all other goods relative to electricity, and electricity in each
hour relative to other other hours, and M is total income. M is calibrated by dividing total
baseline electricity expenditure of a particular pseudo-customer in a day by the share of aggre-
gate income spent on electricity. The α and βh parameters are calibrated from the statewide
share of income spent on electricity expenditure, and by baseline load shares allocated to each
pseudo-customer.
      Following Rutherford (2008), suppose there exists a unit expenditure function or an ideal
price index (the minimum expenditure required to achieve baseline utility) in the “calibrated
share form,” a measure relative to baseline values. The expenditure function is:




                                                             6
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                             1−θ    1−θ
                                                        1−θ                    n                    1−σ ! 1−σ
                                                   pY                            X               ph
     e(ph , p(−h) , p¯h , p(−h)
                            ¯ , Ū ) = Ū α                     + (1 − α)             βh                                  (1)
                                                   p¯Y                                           p¯h
                                                                                 h=1


where Ū , p¯Y , p¯h indicate baseline values for respective parameters, α is the calibrated share
                                         P
given the baseline value of Ȳ = M − h x¯h p¯h , α = Ȳ /M , and βh are calibrated shares of each
day’s electricity consumed by the pseudo-customer in each hour at the associated baseline
prices p̄h .
    Consumer welfare is measured by the indirect money metric utility function. That is, we
can write indirect utility in terms of the income required at baseline prices to achieve the
utility level achievable at prices p and income M , as:

                                                                     M
                              V (ph , p̄−h , M ) =                                                                          (2)
                                                          e(ph , p(−h) , p¯h , p̄−h , Ū )

From Roy’s Identity, Marshallian demand is given by:

                                                                           ∂V /∂ph   M ∂e
                         xh (e(ph , p−h , p¯h , p̄−h ), M ) = −                    =
                                                                           ∂V /∂M    e ∂ph

    The closed form solution of demand functions then can be written as a function of cali-
brated share parameters derived from a baseline load profile and the share of income spent on
electricity at baseline prices.

                                     xh (p|p̄, σ, β, M )
                                                         =
                                               p̄
                                  1−θ −1                           σ−θ
                  24                 1−σ                   24     1−σ 1−σ
                             1−σ                                                σ
                 X        p j
                                                           X      p j             p¯h
 M α + (1 − α)     βj                   ×(1−α)            βj             ×βh      (3)
                                                                    
                          p¯j                                     p¯j             ph
                        j=1                                                   j=1

    In the computational model, we partition a baseline load profile, drawn from actual histori-
cal hourly demand, into three pseudo-customers, each with a different interhour substitutability
parameter, σ ∈ {σl = 0.1, σm = 1, σf = 10} and a different baseline demand profile, derived
from historic loads. Pseudo customers thus differ with regard to their budget and with regard
to their calibrated share parameters (βh ), because their load profiles differ. The calibrated
share parameters also differ by day and season, to account for weather.
    To formalize this demand system, denote the calibrated load shares on day d and pseudo-
                                                         E id
customer i by β id and income by M id =                   s ,   where E id is the baseline expenditure of pseudo-
customer i on day d, and s is the share of baseline state income spent on electricity. Thus,
define the demand for a pseudo-customer i on day d in hour h as xh (p|p̄, σi , β id , M id ), using
the definition in equation 3. Aggregate demand on day d and hour h is given by the sum of
the demands from the three pseudo-customers:

                                                                7
          xdh (p|p̄) = xh (p|p̄, σl , β ld , M ld ) + xh (p|p̄, σm , β md , M md ) + xh (p|p̄, σf , β f d , M f d )   (4)

      This demand system provides an intuitive and relatively simple way to embody a range of
heterogenous demand responses and inter-temporal substitutability of loads that vary over sea-
sons and weather-related circumstances. The degree of interhour substitutability may under-
or over-estimate actual technical possibilities. For example, it assumes the same degree of
substitutability between any two hours within the same day. At least for some kinds of de-
mand, substitutability may be greater for hours nearer in time. At the same time, the demand
system assumes zero substitutability between days, when in reality substitution between late
in one day and early in the next may be fairly elastic. While this later assumption may under-
estimate the overall degree of flexibility, the structure makes it easy to scale up a sample of
representative days throughout the year to parsimoniously represent a portfolio of days with
weather and demand that are chronologically matched with supply.

2.2     Shares of Flexible Demand
This section describes how we estimate baseline loads for each kind of pseudo-customer. We
used hourly aggregate demand data for Oahu from the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
to calibrate hourly load shares that are coincident with solar and wind data used in modeling
the supply side. This allows the model to account for the covariances between renewable supply
and demand. However, because some kinds of demand are likely to be more time shiftable than
others, we develop alternative interhour flexibility scenarios based on estimated load shares
that are known to be shiftable using current technologies: air conditioning, water pumping
and water heating.
      Air conditioning demand is shiftable using ice storage, wherein ice is generated when elec-
tricity prices are low, and used for cooling instead of running the compressor when electricity
prices are high. These systems can be retrofitted onto existing air-conditioning systems. A
number of companies already market this technology to reduce demand charges 2 , to respond
to real-time variation in prices, or provide contingency or regulating reserves to the balancing
authority.3 Such systems may only require different, smarter controllers and network connec-
tivity. A considerable amount of flexible power is also used to pump water from aquifers to
storage reservoirs and tanks on hillsides; water is then gravity fed to homes and businesses.


2
  Demand charges, which are common for commercial electricity customers, link monthly bills to the highest
    kW draw, typically averaged over a 15-minute period, from each commercial customer during the month
    or year. However, because peak demand by an individual customer is unlikely to coincide with the system
    peak, demand charges may do little to improve efficiency relative to real-time pricing (Borenstein, Jaske
    and Rosenfeld 2002).
3
  Regulating reserves balance the electricity system in real time as demand fluctuates from moment to moment
    while contingency reserves keep the system stable in response to larger disruptions, such as a power plant
    unexpectedly falling off line.


                                                             8
Currently, most water pumping is done at night, because the water municipality receives a
slight discount under current time-of-use pricing. There should be a considerable amount of
flexibility in when pumping could occur, a flexibility that is mainly constrained by the capacity
of water storage. A number of companies have also developed smart water heaters, which can
heat proactively in relation to power availability (or prices) and typical use patterns instead
of reactively to hot water use. All of these systems embody an implicit form of storage that
may be much less expensive than batteries, compressed air, pumped-water hydroelectricity or
other means. These systems can also provide a source of reserves to help maintain system
stability in the face of unexpected load fluctuations.
   By considering loads from only these three principle sources, we believe our estimates
of demand-response potential should be conservative, because other kinds of electricity de-
mand for which we could not obtain estimates, or for which current technologies do not exist,
may nevertheless prove shiftable if appropriate incentives and technologies were to be made
available. For example, refrigerator/freezers and swimming pool pumps likely have large, time-
shiftable loads, but we do not explicitly consider them in this study because we were unable
to obtain data on their real-time use.
   Another consideration is that over 70 percent of total demand on Oahu derives from com-
mercial customers, many of whom have electricity metered at 15 minute intervals or less to
accommodate demand charges specified in commercial tariffs. The state is also developing
plans to install smart meters for other customers. Even without smart meters, we expect that
integrators could implement a wide range of demand-response services, including reserve pro-
vision, by using other forms of network connectivity to control power consumption of certain
designated devices. Alternatively, devices could be programmed to forecast and respond to
price signals automatically.
   Estimates of shiftable load in each hour of each month are drawn from Navigant Consulting
(2015), a private consulting report commissioned by Hawaiian Electric, a copy of which was
submitted to the Public Utility Commission. Although much of the report is redacted, ob-
scuring the methods used to estimate load shares from alternative uses, it is the only available
load share data, specific to Oahu, that we have been able to obtain. The starting point for
our estimates is a graph in the report depicting September 2025 projected end-use loads by
hour of the day. We measured the bars in the graphs by hand to estimate load shares in each
hour for this month, and summed those for air conditioning, water heating and water pump-
ing to obtain an estimate for the mid-September share of potentially shiftable load. Because
loads vary over time, and tend to be higher when it is warmer, presumably due to greater use
of air conditioning, we adjusted load shares for other months to account for this seasonality.
We made this adjustment using hourly load estimates provided in the Navigant report for
February, May, August and November of 2014, but were not partitioned by end use. These
hourly loads were regressed against a polynomial of hour-of-day and average temperature in
each month.


                                               9
                        Load = β0 + β1 h + β2 h2 + β3 h3 + β4 P V + β5 T.

where h is hour per day, P V is distributed generation from photovoltaic solar (which may be
associated with temperature), and T is temperature. We attribute temperature-sensitive load
to air conditioning, and then using load shares given for September 2025 as a baseline, we
infer the air conditioning share for the other months, linearly interpolating between February,
May, August and Noveember. Load shares attributable to water pumping and water heating
is assumed to be same across all months of the year.
   We consider three different scenarios (optimistic, moderate, pessimistic), each of which
assigns different shares of the potentially-flexible and other load to pseudo-customers with
different interhour substitutability. The assumptions for each scenario are reported in table 1.
In figures 2 and 3 we plot the implied shares of highly flexible, moderately flexible, and
inflexible demand in total and by hour and month for each of the three scenarios.
   In the end, we cannot know in advance how much demand is truly flexible or the appropriate
elasticities to use, nor anticipate how much potentially flexible customers will choose to engage
with a well-designed variable-pricing program. We anticipate that commercial customers would
comprise the bulk of participating flexible demand. Because commercial customers comprise
over 70% of Oahu’s load and commercial loads have a large share of potentially-shiftable load,
the optimistic scenarios assume that a large majority, but not all, of commercial customers
with shiftable load would actively participate in a demand response program. That optimistic
scenario might be justified by the historically high participation of commercial customers in
real-time marginal-cost pricing programs like the one in Georgia. We anticipate that participa-
tion could be even greater in future Hawai’i, since price variation will presumably be far greater
and advanced computing technologies could make participation convenient and relatively low
cost.

                           Figure 2: Demand flexibility scenarios




                                               10
                                  Table 1: Share of shiftable load

                                    σ Optimistic Moderate        Pessimistic
             Share of potentially flexible load
             (water pumping, water heading and air conditioning)
             Highly Flexible        10       67%     33%            15%
             Somewhat Flexible 1              5%      5%             5%
             Highly Inflexible     0.1       28%     62%            80%

             Other load
             Highly Flexible           10        15%            8%                0%
             Somewhat Flexible          1         5%            5%                5%
             Highly Inflexible         0.1       80%            88%              95%
             Notes: Shares of flexible and inflexible shares in each scenario.


2.3     Demand-Side Reserves
Up reserves normally refer to residual capacity by dispatchable generators that can ramp up
in the event that a power plant drops offline, wind or solar energy generation unexpectedly
falls, or demand suddenly spikes. Reserves can also be provided by the demand side, and this
is typically what power engineers call demand response, while economists normally connect the
term to the more general idea of price-sensitive demand. Historically, demand-side up reserves
have involved contracts between the balancing authority (e.g., utility or ISO) and large-scale
users of electricity that give the balancing authority the ability and right, in exchange for a
rate reduction, to remotely reduce or terminate power supply to participating customers during
certain critical events (note that “up” reserves are specified from a generation perspective, so
they correspond to reducing load). In Hawai’i, residential customers have also participated
in a program that gives residential customers a $3 monthly discount in exchange for allowing
the utility to suspend power supply to water heaters during critical events. Similarly, down
reserves correspond to the option of quickly ramping down a power plant or increasing energy
use in the event of a net supply surge, which might result from a sudden falloff of demand or
supply surge from intermittent renewables.
      The model presented here includes demand-side participation in reserve markets for both
up and down reserves, with only highly-flexible demand types assumed to participate. Reserves
can also be supplied by the supply side, either from batteries or dispatchable generators. On
the demand side, we incorporate reserve provision into flexible-type demand by applying a net
cost that includes sale of up and down reserves and purchase of energy, all at real-time prices.
We define these as follows:




                                                    11
          Figure 3: Demand flexibility scenarios by hour and month




The graphs show three scenarios for interhour demand flexibility, optimistic, moderate, pessimistic,
respectively. Note that all demand types are assumed to have the same overall demand elasticity for
electricity (0.1 in the the baseline case). Flexible, midflex and inflexible loads are assumed to have
within-day interhour elasticities of substitution equal to 10, 1 and 0.1 respectively.




                                                 12
                                       xuh = x∗h                                              (5)
                                       xdh = max(xh ) − x∗h                                   (6)

where x∗h is energy use in hour h, xuh is demand-side up-reserves provision (option to decrease
demand) in hour h, xdh is demand-side down-reserves provision (option to increase demand) in
hour h, max(xh ) is the maximum electricity demand when price equals an imposed minimum
($1 per MWh). The minimum price limits demand that could otherwise rise to infinite levels
given the constant-elasticity structure of the demand system. The flexible pseudo-customer
chooses x∗h (and implicitly xuh and xdh ), resulting in a net cost given as follows:



                        Net Cost = p∗h x∗h + puh xuh + pdh xdh                                (7)
                                    = p∗h x∗h + puh x∗h + pdh · (max(xh ) − x∗h )             (8)
                                    = x∗h · (p∗h + puh − pdh ) + pdh max(xh ),                (9)

i.e., the incremental cost per unit of consumption is p∗h + puh − pdh .

2.4     Calibration of Hourly Demand Shares
We calibrate demand scenarios by estimating the share of aggregate load in each hour and
each month used for three potentially shiftable loads: water heating, water pumping and air
conditioning. Typically these uses of power can be shifted many hours at relatively low cost
using existing technologies. We then suppose optimistic (67%), midline (33%) and pessimistic
(15%) scenarios, each of which assumes a different share of these potentially-shiftable loads will
actually have high interhour substitutability within a day (elasticity = 10). Across all scenarios
we assume just 5% of baseline demand has moderate substitutability between hours (elasticity
= 1). We assume that 80-95% of remaining load (not for water heating, water pumping or air
conditioning) is highly inelastic between hours (elasticity = 0.1). The optimistic scenario could
be achieved with widespread adoption of real-time pricing and automated demand-response
systems by commercial users alone.
      We use a baseline model that assumes an overall demand for energy (capturing substitution
between electricity and all other goods) that is highly inelastic (elasticity = 0.1), which is
consistent with a recent estimate with a strong study design and relatively similar climate
and marginal price profile (Ito 2014). While some studies find larger demand elasticities, they
tend to be based on poorer study designs and we believe it is important to have a baseline
model that is reasonably conservative. Within our model, this outer elasticity captures demand
response over longer time horizons, which helps with seasonal imbalance and episodic weather,
and adjusts overall scale modestly depending on average prices. However, because it seems
possible that new technologies and energy demands might arise in a world with highly variable


                                                  13
(and often free or nearly free) electricity, we also consider scenarios with larger demand overall
elasticities (0.5, 0.9 and 2.0).

2.5      Electric Vehicles
An important consideration for modeling future power systems with high-penetration renew-
ables is the potential growth of electric vehicles. Electric vehicles represent a new source of
power demand and, given their large and growing battery sizes, a new source of power stor-
age or interhour flexibility that might also provide reserves. Like demand-side flexibility, it is
highly uncertain how quickly electric vehicles may grow as a share of the vehicle fleet. Given
the unique nature of power demand from electric vehicles, plus the fact that they comprise
a small share of historical loads used to calibrate the demand functions described above, we
treat them separately. We also consider scenarios with a wide range of electric vehicle adop-
tion, 0.5% (the current share), 50% and 100%. In variable pricing environments we assume
that vehicle charging is optimally scheduled to least-cost times in each day, and thus makes
high-penetration renewable systems easier to achieve, but do not allow for any interday sub-
stitution of charging (which will likely be feasible). In fixed-price environments we assume
vehicle charging occurs as soon as vehicles arrive at home or work, based on trip inventories
from the National Household Travel Survey (Fripp 2017, Das 2015, FHA 2009). This shifts up
the evening peak more than other times, and makes high-penetration renewable systems more
costly.

3       Switch 2.0
Switch4 (Fripp 2012, Johnston et al. 2017) is open-source power planning software that uses
mixed-integer linear programming to minimize the net present value of the cost of electricity
production subject to operation and policy constraints. The main decision variables are gen-
eration capacities at each candidate project site and the amount of power to produce or store
at each project site during each hour of the planning period. Constraints require adequate
power to satisfy demand plus reserves during all hours, and satisfaction of any exogenous
policy constraints, such as a renewable portfolio standard (RPS).
      Switch combines an operational model, similar in detail to production cost models such as
GE MAPS or Plexos, and a long-term capacity expansion model, similar to Ventyx Strategist or
PowerSimm Planner. Commercial capacity planning models typically consider the distribution
of loads exogenously imposed on a system, neglecting price response by customers. Moreover,
conventional planning or expansion models generally use unordered sets of time steps, and
thus do no have enough temporal detail to model the operation of power systems with a large
share of time-varying renewables. Such power sources may need to be curtailed or be balanced
by interhour load shifting or energy storage, which can only be modeled accurately with


4
    http://www.switch-model.org



                                               14
chronological time steps. In contrast to conventional capacity planning models, conventional
production cost models can optimize chronological management, but assume fixed generation
portfolios that must be selected by other means. Efficient integration of renewables can be
greatly enhanced by simultaneously considering both capacity and chronological operation
decisions, as does Switch (Fripp 2012, Johnston et al. 2017, Nweke, Leanez, Drayton and
Kolhe 2012, Sullivan, Eurek and Margolis 2014).

3.1     Mathematical Formulation of Switch
Here we provide a brief overview of the core equations used by Switch. A more complete
documentation of the software can be found in Johnston et al. (2017).
      Switch 2.0 has a modular architecture that reflects the modularity of actual power systems.
Most power system operators follow rules that maintain an adequate supply of power, and
most individual devices are not concerned with the operation of other devices. Similarly, core
modules in Switch define spatially and temporally resolved balancing constraints for energy and
reserves, and an overall social cost. Separate modules represent components such as generators,
batteries or transmission links. These modules interact with the overall optimization model by
adding terms to the shared energy and reserve balances and the overall cost expression. They
can also define decision variables and constraints to govern operation of each technology. This
approach makes it possible for users to add, remove or alter modules, representing different
system components and formulations without unexpected interactions with other parts of the
model. Consequently, Switch 2.0 can be readily customized to address the needs of a given
study or region.
      In the treatment below, we have omitted elements that define regional load zones and
power transfers between these zones, since our model of Oahu has only a single zone. However,
transmission constraints would be of critical importance for applications to larger geographical
areas that are connected, such as the continental United States. We have similarly omitted
definitions for multiple investment periods, since we use a single stage for this study.

3.1.1     Objective Function
The objective function minimizes the net present value of all investment and operation costs:



                                                                 wtyear
                                        X                  X                X
                                min                 cf +                              cvt   (10)
                                      cf ∈C fixed          t∈T            cv ∈C var


Function (10) sums over sets of fixed costs C fixed and variable costs C var . Each fixed cost
component cf ∈ C fixed is a model object, specified in units of dollars per year. This object may
be a variable, parameter or expression (calculation based on other components). Variable cost
components cv are indexed by timepoint (t) among all study timepoints (T ) and specified in
units of dollars per hour. The term cvt is the element with index t from component cv , i.e.,
a variable cost that occurs during timepoint t. The weight factor wtyear scales costs from a

                                                       15
sampled timepoint to an annualized value. For this study, we select one 24 hour day from each
month of the year, so that the time points t specify actual hours. The weights multiply the
individual days by about 30 such that the accounting reflects costs over an entire year.
   Plug-in modules add components to the fixed and variable cost sets to represent each cost
that they introduce. For example, the generator-building module adds the total annual fixed
cost for all generators and batteries (capital repayment and fixed operation and maintenance)
to the C fixed set, and the generator-dispatch module adds variable costs (fuel and variable
O&M) for these facilities to C var . The specification is generic so that models of different gran-
ularity may be considered depending on the needs of a particular problem and computational
expense.

3.1.2   Operational Constraints
Power Balance: Specifies that power injections and withdrawals must balance during each time
point. Injections are mainly output from power plants and battery storage, and withdrawals
are mainly customer loads and battery charging. As with the objective function, plug-in
modules add model objects to P inject and P withdraw to show the amount of power injected
or withdrawn by each system component during each timepoint. For this study, production
components were defined by the standard generation modules, and withdrawal components
were defined by the standard electric vehicle model and a purpose-built responsive demand
module.


                       X                           X
                                   pit     =                    pw
                                                                 t ,                    ∀t ∈ T   (11)
                    pi ∈P inject               pw ∈P withdraw


Dispatch: Power generation from a source (e.g., a power plant) must fall below its committed
(turned on) capacity Wg,t during time point t multiplied by a capacity factor ηg,t , that may
vary with exogenous factors like solar radiation or wind speed.

                                         Pg,t ≤ ηg,t Wg ,          ∀g ∈ G, ∀t ∈ T                (12)

Additional constraints further limit operation:


                                          Wg,t ≤ Kg ,            ∀g ∈ G, ∀t ∈ T                  (13)


                                     dmin
                                      g Wg,t ≤ Pg,t ,                  ∀g ∈ G, ∀t ∈ T            (14)

Equation 13 constrains the commitment choice to fall below the installed capacity Kg (possibly
multiple identical units); equation 14 limits dispatch by a minimum-load constraint that applies
to many power plants.



                                                            16
Minimum up and down times: The amount of capacity started up (Up,t ) or shut down (Vp,t )
during each hour in each generation project is calculated via


                           Wg,t − Wg,t−1 = Ug,t − Vg,t ,                ∀g ∈ G, ∀t ∈ T         (15)

       Additional constraints require that all capacity that was started up during an uptime look
back window (τ̂gu , defined for each project technology) is still online, and that all capacity that
was shutdown during the downtime look back window (τ̂gd ) remains uncommitted.

                                          t
                                          X
                               Wg,t ≥                Ug,t0 ,        ∀g ∈ G, ∀t ∈ T             (16)
                                        t0 =t−τ̂gu

                                               t
                                               X
                            Wg,t ≤ KgG −                  Vg,t0 ,      ∀g ∈ G, ∀t ∈ T          (17)
                                             t0 =t−τ̂gd

       The variable Ug,t is also used to determine startup costs for each plant (not shown).

3.2      Oahu Configuration of Switch
Switch is configured based on Hawai’i’s 2007 power system data, together with finely gridded,
coincident, chronological wind and solar radiation data. Capital cost and fuel cost assump-
tions are based on Hawaiian Electric Company’s recent Power Supply and Improvement Plan
(https://www.hawaiianelectric.com/about-us/our-vision). Renewable resource poten-
tial is derived from screening available land resources as described below.

3.2.1      Utility-Scale Solar
Land available for utility-scale solar was restricted to parcels zoned for agricultural or country
use, excluding Class A agricultural land per Hawai’i statute. This is conservative because it
excludes a significant amount military land, and the military plans to install a considerable
amount of solar. We also excluded land with a slope greater than 10%, land within 50 meters of
street centerlines, and parcels with any directional dimension less than 60 meters. We assume
fixed-panel photovoltaic installations use six acres per MW (AC) of capacity and that tracking
photovoltaic installations use 7.5 acres per MW (AC) of capacity. These are roughly in the
lower quartile of the national statistics indicated by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory
(NREL)5 . Fixed photovoltaic has a ground cover ratio of 0.68 and tracking systems have a
cover ratio of 0.45. These assumptions affect the capacity factor when the sun is low. We
then use NREL’s PV Watts tool to calculate hourly output for each 4 km cell using irradiance
data from the National Solar Radiation Database (NSRDB). The map of lands considered are
shown in figure 4.


5
    See http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy13osti/56290.pdf.




                                                          17
                           Figure 4: Land Available for Utility-Scale Solar




         The map shows land that is assumed to be available for utility scale solar installations on Oahu given
         zoning and other technical and legal constraints (shown in yellow). Each area circled in blue is entered
         as a separate generation project in Switch, with different projects having different capacity limits and
         hourly production profiles. Red lines indicate roads.




3.3     Rooftop Solar
Rooftop solar potential was estimated from roof area from Google Map images. Visual review
of many roofs indicates accurate identification. We assume 40 percent coverage of roofs, which
is equivalent to 15 percent of roofs being flat with 70 percent coverage and 85 percent are
sloped with 35 percent coverage. We estimate total capacity assuming 12 percent efficiency
with 1000 W/m2 irradiance (capacity = 120 W/m2 ). Hourly output was estimated using PV
Watts and the NSRD. figure 5 shows an image of rooftops on Oahu, including a closeup of the
UH Mānoa campus.

3.4     Wind Potential
      On shore wind potential was estimated using a screening of available land similar to solar.
Only land zoned for agriculture or country and not within 300 meters of other zones was
considered. Slopes were restricted to 20 percent grade or less, and not within 30 meters of
steep slopes, to eliminate narrow ridge tops and valleys. A map of areas potentially developable
for wind is show in figure 6. We considered wind turbine density of 8.8 megawatts (MW) per
square kilometer (km2 ), which is conservatively less dense than the current Kahuku wind farm
already installed on the island (12.9 MW/km2 ), but on the high end of 5-8 MW/km2 that is
estimated by Denholm, Hand, Jackson and Ong (2009). Potential turbines were clustered by
region into separate scalable projects. Hourly behavior of each potential project—its coincident


                                                           18
                   Figure 5: Estimating Potential Rooftop Solar
                                                                                                    m2 m2




Rooftop Solar




                            m2 m2




 The bottom image shows rooftop space islandwide (in lighted in yellow). The image on top shows a
 closeup of part of the Mānoa campus to demonstrate accuracy of rooftop identification. [6]




                                               19
potential capacity—is calculated based on historical meteorological modeling conducted for the
Oahu Wind Integration and Transmission Study (Corbus, Schuerger, Roose, Strickler, Surles,
Manz, Burlingame and Woodford 2010). For all practical purposes, there is an unlimited
supply of off-shore wind potential with a high capacity factor of an estimated 43 percent,
which enters the model as a single scalable resource.
                        Potential Wind Farm Locations
                               Figure 6: Potential wind farm locations




                                                                                             [8]
         The map shows land that is assumed to be available for on-shore wind development.




3.5     Time points and build scenarios
      The model solves for a 30-year planning horizon and 12 representative days in each invest-
ment period, each representing a typical day from each month (the 15th), while constraining
the model to achieve the state’s 100 percent renewable energy goal by 2045 in the 100% scenar-
ios. We also solve models that constrain generation to be purely traditional fossil fuels, plus
a model that is unconstrained, and simply maximizes welfare (and minimizes costs) ignoring
pollution externalities. The analysis we perform here is a single stage analysis in the sense
that each scenario assumes all new assets are built at one point in time (i.e., 2045). Switch
is designed to consider a series of investment windows so as to optimize a long-run plan or
transition. However, because our focus in this paper is on the value of variable pricing, we
chose to simplify this part of the problem so as to provide more clarity about the long-run
tradeoffs of this critical policy choice. It is also possible to add more sample days to gain a
fuller representation of the joint distributions of time, weather, supply and demand; this does
not appear to change our results in a substantial way, but may be useful for fine-tuning an
actual resource plan.

                                                        20
3.6       Equilibrium: Merging Switch with Demand
       Iterations between Switch and the demand system were completed as follows. First, we
solve Switch for a baseline load profile, which is connected to either actual 2007 loads or
projected loads for 2045 (differences are discussed below). Tentative prices are derived as
marginal costs (shadow values of the constraints specified in equation 11), and these are offered
to the demand system. The demand system returns optimal quantities given these prices, and
also reports Marshallian consumer surplus minus a fixed offset – i.e., the line integral of demand
taken from baseline prices to offered prices.          6   Switch then minimizes the cost of serving the
new quantities, sending new prices based on marginal costs. During successive iterations,
Switch constructs a linearized demand system from the convex hull of the demand and total
willingness to pay (consumer surplus plus total expenditure). In other words, it approximates
total willingness to pay as a convex combination of willingness to pay from prior iterations
(i.e., any linear combination of prior bids with total weight of 100%). During each iteration,
Switch chooses a new system design to maximize welfare (willingness to pay minus cost) and
offers new prices. This cycle repeats until there is no further improvement in total surplus
from having new prices offered and receiving new bids.
       This method is a Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition of the joint supply-demand problem (Dantzig
and Wolfe 1960). With this method, solutions from the supply problem, in which consumers
are given quantities based on the linearized demand function, represent a lower bound on
surplus; solutions from the demand problem, in which consumers can choose any amount
they want without changing prices, provide an upper bound on surplus. We stop iterating
when the difference between these two measures is less than 0.1 percent of baseline electricity
expenditure.

4        Cost assumptions and scenarios
4.1       Cost Assumptions
The inputs for the Switch model are based on Hawaiian Electric Company’s Power Supply
Improvement Plan (PSIP) and are summarized in table 2. The report lays out projected costs
each year from 2016 through 2045, and we consider models with costs at each endpoint to
show sensitivity of results to cost assumptions.
       We summarize average capacity factors (normalized production potential) for the renewable
sources in figure 7. In the optimization model, capacity factors for each project vary by hour.


6
    To find the correct competitive equilibrium in this iterative manner requires that we use Marshallian surplus
      rather than compensating or equivalent variation. Because nested-CES utility is well behaved and homoth-
      etic, this integral is not path dependent (Takayama 1982). And because income effects are small, owing to
      the fact that electricity expenditure is a small share of income, this measure of surplus is also very similar to
      compensating and equivalent variation or money-metric utility. For this reason, we only report Marshallian
      consumer surplus.




                                                        21
                                     Table 2: Summary of Cost Assumptions

                                                  Capital cost ($/MW)       Unit cost ($/MMBtu)       Op. &
                                                                                                      Maint.
            Category   Description                   2016           2045      2016        2045      ($/MW/Yr.)
            New power generators
                     Combined Cycle Gas/Oil        1,653,242    1,415,952                            17,452
                     Central Tracking PV           2,856,257    1,680,388                            22,970
                     Distributed PV                3,650,295    1,511,097                               -
                     Diesel Barge                  1,323,183    1,323,328                            34,214
                     Diesel MCBH                   3,162,083    2,855,884                            33,844
                     Diesel Schofield              2,481,336    2,241,312                            33,844
                     Offshore Wind                 6,205,598    3,882,934                            96,710
                     Onshore Wind                  2,459,329    1,986,498                            27,400
                     Pumped Hydro                  3,033,333    3,033,333
            Storage
                     Battery                        484,283      146,639
                                                   ($/MWh)      ($/MWh)
                        Hydrogren Electrolyzer     1,596,797     697,014
                        Hydrogen Fuel Cell          990,562      528,787
                        Hydrogen Liquifier           42,997       42,997
            Inputs for fossil power plants
                        Biodiesel                                             30.37       48.68
                        Coal                                                   2.74       3.60
                        Diesel                                                10.48       32.50
                        LNG bulk                                               6.26       22.01
                        LNG container                                         10.52       14.38
                        LSFO                                                   7.95       29.56
                        Pellet Biomass                                        14.00       14.00
            Note: Cost assumptions are derived from Hawaiian Electric Company’s Power Supply Improvement Plan from
            December 2016. See https://www.hawaiianelectric.com/about-us/our-vision.



While projects with higher average capacity factors are more likely to be selected from the
optimization routine, the timing of output also matters.

4.2       Scenarios
We solve the full model under a large number of scenarios to explore sensitivity of results to
different assumptions. Specifically, the scenarios span all combinations of the following sets of
assumptions. Solving many scenarios also allows us to check internal consistency of results,
which is useful for developing some confidence that the models converged correctly.

Interhour demand flexibility (3) Pessimistic, Middling, Optimistic.7
                 Cost assumptions (2) HECO PSIP for 2016, 2045.
     Overall electricity demand                  (4) 0.1, 0.5, 0.9, 2.0.
            Electric vehicle share (3) 0.5%, 50%, 100%.
                    Policy Objective (3) Fossil, 100% Renewable, Unconstrained.
              Baseline load profile (2) Projected 2045, Actual 2007.


7
    Baseline scenario in boldface.

                                                               22
                        Oahu Renewable Resource
Figure 7:               Supply
            Average output        Curves
                           and potential capacity of renewable energy sources on Oahu
                                        0.45
                                         0.4
                                        0.35

              Project capacity factor
                                         0.3
                                                                                        Offshore Wind
                                        0.25
                                                                                        Onshore Wind
                                         0.2
                                                                                        Tracking PV
                                        0.15
                                                                                        Fixed-Axis PV
                                         0.1                                            Rooftop PV
                                        0.05
                                          0
                                               0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000

                                                            MW available                                [9]
       The graph shows the resource capacity of different potential sources of renewable energy, each ordered
       from highest average output (capacity factor) to lowest. For perspective, peak demand on Oahu is about
       1000 MW. A project with a 0.25 capacity factor would produce an average of 25% of its nameplate
       capacity throughout the year.




                     Pricing scenario (2) Flat, Variable marginal-cost prices.

   Most of the different sets of assumptions have been detailed above. We described the
different interhour demand flexibilities in sections 2.2 and 2.4. Cost assumptions for 2016 and
2045 are summarized in table 2. Overall demand is likely inelastic, so we focus mainly on results
with an overall demand elasticity for electricity of 0.1 (the elasticity of substitution between
electricity and all other goods). However, we do consider models with larger elasticities because
some scholars may find these more plausible, and because new uses for electricity may arise
that can make use of inexpensive electricity that would likely arise for significant stretches
under high-renewable scenarios. New intermittent demands may be more elastic.
   The two load profiles, actual 2007 and projected 2045, differ mainly in their degree of
variability, including seasonality. Current demand tends to be considerably higher during
Summer and early Fall, while loads that the Hawaiian Electric Company projects for 2045 are
considerably flatter. Because seasonal variability may be more costly to manage than intraday
variability, comparison of these scenarios provides some sense of this cost of seasonality. We
do not have a strong sense of why Hawaiian Electric Company believes the load profile will
become flatter in the future, but we have augmented historical loads to match their projections
for peak and average load in 2045. Because HECO reports a projected peak load of 1065 MW
and average of 861.4, but the historical peak and average were 1249 and 955 (in 2007), the




                                                                   23
profile is flatter for 2045 than it is for 2007.8
       Much of our discussion focuses on welfare differences between flat and variable, marginal-
cost pricing, and those scenarios are crossed with all other sets of assumptions. Considering all
combinations of the above scenarios yields 3 × 2 × 4 × 3 × 3 × 2 × 2 = 864 scenarios. Computing
time required to solve a single scenario can range from less than an hour for flat-price scenarios,
to nearly two days for some of the dynamic scenarios where many different resources are
on the margin. We used the University of Hawai’i’s high performance computing facility
with hundreds of state-of-the-art cores to solve many models simultaneously. Although space
constrains us from reporting all individual scenarios, we have characterized many of them here,
and have developed a website with drop down menus that will allow readers to explore details
of any particular scenario (http://www2.hawaii.edu/~mjrobert/power_production/).
    In addition to the above scenarios, we also solved models along a path wherein we constrain
the percent renewable to a range of values between the least cost (unconstrained) portfolio
and 100% renewable, holding all else the same. This allows us to trace out the social cost
(loss in producer plus consumer surplus) of additional renewable energy under each set of
assumptions. Note that we do not consider the external cost of pollution emissions. The idea
is that whatever benefits society may glean from renewable energy above the minimum cost,
such as reduced pollution externalities, ought to be weighed against these cost curves.
       Welfare calculations consider changes in Marshallian consumer surplus (CS), producer sur-
plus (PS), and charging costs for electrical vehicles (EV), which are treated separately but
included in total CS. We also calculated CS for each type of pseudo-customer, each having
different interhour flexibility and base load profiles. CS changes are similar to compensating
or equivalent variation, given the relatively small share of expenditure, so we do not report
CV or EV. Producer surplus is the change in revenue minus total cost. Note that these cal-
culations do not include fixed customer charges or rebates, which could be used to change the
overall balance of welfare between customers and producers. For this reason, it may be more
meaningful to focus on changes in total surplus and differences across pseudo-customers. Also
note that we do not explicitly account for fuel savings that may derive from greater EV use.
Comparison of low versus high EV scenarios are meant to show how EVs could change the
value of variable versus fixed pricing, since EVs embody a potentially large block of flexible
demand.

5        Results
       To ease comparison of scenarios, results are reported as the difference between a particular
scenario and a baseline scenario. In most cases, the baseline scenario, indicated by the bold-
faced sets of assumptions in the list above, assumes fossil-based generation, future 2045 costs


8
    We derived projected future baseline demand by multiplying the historical loads by 0.693 and adding 200
     MW.



                                                    24
and projected load profile, flat pricing and an overall demand elasticity for electricity of 0.1
(the elasticity of substitution between electricity and all other goods). Note that under flat
pricing scenarios, interhour demand flexibility has no bearing on the outcome. We choose this
scenario as the baseline because we presume that it is the future that utilities envision in the
absence of renewable energy. To make welfare calculations easy to interpret, we report these
as percent differences from the baseline level of total expenditure on electricity.

5.1     Main Results
      Table 3 reports the main results for scenarios with projected 2045 loads and costs. Compar-
ing different rows from this table, one can infer the value of variable pricing under both fossil
and high-penetration renewable systems. One can also infer the value of having more or less
optimism about the degree of interhour flexibility of demand. Finally, we can see how much
the projected cost trends favor renewables, by comparing current (2016) costs and projected
costs in 2045.
      We present a larger set of results graphically in figures 17 and 10. The first figure shows
the value of real time marginal cost pricing in comparison to flat pricing, all else the same.
The second figure shows the social cost of a 100 percent renewable system (negative change in
producer plus consumer surplus) against fossil and unconstrained baseline scenarios, all else
the same.
      To illustrate what a few scenarios look like in real time, figure 8 shows both consumption
and production mixes by hour and season for middling demand flexibility, the scenarios that
sit between the paired optimistic and pessimistic demand flexibility in table 3. For higher
resolution depictions of all 864 scenarios, see the interactive website at: http://www2.hawaii.
edu/~mjrobert/power_production/, which allows users to select desired scenarios from a
series of drop down menus.
      Finally, in figure 11 we show how the social cost of renewable energy rises as the share
of renewable energy is gradually increased from the optimal portfolio (greatest social welfare,
excluding pollution externalities) to 100 percent renewable. The graphs summarize a large
number of scenarios and generally illustrate the value of variable versus flat pricing, the role of
electric vehicles, interhour demand flexibility and overall demand elasticity, and current versus
future technology assumptions.
      The main observations that we can take from these results are:

   • A small amount of demand-side flexibility is valuable. We can see this by observing that
       the pessimistic scenarios, with less than one sixth the amount of flexible demand as the
       optimistic cases, still benefit at least half as much from variable marginal-cost pricing as
       the optimistic scenarios.
   • Under current costs, the unconstrained system is mostly fossil fuels (4 - 5.6 percent
       renewable), however under future projected costs, the unconstrained system is mostly



                                                25
         renewable (73 - 80 percent). Increasing renewable energy shares 5-15 percentage points
         above these baselines tends to be inexpensive.
       • Dynamic pricing in the unconstrained scenarios lowers costs while increasing the share of
         renewables. This value increases over time as the cost of renewables relative to fossil fuels
         declines, and renewable energy makes up a larger share of electricity in unconstrained
         scenarios.
       • A 100 percent renewable system is projected to be less costly than a fossil system by
         2045, but only under dynamic pricing.
       • The value of dynamic pricing accrues mostly to consumers and may actually reduce
         producer surplus, while total surplus always increases with dynamic pricing. Adjustments
         in fixed charges could change this imbalance.
       • Dynamic marginal cost pricing is considerably more valuable the greater the penetration
         of renewable energy, rising from about 2.6% under the baseline scenario with pessimistic
         demand flexibility, to 23.4 percent in a 100 percent renewable system with optimistic
         demand flexibility. Note that if the overall demand elasticity were larger, the value of
         dynamic pricing would also be greater, as high as 47 percent when θ = 2 and the portfolio
         is constrained to be 100 percent renewable (results reported in the appendix).
       • The production and consumption profiles indicate that in high-renewable scenarios, the
         value of the variable pricing mainly derives from considerably less use of batteries. In
         scenarios with more elastic overall demand, much greater value is realized by growing
         demand during low cost times when renewable energy is abundant.
       • While variable pricing benefits more flexible demand types more than inflexible demand
         types, even inflexible demand types tend to benefit from variable pricing, and in some
         cases, nearly as much as flexible demand types.9
       • Optimal dynamic prices vary a lot between days as well as within days, with many days
         having zero or near-zero prices nearly all day, and other days having very high prices all
         day, even midday during peak sun. Put another way, storage and interhour substitution
         can arbitrage away much of the price differences between hours, but low-sun/low-wind
         days may have high prices all day.




9
    This analysis accounts for the estimated baseline load profiles of more-flexible and less-flexible demand, but
      it does not account for individual heterogeneity of load profiles across customers. Residential customers,
      for example, may have little midday demand and high morning and evening demand, which would be more
      costly to serve.


                                                      26
     Table 3: Main Results: Change in surpluses relative to baseline future fossil system with flat prices as a percent of baseline
     expenditure.

             (1)                 (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)    (7)      (8)    (9)                         (10)        (11)         (12)        (13)        (14)          (15)       (16)
            Policy              Cost       Demand       Pricing     % Re-        Price Mean Q    SD of  ∆ CS                         ∆ EV        ∆ PS         ∆ TS        ∆ CS       ∆ CS          ∆ CS        ∆ TS
            Objec-                         Flexibil-                new-       ($/MWh) (MWh/hr.) Price  (%.)                         Cost        (%)          (%)         High-      Midflex       Inflex      Dyn
             tive                             ity                    able                       ($/MWh)                               (%)                                  flex       (%)           (%)        (%)
                                                                                                                                                                           (%)
                                                        Flat         4.12          87           944            0         33.6 -41.8  8.1   41.7       30.9 30.9 30.9
                                           Optimistic                                                                                                                                                            4.6
                                 Current


                                                       Dynamic       3.99          62           980            2         58.9 -58.2 -12.6  46.3       51.8 51.8 51.8
                                                        Flat         4.12          87           945            0         36.1 -37.2  5.1   41.2       31.5 31.5 31.5
                                           Pessimistic                                                                                                                                                           4.1
               Fossil




                                                       Dynamic       4.01          61           972            0         54.1 -57.4  -8.8  45.3       53.1 48.2 47.8
                                                        Flat         4.27         124           906            0           —————————— B a s e l i n e ——————————
                                           Optimistic                                                                                                                                                            3.4
                                 Future




                                                       Dynamic       4.31         131           900            3         -4.9  -2.7  8.4    3.4       -5.8 -5.8 -5.8
                                                        Flat         4.28         126           904            0           —————————— B a s e l i n e ——————————
                                           Pessimistic                                                                                                                                                           2.6
                                                       Dynamic       4.25         107           912            0          8   -20.8  -5.5   2.6       14.8  6.3  5.4
                                                        Flat         100          173          871            0          -38.9         36          -1.6       -40.5        -38.3       -38.3       -38.3
                                           Optimistic                                                                                                                                                           23.4
                                 Current




                                                       Dynamic       100          128          959            86         -12.6       -15.5         -4.5       -17.1          3.1       -15.9       -25.7
               100% Renewable




                                                        Flat         100          171          871            0          -37.1        33.8         -2.9        -40          -35         -35         -35
27




                                           Pessimistic                                                                                                                                                          13.9
                                                       Dynamic       100          137          931            96         -24.8       -14.9         -1.3       -26.1          6.4       -17.8       -28.9
                                                        Flat         100           98           931           0           25          -30         -28.6        -3.6         21.2        21.2        21.2
                                           Optimistic                                                                                                                                                           13.7
                                 Future




                                                       Dynamic       100           84          1047           75         39.3        -52.9        -29.2        10.1         43.4        30.9       26.2
                                                        Flat         100           98           931           0          25.3        -29.1        -28.9        -3.6        22.4         22.4        22.4
                                           Pessimistic                                                                                                                                                           8.5
                                                       Dynamic       100           92          1016           80         33.9        -51.5         -29          4.9         45.2        31.7         27
                                                        Flat         5.39          88           943           0          34.8        -23.7          6.9        41.7        29.7        29.7         29.7
                                           Optimistic                                                                                                                                                            4.6
                                 Current




                                                       Dynamic       3.99          62           980           2          58.9        -58.2        -12.6        46.3        51.8        51.8         51.8
               Unconstrained




                                                        Flat         5.63          82           949           0          38.3        -37.7          2.9        41.2        35.9        35.9         35.9
                                           Pessimistic                                                                                                                                                           4.1
                                                       Dynamic       4.02          61           972           0          53.4        -57.4          -8         45.3        53.1        47.8         47.3
                                                        Flat          73           87           944            0         35.4        -35.7          -6         29.4        30.6        30.6         30.6
                                           Optimistic                                                                                                                                                            9.3
                                 Future




                                                       Dynamic        80           71           994           32         45.5        -55.3         -6.7        38.7        45.7        37.5         34.4
                                                        Flat          73           87           944            0         35.4        -34.7         -6.3        29.1        31.6        31.6         31.6
                                           Pessimistic                                                                                                                                                           5.5
                                                       Dynamic        79           79           976           39         39.3        -54.4         -4.8        34.6        47.1        36.3         32.4
           Notes: In all of the scenarios presented in this table, the overall demand elasticity for electricity (θ) equals 0.1, the baseline load profile is that projected for 2045, and electric vehicles are assumed
           to comprise 50% of the fleet. Each scenario (row in the table) is defined by assumptions delineated in the first four columns. The first column (Policy Objective) indicates exogenous constraints
           determined by policy: The Fossil scenario restricts any new installation of renewable energy, but is otherwise least cost; the 100% Renewable scenario reflects the intended outcome of the State’s
           Renewable Portfolio Standard, and the Unconstrained scenario maximizes welfare without any constraints on the mix of power plants. The second column indicates whether current costs (2016)
           or the present value of future costs projected for 2045 from HECO’s Power Supply and Improvement Plan are assumed. The third column indicates the degree of demand flexibility, as detailed
           in table 1. The fourth column indicates whether retail prices are flat or dynamic (time-varying and equal to marginal cost). The remaining columns summarize the outcomes of the conditionally
           optimized system: average price, average quantity, standard deviation of price, and changes in surpluses from the baseline case (fossil system, future costs, and flat pricing). All changes welfare
           are reported as the percent difference relative to the baseline level of expenditure on electricity. %∆EV is simply the percent change in charging costs for electric vehicles from the base case. Note
           that ∆CS includes EV changes. We also examine changes in welfare for different demand flexibilities, which only matters for dynamic pricing scenarios. The last column reports the social value
           of dynamic pricing holding all else the same.
                   Figure 8: Hourly production and consumption profiles for several scenarios with middling interhour demand flexiblity.
                                                                                                                                                                                             Fossil with Flat Prices
                                                                                 Hourly Power Production (MW)                                                                                                                                                                     Hourly Power Consumption (MW)
                                                                                                                                                                                                        400

            2000                                                                                                                                                                                                   2000                                                                                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                        300
       MW




                                                                                                                                                                                                              MW
                                                                                                                                                                                     Base price         200
            1000                                                                                                                                                                                                   1000                                                                                                                                                                          1000
                                                                                                                                                                                 Offered price                                                                                                                                                                                        Last bid
                                                                                                                                                                                                        100                                                                                                                                                                   Base load

               0                                                                                                                                                                                         0            0
                     15/1/2045   15/2/2045      15/3/2045      15/4/2045          Hourly 15/6/2045
                                                                             15/5/2045   Power Production
                                                                                                   15/7/2045             (MW)
                                                                                                                           15/8/2045          15/9/2045       15/10/2045      15/11/2045   15/12/2045                     15/1/2045   15/2/2045       15/3/2045   15/4/2045       Hourly Power
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15/5/2045           Consumption
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15/6/2045   15/7/2045             (MW)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15/8/2045       15/9/2045   15/10/2045   15/11/2045    15/12/2045

                                               Fossil − Flat Pricing − Future Cost Assumption − 50% EV − 2045 Load − Aggregate Elasticity 0.1                                                           400                                           Fossil − Flat Pricing − Future Cost Assumption − 50% EV − 2045 Load − Aggregate Elasticity 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                       Fossil with Dynamic Prices
            2000                                                                                                                                                                                                   2000                                                                                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                        300
                                                                  Source        DischargeBattery       Diesel      LNG         H.Power        Coal                                                                                                                        Usage        ChargeEVs     ChargeBattery          FlexibleDemand
       MW




                                                                                                                                                                                                              MW
                                                                                                                                                                                     Base price         200
            1000                                                                                                                                                                 Offered price                     1000                                                                                                                                                                          1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Last bid
                                                                                                                                                                                                        100                                                                                                                                                                   Base load

               0                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                     15/1/2045   15/2/2045      15/3/2045      15/4/2045          Hourly 15/6/2045
                                                                             15/5/2045   Power Production
                                                                                                   15/7/2045             (MW)
                                                                                                                           15/8/2045          15/9/2045       15/10/2045      15/11/2045   15/12/2045
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15/1/2045   15/2/2045       15/3/2045   15/4/2045       Hourly Power
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15/5/2045           Consumption
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15/6/2045   15/7/2045             (MW)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15/8/2045       15/9/2045   15/10/2045   15/11/2045    15/12/2045
            4000                             Fossil − Dynamic Pricing − Future Cost Assumption − 50% EV − 2045 Load − Aggregate Elasticity 0.1                                                          400        4000                                                                                                                                                                          4000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fossil − Dynamic Pricing − Future Cost Assumption − 50% EV − 2045 Load − Aggregate Elasticity 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                100% Renewable with Flat Prices
            3000                                                                                                                                                                                        300        3000                                                                                                                                                                          3000
                                                                                  Source       LNG           H.Power         Coal                                                                                                                                                    Usage     ChargeEVs         FlexibleDemand
       MW




                                                                                                                                                                                                              MW
            2000                                                                                                                                                                     Base price         200        2000                                                                                                                                                                          2000

                                                                                                                                                                                 Offered price
            1000                                                                                                                                                                                        100        1000                                                                                                                                                               Last bid   1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Base load
               0                                                                  Hourly 15/6/2045
                                                                                         Power Production                (MW)                                                                            0            0                                                           Hourly Power    Consumption               (MW)
                     15/1/2045   15/2/2045      15/3/2045      15/4/2045     15/5/2045             15/7/2045               15/8/2045          15/9/2045       15/10/2045      15/11/2045   15/12/2045                     15/1/2045   15/2/2045       15/3/2045   15/4/2045   15/5/2045   15/6/2045   15/7/2045              15/8/2045       15/9/2045   15/10/2045   15/11/2045    15/12/2045
            4000                      100% Renewable − Flat Pricing − Future Cost Assumption − 50% EV − 2045 Load − Aggregate Elasticity 0.1                                                            400        4000                      100% Renewable − Flat Pricing − Future Cost Assumption − 50% EV − 2045 Load − Aggregate Elasticity 0.1                                              4000
                                                                                                                                                                           100% Renewable with Dynamic Prices
            3000                                                                                                                                                                                        300        3000                                                                                                                                                                          3000
                                             Source         curtail_SUN    DischargeBattery        SolarPV       Wind        Pellet.Biomass       Biodiesel         H.Power      Offered price                                                          Usage      ProduceHydrogen      ChargeEVs        LiquifyHidrogren      ChargeBattery      FlexibleDemand
28


       MW




                                                                                                                                                                                                              MW
            2000                                                                                                                                                                     Base price         200        2000                                                                                                                                                                          2000


            1000                                                                                                                                                                                        100                                                                                                                                                                           Last bid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1000                                                                                                                                                                          1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Base load
               0
                     15/1/2045   15/2/2045      15/3/2045      15/4/2045          Hourly 15/6/2045
                                                                             15/5/2045   Power Production
                                                                                                   15/7/2045             (MW)
                                                                                                                           15/8/2045          15/9/2045       15/10/2045      15/11/2045   15/12/2045
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15/1/2045   15/2/2045       15/3/2045   15/4/2045
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hourly Power
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15/5/2045
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Consumption
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15/6/2045   15/7/2045
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (MW)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15/8/2045                   15/9/2045   15/10/2045   15/11/2045    15/12/2045
            4000                                                                                                                                                                                        400        4000                                                                                                                                                                          4000
                                    100% Renewable − Dynamic Pricing − Future Cost Assumption − 50% EV − 2045 Load − Aggregate Elasticity 0.1                                                                                             100% Renewable − Dynamic Pricing − Future Cost Assumption − 50% EV − 2045 Load − Aggregate Elasticity 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                   Unconstrained with Flat Prices
            3000                                                                                                                                                                                        300        3000                                                                                                                                                                          3000
                                                      Source       DischargeBattery      SolarPV       Wind       Pellet.Biomass          Biodiesel       H.Power                                                                                                         Usage        ChargeEVs     ChargeBattery          FlexibleDemand
       MW




                                                                                                                                                                                                              MW
            2000                                                                                                                                                                     Base price         200        2000                                                                                                                                                                          2000


            1000                                                                                                                                                                 Offered price          100        1000                                                                                                                                                                          1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Last bid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Base load
               0                                                                  Hourly 15/6/2045
                                                                                         Power Production                (MW)                                                                            0            0                                                           Hourly Power    Consumption               (MW)
                     15/1/2045   15/2/2045      15/3/2045      15/4/2045     15/5/2045             15/7/2045               15/8/2045          15/9/2045       15/10/2045      15/11/2045   15/12/2045                     15/1/2045   15/2/2045       15/3/2045   15/4/2045   15/5/2045   15/6/2045   15/7/2045              15/8/2045       15/9/2045   15/10/2045   15/11/2045    15/12/2045
            4000                        Unconstrained − Flat Pricing − Future Cost Assumption − 50% EV − 2045 Load − Aggregate Elasticity 0.1                                                           400        4000                           Unconstrained − Flat Pricing − Future Cost Assumption − 50% EV − 2045 Load − Aggregate Elasticity 0.1                                          4000
                                                                                                                                                                              Unconstrained with Dynamic Prices
            3000                                                                                                                                                                                        300        3000                                                                                                                                                                          3000
                                                       Source        DischargeBattery     SolarPV       Wind        Diesel          LNG     H.Power        Coal                                                                                                           Usage        ChargeEVs     ChargeBattery          FlexibleDemand
       MW




                                                                                                                                                                                                              MW
            2000                                                                                                                                                                     Base price         200        2000                                                                                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                                                                 Offered price
            1000                                                                                                                                                                                        100        1000                                                                                                                                                               Last bid   1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Base load
               0                                                                                                                                                                                         0            0
                     15/1/2045   15/2/2045      15/3/2045      15/4/2045     15/5/2045     15/6/2045         15/7/2045       15/8/2045        15/9/2045       15/10/2045      15/11/2045   15/12/2045                     15/1/2045   15/2/2045       15/3/2045   15/4/2045   15/5/2045      15/6/2045       15/7/2045       15/8/2045       15/9/2045   15/10/2045   15/11/2045    15/12/2045

                                     Unconstrained − Dynamic Pricing − Future Cost Assumption − 50% EV − 2045 Load − Aggregate Elasticity 0.1                                                                                               Unconstrained − Dynamic Pricing − Future Cost Assumption − 50% EV − 2045 Load − Aggregate Elasticity 0.1

                                                       Source        DischargeBattery     SolarPV       Wind        Diesel          LNG     H.Power        Coal                                                                                                           Usage        ChargeEVs     ChargeBattery          FlexibleDemand




     The scenarios presented above assume the middling scenario for interhour substitutability of demand, an inelastic overall demand elasticity for electricity equal to 0.1, a baseline
     demand profile projected for 2045, a vehicle fleet with 50% electric vehicles, and costs of production as projected for 2045 in HECO’s Power Supply and Improvement Plan. The
     first two rows show fossil-fuel systems with flat and dynamic, real-time pricing; the next two rows show 100% renewable systems with flat and dynamic pricing; and the last
     two rows show the welfare-maximizing systems (resource unconstrained) with flat and dynamic pricing. Higher resolution graphs for all scenarios can be viewed at the website:
     www2.hawaii.edu/~mjrobert/power_production/.
     Figure 9: Surplus gain from dynamic pricing under different policy, cost and demand flexibility scenarios.
29




        The graph shows the difference in total economic surplus with real-time marginal-cost pricing and total surplus when
        prices are flat, holding all else the same. Total surplus change is reported as a percentage of baseline (flat price)
        expenditure on electricity. The graph depicts all scenarios with an overall demand elasticity of 0.1; results for larger
        overall elasticities are shown in the appendix. The top row shows the value of variable pricing under current costs;
        the bottom row shows the value of variable pricing under projected future costs (2045). The horizontal axis shows
        the policy scenario: fossil, 100% renewable or unconstrained (maximum surplus, regardless of source). The bars
        show the baseline case with 50 percent electric vehicle fleet and 2045 load profile, the diamonds show the 2007 load
        profile, and the error bars show how results differ with 0.5 percent and 100 percent electric vehicles–more electric
        vehicles always increase the value of variable pricing.
     Figure 10: Cost of 100 percent renewable energy system under different policy, cost and demand flexibility scenarios.
30




              The graph shows the difference in total economic surplus with a 100 percent renewable system versus the baseline
              scenario given on the horizontal axis, holding all else the same. Total surplus change is reported as a percentage of
              baseline expenditure on electricity. The graph depicts all scenarios with an overall demand elasticity of 0.1; results
              for larger overall elasticities are shown in the appendix. The top row shows the value of variable pricing under
              current costs; the bottom row shows the value of variable pricing under projected future costs (2045). The horizontal
              axis shows the policy scenario: fossil, 100% renewable or unconstrained (maximum surplus, regardless of source).
              The bars show the baseline case with 50 percent electric vehicle fleet and 2045 load profile, the diamonds show the
              2007 load profile, and the error bars show how results differ with 0.5 percent and 100 percent electric vehicles–more
              electric vehicles always increase the value of variable pricing.
                             Figure 11: The social cost of renewable electricity relative to a fossil future with flat pricing.

                                                    Current Cost                                                         Future Cost
                                     50




                                                                                                                                                  EV = 0.5%
                                      0                                                   Flat pricing




     (% of baseline expenditure)
      Cost of renewable energy
                                                                                          Dynamic pricing − Optimistic
                                   −50                                                    Dynamic pricing − Pessimistic

                                   −100
                                     50




                                                                                                                                                  EV = 100%
                                      0


                                   −50


                                   −100
                                          0   25         50        75        100      0                  25                  50        75   100



                                                    Current Cost                                                         Future Cost
                                     50


                                      0




                                                                                                                                                  θ = 0.1
     (% of baseline expenditure)




                                                                                                          Least cost
      Cost of renewable energy




                                   −50
                                                                                                           share of
                                                                                                          renewable
                                   −100
                                     50
31




                                      0




                                                                                                                                                  θ=2
                                   −50


                                   −100
                                          0   25         50        75        100      0                  25                  50        75   100
                                                                          Share of renewable
     Each line shows the social cost—the loss in total economic surplus (PS + CS)—as the share renewable electricity rises
     above the least-cost share, holding all else the same. Social cost is measured as percent of expenditure in the baseline
     scenario, which is a predominantly fossil system with flat pricing in the year 2045. Thus, values less than zero imply
     a welfare improvement compared to using a conventional fossil system in the future (excluding externalities). Graphs
     on the left assume current (2016) costs, while graphs on the right assume future (2045) costs. Comparison of the
     top two rows shows the influence of electric vehicles (EV), contrasting the current fleet share of 0.5 percent EV with
     100 percent EV. In the top two rows the overall demand elasticity is fixed at the baseline of θ = 0.1. Comparison
     of the bottom two rows shows the influence of a more elastic demand (θ = 2 versus θ = 0.1), while holding the EV
     share fixed at 50 percent. In all graphs, black lines show the social cost with flat prices; dark green line show the
     social cost with variable prices and pessimistic interhour substitutability; and the light green lines show social cost
     with variable prices and optimistic interhour substitutability.
 5.2       Supplementary results
        In the appendix we report results from scenarios that are exactly like those reported in
 table 3, except we change individual assumptions that were held constant across all scenarios
 in the main results. We also replicate figures 17 and 10 for different overall demand elasticities.
 These results mainly show that the value of dynamic pricing increases considerably, and the
 social cost of renewable energy falls, with a greater share of electric vehicle use and a higher
 overall demand elasticity.

 6        Discussion
        We developed the first integrated model of power supply, nonlinear demand, storage and
 reserves that simultaneously optimizes investment and chronological management of the sys-
 tem, with and without constraints on the share of renewable energy. The model is open source
 and generalizable to other settings with multiple nodes, transmission considerations, and mul-
 tiple investment windows. We use this model to evaluate the benefits of variable pricing in
 comparison to flat pricing for fossil-based, unconstrained and high-renewable systems on Oahu,
 Hawai’i’s most populous island. We find that variable pricing is considerably more valuable in
 high-renewable systems, that a large share of renewables will soon be optimal, even excluding
 externalities, and that the optimal renewable share is higher with variable pricing than it is
 with flat pricing.
        Optimal power systems with a high share of renewables can use batteries and/or demand
 response to cost-effectively manage day-night and other short-term variations in supply. The
 larger challenge with intermittent renewables concerns seasonality and episodic or prolonged
 shortfalls in power generation. The optimized system manages these variations by striking
 a balance between overbuilding generation capacity for normal and resource rich times and,
 during resource poor times, using high-cost biofuels in traditional power plants and increasing
 prices to limit demand.10 Unlike current fossil-based power systems wherein the main benefit
 of variable pricing comes from limiting peak demand, the benefits of variable pricing in high-
 renewable systems are multifaceted, lowering the cost of day-night balance, helping to limit
 generation capacity by staving off demand during resource lean times (not necessarily peak
 demand), and allowing greater social benefit from higher electricity use during resource rich
 times.
        The last phenomenon—new uses of low-cost power—is a key source of value from variable
 pricing in high-renewable systems, especially when overall demand is more elastic. Although
 existing empirical studies suggest that demand is inelastic, we speculate that some of the inelas-


10
     Switch also includes a hydrogen storage option, wherein excess generation produced in resource rich times is
       used to make hydrogen from water, which is then stored for fuel cell generation in resource lean times. This
       technology is not economic in most of our scenarios, but does show up in limited capacity in a few of them.
       Similarly, a pumped-water hydropower option that would make use of an existing reservoir is not economic
       in any of our scenarios.


                                                       32
 ticity stems from the fact that retail pricing tends to be flat. It is hard to know how demand
 could evolve in an environment with long spells of essentially free energy. Currently cost-
 prohibitive energy uses, like desalination, may be both flexible in their timing and economic
 in high-renewable systems with long stretches of cheap power. Alternatively, new long-term,
 low-cost storage options may arise if appropriately incentivized. While flexible uses of low-cost
 power are speculative, they do seem plausible, and are what we have in mind in scenarios with
 higher demand elasticities. The benefit of more elastic demand is two-fold: it includes the
 extra surplus from more electricity consumption while making it easier to curb demand during
 resource lean times.
        Some have suggested that the viability of low-cost, high-penetration renewable energy
 reflects Hawai’i’s unique characteristics: the state is rich in wind and solar resources, but
 must otherwise import fossil fuels a great distance, making fossil fuels expensive relative to
 renewable alternatives. The unconstrained options also rule out additional installations of new
 coal-fired power plants. Still, the cost assumptions used in this analysis are fairly conservative,
 especially in light of rapid technological advancement in the last few years. By some estimates,
 such as Bloomberg New Energy Finance and Lazard,11 current renewable energy and battery
 technology costs already rival Hawaiian Electric Company’s projections for 2045 (Lazard 2017).
        At the same time, renewable energy in Hawai’i is in some ways more challenging than other
 locations, due to its extreme isolation. In continental regions, which have much more connec-
 tivity, transmission provides another, potentially lower-cost method of managing intermittency
 challenges, as well as transferring renewable power from areas rich in renewable resources to
 areas that are renewable energy poor. The modeling framework presented here can be used to
 assess the substitution possibilities between transmission and demand response, and generally
 optimizing high-dimensional chronological power systems in a realistic way. Solving such a
 model would be computationally expensive, perhaps two orders of magnitude more expensive
 that our model of the island of Oahu, but potentially feasible with solution algorithms that
 could subdivide the larger problem and thereby make use of modern parallel computing.
        We believe these results provide credible evidence that high-penetration renewable energy
 is viable at reasonable economic cost in many places soon. The low cost of renewable energy
 greatly strengthens the case for real-time dynamic pricing options at the retail level.




11
     See       https://about.bnef.com/blog/           and        https://www.lazard.com/perspective/
       levelized-cost-of-energy-2017/


                                                 33
References
Blonz, Joshua A, “Making the Best of the Second-Best: Welfare Consequences of Time-
    Varying Electricity Prices,” Working Paper, Energy Instittue, Haas School of Business,
    Univresity of California at Berkeley, 2016, (W275).
Borenstein, Severin, “The long-run efficiency of real-time electricity pricing,” The Energy
    Journal, 2005, 26 (3), 93–116.
     and Stephen Holland, “On the efficiency of competitive electricity markets with time-
    invariant retail prices,” RAND Journal of Economics, 2005, 36 (3), 469–494.
    , Michael Jaske, and Arthur Rosenfeld, “Dynamic pricing, advanced metering, and
    demand response in electricity markets,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2002,
    128 (12), 4136–45.
Consulting, Inc. Navigant, “Demand Response Potential Assessment for the Hawaiian
    Electric Companies: Final Draft Report,” Technical Report, Navigant Consulting, Inc.
    December 2015.
Corbus, D, M Schuerger, L Roose, J Strickler, T Surles, D Manz, D Burlingame,
    and D Woodford, “Oahu wind integration and transmission study: Summary report,”
    Technical Report, National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Golden, CO. 2010.
Dantzig, George B and Philip Wolfe, “Decomposition principle for linear programs,”
    Operations research, 1960, 8 (1), 101–111.
Das, Paritosh; Matthias Fripp, “Savings and Peak Reduction Due to Optimally-Timed
    Charging of Electric Vehicles on the Oahu Power System,” Technical Report HI-14-17,
    Electric Vehicle Transportation Center December 2015.
de Leon Barido, Diego Ponce, Josiah Johnston, Maria V Moncada, Duncan Call-
    away, and Daniel M Kammen, “Evidence and future scenarios of a low-carbon energy
    transition in Central America: a case study in Nicaragua,” Environmental Research Let-
    ters, September 2015, 10 (10), 104002.
Denholm, Paul, Maureen Hand, Maddalena Jackson, and Sean Ong, “Land use
    requirements of modern wind power plants in the United States,” Technical Report,
    National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Golden, CO. 2009.
FHA, “2009 National Household Travel Survey,” Technical Report, U.S. Department of Trans-
    portation, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, D.C. 2009.
Fripp, Matthias, “Switch: a planning tool for power systems with large shares of intermittent
    renewable energy,” Environmental science & technology, 2012, 46 (11), 6371–6378.
    , “Effect of Electric Vehicles on Design, Operation and Cost of a 100% Renewable Power
    System,” Technical Report Working Paper No. 2017-3, University of Hawaii Economic
    Research Organization (UHERO), Honolulu, Hawaii March 2017.

                                             34
Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Stanley S Reynolds, and Mario Samano, “Intermittency
    and the value of renewable energy,” Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (4), 1187–
    1233.
He, Gang, Anne-Perrine Avrin, James H Nelson, Josiah Johnston, Ana Mileva,
    Jianwei Tian, and Daniel M Kammen, “SWITCH-China: A Systems Approach to
    Decarbonize China’s Power System,” Environmental Science & Technology, 2016.
Ito, Koichiro, “Do consumers respond to marginal or average price? Evidence from nonlinear
    electricity pricing,” The American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (2), 537–563.
Johnston, Josiah, Benjamı́n Maluenda, Rodrigo Henrı́quez, and Matthias Fripp,
    “Switch 2.0: A Modern Platform for Planning High-Renewable Power Systems,” Technical
    Report, Preprint, https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.05481 2017.
Lazard, P, “Levelized Cost of Energy Analysis 11.0,” Technical Report, Tech. rep., Lazar
    Capital Markets Report, version 11 2017.
Mileva, Ana, James H Nelson, Josiah Johnston, and Daniel M Kammen, “Sun-
    Shot solar power reduces costs and uncertainty in future low-carbon electricity systems,”
    Environmental Science & Technology, 2013, 47 (16), 9053–9060.
Nelson, James, Josiah Johnston, Ana Mileva, Matthias Fripp, Ian Hoffman, Au-
    tumn Petros-Good, Christian Blanco, and Daniel M Kammen, “High-resolution
    modeling of the western North American power system demonstrates low-cost and low-
    carbon futures,” Energy Policy, 2012, 43, 436–447.
Nweke, Charles I, Frank Leanez, Glenn R Drayton, and Mohan Kolhe, “Benefits of
    chronological optimization in capacity planning for electricity markets,” in “Power System
    Technology (POWERCON), 2012 IEEE International Conference on” IEEE 2012, pp. 1–6.
Rutherford, Thomas F, “Calibrated CES Utility Functions: A Worked Example,” Technical
    Report, Mimeo, ETH Zürich 2008.
Sanchez, Daniel L, James H Nelson, Josiah Johnston, Ana Mileva, and Daniel M
    Kammen, “Biomass enables the transition to a carbon-negative power system across
    western North America,” Nature Climate Change, February 2015, 5 (3), 230–234.
Sullivan, Patrick, Kelly Eurek, and Robert Margolis, “Advanced methods for incorpo-
    rating solar energy technologies into electric sector capacity-expansion models: Literature
    review and analysis,” Technical Report, National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL),
    Golden, CO. 2014.
Takayama, Akira, “On consumer’s surplus,” Economics Letters, 1982, 10 (1-2), 35–42.
Wei, Max, James H Nelson, Jeffery B Greenblatt, Ana Mileva, Josiah John-
    ston, Michael Ting, Christopher Yang, Chris Jones, James E McMahon, and
    Daniel M Kammen, “Deep carbon reductions in California require electrification and
    integration across economic sectors,” Environmental Research Letters, 2013, 8 (1), 014038.


                                             35
A   Supplementary Results




                            36
     Figure 12: Surplus gain from dynamic pricing under different policy, cost and demand flexibility scenarios when the overall demand
     elasticity equals 0.5.
37




                    The graph shows the difference in total economic surplus with real-time marginal-cost pricing and total surplus when
                    prices are flat, holding all else the same. Total surplus change is reported as a percentage of baseline (flat price)
                    expenditure on electricity. The graph depicts all scenarios with an overall demand elasticity of 0.5 instead of 0.1 as
                    reported in the main paper. The top row shows the value of variable pricing under current costs; the bottom row
                    shows the value of variable pricing under projected future costs (2045). The horizontal axis shows the policy scenario:
                    fossil, 100% renewable or unconstrained (maximum surplus, regardless of source). The bars show the baseline case
                    with 50 percent electric vehicle fleet and 2045 load profile, the diamonds show the 2007 load profile, and the error
                    bars show how results differ with 0.5 percent and 100 percent electric vehicles–more electric vehicles always increase
                    the value of variable pricing.
     Figure 13: Cost of 100 percent renewable energy system under different policy, cost and demand flexibility scenarios when the
     overall demand elasticity equals 0.5.
38




                   The graph shows the difference in total economic surplus with a 100 percent renewable system versus the baseline
                   scenario given on the horizontal axis, holding all else the same. Total surplus change is reported as a percentage of
                   baseline expenditure on electricity. The graph depicts all scenarios with an overall demand elasticity of 0.5 instead
                   of 0.1 as reported in the main paper. The top row shows the value of variable pricing under current costs; the
                   bottom row shows the value of variable pricing under projected future costs (2045). The horizontal axis shows the
                   policy scenario: fossil, 100% renewable or unconstrained (maximum surplus, regardless of source). The bars show
                   the baseline case with 50 percent electric vehicle fleet and 2045 load profile, the diamonds show the 2007 load profile,
                   and the error bars show how results differ with 0.5 percent and 100 percent electric vehicles–more electric vehicles
                   always increase the value of variable pricing.
     Figure 14: Surplus gain from dynamic pricing under different policy, cost and demand flexibility scenarios when the overall demand
     elasticity equals 0.9.
39




                    The graph shows the difference in total economic surplus with real-time marginal-cost pricing and total surplus when
                    prices are flat, holding all else the same. Total surplus change is reported as a percentage of baseline (flat price)
                    expenditure on electricity. The graph depicts all scenarios with an overall demand elasticity of 0.9 instead of 0.1 as
                    reported in the main paper. The top row shows the value of variable pricing under current costs; the bottom row
                    shows the value of variable pricing under projected future costs (2045). The horizontal axis shows the policy scenario:
                    fossil, 100% renewable or unconstrained (maximum surplus, regardless of source). The bars show the baseline case
                    with 50 percent electric vehicle fleet and 2045 load profile, the diamonds show the 2007 load profile, and the error
                    bars show how results differ with 0.5 percent and 100 percent electric vehicles–more electric vehicles always increase
                    the value of variable pricing.
     Figure 15: Cost of 100 percent renewable energy system under different policy, cost and demand flexibility scenarios when the
     overall demand elasticity equals 0.9.
40




                   The graph shows the difference in total economic surplus with a 100 percent renewable system versus the baseline
                   scenario given on the horizontal axis, holding all else the same. Total surplus change is reported as a percentage of
                   baseline expenditure on electricity. The graph depicts all scenarios with an overall demand elasticity of 0.9 instead
                   of 0.1 as reported in the main paper. The top row shows the value of variable pricing under current costs; the
                   bottom row shows the value of variable pricing under projected future costs (2045). The horizontal axis shows the
                   policy scenario: fossil, 100% renewable or unconstrained (maximum surplus, regardless of source). The bars show
                   the baseline case with 50 percent electric vehicle fleet and 2045 load profile, the diamonds show the 2007 load profile,
                   and the error bars show how results differ with 0.5 percent and 100 percent electric vehicles–more electric vehicles
                   always increase the value of variable pricing.
     Figure 16: Surplus gain from dynamic pricing under different policy, cost and demand flexibility scenarios when the overall demand
     elasticity equals 2.
41




                    The graph shows the difference in total economic surplus with real-time marginal-cost pricing and total surplus when
                    prices are flat, holding all else the same. Total surplus change is reported as a percentage of baseline (flat price)
                    expenditure on electricity. The graph depicts all scenarios with an overall demand elasticity of 2 instead of 0.1 as
                    reported in the main paper. The top row shows the value of variable pricing under current costs; the bottom row
                    shows the value of variable pricing under projected future costs (2045). The horizontal axis shows the policy scenario:
                    fossil, 100% renewable or unconstrained (maximum surplus, regardless of source). The bars show the baseline case
                    with 50 percent electric vehicle fleet and 2045 load profile, the diamonds show the 2007 load profile, and the error
                    bars show how results differ with 0.5 percent and 100 percent electric vehicles–more electric vehicles always increase
                    the value of variable pricing.
     Figure 17: Cost of 100 percent renewable energy system under different policy, cost and demand flexibility scenarios when the
     overall demand elasticity equals 2.
42




                   The graph shows the difference in total economic surplus with a 100 percent renewable system versus the baseline
                   scenario given on the horizontal axis, holding all else the same. Total surplus change is reported as a percentage of
                   baseline expenditure on electricity. The graph depicts all scenarios with an overall demand elasticity of 2 instead
                   of 0.1 as reported in the main paper. The top row shows the value of variable pricing under current costs; the
                   bottom row shows the value of variable pricing under projected future costs (2045). The horizontal axis shows the
                   policy scenario: fossil, 100% renewable or unconstrained (maximum surplus, regardless of source). The bars show
                   the baseline case with 50 percent electric vehicle fleet and 2045 load profile, the diamonds show the 2007 load profile,
                   and the error bars show how results differ with 0.5 percent and 100 percent electric vehicles–more electric vehicles
                   always increase the value of variable pricing.
                          Table 4: Supplementary Results: Surplus changes relative to baseline if actual loads from 2007.

      (1)                 (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)    (7)      (8)    (9)                    (10)    (11)    (12)    (13)     (14)      (15)    (16)
     Policy              Cost       Demand       Pricing    % Re-       Price Mean Q    SD of  ∆ CS                    ∆ EV    ∆ PS    ∆ TS    ∆ CS    ∆ CS      ∆ CS     ∆ TS
     Objec-                         Flexibil-               new-      ($/MWh) (MWh/hr.) Price  (%.)                    Cost    (%)     (%)     High-   Midflex   Inflex   Dyn
      tive                             ity                   able                      ($/MWh)                          (%)                     flex    (%)       (%)     (%)
                                                                                                                                                (%)
                                                 Flat        3.78         91          1043          0          32.7 -28.6  8.2          40.9       27.8 27.8 27.8
                          Current   Optimistic                                                                                                                            4.6
                                                Dynamic      3.64         63          1085           4         57.7 -56.6 -12.2         45.5       50.9 50.9 50.9
                                                 Flat        3.78         91          1043          0          32.6 -27.1   8           40.7       28.3 28.3 28.3
                                    Pessimistic                                                                                                                           3.7
        Fossil




                                                Dynamic      3.65         61          1084           0         56.4 -56.1  -12          44.4        53  50.4 50.2
                                                 Flat        3.90        125          1005           0           —————————— B a        s e l i n e ——————————
                                    Optimistic                                                                                                                            3.9
                          Future




                                                Dynamic      3.89        121          1007          11         4.4  -10.4  -0.6          3.9        2.3  2.3  2.3
                                                 Flat        3.90        125          1004           0           —————————— B a        s e l i n e ——————————
                                    Pessimistic                                                                                                                            3
                                                Dynamic      3.91        116          1004          10         0.4  -13.2  2.6            3         7.6 -1.3  -2
                                                 Flat        100         171           967          0          -41.1    40.7    1.3    -39.8   -36.4    -36.4    -36.4
                                    Optimistic                                                                                                                            23.7
                          Current




                                                Dynamic      100         128          1063          87         -12.2   -14.4    -3.9   -16.1    3.1     -16.1     -26
        100% Renewable




                                                 Flat        100         172           967          0          -39.1    39.6    -0.4   -39.5   -36.5    -36.5    -36.5
                                    Pessimistic                                                                                                                           13.4
                                                Dynamic                  133          1034          91         -22.2   -14.8    -3.9   -26.1    7.5     -16.1    -26.9
                                                 Flat        100          98          1033          0           25.3   -29.5   -25.7    -0.4    21.4    21.4      21.4
                                    Optimistic                                                                                                                            13.5
43




                          Future




                                                Dynamic      100          84          1159          75           39    -51.3   -25.9    13.1    43.1     30.8     26.4
                                                 Flat        100          98          1033          0           25.3   -28.2   -25.7    -0.4     22       22       22
                                    Pessimistic                                                                                                                           8.4
                                                Dynamic      100          92          1127          82          33.5   -49.9   -25.5     8     44.6       31      26.6
                                                 Flat        3.68         72          1072          0          49.6    -44.9    -8.7    41     43.3     43.3     43.3
                                    Optimistic                                                                                                                            5.7
                          Current




                                                Dynamic      6.24         74          1067           7         47.9    -48.8    -1.2   46.7    41.8     41.8     41.8
        Unconstrained




                                                 Flat        3.68         70          1072          0          49.4    -43.4    -8.7   40.7    45.6     45.6     45.6
                                    Pessimistic                                                                                                                           3.7
                                                Dynamic      3.65         61          1083           0         55.9    -56.1   -11.5   44.4     53       50      49.7
                                                 Flat         74          88          1046           0         34.4    -34.7    -4.4    30      30       30       30
                                    Optimistic                                                                                                                            8.8
                          Future




                                                Dynamic                   72          1105          38         44.1    -53.7    -5.3   38.8    45.6     38.7     34.5
                                                 Flat         74          88          1046           0         34.4    -33.3    -4.6   29.8    30.6     30.6     30.6
                                    Pessimistic                                                                                                                           5.3
                                                Dynamic       81          80          1085          42         38.2    -52.2    -3.1   35.1    45.9     35.2     31.2
     Notes: Like table 3, except baseline demand is tied to actual 2007 loads, not projected loads for 2045.
                          Table 5: Supplementary Results: Surplus changes relative to baseline if fewer electric vehicles (0.5 percent).

      (1)                       (2)          (3)         (4)      (5)       (6)    (7)      (8)    (9)                     (10)    (11)    (12)    (13)     (14)      (15)    (16)
     Policy                    Cost       Demand       Pricing   % Re-     Price Mean Q    SD of  ∆ CS                     ∆ EV    ∆ PS    ∆ TS    ∆ CS    ∆ CS      ∆ CS     ∆ TS
     Objec-                               Flexibil-              new-    ($/MWh) (MWh/hr.) Price  (%.)                     Cost    (%)     (%)     High-   Midflex   Inflex   Dyn
      tive                                   ity                  able                    ($/MWh)                           (%)                     flex    (%)       (%)     (%)
                                                                                                                                                    (%)
                                                       Flat      4.39       60           982           0           54  -54.2 -17.3  36.7       54.5 54.5 54.5
                                Current   Optimistic                                                                                                                          2.6
                                                      Dynamic    4.30       50          1002            1         63.2 -61.8 -23.9  39.3       62.9 62.8 62.8
                                                       Flat      4.51       77           955           0          38.8 -44.8  -2.8  36.1       39.8 39.8 39.8
                                          Pessimistic                                                                                                                         2.4
         Fossil




                                                      Dynamic    4.35       49           990           1          56.7 -63.7 -18.2  38.5       63.9 56.7 55.8
                                                       Flat      4.76      126          904            0            —————————— B a s e l i n e ——————————
                                          Optimistic                                                                                                                          2.5
                                Future




                                                      Dynamic    4.70      120          911            12          7.1 -14.1  -4.7  2.5         5.2  4.7  4.7
                                                       Flat      4.76      126          904            0            —————————— B a s e l i n e ——————————
                                          Pessimistic                                                                                                                         1.1
                                                      Dynamic    4.74      111          908             5          3.4 -18.4  -2.4   1.1        12   3.4  2.5
                                                       Flat       100      164          876            0         -29.2      31.1    -7.1   -36.3   -29.6    -29.6    -29.6
                                          Optimistic                                                                                                                          17.7
                                Current




                                                      Dynamic     100      126          961            86        -12.5     -14.2    -6.1   -18.6     5.7    -13.6     -23
         100% Renewable




                                                       Flat       100      161          877            0         -29.3      23.6    -6.8   -36.1   -27.3    -27.3    -27.3
                                          Pessimistic                                                                                                                         8.2
                                                      Dynamic     100      134          936            95        -23.2     -19.9    -4.7   -27.9     10     -15.3    -26.4
                                                       Flat       100       98           931           0         22.9      -25.1   -29.6    -6.7   22.5     22.5      22.5
                                          Optimistic                                                                                                                          11.1
44




                                Future




                                                      Dynamic     100       84          1043           74        34.2      -48.1   -29.8     4.4    44.4    31.4      27.2
                                                       Flat       100       98           931           0         22.9      -25.1   -29.6    -6.7   22.6     22.6      22.6
                                          Pessimistic                                                                                                                          6
                                                      Dynamic     100       91          1008           80        29.2      -49.7   -29.9    -0.7     46      31.7     27.5
                                                       Flat      4.49       76           960            0         41.8     -29.5    -5.3   36.4    40.7     40.7     40.7
                                          Optimistic                                                                                                                          4.4
                                Current




                                                      Dynamic    4.34       57           987            5         56.7     -59.3   -15.9   40.8    57.6     57.1     57.1
         Unconstrained




                                                       Flat      4.39       61           982            0         54.3     -54.4   -17.6   36.6    53.2     53.2     53.2
                                          Pessimistic                                                                                                                         1.7
                                                      Dynamic    4.34       49           993            1         57.8     -63.7   -19.5   38.3    63.9     58.1     57.4
                                                       Flat       75        93           937            0         26.1     -27.7    -0.4   25.6    26.8     26.8     26.8
                                          Optimistic                                                                                                                          6.8
                                Future




                                                      Dynamic               71           995           32         40.2     -50.7    -7.8   32.4    46.8     38.6     35.6
                                                       Flat       75        93           936            0         26.4     -27.8    -0.7   25.6    26.4     26.4     26.4
                                          Pessimistic                                                                                                                          3
                                                      Dynamic     76        79           973           38         33.9     -51.7    -5.2   28.6    47.5      36      32.3
     Notes: Like table 3, except the share of electric vehicles is 0.5% (the current share of the fleet) instead of 50%.
                          Table 6: Supplementary Results: Surplus changes relative to baseline if more electric vehicles (100 percent).

      (1)                       (2)          (3)         (4)      (5)       (6)    (7)      (8)    (9)        (10)    (11)    (12)    (13)     (14)      (15)    (16)
     Policy                    Cost       Demand       Pricing   % Re-     Price Mean Q    SD of  ∆ CS        ∆ EV    ∆ PS    ∆ TS    ∆ CS    ∆ CS      ∆ CS     ∆ TS
     Objec-                               Flexibil-              new-    ($/MWh) (MWh/hr.) Price  (%.)        Cost    (%)     (%)     High-   Midflex   Inflex   Dyn
      tive                                   ity                  able                    ($/MWh)              (%)                     flex    (%)       (%)     (%)
                                                                                                                                       (%)
                                                       Flat      3.77       91            941    0    34.9 -31.8 10.4   45.3       27.4 27.4 27.4
                                Current   Optimistic                                                                                                             6.4
                                                      Dynamic    3.71       77            958    5    48.3 -41.3  3.5   51.7       38.9 38.9 38.9
                                                       Flat      3.77       91            941    0    32.4  -22   13    45.5       27.1 27.1 27.1
                                          Pessimistic                                                                                                            6.3
         Fossil




                                                      Dynamic               75            956    0    47.6 -45.6  4.2   51.8       41.1 38.1 37.8
                                                       Flat      3.88      125            905    0      —————————— B a s e l i n e ——————————
                                          Optimistic                                                                                                             4.5
                                Future




                                                      Dynamic    3.88      121            907    10    3.1  -5.3  1.4    4.5        3.2  3.2  3.2
                                                       Flat      3.88      124            905    0      —————————— B a s e l i n e ——————————
                                          Pessimistic                                                                                                            4.5
                                                      Dynamic    3.87      121            910    11    5.8 -10.9 -1.3    4.5        2.6  2.4  2.4
                                                       Flat       100      166            872    0    -42.2    33.8    -2.3   -44.5   -32.7    -32.7    -32.7
                                          Optimistic                                                                                                              29
                                Current




                                                      Dynamic     100      128            957    88    -13     -9.7    -2.5   -15.5    3.4     -16.3    -25.5
         100% Renewable




                                                       Flat       100      171            871    0    -41.9    29.6    -2.8   -44.7    -37      -37      -37
                                          Pessimistic                                                                                                            19.9
                                                      Dynamic     100      137            930    96   -24.9   -13.4     0.1   -24.8    4.7      -19     -30.3
                                                       Flat       100       98             931   0    26.4    -24.5   -26.7    -0.4   21.6     21.6      21.6
                                          Optimistic                                                                                                             16.2
45




                                Future




                                                      Dynamic     100       85            1048   75   42.6    -46.7   -26.8    15.8     43     31.1      26.2
                                                       Flat       100       98             931   0     27      -28    -27.4    -0.4    21.3    21.3      21.3
                                          Pessimistic                                                                                                            11.2
                                                      Dynamic     100       93            1021   83   37.9    -50.3   -27.1    10.8   44.3      30.7     25.5
                                                       Flat      3.93      75             960    0    49.5     -36    -4.1    45.4     41       41       41
                                          Optimistic                                                                                                             6.4
                                Current




                                                      Dynamic    6.09      73             962    4    52.5    -44.6   -0.7    51.8    42.7     42.7     42.7
         Unconstrained




                                                       Flat      4.67      89             941    0    33.4    -19.9   12.1    45.5    28.7     28.7     28.7
                                          Pessimistic                                                                                                            6.3
                                                      Dynamic    5.88      72             961    4    49.8    -49.6    2      51.8    42.9     41.5     41.4
                                                       Flat       74       89             942     0   35.9    -30.3   -2.8    33.1    29.7     29.7     29.7
                                          Optimistic                                                                                                             11.5
                                Future




                                                      Dynamic     81       73             993    36   47.9    -48.4   -3.3    44.6    44.4     36.5     33.2
                                                       Flat       75       88             942     0   36.6    -34.1   -3.3    33.3    29.7     29.7     29.7
                                          Pessimistic                                                                                                            7.8
                                                      Dynamic     81       80             977    41   43.8     -53    -2.7    41.1    45.6     35.1      31
     Notes: Like table 3, except the share of electric vehicles is 100% instead of 50%.
                                     Table 7: Supplementary Results: Surplus changes if overall demand elasticity = 0.5

      (1)                  (2)          (3)         (4)      (5)          (6)    (7)      (8)    (9)            (10)    (11)    (12)    (13)     (14)      (15)    (16)
     Policy               Cost       Demand       Pricing   % Re-        Price Mean Q    SD of  ∆ CS            ∆ EV    ∆ PS    ∆ TS    ∆ CS    ∆ CS      ∆ CS     ∆ TS
     Objec-                          Flexibil-              new-       ($/MWh) (MWh/hr.) Price  (%.)            Cost    (%)     (%)     High-   Midflex   Inflex   Dyn
      tive                              ity                  able                       ($/MWh)                  (%)                     flex    (%)       (%)     (%)
                                                                                                                                         (%)
                                                  Flat        3.11         82          1283        0    48.4 -38.2  2.5   50.9       35.1 35.1 35.1
                           Current   Optimistic                                                                                                                    5.1
                                                 Dynamic      2.68         61          1508        2    77.7 -59.7 -21.6   56        53.4 53.4 53.4
                                                  Flat        3.11         84          1283        0    45.6  -36   5.3   50.9       33.5 33.5 33.5
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                   1.9
         Fossil




                                                 Dynamic      2.46         49          1648        0     90  -66.5 -37.2  52.8       63.5 61.9 61.7
                                                  Flat        3.76        125          1043        0      —————————— B a s e l i n e ——————————
                                     Optimistic                                                                                                                    3.7
                           Future




                                                 Dynamic      3.80        127          1033        4    -0.4  -6.1   4.1   3.7        -2   -2   -2
                                                  Flat        3.76        125          1043        0      —————————— B a s e l i n e ——————————
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                   2.8
                                                 Dynamic      3.64        107          1083        0    9.1   -20   -6.3   2.8       14.3  6.9  6.4
                                                  Flat        100         171           888        0    -43.6   39.9     0.5    -43.1   -36.2    -36.2    -36.2
                                     Optimistic                                                                                                                    31.4
                           Current




                                                 Dynamic      100         128          1064        62   -11.5   -15.5    -0.1   -11.7    1.8     -19.5    -28.3
         100% Renewable




                                                  Flat        100         173           886        0    -45.3   39.9     2.1    -43.1   -37.2    -37.2    -37.2
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                   20.1
                                                 Dynamic      100         138           989        80   -27.9    -13     4.9     -23     3.2     -21.4    -32.3
                                                  Flat        100         102          1159         0   26.8    -27.9   -26.2    0.6     18.8     18.8    18.8
                                     Optimistic                                                                                                                    22.4
46




                           Future




                                                 Dynamic      100          82          1370        37   48.6    -53.2   -25.6     23     42.3     29.1    25.2
                                                  Flat        100         102          1159         0   24.5     -26    -23.9    0.6    18.8      18.8     18.8
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                   15.4
                                                 Dynamic      100          91          1277        41   38.4    -50.8   -22.4     16      43      28.8     24.7
                                                  Flat        3.23         83          1283        0    48.3    -37.7    2.7    50.9    34.1     34.1     34.1
                                     Optimistic                                                                                                                    5.2
                           Current




                                                 Dynamic      2.67         60          1509         2   78.5     -60    -22.5   56.1    53.6     53.6     53.6
         Unconstrained




                                                  Flat        3.23         84          1283        0    45.4    -35.2    5.5    50.9    33.5     33.5     33.5
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                   3.6
                                                 Dynamic      2.56         50          1581         1    84     -66.4   -29.5   54.5    63.2     57.7     57.2
                                                  Flat         76          94          1205         0   35.8    -33.7    -0.4   35.4     25       25       25
                                     Optimistic                                                                                                                    14.2
                           Future




                                                 Dynamic       84          76          1366        21   52.4    -53.4    -2.9   49.6    42.9     33.6     30.6
                                                  Flat         77          95          1204         0   32.5     -31       3    35.4    24.8     24.8     24.8
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                   8.4
                                                 Dynamic       81          88          1272        33   40.1    -52.3     3.7   43.8    44.1     29.9     26.6
     Notes: Like table 3, except the the overall demand elasticity (θ) equals 0.5 instead of 0.1
                                     Table 8: Supplementary Results: Surplus changes if overall demand elasticity = 0.9

      (1)                  (2)          (3)         (4)      (5)          (6)    (7)      (8)    (9)            (10)    (11)    (12)    (13)     (14)      (15)    (16)
     Policy               Cost       Demand       Pricing   % Re-        Price Mean Q    SD of  ∆ CS            ∆ EV    ∆ PS    ∆ TS    ∆ CS    ∆ CS      ∆ CS     ∆ TS
     Objec-                          Flexibil-              new-       ($/MWh) (MWh/hr.) Price  (%.)            Cost    (%)     (%)     High-   Midflex   Inflex   Dyn
      tive                              ity                  able                       ($/MWh)                  (%)                     flex    (%)       (%)     (%)
                                                                                                                                         (%)
                                                  Flat        2.43         86          1673        0    50.9 -22.1 10.6   61.6       32.8 32.8 32.8
                           Current   Optimistic                                                                                                                    10.2
                                                 Dynamic      2.22         78          1840        3    66.7 -46.6  5.1   71.8       39.6 39.5 39.5
                                                  Flat        2.43         86          1673        0     51  -22.2 10.7   61.7       32.7 32.7 32.7
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                   8.9
         Fossil




                                                 Dynamic      2.28         66          1791        4    63.8 -56.2  6.8   70.6       49.9 37.8 36.1
                                                  Flat        3.34        127          1187        0      —————————— B a s e l i n e ——————————
                                     Optimistic                                                                                                                     4
                           Future




                                                 Dynamic      3.37        128          1179        3    -0.4   -7   4.4     4        -0.7 -0.7 -0.7
                                                  Flat        3.34        127          1188        0      —————————— B a s e l i n e ——————————
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                   3.2
                                                 Dynamic      3.24        112          1230        0    6.1  -18.8 -2.8    3.2       12.1  3.4  2.8
                                                  Flat        100         170           903        0    -44.4   35.1     -1.7   -46.1   -33.2    -33.2    -33.2
                                     Optimistic                                                                                                                    35.7
                           Current




                                                 Dynamic      100         128          1155        45   -14.2   -16.2     3.7   -10.4     3.1    -18.3     -27
         100% Renewable




                                                  Flat        100         169           923        0    -40.1   28.3     -6.1   -46.3   -32.6    -32.6    -32.6
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                   23.5
                                                 Dynamic      100         138          1032        65   -27.9   -15.9     5.1   -22.8     3.7    -19.8    -30.6
                                                  Flat        100         102          1440         0   30.4     -28    -25.4     5     19.6     19.6      19.6
                                     Optimistic                                                                                                                    28.9
47




                           Future




                                                 Dynamic      100          82          1818        28   56.5    -52.7   -22.5    33.9   42.6      29.1    25.5
                                                  Flat        100         102          1440         0   30.5    -28.2   -25.5     5     19.4      19.4     19.4
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                   19.7
                                                 Dynamic      100          91          1641        34   46.7    -52.5    -22     24.7    43.2      29      25.3
                                                  Flat        2.44         87          1673        0    50.4    -22.6   11.2    61.6    32.4     32.4     32.4
                                     Optimistic                                                                                                                    10.5
                           Current




                                                 Dynamic      7.49         75          1912         3   72.5     -49    -0.4    72.1    42.3     42.3     42.3
         Unconstrained




                                                  Flat        2.44         87          1673        0    50.4    -22.7   11.2    61.7    32.2     32.2     32.2
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                    9
                                                 Dynamic      3.22         64          1803         3   64.3    -57.5    6.4    70.7    51.9     38.1     36.2
                                                  Flat         81          98          1493         0   35.4    -29.9   5.5     40.9    22.8     22.8     22.8
                                     Optimistic
                           Future




                                                 Dynamic       87          78          1834        20   59.5    -53.1    0.9    60.4    43.1     31.8      29      19.5
                                                  Flat         81          99          1491         0   36.3    -30.6   4.7      41     22.5     22.5     22.5
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                    11
                                                 Dynamic       85          90          1642        30   47.8    -53.5    4.2     52     43.9     29.4     26.3
     Notes: Like table 3, except the the overall demand elasticity (θ) equals 0.9 instead of 0.1
                                      Table 9: Supplementary Results: Surplus changes if overall demand elasticity = 2

      (1)                  (2)          (3)         (4)      (5)          (6)    (7)      (8)    (9)          (10)    (11)   (12)    (13)     (14)      (15)    (16)
     Policy               Cost       Demand       Pricing   % Re-        Price Mean Q    SD of  ∆ CS          ∆ EV    ∆ PS   ∆ TS    ∆ CS    ∆ CS      ∆ CS     ∆ TS
     Objec-                          Flexibil-              new-       ($/MWh) (MWh/hr.) Price  (%.)          Cost    (%)    (%)     High-   Midflex   Inflex   Dyn
      tive                              ity                  able                       ($/MWh)                (%)                    flex    (%)       (%)     (%)
                                                                                                                                      (%)
                                                  Flat       1.78         110          2324      0    33.5  -2.4 48.6   82.2       14.9 14.9 14.9
                           Current   Optimistic                                                                                                                 10.8
                                                 Dynamic     1.64         104          2522      4    45.6  -21  47.5    93        19.4 19.1 19.1
                                                  Flat       1.78         110          2324      0    33.6 -10.2 48.4    82        15.1 15.1 15.1
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                9.1
         Fossil




                                                 Dynamic     1.65          92          2512      7    47.1 -39.6  44    91.1        30  19.5 18.1
                                                  Flat       2.42         128          1672      0      —————————— B a s e l i n e ——————————
                                     Optimistic                                                                                                                 5.5
                           Future




                                                 Dynamic     2.33         126          1742      4     4.1  -3.2  1.4    5.5         2   1.8  1.8
                                                  Flat       2.42         129          1673      0      —————————— B a s e l i n e ——————————
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                4.7
                                                 Dynamic     2.30         115          1772      5     6.5 -21.6 -1.8    4.7       11.5  2.9  2.1
                                                  Flat        100         168           967      0     -50     38.3   -3.4   -53.3   -30.6    -30.6    -30.6
                                     Optimistic                                                                                                                 43.1
                           Current




                                                 Dynamic      100         126          1471      30   -17.4   -10.4    7.2   -10.2    4.5     -18.2    -26.6
         100% Renewable




                                                  Flat        100         171           945      0     -53     36.7   -0.1   -53.1   -32.6    -32.6    -32.6
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                27.6
                                                 Dynamic      100         138          1156      50   -34.5   -17.8     9    -25.5    5.5     -19.9    -29.1
                                                  Flat        100         117          2043       0   20.8     -9.6   -2.1    18.7      9        9       9
                                     Optimistic                                                                                                                 46.9
48




                           Future




                                                 Dynamic      100         100          2659      25    45.3    -32    20.3    65.6    27.1     13.6     10.5
                                                  Flat        100         117          2043       0   20.9    -17.4   -2.3    18.6    9.3       9.3     9.3
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                32.1
                                                 Dynamic      100         104          2515      30    43.6   -43.5    7.1    50.7     33      18.7    15.6
                                                  Flat        9.28        107          2382       0   37.7     -4.6   45.7   83.5    17.1     17.1     17.1
                                     Optimistic                                                                                                                 16.6
                           Current




                                                 Dynamic     23.42        105          2503      6    44.4    -18.9   55.8   100.1   18.5     18.3     18.3
         Unconstrained




                                                  Flat        9.28        107          2382       0   37.9    -12.5   45.4   83.3    17.2     17.2     17.2
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                12.5
                                                 Dynamic     13.47         88          2546       4   46.7     -40    49.1   95.8    32.5     19.8     17.8
                                                  Flat         80         103          2563      0    47.4    -19.4   14.6     62    19.9     19.9     19.9
                                     Optimistic                                                                                                                 33.2
                           Future




                                                 Dynamic       89          97          2820      21    53      -34    42.2    95.2   29.4     16.9     14.1
                                                  Flat         80         104          2563      0    47.9    -27.3   13.9   61.8    19.7     19.7     19.7
                                     Pessimistic                                                                                                                17.7
                                                 Dynamic       90         101          2638      28   49.8    -46.1   29.7    79.5   35.3     20.8     17.9
     Notes: Like table 3, except the the overall demand elasticity (θ) equals 2 instead of 0.1
