                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     PSYCHOLOGY-BASED MODELS OF ASSET PRICES AND TRADING VOLUME

                                    Nicholas C. Barberis

                                     Working Paper 24723
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24723


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2018




This article has been informed by many discussions over the years with Robin Greenwood, Ming
Huang, Lawrence Jin, Matthew Rabin, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Thaler, and Wei Xiong, as well
as with my students and my colleagues in the fields of behavioral finance and behavioral
economics. I am grateful to Douglas Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson for their
comments on an early draft, and to Pedro Bordalo, Erik Eyster, Shane Frederick, Sam Hanson,
Philipp Krueger, Alan Moreira, Tobias Moskowitz, Charles Nathanson, Cameron Peng, David
Thesmar, and Baolian Wang for their help with questions that came up during the writing
process. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Nicholas C. Barberis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Psychology-based Models of Asset Prices and Trading Volume
Nicholas C. Barberis
NBER Working Paper No. 24723
June 2018
JEL No. G11,G12,G40

                                          ABSTRACT

Behavioral finance tries to make sense of financial data using models that are based on
psychologically accurate assumptions about people's beliefs, preferences, and cognitive limits. I
review behavioral finance approaches to understanding asset prices and trading volume, with
particular emphasis on three types of models: extrapolation-based models, models of
overconfident beliefs, and models of gain-loss utility inspired by prospect theory. The research to
date shows that a few simple assumptions about investor psychology capture a wide range of
facts about prices and volume and lead to concrete new predictions. I end by speculating about
the form that a unified psychology-based model of investor behavior might take.

Nicholas C. Barberis
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P O Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
nick.barberis@yale.edu
Contents

1 Introduction                                                                                  4

2 Empirical facts                                                                               6
  2.1   Aggregate asset classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     6
  2.2   The cross-section of average returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      8
  2.3   Bubbles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    11

3 Limits to arbitrage                                                                          12

4 Beliefs: Extrapolation                                                                       16
  4.1   Return extrapolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     16
  4.2   Extrapolation of fundamentals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24
  4.3   Sources of extrapolative beliefs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
  4.4   Experience eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    31
  4.5   Extrapolative beliefs: Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       33

5 Beliefs: Overconﬁdence                                                                       34
  5.1   Disagreement with a short-sale constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      37

6 Other belief-based approaches                                                                40
  6.1   Sticky beliefs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40
  6.2   Models of under- and over-reaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       42
  6.3   Beliefs about rare events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    44
  6.4   Feelings and beliefs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   45
  6.5   Herding and social interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     46
  6.6   Psychology-free approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     48

7 Preferences: Gain-loss utility and prospect theory                                           50
  7.1   The elements of prospect theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      51
  7.2   Prospect theory and the cross-section: Static models . . . . . . . . . . . . .         56
  7.3   Prospect theory and the cross-section: Dynamic models . . . . . . . . . . . .          59

                                               2
  7.4   Prospect theory and the aggregate stock market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          62
  7.5   Prospect theory applications: Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         66
  7.6   Other alternatives to Expected Utility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        67

8 Preferences: Ambiguity aversion                                                               69

9 Bounded rationality                                                                           72
  9.1   Inattention   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   74
  9.2   Categorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    75

10 Discussion and Conclusion                                                                    77

11 Appendix                                                                                     80

12 References                                                                                   81




                                               3
1       Introduction

The modern era of ﬁnance research began in the 1950s with the work of Markowitz (1952)
on portfolio choice and Modigliani and Miller (1958) on capital structure. For the next four
decades, research in ﬁnance – especially research on asset prices – was dominated by a single
framework, the “traditional” framework, which is based on two assumptions about individual
psychology. The ﬁrst is that people have rational beliefs: when new information arrives, they
immediately update their beliefs about future outcomes, and do so correctly, as prescribed
by Bayes’ rule. The second is that they make decisions according to Expected Utility: given
their beliefs, they choose the action with the highest Expected Utility for a utility function
that is deﬁned over consumption outcomes and that is increasing and concave.
    In the 1980s, a new paradigm, behavioral ﬁnance, began to emerge. Its goal is to make
sense of facts in ﬁnance using models that are psychologically more realistic than those that
came before. The ﬁeld has grown rapidly over the past 30 years. In this article, I review
research in behavioral ﬁnance, focusing on applications to asset prices and trading volume.1
    Research in behavioral ﬁnance has tried to improve the psychological realism of the
traditional model along three dimensions. First, through more realistic assumptions about
individual beliefs – in particular, that people do not update their beliefs in a fully rational
manner, thereby deviating from Bayes’ rule. Second, through more realistic assumptions
about individual preferences – for example, by rethinking what it is that people derive
utility from and what form their utility function takes, or by replacing Expected Utility with
an alternative framework such as prospect theory. And third, by taking account of cognitive
limits – by recognizing that people are unlikely to be able to immediately process all of the
information that is relevant to their ﬁnancial situation, given how much information of this
kind arrives every week. This article is structured around these three dimensions: I review,
in turn, models of beliefs, models of preferences, and models of cognitive limits.
    Why did behavioral ﬁnance emerge when it did, in the 1980s, and then gather steam
in the 1990s? At least three factors played a role. First, by the late 1980s, there was a
growing sense that some basic facts about ﬁnancial markets were hard to reconcile with the
traditional ﬁnance framework. In a 1981 paper – a paper seen by many as the starting point
of modern behavioral ﬁnance – Robert Shiller argued that ﬂuctuations in stock market prices
are unlikely to be the result of rationally-varying forecasts of ﬁrms’ future cash ﬂows. Other
papers, among them De Bondt and Thaler (1985), showed that some investment strategies
earn average returns that are higher than can be justiﬁed by simple measures of risk. In
the view of many researchers, these ﬁndings called for a new generation of models – for
    1
    The models of asset prices and volume that I discuss also make predictions about individual portfolio
choice, but I do not cover that topic in much detail; for a fuller treatment of it, see Guiso and Sodini (2013)
and Beshears et al. (2018). For behavioral ﬁnance approaches to corporate ﬁnance, see Baker and Wurgler
(2012) and Malmendier (2018). For other surveys of psychology-based models of asset prices, see Shleifer
(2000), Hirshleifer (2001), and Barberis and Thaler (2003).



                                                      4
example, models that allow for less than fully rational beliefs – and this spurred the growth
of behavioral ﬁnance. The technology stock mania of the late 1990s and the more recent real
estate boom and subsequent ﬁnancial crisis brought additional attention to the ﬁeld.
   A second factor is the work on limits to arbitrage in the 1990s. An old critique of
behavioral ﬁnance, the “arbitrage critique,” posits that irrational investors cannot have a
substantial and long-lived impact on the price of an asset, because, if they did, this would
create an attractive opportunity for rational investors who would trade aggressively against
the mispricing and remove it. This argument proved compelling to economists for many years
and slowed the development of behavioral ﬁnance. In the 1990s, however, some researchers
pushed back against the arbitrage critique, noting that, in reality, rational traders face risks
and costs that limit their ability to correct a mispricing (De Long et al., 1990a; Shleifer and
Vishny, 1997). This work on limits to arbitrage, which I discuss in more detail later, has
been inﬂuential and was an important factor in the rise of behavioral ﬁnance.
    The third reason for the growth of behavioral ﬁnance in the 1990s was the dramatic
progress in the 1970s and 1980s in an area of psychology known as “judgment and decision-
making.” This ﬁeld, which was dominated for years by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky,
seeks to paint a more realistic picture of how people form beliefs and make decisions. For
ﬁnancial economists who were looking for guidance on how to make their models more
psychologically accurate, this research was invaluable. Much of the conceptual progress in
behavioral ﬁnance over the past 30 years has come from incorporating ideas from the ﬁeld
of judgment and decision-making into more traditional ﬁnance models.
    Behavioral ﬁnance research on asset prices has an ambitious agenda. It argues that the
traditional model does not oﬀer a complete account of even the most basic aspects of the data
– facts about asset market ﬂuctuations, average returns on asset classes, trading volume, and
bubbles – and that a behavioral ﬁnance perspective is essential for a full understanding of the
evidence. On some dimensions, behavioral ﬁnance can already claim success: it has shown
that models based on a few simple assumptions about individual psychology can explain a
wide range of empirical facts, and can make concrete, testable predictions, some of which
have already been conﬁrmed in the data.
    As indicated above, this article is organized around the three approaches researchers have
taken to develop psychologically realistic models of investor behavior. In Sections 4 through
6, I review models based on more psychologically accurate assumptions about individual
beliefs; the main ideas here are extrapolation and overconﬁdence. In Sections 7 and 8,
I discuss models that focus on individual preferences; the key concepts here are gain-loss
utility and prospect theory, and ambiguity aversion. And in Section 9, I cover models that
take into account people’s cognitive limits. In Section 10, I evaluate progress in the ﬁeld
and conclude. Before embarking on the discussion of behavioral ﬁnance models in Section
4, I ﬁrst cover two important background topics. In Section 2, I review the main empirical
facts that are the focus of study in the ﬁeld of asset prices. In Section 3, I summarize the
research on limits to arbitrage and relate the themes of this article to the concept of “eﬃcient

                                               5
markets.”
    Over the years, researchers in behavioral ﬁnance have pursued a number of diﬀerent
psychology-based approaches. One might therefore worry that the ﬁeld consists of many
scattered ideas. Fortunately, this is not the case. The center of gravity in behavioral ﬁnance
lies in just three frameworks: the extrapolation framework (Section 4), the overconﬁdence
framework (Section 5), and a gain-loss utility framework inspired by prospect theory (Section
7). These frameworks are not in competition with one another, in part because they have
somewhat diﬀerent applications: extrapolation is most helpful for explaining ﬂuctuations in
ﬁnancial markets, overconﬁdence for understanding trading volume, and gain-loss utility for
thinking about assets’ average returns. It is true that there is as yet no “uniﬁed” model in
behavioral ﬁnance – no single, parsimonious, widely-used model that makes psychologically
realistic assumptions about both beliefs and preferences. However, the research to date is
beginning to point to the form that such a model might take. In the concluding section, I
attempt to sketch its outlines.



2       Empirical facts

Much of the research on asset prices is aimed at understanding a speciﬁc set of widely
agreed-upon empirical ﬁndings. These were ﬁrst documented in the context of the stock
market: academic researchers have long had access to high quality data on stock market
prices. However, an important ﬁnding of recent years is that many of the patterns we
observe in the stock market are also present in other asset classes. This raises the appeal
of behavioral ﬁnance approaches: the most prominent psychology-based assumptions about
investor behavior apply in a natural way in all asset classes, not just the stock market.
   Below, I review three groups of empirical facts: facts about aggregate asset classes; facts
about the cross-section of average returns; and facts about bubbles. In the case of aggregate
asset classes and the cross-section, I ﬁrst describe the facts in the context of the stock market
and then summarize what is known about other asset classes.2


2.1     Aggregate asset classes

There are three central facts about the returns on the overall U.S. stock market: these
returns are predictable in the time series; they display “excess volatility”; and their average
level is high.
    Time-series predictability. Stock market ratios of price to fundamentals – the market’s
price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio or its price-to-dividend (P/D) ratio – predict the market’s
    2
   See Ilmanen (2011) for a detailed review of empirical evidence on asset prices. I do not discuss facts
about volume in this section, but instead introduce them at the appropriate time later in the article.


                                                   6
subsequent excess return – its return in excess of the risk-free rate – with a negative sign
(Campbell and Shiller, 1988; Fama and French, 1988). This time-series predictability is
widely viewed as the essential fact about stock market returns that needs to be understood.
The best-known rational models of it are based on rationally-changing forecasts of future risk
– speciﬁcally, the “rare disasters” framework and the “long-run risk” framework; changing
investor risk aversion, speciﬁcally, the “habit formation” framework; and rational learning.3
For example, under the rare disasters framework, if investors rationally decide that an eco-
nomic disaster is less likely going forward, they lower the risk premium that they use to
discount ﬁrms’ future cash ﬂows. As a consequence, the stock market’s P/E ratio rises to-
day and its subsequent return in excess of the risk-free rate is lower, on average. The P/E
ratio is then negatively related to the subsequent excess return, as in the data.
    Excess volatility. Shiller (1981) and LeRoy and Porter (1981) show that aggregate stock
market prices are “excessively” volatile, in the sense that it is hard to justify their ﬂuctuations
on the basis of rationally-varying forecasts of the future cash ﬂows paid to investors. To see
why, suppose that variation in the P/D ratio of the stock market is driven by rationally-
changing forecasts of future dividend growth: in some years, investors rationally expect
higher dividend growth in the future and push the stock market price up relative to current
dividends; in other years, they rationally expect lower dividend growth and push the price
down relative to current dividends. Since these forecasts of dividend growth are taken to
be rational, this framework implies that, in a long time series of data, the P/D ratio will
predict subsequent dividend growth with a positive sign. In historical U.S. data, however,
it does not (Campbell and Shiller, 1998). Rationally-changing forecasts of future cash ﬂows
are therefore unlikely to be the main source of stock market ﬂuctuations.4
    Time-series predictability and excess volatility are now seen as the same phenomenon.
To see why, note that, in historical U.S. data, the stock market’s P/D ratio is stationary;
loosely put, years of high P/D ratios are followed by years with moderate P/D ratios. Math-
ematically, this can happen in one of two ways: either dividends D must rise or prices P
must fall. From the discussion of excess volatility above, we can rule out the ﬁrst channel:
in the data, high P/D ratios are not followed by higher dividend growth. High P/D ratios
must therefore be followed by lower average returns. But this is exactly the ﬁnding known
as time-series predictability.
    Excess volatility and time-series predictability are not conﬁned to the stock market. They
have also been documented in other major asset classes, including real estate and long-term
bonds. For example, it is hard to explain real estate price ﬂuctuations on the basis of rational
forecasts of income growth or rent growth, and the price-to-rent ratio predicts subsequent
   3
     On rare disasters, see Gabaix (2012) and Wachter (2013); on long-run risk, see Bansal and Yaron
(2004) and Bansal et al. (2012); on changing risk aversion, see Campbell and Cochrane (1999); and on
rational learning, see Timmermann (1993) and Pastor and Veronesi (2009). Campbell (2018) provides a
comprehensive review of rational models of asset prices.
   4
     Giglio and Kelly (2017) and Augenblick and Lazarus (2018) show that some price movements in ﬁnancial
markets are hard to explain based on rationally-varying forecasts of either cash ﬂows or discount rates.


                                                   7
housing returns with a negative sign (Glaeser and Nathanson, 2015).
    Given that excess volatility and time-series predictability are the same phenomenon, it
is not surprising that the rational approaches to thinking about excess volatility are the
same as those that have been used to address time-series predictability: rationally-changing
forecasts of future risk, changing risk aversion, and rational learning.
    Equity premium. Over the past century, the average return of the U.S. stock market
has exceeded the average return of Treasury Bills by over 5% per year. Such a large equity
premium has proven hard to explain in a rational model, a puzzle known as the “equity
premium puzzle.” For example, a simple rational model – one with a representative investor
who has power utility preferences over lifetime consumption – predicts an equity premium
of less than 0.5% per year when the investor’s risk aversion is set at levels suggested by
simple thought experiments (Mehra and Prescott, 1985). In this model, the risk of the stock
market is measured by the covariance of stock market returns with consumption growth.
Empirically, this quantity is very small: the standard deviation of aggregate consumption
growth, in particular, is low. The representative investor therefore does not view the stock
market as very risky, and requires a very low equity premium.
    In recent years, the equity premium puzzle has received less attention. One possible
reason is that, after many years of eﬀort, researchers have run out of ideas for solving the
puzzle and have turned their attention to other topics. Another is a belief that the historical
equity premium is not as high as it once was, and is therefore less anomalous. And another
possibility is that the extant rational and behavioral explanations of the puzzle are seen as
resolving it in a satisfactory way. I discuss a prominent psychology-based explanation of the
puzzle in Section 7.4.5


2.2       The cross-section of average returns

Why do some ﬁnancial assets have higher average returns than others? The benchmark
rational model for thinking about this, the Capital Asset Pricing Model, or CAPM, predicts
that the average return of an asset is determined by the asset’s “beta” – the covariance of
the asset’s return with the return on the overall market, scaled by the variance of the market
return – and by beta alone. In this framework, assets with higher betas are riskier and
compensate investors by oﬀering a higher average return.
    The CAPM’s predictions have been roundly rejected. Stocks with higher betas do not
have higher average returns (Fama and French, 1992). At the same time, several other
stock-level characteristics do have signiﬁcant predictive power for the cross-section of average
returns. Understanding why these variables predict returns is the focus of a major research
eﬀort. Table 1 lists some of the best-known predictors; the “+” and “-” signs indicate
whether the variable has positive or negative predictive power. To be clear, if a variable F
  5
      See Mehra (2008) for a review of diﬀerent approaches to tackling the puzzle.


                                                      8
has, say, negative predictive power, this means that, on average, stocks with high values of
F have a lower return than stocks with low values of F in a way that is not captured by beta
and that remains statistically signiﬁcant even after controlling for the other main predictor
variables. I now brieﬂy describe the ﬁndings summarized in the table.
   Past long-term return. A stock’s return over the past three to ﬁve years predicts the
stock’s subsequent return with a negative sign in the cross-section (De Bondt and Thaler,
1985). This is known as “long-term reversal.”
   Past medium-term return. A stock’s return over the past six months or one year predicts
the stock’s subsequent return with a positive sign in the cross-section (Jegadeesh and Titman,
1993). This is known as “momentum.” Notice the contrast with long-term reversal. A long-
standing challenge is to build a parsimonious model that captures both of these patterns.
    Past short-term return. A stock’s return over the past week or month predicts the stock’s
subsequent return with a negative sign in the cross-section (Lehmann, 1990). This is often
referred to as “short-term reversal.”
   Earnings surprise. The size of the surprise in a ﬁrm’s most recent earnings announcement
predicts the subsequent return of the ﬁrm’s stock with a positive sign (Bernard and Thomas,
1989). Informally, if a ﬁrm announces earnings that are better than expected, its stock price
naturally jumps up on the day of the announcement, but, more interestingly, keeps rising in
the weeks after the announcement. This is known as “post-earnings announcement drift.”
   Market capitalization. A ﬁrm’s market capitalization predicts the ﬁrm’s subsequent stock
return with a negative sign in the cross-section (Banz, 1981).
    Price-to-fundamentals ratio. A stock’s price-to-earnings, price-to-cash ﬂow, and price-to-
book ratios predict the stock’s subsequent return with a negative sign (Basu, 1983; Rosenberg
et al., 1985; Fama and French, 1992). The diﬀerence in the average returns earned by
“value” stocks with low price-to-fundamentals ratios and “growth” stocks with high price-
to-fundamentals ratios is known as the value premium.
   Issuance. Stocks of ﬁrms that issue equity, whether in an initial public oﬀering or a
seasoned equity oﬀering, earn a lower average return than a control group of ﬁrms (Loughran
and Ritter, 1995). Stocks of ﬁrms that repurchase equity have a higher average return than
a control group (Ikenberry et al., 1995).
   Systematic volatility. The average raw return of high beta stocks is similar to the average
raw return of low beta stocks. This stands in contrast to the prediction of the CAPM,
namely that high beta stocks should have a higher average return, and is known as the
“beta anomaly” (Black, 1972; Frazzini and Pedersen, 2014).
   Idiosyncratic volatility. The volatility of a stock’s daily idiosyncratic returns over the
previous month predicts the stock’s subsequent return with a negative sign (Ang et al.,
2006).


                                              9
   Profitability. Measures of a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability – for example, its gross margin scaled by
asset value – predict the subsequent return of the ﬁrm’s stock with a positive sign (Novy-
Marx, 2013; Ball et al., 2015).6
    Data mining is a concern in the context of the cross-section of average returns (Harvey
et al., 2016). Academic researchers and investment managers have strong incentives to ﬁnd
variables that predict stock returns in a statistically signiﬁcant way – the academics so that
they can publish a paper that might further their careers, and the managers so that they can
pitch a new stock-selection strategy to potential clients. Given these incentives, researchers
have likely gone through hundreds of ﬁrm characteristics in their search for predictors. Even
if none of these variables has true predictive power for stock returns, some of them will
predict returns in sample in a statistically signiﬁcant way, thereby giving the appearance
of a genuine relationship. While over one hundred variables have been shown, in published
studies in academic journals, to predict returns in a signiﬁcant way, it is likely that, in some
cases, there is no true predictive relationship.
   The variables in Table 1 are thought to have genuine predictive power for future returns
because they forecast returns out of sample: while many of the relationships in Table 1 were
ﬁrst documented using U.S. stock market data from the 1960s to the 1990s, they also hold
in many international stock markets or in the U.S. market before the 1960s.
    There is no consensus explanation for any of the empirical ﬁndings in Table 1. Some
researchers have tried to understand these patterns using rational frameworks where diﬀer-
ences in average returns across stocks are due to diﬀerences in risk; since the CAPM does
not explain the ﬁndings in the table, the risks considered by these frameworks are necessar-
ily something other than beta. Other researchers have pursued behavioral explanations for
these patterns, and I discuss several of these later in the article.
    The facts summarized in this section have drawn attention from hedge funds. These funds
implement strategies that, in the case of a characteristic F with negative predictive power
for returns, buy stocks with low values of F and short stocks with high values of F . For
several of the characteristics, such strategies have historically earned a higher average return
than would be expected for their risk, as judged by the CAPM, even after taking transaction
costs into account, at least for the low transaction costs incurred by sophisticated investors
(Frazzini et al., 2015; Novy-Marx and Velikov, 2015). Hedge funds’ pursuit of these strategies
may explain why the predictive power of some of the characteristics in Table 1 has weakened
over time. However, perhaps because of the “limits to arbitrage” that I discuss in Section 3,
most of the empirical ﬁndings in the table remain robust even in recent data.7
   6
     Other well-known predictors of stock returns that I do not discuss in detail in this article are asset
growth (Cooper et al., 2008); investment (Titman et al., 2004); and accruals (Sloan, 1996). All three predict
subsequent returns with a negative sign in the cross-section.
   7
     McLean and Pontiﬀ (2016) show that the predictive power of characteristics such as those in Table 1
goes down after a study documenting the predictability is published in a journal – and that the decline is
larger, the weaker are the limits to arbitrage. Their interpretation is that the publication of a ﬁnding brings



                                                      10
    I have presented the predictive relationships in Table 1 in the context of the stock market
because that is the context in which they were ﬁrst discovered. However, several of these
patterns also hold in other asset classes. For example, momentum and long-term reversal
are present not only in the U.S. stock market, but also in the stock markets of several other
developed countries, and across country equity indices, government bonds, currencies, and
commodities (Asness et al., 2013). Similarly, the beta anomaly is present not only in the
U.S. stock market but also in many international stock markets, Treasury bonds, corporate
bonds, and futures (Frazzini and Pedersen, 2014).


2.3     Bubbles

One deﬁnition of a bubble is that it is an episode in which an asset becomes substantially
overvalued for a signiﬁcant period of time, where “overvalued” means that the price of the
asset exceeds a sensible present value of the asset’s future cash ﬂows. In some settings, this
deﬁnition can be used productively. For example, in experimental markets, it is often possible
to state exactly what the rational present value of an asset’s future cash ﬂows is (Smith et
al., 1988). Even in actual ﬁnancial markets, we can sometimes compute this present value
with a high degree of conﬁdence, or at least put sharp bounds on it (Xiong and Yu, 2011).
However, in many real-world contexts, it is hard to determine the sensible price of an asset,
making it diﬃcult to decide whether a particular episode constitutes a bubble and leading
some observers to question whether bubbles, as deﬁned above, even exist (Fama, 2014).
    In light of this, it may be more productive to use an empirical deﬁnition of a bubble – to
deﬁne a bubble as an episode with a set of concrete empirical characteristics.8 One candidate
set of characteristics is: (i) the price of an asset rises sharply over some period of time and
then declines, reversing much of the rise; (ii) during the price rise, there are many reports
in the media and from sophisticated investors that the asset is overvalued; (iii) as the price
of the asset rises and reaches its peak, there is an abnormally high volume of trading in the
asset; (iv) during the episode, many investors have highly extrapolative expectations about
returns, in that their expectation about the asset’s future return is strongly positively related
to its recent past return; (v) during the price rise, some sophisticated investors increase their
exposure to the asset; and (vi) in the early stages of the price rise, there is positive news
about the asset’s future cash ﬂows.
   A bubble can be deﬁned as an episode that exhibits characteristics (i) and (ii) – these
are the most essential features of a bubble – and at least two, say, of characteristics (iii)
through (vi). Characteristics (iii) through (vi) are motivated, respectively, by evidence
it to the attention of hedge funds, which then exploit it.
    8
      Almost every other asset price phenomenon studied by economists – and all the phenomena described
in Sections 2.1 and 2.2 – is deﬁned in an empirically concrete way. For example, “momentum” is the ﬁnding
that a stock’s past six-month return predicts the stock’s subsequent return with a positive sign. It therefore
seems reasonable to ask that the term “bubble” be deﬁned in a similarly concrete way.



                                                     11
that, for assets that appear to be overvalued, we typically observe heavy trading (Hong
and Stein, 2007); extrapolative investor expectations (Case et al., 2012); some sophisticated
investors increasing their exposure to the asset (Brunnermeier and Nagel, 2004); and strong
fundamental news in the early stages of the asset’s rise in price (Kindleberger, 1978).
   Given that all of characteristics (i) through (vi) are either already concrete or can be
made so, it should be straightforward, given the right data, for researchers to check and
agree whether a particular episode constitutes a bubble by the above empirical deﬁnition. I
suggest that the historical episodes that would be categorized as bubbles by this deﬁnition
would match up well with the episodes that have been informally viewed as bubbles. At
the very least, it is clear that, by this deﬁnition, bubbles exist. For example, stocks in the
technology sector in the U.S. in the late 1990s exhibit all six characteristics.
    The challenge for economists is to write down a model of asset prices and trading volume
that, on occasion and under some circumstances, generates episodes that feature most or all
of the characteristics laid out above. The best-known rational framework for thinking about
bubbles is the aptly-named “rational bubble” model (Blanchard and Watson, 1982; Tirole,
1985). This framework can generate characteristics (i) and (ii), but, at least in its basic
form, does not generate any of characteristics (iii) through (vi). Rational bubble models also
face other challenges, both theoretical and empirical. For example, Giglio et al. (2016) use
data from the U.K. and Singapore to check for a rational-bubble component in the price of
real estate, but ﬁnd no such component.9
    According to the empirical deﬁnition suggested here, an episode can only be categorized
as a bubble with a high degree of conﬁdence “after the fact,” once both the price rise and price
decline have been observed. However, Greenwood et al. (2018) show that, by conditioning
on other observables, it is possible to say, even while the price of an asset is still rising, that
there is an increased likelihood that the episode constitutes a bubble – in other words, that
the price rise will eventually be followed by a sharp decline.



3       Limits to arbitrage

A common theme in behavioral ﬁnance is that investors who are less than fully rational can
aﬀect the prices of ﬁnancial assets. There is a challenge to this view, sometimes called the
arbitrage critique. According to this critique, irrational investors cannot have a substantial,
long-lived impact on prices. The argument is that, if irrational investors aﬀect the price of an
asset – if they push it up too high or down too low – this creates an attractive opportunity for
rational investors, or “arbitrageurs,” who trade aggressively against the mispricing, causing
it to disappear. As recently as the late 1980s, most ﬁnancial economists found the arbitrage
critique persuasive, and this slowed the development of behavioral ﬁnance.
    9
    See Brunnermeier and Oehmke (2013) for a detailed discussion of the rational bubble model and of other
frameworks for thinking about bubble episodes.


                                                   12
    In the 1990s, a group of researchers pushed back against the arbitrage critique in a
convincing way, and this is one reason why behavioral ﬁnance began to develop rapidly in
that decade. In a nutshell, the response to the arbitrage critique is this. According to
the critique, if irrational investors push the price of an asset up too high or down too low,
this creates an attractive opportunity for rational investors. The ﬂaw in this argument is
that, in reality, trading against a mispricing is not as attractive an opportunity as it seems.
Real-world arbitrageurs – hedge funds, for example – face risks and costs when they attack
a mispricing. These risks and costs lead them to trade less aggressively, which, in turn,
allows the mispricing to survive. In short, there are limits to arbitrage, and this means that
irrational investors can have a substantial impact on prices.
    What are the risks and costs that arbitrageurs face? I now brieﬂy discuss the most im-
portant of these; see Shleifer (2000) and Gromb and Vayanos (2010) for more comprehensive
reviews.
     Fundamental risk. A hedge fund that takes a position in a misvalued asset runs the risk
that there will be adverse news about the asset’s fundamentals. Suppose that the “fair”
price of a stock – the sum of its expected future cash ﬂows, carefully forecasted using all
available information and discounted at a rate that properly accounts for risk – is equal to
$20, but that excessively pessimistic traders push the market price down to $15. A hedge
fund that tries to take advantage of this by buying at $15 runs the risk that there will be
bad news about the fundamentals of the underlying company, news that pulls the fair price
down to $10, say. If the market price of the stock then converges to the fair price of $10, as
it is eventually likely to do once irrational investors correct their mistaken perceptions, the
fund will lose money. If hedge funds and other arbitrageurs are risk averse, fundamental risk
of this kind can be enough to make them trade less aggressively against the mispricing.
    Fundamental risk can be partially hedged by taking an oﬀsetting position in a “sub-
stitute” asset. For example, a hedge fund that buys shares of General Motors because it
perceives them to be undervalued can simultaneously short shares of Ford; this protects the
fund against adverse fundamental news about the economy as a whole or about the automo-
bile sector in particular. However, it is diﬃcult to avoid fundamental risk entirely: in this
example, the hedge fund is still exposed to bad idiosyncratic news about General Motors
which does not aﬀect Ford. Moreover, some assets – for example, aggregate asset classes –
do not have good substitutes.
   Noise-trader risk. Another risk that hedge funds face when they trade against a mispric-
ing is that the mispricing may get worse in the short run: the irrational investors causing
the mispricing may become even more irrational in the short term (De Long et al., 1990a).
This constitutes a risk for hedge funds and other arbitrageurs because these funds typically
manage other people’s money (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997). If a mispricing worsens, a fund
trading against the mispricing will post poor returns. Seeing this, the fund’s outside investors
may decide that the fund manager is not very skilled, leading them to withdraw their money
and forcing the manager to close out his trade at a loss. If the fund manager recognizes this

                                              13
possibility in advance, he will trade less aggressively against the mispricing.
   Hedge funds’ use of leverage, or borrowed money, compounds the problem. If a fund
borrows money to buy an undervalued asset and the mispricing then worsens, so that the
asset falls further in value, the lender, seeing the value of his collateral decline, may call the
loan, again forcing the fund to close out its trade at a loss. Similarly, if the fund shorts an
overvalued asset and the asset then goes up in price, the asset lender will demand additional
margin. If the fund cannot meet this demand, the short position will be closed out at a loss.
Once again, a fund manager who foresees these potential outcomes will trade less aggressively
against the mispricing.
    Synchronization risk (Abreu and Brunnermeier, 2002). Suppose that an asset is overval-
ued and that its price continues to rise. A hedge fund manager who detects the overvaluation
may be reluctant to trade against it because he does not know how many other hedge funds
are aware of the mispricing. If other funds are not aware of the mispricing, then, if he trades
against it, he will not be able to aﬀect the price of the asset and will instead lose out on
proﬁts as the price continues to rise. Due to this “synchronization risk,” he delays trading
against the mispricing until he is conﬁdent that enough other funds are aware of the mispric-
ing. During this waiting period, irrational investors continue to have a substantial impact
on the price of the asset.
    Aside from these risks, arbitrageurs also face costs that hinder their ability to correct a
mispricing: the obvious costs of trading, such as commissions, bid-ask spreads, and short-
selling fees, but also, importantly, the cost of discovering a mispricing and understanding
the risks of exploiting it.
    Thus far, we have responded to the “static” form of the arbitrage critique – the argument
that, if irrational investors cause a mispricing, this creates an attractive opportunity that
arbitrageurs will aggressively exploit. However, there is a second, “dynamic” version of the
critique, which posits that, because they trade in suboptimal ways, the irrational investors
will eventually lose most of their money and will therefore play a much smaller role in
ﬁnancial markets. As a consequence, there will be much less mispricing of assets.
    These are several counter-arguments to this dynamic version of the critique. First, it
is likely that, every year, many new inexperienced investors enter ﬁnancial markets, thus
replenishing the stock of irrational investors and preventing such investors from becoming
“extinct.” Second, many of the unsophisticated traders in ﬁnancial markets also earn labor
income from their day jobs, and this allows them to pursue even unproﬁtable investment
strategies for a long time. Third, it can take irrational investors years if not decades to lose
a substantial fraction of their wealth (Yan, 2008).
    In this section, I have focused on the theoretical work on limits to arbitrage. However,
there is also very useful empirical research on this topic which studies speciﬁc market situa-
tions that are widely viewed as mispricings. One example is “twin shares”: shares that are
claims to the same cash-ﬂow stream but that trade at diﬀerent prices (Froot and Dabora,

                                               14
1999). Another is “negative equity stubs”: cases where the market value of a company’s
shares is lower than the value of the company’s stake in a subsidiary ﬁrm (Mitchell et al.,
2002; Lamont and Thaler, 2003). Yet another is “index inclusions”: stocks that are added
to the S&P 500 index jump up a lot in price upon inclusion, even though a stock’s inclusion
in the index is not intended to convey any information about the present value of the stock’s
future cash ﬂows (Harris and Gurel, 1986; Shleifer, 1986).
    The existence of these situations is evidence that there are limits to arbitrage: if there
were no such limits, these mispricings would not arise. These examples also serve as labora-
tories for understanding which of the various limits to arbitrage are the most important. In
the case of twin shares, noise trader risk is of primary importance; for negative equity stubs
and index inclusions, both fundamental risk and noise-trader risk play a role.
    How does the concept of “eﬃcient markets” relate to the ideas in this section, and to the
themes of the article more generally? A market is eﬃcient if the prices of the ﬁnancial assets
in the market “properly reﬂect all available information,” where “all available information”
is most commonly taken to mean “all public information” (Fama, 1991). In a framework
with rational investors and no frictions, ﬁnancial markets are eﬃcient: since investors are
rational, they know what the “proper” price of an asset is, and since there are no frictions,
they are able to freely trade the asset until its price reaches this proper level. The research
described in this section indicates that, if some investors are not fully rational, or if they
are subject to a friction of some kind – a short-sale constraint, say – then ﬁnancial markets
may be ineﬃcient: the irrationality or friction can generate a mispricing that, due to limits
to arbitrage, rational investors are unable to correct.
    Market eﬃciency is a fundamental and historically signiﬁcant concept. However, the term
is now seldom used in academic conferences, and it will not appear again in the remaining
sections of this article. The reason is that the terms “eﬃcient market” and “ineﬃcient
market” are too broad to capture the debate at the frontier of ﬁnance research today. If an
economist says that he believes that markets are eﬃcient, we understand this to mean that
his preferred model of the world is one with rational investors and no frictions. However, at
this point in the evolution of ﬁnance as a ﬁeld, we care about the details: Which speciﬁc
rational frictionless model does the researcher have in mind? For example, what form do
investor preferences take? Can he write down the model and show that it explains a range
of facts and makes testable predictions? Similarly, if an economist says that he believes that
markets are ineﬃcient, we understand this to mean that his preferred model of the world is
one where some investors are not fully rational or where there is a friction. However, at this
point, we want to know exactly which model the researcher has in mind: What is the speciﬁc
irrationality or friction? Again, can he write the model down and show that it explains a
range of facts and makes testable predictions? The battle that is being fought today is
not between broad concepts like “eﬃcient markets” and “ineﬃcient markets” but between
speciﬁc, precisely-deﬁned models: long-run risk vs. extrapolation, say, or habit formation
vs. gain-loss utility.


                                              15
    Over the past few decades, there has been a remarkable shift in the views of ﬁnancial
economists. Until the late 1980s, most of them embraced the arbitrage critique and thought
that it was unlikely that irrational investors could have a substantial impact on asset prices.
Now, at the time of writing, many if not most ﬁnance researchers accept that there are
limits to arbitrage and that irrational investors can therefore aﬀect asset prices. If there
is disagreement, it is about how strong these limits are and how much irrational investors
matter. The success of the work on limits to arbitrage helped to usher in a new era of intense
research in behavioral ﬁnance, one where economists began to take seriously models of asset
prices in which some investors are not fully rational. In Sections 4 through 9, I discuss these
models in detail.



4     Beliefs: Extrapolation

Psychology-based models of ﬁnancial markets aim to improve our understanding of the data
by making more accurate assumptions about people’s beliefs, preferences, and cognitive
limits. In Sections 4 through 6, I review models where the focus is on the ﬁrst of these,
namely beliefs.
    One of the most useful ideas in behavioral ﬁnance is that people have extrapolative beliefs:
their estimate of the future value of a quantity is a positive function of the recent past
values of that quantity. This idea is typically applied to beliefs about returns or growth in
fundamentals: we work with models where investors’ expectation of the future return of an
asset is a positive function of the asset’s recent past returns, or where their expectation of a
ﬁrm’s future earnings growth is a positive function of the ﬁrm’s recent earnings growth rates.
However, it can also be usefully applied to estimates of other quantities – future volatility,
say, or future crash risk.
    In this section, I focus primarily on return extrapolation because it has proved to be a
particularly helpful assumption. In Section 4.1, I use a simple model to show how return
extrapolation can explain a wide range of facts about asset prices. More brieﬂy, in Section 4.2,
I discuss models where investors extrapolate past fundamentals. In Section 4.3, I explore
the possible sources of extrapolative beliefs. Finally, in Section 4.4, I review models of
“experience eﬀects” which posit a type of heterogeneity in extrapolation across individuals
that has additional implications for portfolio holdings, volume, and prices.


4.1    Return extrapolation

Return extrapolation is the idea that people’s expectation of the future return of an asset,
asset class, or fund is a weighted average of the past returns of the asset, asset class, or fund,
where the weights on the past returns are positive and larger for more recent past returns.
Models based on this assumption can explain, in straightforward and intuitive ways: (i)

                                               16
medium-term momentum, long-term reversal, and the value premium in the cross-section of
average returns; (ii) excess volatility and time-series predictability in aggregate asset classes;
and (iii) the formation and collapse of bubbles. Understanding these phenomena is a major
goal of research on asset prices, so it is striking that a single, simple assumption can address
all of them. Another appealing feature of the extrapolation approach is that it can be applied
in a natural way in any asset class, and can therefore explain why empirical patterns like
excess volatility, momentum, and reversal are present in many asset classes, not just the
stock market.
    The idea that investors have extrapolative beliefs can be found in decades-old qualitative
accounts of investor behavior. The ﬁrst wave of formal research on the topic appeared in
the 1990s and includes papers such as Cutler et al. (1990), De Long et al. (1990b), Frankel
and Froot (1990), Hong and Stein (1999), and Barberis and Shleifer (2003). Recently, there
has been a second wave of research on the topic, including papers such as Barberis et al.
(2015, 2018), Adam et al. (2017), Glaeser and Nathanson (2017), Cassella and Gulen (2018),
DeFusco et al. (2018), Jin and Sui (2018), and Liao and Peng (2018). This second wave
has been spurred in part by renewed attention to a neglected but potentially very useful
type of data, namely survey data on the beliefs of real-world investors about future asset
returns (Bacchetta et al., 2009; Amromin and Sharpe, 2014; Greenwood and Shleifer, 2014).
Several surveys ask investors, both individual and institutional, to forecast the return on
the stock market over the next six months or one year. These data provide direct evidence
of extrapolative beliefs: the average belief of the surveyed investors about the future stock
market return is a positive function of recent past stock market returns. But the data also
point to over -extrapolation: the average belief of the surveyed investors is negatively related
to the subsequent realized return, suggesting that the extrapolative beliefs are incorrect.
    I now explain, with the help of a simple model, how return extrapolation can generate
facts (i), (ii), and (iii) about asset prices listed at the start of this section. Consider an
economy with T + 1 dates, t = 0, 1, . . . , T , and two assets: a risk-free asset whose net return
is zero, and a risky asset which has a ﬁxed supply of Q shares and is a claim to a single cash
ﬂow D  to be paid at time T . The value of D     is given by
        T                                          T

                               
                               D          1 + ε2 + . . . + εT ,
                                 T = D0 + ε

                                εt ∼ N(0, σε2 ), i.i.d over time.                            (1)

Here, D0 is realized and publicly announced at time 0, while εt is realized and publicly
announced at time t. The expected value of D  at time 0 is therefore D , while its expected
                                              T                           0
                            t
value at time t is Dt ≡ D0 + j=1 εj . The price of the risky asset at time t, Pt , is determined
in equilibrium.
   Models of return extrapolation usually feature two types of investors, and I follow this
approach here. The ﬁrst type is the extrapolators themselves. At time t, their belief about




                                               17
the future price change of the risky asset is
                                                t−1
                                                
              Ete (Pt+1 − Pt ) = Xt ≡ (1 − θ)         θk−1 (Pt−k − Pt−k−1 ) + θt−1 X1 ,       (2)
                                                k=1

in words, a weighted average of past price changes that puts more weight on the more recent
past: the parameter θ is in the (0, 1) interval. The “e” superscript indicates that this is
the expectation of extrapolators, and X1 denotes the extrapolators’ belief at time 1; in the
analysis below, I set it to a neutral, steady-state value. For brevity, I refer to the beliefs in
(2) as “return extrapolation,” even though “price-change extrapolation” would be a more
accurate label.
   In the Appendix, I show that if, at each date t, extrapolators maximize a utility function
with constant absolute risk aversion γ that is deﬁned over next period’s wealth and also, for
simplicity, take the conditional distribution of the next period’s price change to be Normal
with variance σε2 , then their per-capita share demand for the risky asset at time t is

                                                   Xt
                                           Nte =        ,                                     (3)
                                                   γσε2

in words, their expectation of the future price change scaled by their risk aversion and by
their estimate of the risk they are facing.
    The second type of investor is arbitrageurs, whom I refer to as “fundamental traders.”
For simplicity, I assume that these traders are boundedly rational: they do not have a
full understanding of extrapolator demand; rather, they believe that, in future periods, the
extrapolators will hold the risky asset in proportion to their weight in the population. In
the Appendix, I show that, under this assumption, the per-capita share demand of the
fundamental traders at time t is
                                      Dt − (T − t − 1)γσε2 Q − Pt
                              Ntf =                               ,                           (4)
                                                 γσε2

where the “f” superscript denotes “fundamental traders.” Notice that this demand is higher,
the lower is the price Pt relative to the expected cash ﬂow Dt . By buying when the price is
low relative to fundamentals and selling when it is high, these traders ensure that the price
does not deviate too far from a sensible present value of the ﬁnal cash ﬂow. For our purposes,
the assumption of bounded rationality is innocuous. As I explain below, if the fundamental
traders were more fully rational in that they understood how extrapolators form beliefs, the
level of mispricing would actually be larger than in the simpler economy I study here.
     If the fraction of extrapolators and of fundamental traders in the population are μe ∈
[0, 1) and μf = 1−μe , respectively, then, by substituting (3) and (4) into the market-clearing
condition μe Nte + μf Ntf = Q, we obtain the equilibrium price of the risky asset:
                         μe                          1
             Pt = Dt +     f
                             Xt − γσε2 Q(T − t − 1 + f ),             t = 1, . . . , T − 1.   (5)
                         μ                          μ

                                                18
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of (5) shows that the asset’s price is anchored to the
expected value of the ﬁnal cash ﬂow. The second term shows that the price is a positive
function of Xt : if past price changes have been strongly positive, extrapolators become more
bullish about the future price change and therefore increase their demand for the risky asset,
pushing its price higher. The third term is a price discount which compensates investors for
the risk they are bearing.
    To show how this simple model captures facts (i), (ii), and (iii) above, I use (5) to compute
the price of the risky asset following a large, positive cash-ﬂow shock. Speciﬁcally, there are
T = 20 periods, and the remaining parameters take the values in Table 2. I set ε1 to zero,
ε2 to 6 – a large, two-standard deviation cash-ﬂow shock – and ε3 through ε20 to zero. The
solid line in Figure 1 plots the price of the risky asset from time 1 to time 12. The dashed
line plots the “fundamental value” of the asset – the price the asset would trade at if all
investors were fundamental traders. At time t, this equals Dt − γσε2 Q(T − t).10
    Why does the price behave in the way shown? At date 2, there is a large positive cash-
ﬂow shock that pushes the price up. At date 3, the extrapolators, seeing the large price
increase at date 2, become more optimistic about the future price change of the risky asset
and therefore push the price up higher. At dates 4 and 5, they become even more optimistic,
pushing the price higher still. At date 6, however, the price falls. By this point, the largest
past price increases – those at dates 2 and 3 – have receded some way into the past. From
(2), this means that their contribution to extrapolators’ beliefs is smaller than before. This
reduces extrapolators’ enthusiasm and causes the price to drop.
    From Figure 1, we can see, informally, how a model where some investors extrapolate past
price changes can explain: (i) medium-term momentum, long-term reversal, and the value
premium in the cross-section; (ii) excess volatility and time-series predictability in aggregate
asset classes; and (iii) bubbles.
    We can see momentum in the way the positive price change at date 2 is followed by
another positive price change at date 3: the price change at date 2 leads extrapolators to
become more bullish at date 3 and hence to push the price even further up on that date.
We can see long-term reversal in the way the high return between date 1 and date 5 is
followed by a poor return over the next few periods. If the asset has had a good long-term
past return, this is a sign that extrapolators have been buying it aggressively, causing it to
become overpriced; the overvaluation is then followed by low returns. And we can see excess
volatility in the way that, following the good cash-ﬂow news at date 2, the solid line rises
above the dashed line: due to aggressive buying by extrapolators at date 3, the price of the
risky asset is more volatile than in the absence of extrapolators.
   Figure 1 also shows that, in an economy with extrapolators, the diﬀerence between price
and fundamental value predicts the subsequent return with a negative sign; for example, the
high price relative to fundamental value at date 5 is followed by a low return. When the
 10
      In this example, the economy starts in a steady state in which P0 = D0 − γσε2 QT and X1 = γσε2 Q.


                                                     19
price is high relative to fundamentals, this is a sign that extrapolators have been buying the
asset aggressively, causing it to be overpriced; this overvaluation is then followed by a low
return. This mechanism generates time-series predictability in aggregate asset classes and a
value premium in the cross-section.
    Finally, the swift rise in the asset’s price between date 1 and date 5 followed by a decline
in the periods thereafter captures the essential characteristic of an asset bubble. If, instead
of the single cash-ﬂow shock at date 2, there were two or three substantial cash-ﬂow shocks
in close succession, the rise and fall in price would be even more dramatic and even more
reminiscent of a bubble. The theory of bubbles suggested here is in essence the one articulated
by Kindleberger (1978). Bubbles are initiated by strongly positive cash-ﬂow news that cause
the price of an asset to rise. This price increase leads extrapolators to become bullish,
generating further price increases and even greater extrapolator enthusiasm. Eventually, as
described above, extrapolator enthusiasm abates and the bubble begins to deﬂate.
   At certain points in the cycle in Figure 1, the extrapolators’ trades are proﬁtable: at
date 3, for example, extrapolators increase their holdings of the risky asset, a move that
earns them a positive return over the next period. Overall, however, they underperform the
fundamental traders: at date 5, for example, extrapolators have a large exposure to the risky
asset, but the asset’s subsequent return is negative.
    At this point, the reader may have the following question in mind: “Return extrapolation
is presented as a mistake. But it sounds similar to momentum trading, which is viewed as a
smart strategy. How can the same thing be both a mistake and smart?” The answer is that
extrapolation, as deﬁned here, and momentum trading are not the same thing; there is a
diﬀerence in timing between the two. If there is a positive price change between time t − 1
and time t, a momentum trader buys immediately, at time t. For example, his demand for
shares of the risky asset at time t can be written as
                                               Pt − Pt−1
                                       Ntm =             ,                                  (6)
                                                  γσε2
where the “m” superscript stands for “momentum traders.” The extrapolators, however, do
not buy at time t; they buy at time t + 1: notice, from equation (2), that extrapolators’
expectations at time t do not depend on the most recent price change from time t − 1 to
t, but only on the price change from t − 2 to t − 1 and on price changes before that. For
example, in Figure 1, following the positive price change at date 2, the momentum trader
buys immediately at date 2, while the extrapolator buys only at date 3. In this framework,
momentum trading is proﬁtable precisely because it “front runs” the extrapolators (Haghani
and McBride, 2016).
    Why do we not include the most recent price change, Pt − Pt−1 , on the right-hand side
of equation (2)? In other words, why do we not specify extrapolator beliefs as
                                                 t−2
                                                 
               Ete (Pt+1 − Pt ) = Xt ≡ (1 − θ)         θk (Pt−k − Pt−k−1 ) + θt−1 X1 ?      (7)
                                                 k=0


                                                 20
At a practical level, the reason is that we want a model that generates momentum; after all,
momentum is a robust feature of actual returns. A model where extrapolators form beliefs
according to equation (7) can generate excess volatility, time-series predictability, long-term
reversal, and a value premium, but struggles to generate momentum. If, as in the example
above, there is good cash-ﬂow news at date 2, extrapolators with the beliefs in (7) become
more bullish immediately and hence push the price up a lot on that date. By date 3, however,
their enthusiasm may have already started to wane: the large price increase at date 2 is now
one period further back in the past and therefore has less impact on their beliefs.
    What is an economic justiﬁcation for excluding the most recent price change from equa-
tion (2)? One possibility is that the right-hand side of (2) actually represents the extrapo-
lators’ belief at time t − 1 rather than at time t, but that, due to frictions and constraints,
the extrapolators do not get around to translating this belief into a portfolio adjustment
until time t. Another possibility is that some investors observe past price changes with a
delay. These channels are particularly relevant in the housing market: it takes time for a
transaction price to be incorporated into the Case-Shiller house price index, and it takes time
to buy a house. If speciﬁcation (2) – a speciﬁcation that generates momentum – is especially
applicable in the housing market, this may explain why there is more short-term positive
autocorrelation in housing returns than in stock market returns (Glaeser and Nathanson,
2015, 2017).
    The parameter θ, which determines the relative weight extrapolators put on recent as
opposed to distant past returns, plays a key role in the model presented above. We can
estimate the value of θ using the survey data studied by Greenwood and Shleifer (2014)
and others. In quarterly data, θ ≈ 0.9, suggesting that investor expectations are aﬀected
primarily by the past two years of returns. However, Cassella and Gulen (2018) use rolling
regressions to document a striking fact: the value of θ estimated from the survey data varies
signiﬁcantly over time. For example, in the late 1990s, the value of θ fell, suggesting that
the typical investor was forming beliefs based only on very recent returns.
    Why would the average investor’s θ vary over time? One possibility is that there is a
within-individual change in θ. For example, if investors decide that there has been a shift
in the forces driving the economy, they may start to put more weight on recent returns.
Another possibility is that the composition of the investor population changes over time.
After a sharp rise in the stock market, investors with low θ are likely to enter the market,
precisely because they put heavy weight on recent observations. As a result, the average
θ across investors will fall. In Section 4.4, I discuss a framework that predicts that young
people are more likely to have a low value of θ.
   As noted above, the extrapolation framework can generate time-series predictability, the
ﬁnding that a high P/D ratio in the stock market is followed by a low return, on average.
Cassella and Gulen (2018) draw a new prediction out of the extrapolation framework, namely
that a high P/D ratio in the stock market will be followed by an especially low average return
over the next year if, at the time of the high P/D ratio, the typical investor’s θ is low: when

                                              21
θ is low, investors more quickly “forget” the positive price changes that caused them to
become excited in the ﬁrst place, and the overvaluation therefore corrects faster. Cassella
and Gulen (2018) conﬁrm this prediction in the data: years of high P/D ratios and low θ
are followed by lower returns on average than are years of high P/D ratios and high θ.
    The simple model presented above shows how extrapolation of past price changes can
explain momentum and reversal in the cross-section, time-series predictability and excess
volatility in aggregate asset classes, and the formation and collapse of bubbles. I now brieﬂy
discuss some of the more sophisticated models of extrapolative beliefs that have been used
to study these phenomena.
     Aggregate stock market. Barberis et al. (2015) use a model of return extrapolation
to think about aggregate stock market prices. In this model, there are two assets – a
risk-free asset and a risky asset – and two types of inﬁnitely-lived investors who maximize
lifetime consumption utility. One type is extrapolators whose expectation about the future
price change of the stock market is a weighted average of the market’s past price changes.
The second type is rational traders who know the stochastic process that prices follow in
equilibrium.
    The model generates the important features of aggregate stock market prices: the price of
the risky asset exhibits excess volatility, and the diﬀerence between the price and a measure
of fundamentals predicts subsequent price changes with a negative sign. Extrapolators have
a large eﬀect on prices despite the presence of rational traders. Why is this? Suppose that
there is good cash-ﬂow news that pushes up the stock market price, causing extrapolators
to become more bullish and hence to push the price up even further. At this point, the
rational traders recognize that the extrapolators are likely to stay bullish for some time –
the beliefs in equations (2) and (7) are persistent, particularly for higher values of θ – and
that it therefore does not make sense to trade aggressively against them. This allows the
extrapolators to have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on prices.
    In Barberis et al.’s (2015) model, investors have constant absolute risk aversion. While
this makes the model more tractable, it also makes it hard to evaluate its quantitative
predictions: ratio-based quantities such as the P/D ratio are not well-deﬁned. Jin and
Sui (2018) present a model of asset prices in which the representative investor has both
extrapolative beliefs about returns and preferences of the Epstein-Zin form. This model’s
quantitative predictions are easier to evaluate. When the model is calibrated to survey data,
these predictions match important moments of actual stock market returns.11
    An appealing feature of models of the stock market based on return extrapolation is
that they are consistent with the survey data on the beliefs of actual investors about future
returns: in line with the survey evidence, some of the investors in Barberis et al.’s (2015)
model have extrapolative beliefs about returns, as does the representative investor in Jin
and Sui’s (2018) framework. By contrast, the prominent rational models of stock market
 11
      See Adam et al. (2017) for a related analysis.


                                                       22
ﬂuctuations – models based on habit formation, long-run risk, or rare disasters – are not
consistent with the survey data. In these models, high stock market returns are associated
with a decline in risk aversion or perceived risk, at which point investors expect lower, not
higher, returns going forward.
    The cross-section. Hong and Stein (1999) and Barberis and Shleifer (2003) use models
in which some investors extrapolate past price changes to think about the cross-section of
average returns.12 In Hong and Stein (1999), the extrapolative beliefs are derived from other
assumptions, rather than posited exogenously; in Section 4.3, I discuss the micro-foundation
they propose. In Barberis and Shleifer’s (2003) model, investors put assets into categories
and form expectations about the future price change of each category as a weighted average
of its past price changes. One advantage of this framework is that it generates not only
momentum and reversal in the cross-section, but also comovement in returns that is unrelated
to fundamentals, a phenomenon that is observed in the data. I discuss this framework in
more detail in Section 9.
   Bubbles. The model of return extrapolation summarized in equations (1)-(5) can generate
the most essential feature of a bubble, namely a sharp increase in an asset’s price followed
by a steep decline. However, there are aspects of bubbles that this model does not capture
and that call for a richer framework.
    As a bubble grows, sophisticated investors often increase, rather than decrease, their ex-
posure to the risky asset in question: Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004) show that, during the
U.S. technology-stock bubble of the late 1990s, the weight of technology stocks in hedge fund
portfolios was higher than the weight of technology stocks in the overall market portfolio.
We cannot explain this using the two-agent model outlined above: given that extrapolators
increase their holdings of the risky asset as the bubble forms, the more sophisticated fun-
damental traders necessarily reduce their holdings. De Long et al. (1990b) show that it
is possible to generate riding of a bubble by sophisticated investors in a three-agent model
that features extrapolators, boundedly-rational fundamental traders like those described in
equation (4), and fully rational traders who understand how extrapolators form beliefs. In
this case, as the bubble forms, the extrapolators increase their holdings of the risky asset;
the fully rational traders also increase their holdings in order to proﬁt from future buying
by extrapolators; and the boundedly-rational fundamental traders reduce their holdings.
    Most bubbles feature very high trading volume (Hong and Stein, 2007). The model in
equations (1)-(5) can generate high volume during periods of overvaluation, but not in a
fully satisfactory way: it says that, during a bubble, the high volume results from extrapo-
lators steadily increasing their holdings of the risky asset and fundamental traders steadily
decreasing their holdings. This theory of volume faces empirical challenges: for example,
during bubble episodes, few investors monotonically increase or decrease their holdings of
the bubble asset; more commonly, they alternately increase and decrease their exposure over
  12
    See Da et al. (2018) for direct evidence of extrapolative expectations about the returns of individual
stocks.


                                                   23
time (Liao and Peng, 2018).
    Barberis et al. (2018) put forward a new theory of volume during bubble periods. They
propose that investors who extrapolate past price changes do not do so blindly, but rather
also pay attention to what fundamental traders focus on, namely how prices compare to
fundamentals. Speciﬁcally, their model features I types of extrapolators, where the demand
of extrapolators of type i for shares of the risky asset is13
                                                                     
                                        Dt − (T − t − 1)γσε2 Q − Pt                       Xt
                   Nte,i   = wi,t                                         + (1 − wi,t )        ,       (8)
                                                   γσε2                                   γσε2

where Xt , deﬁned in (2), is a weighted average of past price changes. Notice that this
demand function depends not only on past price changes, but also, to some extent, on the
fundamental trader demand in (4). Crucially, the relative weight each extrapolator puts on
past price changes as opposed to fundamental trader demand varies slightly over time, and
independently so across extrapolators, an idea that the authors call “wavering” and motivate
based on time-varying attention. Speciﬁcally,

                                         wi,t = w + ui,t
                                          ui,t ∼ N(0, σu2 ), i.i.d., ∀i, t,                            (9)

where w is a constant in the (0, 0.5) interval, and where wi,t is truncated so that its value is
always between 0 and 1.
    Barberis et al. (2018) show that this model generates high volume during bubble periods
in a way that is more consistent with observed trading behavior. During a bubble, each
extrapolator is torn between two powerful but conﬂicting investment signals. On the one
hand, prices have recently been rising, which makes the extrapolator think that they will
keep rising and encourages him to buy (the Xt /γσε2 term in (8)). On the other hand, prices
are very high relative to fundamentals, which makes him think that there might be a crash
and encourages him to sell (the ﬁrst term in parentheses on the right-hand side of (8)).
During a bubble, these signals are so strong that even a small change in the relative weight
the extrapolator assigns to them leads to a large portfolio adjustment, and hence to trading
volume. The model predicts that, during a bubble, volume will be strongly positively related
to the asset’s past return. The authors conﬁrm this prediction using data on four historical
bubble episodes.14


4.2     Extrapolation of fundamentals

Section 4.1 focused on models of return extrapolation. I now turn to models where investors
extrapolate past fundamentals – for example, where their expectation about the future cash-
  13
    The full model incorporates a short-sale constraint, but I leave it out of equation (8) for simplicity.
  14
    See DeFusco et al. (2018) and Liao and Peng (2018) for alternative extrapolation-based models of
volume, as well as evidence that supports the mechanisms they describe.

                                                         24
ﬂow growth rate of a ﬁrm, or of the aggregate corporate sector, is a positive function of
recent cash-ﬂow growth rates.15
    Models based on cash-ﬂow extrapolation can explain a range of important facts about
asset prices, including excess volatility and return predictability in aggregate asset classes,
and long-term reversal and the value premium in the cross-section of stock returns. Suppose
that the true mean growth rate of an asset’s cash ﬂows is constant, but that, at each moment
of time, investors’ expectation of the future cash-ﬂow growth rate is a positive function of
recent past growth rates. If cash ﬂows have recently been rising quickly, investors become
optimistic about future cash-ﬂow growth and push the asset’s price up relative to current
fundamentals. Since, in reality, the mean cash-ﬂow growth rate is no higher than before,
extrapolators are disappointed by subsequent cash ﬂows, on average, and the asset earns a
low return. This price rise followed by a low average return captures excess volatility and
time-series return predictability in the aggregate stock market, and, in an economy with
many assets, long-term reversal and a value premium. Moreover, if, as suggested above in
the discussion of equation (2), there is a gap between the time at which extrapolators form
beliefs and the time at which they trade, then the cash-ﬂow extrapolation framework also
generates momentum in asset returns.
    Several papers formalize the intuition in the previous paragraph. An early model of
cash-ﬂow extrapolation is that of Barberis et al. (1998), who show how this assumption can
explain long-term reversal and a value premium in the cross-section. I describe this model
in Section 6.2. More recent models include Fuster et al. (2012), Choi and Mertens (2013),
Alti and Tetlock (2014), Hirshleifer et al. (2015), and Bordalo et al. (2017, 2018a).16
    Models of cash-ﬂow extrapolation predict that the past growth in an asset’s fundamentals
will be negatively related to the asset’s subsequent return. The evidence on this prediction is
mixed. On the one hand, Daniel and Titman (2006) ﬁnd that, in the cross-section, the past
growth in a ﬁrm’s fundamentals is not related to the subsequent return of the ﬁrm’s stock.
On the other hand, in an in-depth study of the shipping industry, Greenwood and Hanson
(2015) show that, here, the level of fundamentals does forecast a low subsequent return.
Moreover, in the context of corporate bonds, Greenwood and Hanson (2013) show that past
default rates predict subsequent bond returns with a positive sign, a ﬁnding that is consistent
with investors over-extrapolating default rates. Taken together, these results suggest that
investors extrapolate past fundamentals only under certain conditions. However, we do not
yet have a good understanding of what these conditions are.
  15
     I use “cash ﬂow” as an umbrella term for the various types of fundamentals that investors may extrap-
olate, whether dividends, earnings, or revenues.
  16
     See also Barsky and De Long (1993) and Lakonishok et al. (1994) for early discussions of cash-ﬂow
extrapolation.




                                                   25
4.3    Sources of extrapolative beliefs

In Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we saw that a simple assumption – that some investors form beliefs
about future returns or cash-ﬂow growth based on recent past returns or cash-ﬂow growth –
can explain a wide range of facts about asset prices. While this is encouraging, it immediately
raises another question: Why would investors form beliefs in this way? I now discuss some
possible sources of extrapolative beliefs. These fall into two categories: mechanisms based
on concepts from psychology, and mechanisms based on bounded rationality, the idea that
investors do not have the cognitive capacity to process all relevant information in a timely
and accurate way. I describe the psychological approaches ﬁrst and then turn to the bounded-
rationality approaches. I focus primarily on return extrapolation but also discuss cash-ﬂow
extrapolation.
    A long-standing idea, articulated by Barberis et al. (1998), is that extrapolative beliefs
stem from the “representativeness heuristic,” a concept introduced by Kahneman and Tver-
sky (1972, 1973a). According to this heuristic, when people face questions such as “What
is the probability that object A belongs to class B?,” or “What is the probability that data
A are generated by model B?,” their answers are based on the extent to which A is repre-
sentative of B, in other words, the extent to which A reﬂects the essential characteristics of
B. In many situations, this heuristic generates good probability judgments. In some situa-
tions, however, it leads the individual astray. In particular, it can cause an error known as
base-rate neglect.
   The following example, based on Kahneman and Tversky’s experiments, illustrates base-
rate neglect. Consider this description of a person named Steve:

    “Steve is very shy and withdrawn, invariably helpful, but with little interest in people or
in the world of reality. A meek and tidy soul, he has a need for order and structure, and a
passion for detail.”

    Is Steve more likely to be a lawyer or a librarian? Many people are tempted to say
“librarian.” Kahneman and Tversky argue that they come to this answer by applying the
representativeness heuristic: their judgment is based on the fact that the description is more
representative of a librarian than a lawyer; shyness, for example, is more common among
librarians than lawyers. However, in this case, the representativeness heuristic is leading
people to the wrong answer: it is causing them to neglect the “base rate,” the fact that there
are far more lawyers in the population than librarians, so that, even if Steve sounds like a
librarian, he is actually more likely to be a lawyer. In mathematical terms, Bayes’ rule states
that
                       p(librarian|data)     p(data|librarian) p(librarian)
                                          =                                 .              (10)
                        p(lawyer|data)        p(data|lawyer) p(lawyer)
The original question – Is Steve more likely to be a lawyer or a librarian? – asks people
to evaluate the left-hand side of equation (10). One interpretation of the representativeness
heuristic is that it leads people to base their judgment on the ﬁrst ratio on the right-hand

                                              26
side. In doing so, they neglect the second term on the right-hand side, the relative likelihood
of librarians and lawyers in the population. In many situations, the ﬁrst ratio on the right-
hand side is a good approximation to the left-hand side. In this case, it is not.
    The representativeness heuristic and the base-rate neglect it gives rise to oﬀer a foun-
dation for extrapolative beliefs. To see the argument in the case of return extrapolation,
consider an asset that has posted several periods of high returns. An investor who uses the
representativeness heuristic will over-estimate the asset’s true mean return: his judgment is
aﬀected by the fact that the high realized returns are more representative of an asset with a
high true mean return than of an asset with a low or moderate true mean return. However,
by reasoning in this way, he is neglecting the base rate – the fact that it is relatively rare
for an asset to have a high true mean return. An asset that posted a few periods of high
returns is actually more likely to be an asset with a moderate true mean that just happened
to have a few good draws than to be an asset with a high true mean.
   A similar argument can be used to motivate extrapolation of fundamentals. Following a
few periods of high cash-ﬂow growth for an asset, investors who use the representativeness
heuristic believe that the true mean cash-ﬂow growth rate is high: the data are more repre-
sentative of an asset whose true mean growth rate is high than of an asset whose true mean
growth rate is moderate or low. However, they are over-estimating the growth rate because
they are neglecting the base rate – the fact that it is rare for an asset’s true mean growth
rate to be high for an extended period of time. An early formalization of this argument
appears in Barberis et al. (1998).
    Bordalo et al. (2017) and Bordalo et al. (2018a) link the representativeness heuristic
to extrapolative beliefs using a related, but distinct, argument. They build on a model of
representativeness laid out in Gennaioli and Shleifer (2010) and Bordalo et al. (2014) in
which a type t is representative of a group G if the ratio
                                           p(t|G)
                                                                                          (11)
                                          p(t| − G)
is high, in other words, if type t is more common within group G than outside it. For
example, “old people” (t) are representative of a Florida resident (G), not because most
people in Florida are old – they are not – but because it is old people, rather than other age
groups, that are over-represented in Florida relative to other states: the ratio
                                    p(t|Florida resident)
                                  p(t|non-Florida resident)
is higher for t = “old person” than for t = “middle-aged person” or t = “young person.”
Bordalo et al. (2014) propose that people overweight representative types when forming
                                        
beliefs, so that their distorted belief p(t|G) is given by
                                                             θ
                                      1        p(t|G)
                              
                              p(t|G) = p(t|G)                      ,                      (12)
                                      Z       p(t| − G)

                                              27
where θ > 0 and Z is a normalizing factor. As such, people over-estimate the likelihood that
a randomly-chosen Florida resident is old. While the distorted beliefs in (12) are incorrect,
they contain a “kernel of truth”: they take a true feature of the data – for example, that old
people are over-represented in Florida – and exaggerate it.
    Bordalo et al. (2017) and Bordalo et al. (2018a) incorporate this belief distortion into a
dynamic framework they call “diagnostic expectations.” Let ωt be the state of the economy
at time t. The individual’s assessment, at time t, of the probability that the state of the
economy at time t + 1 will be ωt+1 is
                                                                       θ
                                    1                p(ωt+1 |ωt )
                        t+1 |ωt ) = p(ωt+1 |ωt )
                       p(ω                                                   .                (13)
                                    Z             p(ωt+1 |Et−1 (ωt ))

Here, p(ωt+1 |ωt ) is again the rationally-assessed probability. As in (12), the individual assigns
greater likelihood to states ωt+1 that are more representative of the current state ωt . An
important modeling choice is to specify what “−G” corresponds to in a dynamic setting. In
(13), it is the time t state that the individual expected at time t − 1, in other words, the
time t state in which he receives no news, relative to his prior expectation. Once again, the
beliefs in (13) contain a kernel of truth: they take the time t + 1 states whose true likelihood
has gone up in light of the time t news, and inﬂate their probability.
    The diagnostic expectations framework can generate extrapolation of fundamentals. Sup-
pose that ωt is the state of a ﬁrm’s fundamentals at time t, and that the time t state is good,
so that ωt is higher than expected. Good fundamentals at time t + 1 are more representative
of the good time t state: under the true process for fundamentals, the ratio

                                           p(ωt+1 |ωt )
                                                                                              (14)
                                        p(ωt+1 |Et−1 (ωt ))

is larger for high values of ωt+1 than for low values of ωt+1 . Since investors overweight
representative states when forming beliefs about the future, they are overly optimistic about
future fundamentals. In this sense, they over-extrapolate the good news at time t. Bordalo
et al. (2017, 2018a) incorporate diagnostic expectations into models of individual stock
returns and credit cycles, respectively. The extrapolative mechanism described above plays
an important role in both models.
    Another idea from psychology that has been used to motivate extrapolative beliefs is a
belief in a “law of small numbers” (Tversky and Kahneman, 1971). The law of large numbers
is a mathematical fact which, informally, states that a large sample of data will reﬂect the
properties of the model that generated it. For example, the ratio of Heads to Tails in a large
sample of tosses from a fair coin is very likely to be close to one. Tversky and Kahneman
(1971) propose that people have an incorrect belief in a law of small numbers: they think,
incorrectly, that even a small sample of data will reﬂect the properties of the model that
generated it. One motivation for this idea is the “gambler’s fallacy”: the tendency, after
observing ﬁve tosses of Heads from a fair coin, to predict that the next toss will be Tails

                                                28
(Benjamin et al., 2017). An interpretation of this is that people expect even a small sample
of tosses to reﬂect the essential characteristic of a fair coin, namely an even mix of Heads
and Tails. If the next toss is to bring the sample closer to this expected 50:50 mix, it must
be Tails.17
    An individual who believes in a law of small numbers draws overly strong inferences
from small samples: since he believes that even a short sample reﬂects the properties of
the model that generated it, he thinks that he can infer a lot about the model from the
sample. This provides a basis for extrapolative beliefs. To illustrate the idea in the case of
return extrapolation, consider again an asset that has posted a few periods of high returns.
If an investor believes that even this short sample reﬂects the properties of the model that
generated it, he will over-estimate the asset’s true mean return and will therefore forecast
a high return on the asset going forward. A similar argument can be used to motivate
extrapolation of fundamentals. Rabin (2002) and Rabin and Vayanos (2010) present models
of a belief in a law of small numbers and show how it can lead to extrapolative beliefs.18
    The behavior in the gambler’s fallacy, where people predict Tails after ﬁve Heads, thereby
expecting a trend to reverse, appears inconsistent with the evidence of return extrapolation
in the stock market, where investors expect a trend in returns to continue. However, there
is a way to reconcile these results using the belief in a law of small numbers (Rabin and
Vayanos, 2010). In the case of the gambler’s fallacy, people know the model generating the
data: the coin is known to be fair. In this case, a belief in a law of small numbers leads
them to predict a reversal: only through a reversal will the data come closer to reﬂecting
the essential property of a fair coin. In the case of the stock market, investors know much
less about the model generating the data; for example, they are unsure about the true mean
stock return. Here, a belief in a law of small numbers leads them to extrapolate: they make
an overly strong inference about the mean from the sample and therefore expect any trend
they observe to continue.
    The sources of extrapolative beliefs described above are based on psychological concepts
– on base-rate neglect, representativeness, or a belief in a law of small numbers. A num-
ber of papers argue instead that extrapolative beliefs stem from certain kinds of bounded
rationality. I now discuss some of the ideas in this line of work.
   Hong and Stein (1999) propose that investors extrapolate assets’ past returns because
they are unable to observe the assets’ underlying fundamentals – here, news about the
assets’ future cash ﬂows – and view returns as signaling something about these fundamentals.
  17
      While people incorrectly believe in a law of small numbers, they do not believe in the law of large
numbers, even though the latter is a true mathematical fact (Tversky and Kahneman, 1971). Benjamin et
al. (2015) explore some economic implications of this non-belief in the law of large numbers.
   18
      A belief in a law of small numbers has been used in the same way to interpret the so-called “hot-hand
fallacy,” whereby people think that, given two basketball players with the same average ability, the one who
has made more of his last few shots is signiﬁcantly more likely to make his next one, even though there is
not enough predictability in the data to justify such a belief (Gilovich et al., 1985).



                                                    29
Speciﬁcally, the authors build a model with a risk-free asset and a risky asset, and two sets of
investors, “newswatchers” and “momentum traders.” Because of cognitive processing limits,
each type of investor can attend to only one kind of information. Newswatchers process
only private information about the risky asset’s fundamentals; they do not condition their
demand on past price changes. Momentum traders, by contrast, do not observe the private
information; their demand at time t is a function only of the price change from time t − 2 to
time t − 1. Whether this demand is a positive or negative function of the past price change
is determined endogenously in equilibrium.
     In the Hong and Stein (1999) model, private information is assumed to diﬀuse slowly
through the newswatcher population. It is therefore optimal for momentum traders’ demand
for the risky asset to be a positive, rather than negative, function of the asset’s past price
change: if the past price change is positive, this is a sign that good private information
is diﬀusing through the newswatcher population; since this information is likely to keep
diﬀusing through the newswatcher population in the near future, the price of the asset
is likely to keep rising, making it optimal for momentum traders to increase their demand
today. As such, momentum traders extrapolate past returns. In particular, since they do not
observe the private information, they keep buying the risky asset even after the good news
has diﬀused across all the newswatchers. This, in turn, causes the asset’s price to overshoot.
Hong and Stein (1999) show that the interaction of newswatchers and momentum traders
generates medium-term momentum and long-term reversal in the risky asset price. Hong et
al. (2000) provide evidence in support of the model’s predictions.
    Fuster et al. (2010) present an alternative bounded-rationality foundation for extrap-
olative beliefs. They propose that, when ﬁtting a model to data for the purpose of making
a forecast, people have a preference for simple models, and that this, in turn, can lead
to over-extrapolation. Suppose that an economic variable follows a complex process – an
autoregressive AR(p) process with p = 20, say, under which the variable exhibits positive
autocorrelation in the short run and partial mean-reversion in the long run. If an individual
analyzes the past realizations of this variable using a simpler model – an AR(q) process
with q < 20, say – he will detect the short-term positive autocorrelation but will miss the
long-term mean-reversion. As a consequence, he will extrapolate a past trend too far into
the future. Fuster et al. (2010) propose a model of belief formation that they label “natu-
ral expectations” under which an individual’s beliefs are a weighted average of the rational
forecast and the forecast obtained using his preferred simple model. Fuster et al. (2012)
show formally how such expectations can generate over-extrapolation and, in an asset pricing
context, excess volatility and return predictability.
   Glaeser and Nathanson (2017) propose another bounded-rationality foundation for ex-
trapolative beliefs. Under some assumptions, the price Pt of a risky asset is approximately
equal to Dt /(r − gt ), where Dt , r, and gt are the current dividend level, discount rate, and
expected dividend growth rate, respectively. In Glaeser and Nathanson’s model, investors
incorrectly believe that the market price Pt of a risky asset equals Dt /(r − g), in other words,


                                               30
that the price reﬂects a constant, rather than time-varying, expected dividend growth rate.
As a result, if the asset’s price rises sharply, investors incorrectly attribute this to a large
rise in D. This leads them to over-estimate the dividend growth rate, which, when coupled
with their belief that P = D/(r − g), means that they also over-estimate the future growth
of prices. As a consequence, they eﬀectively engage in return extrapolation: they buy the
asset after good past returns in anticipation of good future returns.
   Finally, Greenwood and Hanson (2015) argue that a type of bounded rationality called
competition neglect contributes to over-extrapolation of fundamentals. A ﬁrm with high past
cash-ﬂow growth attracts competition, reducing the ﬁrm’s ability to grow its cash ﬂows at
the same rate in the future. If investors fail to take this into account, they will over-estimate
the ﬁrm’s future cash-ﬂow growth.


4.4    Experience eﬀects

In the extrapolation-based models of Section 4.1, an investor’s demand for an asset depends
on a weighted average of the asset’s past returns, where recent returns receive more weight.
Malmendier and Nagel (2011) propose a framework that is related, but also distinct in
an important way. They suggest that an investor’s demand for a risky asset is based on
a weighted average of the returns that the investor has experienced during his lifetime.
Speciﬁcally, the demand of investor i at time t for a risky asset depends on the quantity
                                   agei,t −1
                                 1 
                                            (agei,t − k)λ Rt−k ,                        (15)
                                A k=1
where agei,t is investor i’s age at time t and Rt−k is the asset’s return in period t − k. Notice
that this quantity is a function only of returns the investor has personally lived through, and
that, when λ > 0, he puts more weight on more recent past returns. The constant A scales
the weights on the past returns so that they sum to one.
   The speciﬁcation in (15) generates a type of heterogeneity in extrapolation across in-
vestors, one that leads to new predictions, especially about the relative behavior of the
young and the old. For example, it predicts that, following two or three years of strongly
positive stock market returns, the young will increase their exposure to the stock market
more than the old: in (15), the past two or three years are a bigger determinant of investor
demand for the young than for the old. Similarly, after two or three years of poor returns,
the young will decrease their exposure more than the old.
    Malmendier and Nagel (2011) show that the speciﬁcation in (15) has explanatory power
for the portfolio holdings of real-world investors. Using data from the Survey of Consumer
Finances, they document that, whether an individual participates in the stock market, and
the fraction of wealth that he invests in the stock market if he does participate, depend in
a positive and signiﬁcant way on the market returns he has experienced during his lifetime,
in other words, on the quantity in (15). Their estimate of λ is approximately 1.5, which

                                               31
implies substantial weight on even distant past returns. Additional evidence suggests that
the demand in (15) reﬂects beliefs rather than preferences: a survey-based measure of an
investor’s expectation about the future stock market return is positively correlated with the
weighted average of returns the investor has experienced over his lifetime.19
     Malmendier et al. (2017) present a model of asset prices, volume, and portfolio choice in
which investors extrapolate based on data they have personally experienced. There are two
assets: a risk-free asset and a risky asset, which, at time t, pays a dividend dt ∼ N(μ, σ 2 ),
i.i.d. over time. The economy is populated by investors of diﬀerent ages who do not know
the value of μ. Investor i’s estimate of μ at time t is a weighted average of the dividends
paid during his lifetime, with more weight on more recent dividends:
                                     age
                                    1 i,t
                                           (agei,t + 1 − k)λ dt−k .                                  (16)
                                    A k=0

As such, this speciﬁcation couples extrapolation of fundamentals with a focus on personal
experience. The authors show that, under these assumptions, young investors increase their
portfolio holdings more than old investors following a good cash-ﬂow realization. The model
also generates higher levels of volume during periods of sustained good or bad cash-ﬂow news
as these news lead to increased disagreement and hence trading across cohorts of diﬀerent
ages. The authors present evidence consistent with the model’s predictions.20
    In Section 4.3, I noted that extrapolative beliefs are typically motivated by the repre-
sentativeness heuristic, a belief in a law of small numbers, or cognitive limits that make it
hard for investors to monitor fundamentals or use complex models. While the speciﬁcations
in (15) and (16) are mathematically similar to those in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, they are of-
ten motivated using a diﬀerent psychological concept, namely, the “availability heuristic”
(Kahneman and Tversky, 1973b). According to this heuristic, an individual assesses the
probability of an event by the extent to which he can recall instances of the event from
memory; the easier it is to recall such instances, the more likely he judges the event to be.
This is often a reasonable heuristic, but, in some situations, it can lead the individual astray
because of biases in recall: more recent events and events with more emotional impact come
to mind more easily. Consider an individual trying to judge the likelihood of being mugged
in, say, the Wicker Park neighborhood of Chicago. If there have been some recent muggings
in Wicker Park, or if a friend of the individual was mugged at some point in Wicker Park, it
will be easier to recall instances of Wicker Park muggings, and this may lead the individual
to overestimate the likelihood of a mugging in that neighborhood.
   The availability heuristic can be used to motivate the expression in (15). Suppose that an
investor is trying to judge how good the future stock market return is likely to be. To make
  19
     There are now several papers that document the eﬀect of personal experience on beliefs about economic
outcomes; see, for example, Das et al. (2017) and Kuchler and Zafar (2017).
  20
     See Collin-Dufresne et al. (2016), Ehling et al. (2018), and Nagel and Xu (2018) for other ways of
incorporating experience eﬀects into models of asset prices.


                                                   32
this judgment, he may bring to mind the past stock market returns that he can remember.
Since he is more likely to recall returns that he personally observed in his lifetime, these may
aﬀect his judgment more than those he did not observe; in the extreme, the returns he did
not live through may receive a weight of zero, as in (15). Similarly, since he is more likely to
recall recent returns than more distant ones, recent returns may receive more weight in his
judgment, as in (15) when λ > 0.
    The availability heuristic is a plausible explanation of why investors put more weight
on returns they have personally observed. However, it may not be the best explanation for
why investors put more weight on more recent returns. Empirically, investor demand for
assets depends more heavily on recent past returns even when the investment decision is not
based on information recalled from memory, so that the availability heuristic is unlikely to
play a role. For example, retail investors’ propensity to buy individual stocks and mutual
funds is a positive function of these assets’ recent returns. However, when people invest
in a mutual fund or individual stock, they rarely do so based on their recollection of the
assets’ past returns, simply because they have no memory of these returns. More likely, they
read a news report or have a conversation with a friend that draws their attention to the
speciﬁc stock or fund. They then look up the asset’s past returns and what they see leads
them to invest in it. Representativeness, a belief in a law of small numbers, and cognitive
limits may therefore oﬀer more parsimonious accounts than the availability heuristic for why
recent returns are weighted more heavily: they apply both in situations where past returns
are recalled from memory and in situations where they are obtained from an external source.


4.5    Extrapolative beliefs: Summary

The concept of extrapolative beliefs oﬀers a simple and intuitive way of understanding a
host of important facts about asset prices. It has other economic applications as well. For
example, Bordalo et al. (2018a) use extrapolative beliefs as the basis for a model of credit
cycles – of lending to ﬁrms that is by turns excessive and insuﬃcient – while Gennaioli et
al. (2016) use them to think about corporate investment behavior.
    While we have learned a lot from the research on extrapolation, many questions remain.
For example: What determines θ, in other words, how far back people look when forming
beliefs about the future? Why does θ vary over time? Which quantity are investors forming
beliefs about? Is it returns, fundamentals, or both? Does extrapolation aﬀect only forecasts
of the mean of the distribution investors care about, or forecasts of higher moments too?
And most important, what is the root cause of extrapolative demand for assets? Section
4.3 lists a number of possibilities, but we do not know whether they are the true sources
of extrapolation. Other psychological, neural, or biological mechanisms may play just as
large a role. Throughout their evolutionary history, humans have had to make forecasts
about the sources of reward they encounter – sources of food, for example. It is likely that
deep mechanisms have evolved for making these judgments. A better understanding of these


                                              33
mechanisms may help us make sense of people’s forecasts about the stock market, a very
modern source of reward.



5     Beliefs: Overconﬁdence

An important line of research in behavioral ﬁnance builds on the idea that people are over-
conﬁdent. The term “overconﬁdence” refers to a number of related but distinct psychological
phenomena (Moore and Healy, 2008). I focus on two of these: “overprecision” and “over-
placement.”
    Overprecision is the ﬁnding that people overestimate the precision of their judgments.
In a typical study, an individual is asked to estimate various quantities – the number of gas
stations in Connecticut, say – but also to give a 90% conﬁdence interval for each estimate. If
the individual’s judgments are well calibrated, the point estimates will fall into the intervals
approximately 90% of the time. In practice, they fall into the intervals only about 50% of
the time, suggesting that the individual is too conﬁdent in his estimates (Klayman et al.,
1999; Soll and Klayman, 2004).
   Overplacement is the ﬁnding that people have overly rosy views of their abilities relative to
others. In surveys, for example, considerably more than 50% of respondents rank themselves
above the 50th percentile on a variety of positive traits (Dunning et al., 1989, 2004).
   A growing body of research argues that the concept of overconﬁdence can help explain a
number of puzzling facts in ﬁnance, most notably the very high trading volume in ﬁnancial
markets. To give just one data point: since 1998, turnover in the U.S. stock market has
exceeded 100% on an annual basis (French, 2008).
    There are several non-speculative reasons why someone might trade a ﬁnancial asset –
reasons that have nothing to do with beliefs about future price changes. These include trad-
ing to meet a liquidity need, trading to rebalance a portfolio, and trading to minimize taxes.
However, it is unlikely that these motives explain much of the volume we observe. Most
trading is likely driven by investors’ beliefs about the future price of the asset – speciﬁcally,
by disagreement among investors about what this future price will be.
    Why, in general, would people disagree? Suppose that two individuals have the same
prior belief about the future value of some quantity, that they then both observe the same
information signal about this future value, and that they are both fully rational. It follows
that they will have the same posterior belief about the future value of the quantity. This
implies that, if two people are to disagree, one of three things must be true: (i) they have
diﬀerent prior beliefs; (ii) they observe diﬀerent information; or (iii) one or both of them is
not fully rational.
   To build a model of trading volume based on disagreement, there are therefore three
approaches we can try. We can assume that investors have diﬀerent prior beliefs; that they

                                               34
observe diﬀerent information, for example, that some information is “private” to a speciﬁc
investor rather than publicly available; or that some investors are not fully rational. These
three approaches make diﬀerent predictions about trading volume. An informal summary
is this. Models where rational investors observe diﬀerent information tend to predict rela-
tively low volume – and in extreme cases, no volume at all. Models where investors are not
fully rational – speciﬁcally, models where investors are overconﬁdent – can generate substan-
tial volume, and this is one reason why overconﬁdence has become an important concept
in behavioral ﬁnance. Models where investors have diﬀerent priors are, loosely speaking,
somewhere in between: they typically generate more trading than models with private in-
formation but less trading than models with overconﬁdent investors. I now discuss the three
cases in more detail.
    When investors are rational and their rationality is common knowledge, it is hard to
generate substantial trading volume simply on the basis that investors observe diﬀerent
information, an insight that was fully appreciated only in the 1980s (Milgrom and Stokey,
1982). Suppose that an investor does some research to estimate an asset’s future cash ﬂows.
Based on this research, he decides that a sensible price for the asset is $20. When he checks
the market price, however, he sees that it is $15. A rational investor does not react to this
by buying many shares of the seemingly cheap stock. Instead, he infers that other investors
have probably unearthed less positive information than he. This leads him to lower his own
valuation of the stock and hence to be less inclined to trade it.
    A model in which investors are overconﬁdent generates substantially more trading volume
(Odean, 1998a; Eyster et al., 2018). More precisely, following Eyster et al. (2018), I will say
that an investor is “overconﬁdent” if he overestimates the precision of his own information
signal, and “dismissive” if he underestimates the precision of other people’s information
signals. Consider an economy with many investors, each of whom receives a private signal.
Both in the case where each investor is overconﬁdent and in the case where each investor
is dismissive, there is substantial volume. The intuition is straightforward. Each investor
can tell from the market price that other investors have received signals that diﬀer from his
own. However, as a result of either overconﬁdence or dismissiveness, he underestimates the
precision of these other signals relative to the precision of his own signal, and therefore does
not update his beliefs very much. Since none of the investors alters his beliefs very much,
there is substantial disagreement among them about the value of the asset, and this leads
to trading.21
    An intuitive prediction of the overconﬁdence framework is that more overconﬁdent people
will trade more. Grinblatt and Keloharju (2009) test this using data from Finland. At the
age of 19 or 20, every Finnish man goes into the military. As he begins his service, each
conscript takes a series of tests – some psychological tests, and some tests of intellectual
aptitude. One of the psychological tests asks him how conﬁdent he is, on a scale from 1 to 9.
  21
    See Banerjee and Kremer (2010) and Banerjee (2011) for other dismissiveness-based models of trading
volume.


                                                  35
Grinblatt and Keloharju (2009) measure the individual’s overconﬁdence as his self-reported
conﬁdence minus how conﬁdent he should be based on his performance on the aptitude tests.
Strikingly, this measure of overconﬁdence, computed when the individual is 19 or 20 years
old, predicts how frequently he trades stocks several years later when he opens and uses a
brokerage account.
   Another test of the overconﬁdence hypothesis builds on the ﬁnding that, on average, men
are more overconﬁdent than women (Lundeberg et al., 1994). In the trading context, this
predicts that, on average, men trade more and earn lower returns due to the transaction
costs they incur. Barber and Odean (2001) conﬁrm this prediction using data from a large
U.S. discount brokerage ﬁrm on the trading of 78,000 individuals between 1991 and 1997.22
    Eyster et al. (2018) argue that a diﬀerent departure from rationality, “cursedness,” may
also be helpful for thinking about trading volume. In models based on overconﬁdence or
dismissiveness, each investor infers from market prices that other investors have signals that
diﬀer from his own, but, because he underestimates the precision of these signals relative to
the precision of his own signal, he does not update his beliefs very much. By contrast, the
cursedness hypothesis posits that, when an investor sees that the market price of an asset
diﬀers from his own valuation of the asset, he fails to understand what this implies, namely
that other investors have signals that diﬀer from his. As a result, he does not update his
beliefs. If many investors exhibit such cursed thinking, there will be substantial disagreement
among them and hence heavy trading. The implications of cursedness for volume are similar
to those of extreme dismissiveness – the case where each investor recognizes that other
investors have signals that diﬀer from his own but believes that those signals have zero
precision.
    Earlier, I listed three sources of investor disagreement: diﬀerent priors, diﬀerent informa-
tion, and a departure from rationality. So far, I have discussed the latter two approaches.
Morris (1996) analyses the case of diﬀerent priors. In his model, investors start with diﬀer-
ent priors, but then observe the same sequence of public news and update their beliefs in a
rational manner. The model predicts substantial trading volume. This is a surprising result:
one might have thought that diﬀerent priors would not generate much trading volume. Sup-
pose that investor A has a more optimistic prior than investor B. One might have thought
that, as news is publicly released over time, investor A would remain more optimistic than
investor B, and that, as a result, trading volume would be muted. Morris (1996) shows
that, in fact, even though the two investors observe the same information, the identity of
the more optimistic investor can vary a lot over time. As a consequence, there is substantial
trading. Nonetheless, the diﬀerent-priors framework does not lead to as much volume as the
overconﬁdence framework. In the diﬀerent-priors framework, after many periods of public
news, investors’ beliefs converge and volume declines.
      So far, we have used the concept of overconﬁdence to think about trading volume. Daniel
 22
      See Glaser and Weber (2007) for additional evidence linking overconﬁdence to trading activity.



                                                     36
et al. (1998, 2001) show that overconﬁdence also oﬀers an explanation of some basic facts
about asset prices. In the simplest version of their model, there are three dates: t = 0, 1,
and 2. There is a risk-free asset and a risky asset that is a claim to a cash ﬂow at time 2.
The representative investor is risk-neutral. At time 1, by doing some research, he obtains a
private signal about the value of the cash ﬂow. If he is overconﬁdent – if he overestimates
the precision of the signal – the asset will be misvalued: overvalued if the signal is good
and undervalued if it is bad. At time 2, when the cash ﬂow is announced, there is a price
reversal, on average, as the misvaluation is corrected. The excessive movement in the asset
price at time 1 followed by the correction at time 2 oﬀers a way of thinking about several
empirical patterns: excess volatility and return predictability in aggregate asset classes, and
long-term reversal and the value premium in the cross-section of average returns.
    Daniel et al. (1998) show that an extension of the above model can capture other aspects
of the data as well – in particular, medium-term momentum. Suppose that there are now
four dates, t = 0, 1, 2, and 3. At time 1, the investor again observes a private signal. At time
2, public information is released. Finally, at time 3, the value of the cash ﬂow is announced.
Suppose that the investor is not only overconﬁdent but that his degree of conﬁdence varies
over time: if the public information at time 2 is consistent with the private signal at time
1, then, at time 2, the investor becomes even more conﬁdent in his private signal; but if
the public signal is not consistent with the private one, his conﬁdence in the private signal
remains unchanged. This asymmetric updating is motivated by “self-attribution bias” – the
tendency, driven by a desire to maintain a positive self-image, to give oneself credit for a
good outcome but to blame a bad outcome on extraneous bad luck. The idea, in the case
where the public signal is inconsistent with the private one, is that, to maintain a positive
view of himself, the investor is reluctant to accept that there might be a ﬂaw in the research
he conducted to generate the private signal.
    Biased updating of this kind generates both medium-term momentum and long-term
reversal. Suppose that the private information at time 1 is good, so that the price of the
risky asset goes up at that time. If the public signal at time 2 is also good, the price rises
further because of the investor’s increased conﬁdence in his favorable private signal. If the
public signal at time 2 is bad, the price remains largely unchanged as the investor maintains
his conﬁdence in his private signal. On average, then, the price rises at time 2, generating
momentum. The announcement of the cash ﬂow at time 3 generates a reversal, on average.


5.1    Disagreement with a short-sale constraint

The models we have encountered so far in this section posit that investors are overconﬁdent,
but do not impose any trading frictions. An important framework in behavioral ﬁnance
couples overconﬁdence-driven disagreement with a speciﬁc friction, namely, a constraint on
short sales.
   Models that combine investor disagreement with a short-sale constraint are appealing

                                              37
because they can explain why an asset might become signiﬁcantly overvalued. There are two
mechanisms through which this overpricing can occur: a static mechanism and a dynamic
one, described in the late 1970s by Miller (1977) and Harrison and Kreps (1978), respectively.
These papers, now well known, were largely ignored for two decades after they appeared,
probably because they departed from the rational frictionless framework which dominated
ﬁnance thinking at the time. They were “discovered” only in the late 1990s when researchers
realized that they oﬀered a useful way of thinking about the U.S. technology-stock bubble.
    To see the static channel through which disagreement and a short-sale constraint can
generate overpricing, suppose that one group of investors has optimistic expectations about
an asset’s future cash ﬂows, while another group has pessimistic expectations. If it were
possible to sell short, the pessimistic investors would do so; the price of the asset would then
reﬂect the expectations of both groups of investors, and there would not be any mispricing.
However, if short sales are not possible, the pessimists do not take a position in the asset.
The price of the asset then reﬂects only the expectations of the optimists. As such, the asset
is overpriced.
    Harrison and Kreps (1978) describe a dynamic mechanism through which disagreement,
coupled with a short-sale constraint, can lead to overvaluation. If there is a lot of disagree-
ment among investors about an asset’s future cash ﬂows, then, today, each investor is willing
to pay more for the asset than his own (discounted) expectation of the asset’s future cash
ﬂows because he reasons that, at some point in the future, after new information is released
and investors update their beliefs, there is a chance that some of the other investors will
be more optimistic than he and that he will therefore be able to sell the asset to them at
a premium. In other words, the existence of a “resale option” means that, when there is
signiﬁcant disagreement, the asset is overvalued relative to the present value of its future
cash ﬂows as perceived by the asset’s holders. The short-sale constraint plays an important
role in this logic. If short sales were possible, investor A could exploit investor B’s greater
optimism by waiting for investor B to turn optimistic, shorting the stock, and selling it to
him. If short sales are not possible, however, the only way investor A can exploit investor B’s
greater optimism is by buying the asset today, so that, when investor B becomes optimistic,
he can sell it to him. This extra demand for the asset today causes the overvaluation.
    Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) present a model that builds on Harrison and Kreps’ (1978)
framework while incorporating a number of new elements. They explicitly introduce overcon-
ﬁdence as the source of investor disagreement and study the model’s implications for volume
as well as prices. In the model, there is a risky asset that is a claim to a dividend stream
whose mean f is unobserved. There are two groups of risk-neutral investors, group A and
group B. Both groups observe two public signals that provide information about f ; call them
signal A and signal B. Group A overestimates the informativeness of signal A while group B
overestimates the informativeness of signal B. Think of the two signals as the editorial pages
of two newspapers, NA and NB , and suppose that group A overestimates the informativeness
of newspaper NA while group B overestimates the informativeness of newspaper NB . Every


                                              38
day, the investors update their beliefs based on what they read in the two newspapers, with
each group putting more weight on what its preferred newspaper says. Finally, short sales
are not allowed.
   Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) conﬁrm Harrison and Kreps’ result: because of the resale
option, the price of the asset is higher than the present value of the asset’s future cash ﬂows,
as perceived by the asset’s holders. For example, group A is willing to pay more than its
present value of the future cash ﬂows because there is a chance that, at some point in the
future, group B will read something in its preferred newspaper that causes it to become more
bullish, allowing group A to sell the asset on at a premium. Group B investors reason in the
same way.23
    The framework I have outlined – one that couples overconﬁdence-driven disagreement
with a short-sale constraint – has become inﬂuential not just because it oﬀers a theory
of overvaluation, but also because it can explain why overvaluation is often accompanied
by high trading volume, an empirical regularity emphasized by Hong and Stein (2007).
Most historical bubble episodes feature very high trading volume. During the technology-
stock bubble of the 1990s, for example, it was not just that technology stocks attained high
prices; they were also heavily traded. Similarly, growth stocks with high prices relative to
fundamentals have higher turnover than value stocks with low prices relative to fundamentals.
    Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) show how overconﬁdence-based disagreement and a short-
sale constraint can explain this coincidence of overvaluation and high volume. If the investors
in their model become more overconﬁdent, or if signals A and B become more informative,
this leads to larger ﬂuctuations in the relative optimism of the two investor groups. This, in
turn, leads to higher trading volume, but also greater overvaluation: the resale option is now
more valuable as each investor sees that, tomorrow, he has a chance of selling to someone
signiﬁcantly more optimistic than himself.24
   A prediction of the framework of this section is that assets that people disagree about
more will be more overvalued and therefore have lower average returns. Diether et al. (2003)
document a simple fact consistent with this prediction: stocks that analysts disagree about
more – stocks for which analysts’ forecasts of future earnings are more dispersed – have a
lower average return.
    The research reviewed in this section shows that overconﬁdence-based disagreement can
shed light on a number of facts about trading volume and asset prices. However, one aspect
of this framework limits its scope: while overconﬁdence can lead people to hold quite diﬀerent
beliefs, it does not say exactly what these beliefs will be; for example, the identity of signals
A and B in Scheinkman and Xiong’s (2003) model is left unspeciﬁed. On this dimension, the
extrapolation-based models of Section 4 go one step beyond the models of Section 5. Models
  23
    See Section IV of Xiong (2013) for a numerical example that illustrates this logic.
  24
    Hong and Sraer (2013) use the disagreement framework to think about “quiet” bubbles – the minority
of bubbles, often associated with debt securities, that do not feature high volume – while Hong and Sraer
(2016) use it to explain the relationship between beta and average return in the cross-section of stocks.

                                                   39
of extrapolative beliefs implicitly incorporate overconﬁdence-based disagreement: in a model
with extrapolators and fundamental traders, each type of trader fails to learn anything from
the fact that the other type is willing to trade with him. However, these models also explicitly
specify each trader’s beliefs. This, in turn, allows them to make more precise predictions
which can be brought to the data.



6     Other belief-based approaches

The eﬀort to build psychologically-realistic models of investor beliefs has focused primarily
on extrapolation of the past (Section 4) and overconﬁdence (Section 5). However, economists
have also explored other belief speciﬁcations. In this section, I review some of these.


6.1    Sticky beliefs

Investors with extrapolative or overconﬁdent beliefs adjust their views too much in response
to information and thereby cause excessive movements in prices. For example, Figure 1 shows
that, following good cash-ﬂow news that pushes the price of an asset up, extrapolators be-
come bullish about future price changes and push the price even higher, a price increase that
is excessive and that is later reversed. However, some phenomena – for example, momentum
and post-earnings announcement drift – may instead be the result of investors adjusting
their beliefs too little in response to new information (Bernard and Thomas, 1989; Jegadeesh
and Titman, 1993).
    How can sluggish belief adjustment generate post-earnings announcement drift and mo-
mentum? Consider a ﬁrm with a stock price of $40 which subsequently announces earnings
that are much better than expected. If investors are rational, they fully update their be-
liefs about the ﬁrm’s future prospects and immediately push the price of its stock up to
the appropriate level – up to $50, say. However, if investors instead have “sticky” beliefs,
they do not update their beliefs suﬃciently when the news is announced; as a result, the
stock price moves up only to a limited extent on the day of the announcement – up to $45,
say. Only over the next few weeks or months, as investors realize that their initial reaction
was insuﬃcient, does the price ﬁnally move up to the appropriate level of $50. In short,
when investors have sticky beliefs, the stock price jumps up on the announcement date and
keeps rising in the weeks thereafter. But this is precisely the pattern known as post-earnings
announcement drift. A similar intuition links sticky beliefs to momentum.
   An early attempt to model sticky beliefs is Barberis et al. (1998), a paper I discuss in
the next section. A more recent eﬀort is Bouchaud et al. (2018), who embed a framework
used by Coibon and Gorodnichenko (2012) to model inﬂation expectations into a model of
asset prices. Consider a ﬁrm whose cash ﬂow or proﬁt at time t is πt . The representative
investor’s expectation at time t about the next period’s cash ﬂow, denoted Ft πt+1 , is given

                                              40
by
                            Ft πt+1 = (1 − λ)Et πt+1 + λFt−1 πt+1 ,                       (17)
where Et πt+1 is the rational time t expectation about the future cash ﬂow. When λ = 0,
the investor has rational expectations, but when λ > 0, her beliefs are sticky, in that they
depend in part on her expectations at time t − 1. Bouchaud et al. (2018) also assume that,
at time t, the investor receives a signal st about the next period’s cash ﬂow, and that this
signal is persistent over time:

                                    πt+1 = st + εt+1
                                     st+1 = ρst + ut+1 ,                                  (18)

where ε and u are noise terms. The signal st can be simply the time t cash ﬂow πt .
    Bouchaud et al. (2018) show analytically that their model can explain the proﬁtability
anomaly described in Section 2.2 – the fact that, in the cross-section, a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability
predicts the ﬁrm’s subsequent stock return with a positive sign. To see the intuition, suppose
that the time t signal st is the time t cash ﬂow πt . If the cash ﬂow at time t is high, this
indicates that cash ﬂow at time t + 1 will also be high. However, since the investor’s beliefs
are sticky, she does not fully incorporate this information into her expectations at time t. As
a result, she is positively surprised, on average, at time t + 1. Cash ﬂow therefore predicts
the subsequent stock return with a positive sign. The model also generates momentum and
post-earnings announcement drift, and the intuition is similar.
    The authors test their explanation of the proﬁtability anomaly using analysts’ forecasts
of future earnings as a proxy for investors’ expectations about those earnings. For each ﬁrm,
they measure the stickiness of the consensus analyst forecast for the ﬁrm by regressing the
forecast error, πt+1 − Ft πt+1 , on the prior forecast revision, Ft πt+1 − Ft−1 πt+1 . They ﬁnd
that, consistent with their model, the proﬁtability anomaly is stronger for ﬁrms covered by
analysts with stickier beliefs.
    Bouchaud et al. (2018) also compute, for each analyst in their sample, a measure of the
stickiness of the analyst’s beliefs. They ﬁnd that an analyst’s beliefs are stickier, the more
industries she covers. This suggests that belief stickiness stems in part from cognitive limits
– from the fact that it takes time and eﬀort to process news, especially when these news are
about ﬁrms in diﬀerent industries. I discuss cognitive limits in more detail in Section 9.
    Psychological aspects of belief updating also oﬀer a basis for sticky beliefs. One of these
is known as “conservatism” (Edwards, 1968), and is illustrated by the following experiment.
There are two bags: Bag 1 contains 700 blue chips and 300 red chips; Bag 2 contains 300
blue chips and 700 red chips. The experimenter draws 12 chips, with replacement, from one
of the two bags. Of the 12 chips, 8 are blue and 4 are red. Participants in the experiment are
then asked to estimate the probability that the chips were drawn from Bag 1. The correct
answer is 0.97. However, most participants estimate the probability to be between 0.7 and


                                              41
0.8. As such, their beliefs are reacting too little to the information they are given.25
    Slow updating of beliefs may also stem from the “anchoring heuristic” (Kahneman and
Tversky, 1974). According to this heuristic, when people estimate the value of some quantity,
they often start with an initial, possibly arbitrary, estimate, and then adjust away. In
principle, this is a reasonable approach. The problem is that, in practice, the adjustment
away is typically insuﬃcient. In one experiment, participants are asked to estimate the
percentage of United Nations’ countries that are African. Before giving a percentage, they
are asked whether their guess is higher or lower than a randomly-generated number between
0 and 100. Their subsequent estimates are aﬀected by this random number. Those who are
asked to compare their estimate to 10 subsequently estimate 25%, while those who compare
to 60, estimate 45%.
   Anchoring of this kind can lead to sticky beliefs in ﬁnancial settings. When a ﬁrm
announces surprisingly good earnings, an analyst or investor will often start with her prior
view about the ﬁrm and then seek to adjust it in a positive direction. If, as the evidence on
anchoring suggests, this adjustment is insuﬃcient, the investor’s beliefs will be sticky.


6.2       Models of under- and over-reaction

In Sections 4 and 5, we saw that some facts about asset prices are plausibly the result of
investor over -reaction – an overreaction driven by extrapolative beliefs or by overconﬁdence.
In Section 6.1, we noted that other facts about asset prices are suggestive of investor under -
reaction. A long-standing challenge is to build a model that features both under-reaction
and over-reaction and makes testable predictions about the circumstances in which each will
occur.26
    An early model of under- and over-reaction is that of Barberis et al. (1998). I ﬁrst
describe the model and then discuss its psychological foundations. There is a risk-free asset
and a risky asset which is a claim to a ﬁrm’s future earnings, all of which are paid out as
dividends. In reality, the ﬁrm’s earnings follow a random walk, so that changes in earnings
are uncorrelated over time. However, the representative investor thinks that, at any time,
earnings are driven by one of two regimes: a “mean-reverting” regime in which earnings
changes are negatively correlated over time, or a “trending regime” in which earnings changes
are positively correlated over time. The investor also believes that, in each period, there is
a small chance of a switch in the identity of the regime that is generating earnings.
       The investor uses past earnings changes to infer which of the two regimes is currently
  25
     Two other psychological phenomena that are related to conservatism and that may also cause stickiness
in beliefs are “belief perseverance” and “conﬁrmation bias” (Rabin and Schrag, 1999; Baron, 2000; Pouget
et al., 2017).
  26
     In a laboratory study of expectation formation, Landier et al. (2017) document both underreaction and
overreaction in individual forecasts, but also ﬁnd that overreaction, in the form of extrapolative expectations,
predominates.


                                                      42
driving earnings and then forecasts future earnings based on her incorrect understanding of
how they evolve. For example, if the past ﬁve earnings changes have all been positive, she
believes that, with high probability, the trending regime is currently generating earnings.
But if the past ﬁve earnings changes have alternated in sign, she believes that, with high
probability, the mean-reverting regime is currently driving earnings.
    The model captures several facts about the cross-section of stock returns, including post-
earnings announcement drift, medium-term momentum, long-term reversal, and the value
premium. To see this, suppose that, at time t, there is a positive shock to earnings that is
not part of a sequence of positive shocks, so that the investor thinks that the mean-reverting
regime is more likely to be driving earnings. Since she believes that the positive shock at
time t is likely to be followed by a negative shock at time t + 1, she does not push the stock
price up very much at time t. But since the earnings change at time t + 1 is actually equally
likely to be positive or negative, the investor is on average positively surprised at time t + 1
and the stock price rises again on that date. The good earnings news at time t is therefore
followed by a positive return at time t + 1, as in post-earnings announcement drift. The
same mechanism generates momentum in stock returns.
    Now suppose that, at time t, there is a positive shock to earnings that is part of a sequence
of positive shocks going back to time t − 4, say, so that the investor thinks that the trending
regime is more likely to be driving earnings. Since she believes that the positive shock at
time t is likely to be followed by another positive shock at time t + 1, she pushes the stock
price up a lot at time t. However, since the earnings change at time t + 1 is actually equally
likely to be positive or negative, the investor is on average disappointed at that time and the
stock price falls. The good long-term return from time t − 4 to time t is therefore followed
by a poor return at time t + 1, capturing the long-term reversal phenomenon. The same
mechanism generates a value premium.
    Barberis et al. (1998) motivate the model’s assumptions using concepts from psychology
that we have already encountered: conservatism (see Section 6.1) and representativeness (see
Section 4.3). The mean-reverting regime captures the eﬀect of conservatism – in this regime,
the investor reacts “conservatively” to a given change in earnings because she believes that
it is likely to be followed by an opposite change in earnings in the next period – while the
trending regime captures the eﬀect of representativeness, the idea that the investor over-
estimates future earnings growth after high past growth in earnings because the data are
representative of a ﬁrm whose true growth rate is high.
    The model can also be motivated based on representativeness alone. After a sequence
of earnings changes that alternate in sign, the investor believes that earnings changes are
driven by a mean-reverting regime because the data are representative of such a regime. And
after a sequence of earnings changes that all have the same sign, the investor believes that
earnings changes are driven by a trending regime because the data are representative of that
regime. The investor’s mistake is to neglect the base rates – the fact that the true likelihoods
of the mean-reverting and trending regimes are zero, and that actual earnings changes are

                                               43
driven by a third regime in which these changes are uncorrelated.
    Rabin (2002) presents a model of under- and over-reaction based on an incorrect belief
in a law of small numbers. Consider an investor who is trying to judge, based on a ﬁrm’s
realized earnings growth over time, whether the ﬁrm’s true earnings growth rate is high,
moderate, or low. Suppose that her initial belief is that the growth rate is moderate, and
that she then observes a single realization of high earnings growth. She is now less conﬁdent
that the true growth rate is moderate, but still views this as the most probable case. Since
she believes in a law of small numbers, she predicts that next period’s earnings growth
will be low: since she expects the ﬁrm’s earnings growth to look moderate even in a small
sample, low earnings growth is required to “balance out” the high earnings growth in the
current period. But precisely because she predicts low earnings growth in the next period,
she underreacts to the high earnings growth in the current period.
    Now suppose that the ﬁrm posts several periods of high earnings growth. Since the
investor believes in a law of small numbers, she is now too conﬁdent that the ﬁrm’s true
growth rate is high. As a result, she over-estimates future earnings growth and thereby
overreacts to the recent news. Similar to the Barberis et al. (1998) model, then, Rabin’s
(2002) framework predicts overreaction to a sequence of good or bad news, but underreaction
to a single piece of good or bad news that is not part of a sequence of similar news.
   Bordalo et al. (2018b) bring new evidence and theory to the question of whether people
under- or over-react to information. They obtain professional analyst forecasts of 20 macroe-
conomic variables. By running a regression of forecast error on forecast revisions, they ﬁnd
that individual analysts tend to overreact to information, but that the consensus forecast
underreacts.
   To explain these results, the authors couple a rational-inattention framework of the kind
commonly used in macroeconomics with Bordalo et al.’s (2018a) diagnostic expectations
framework, described in Section 4.3. In this model, each analyst receives a noisy signal of the
current value of the quantity she is forecasting. Since she processes this signal according to
diagnostic expectations, she overreacts to it. However, since each analyst does not observe
others’ signals, the consensus forecast underreacts. Bordalo et al.’s (2018b) focus is on
macroeconomic forecasts; it is an open question how well their framework explains empirical
patterns in asset prices.


6.3    Beliefs about rare events

An individual’s investment decisions are likely to be particularly aﬀected by her beliefs about
rare extreme outcomes – outcomes where she suﬀers a large ﬁnancial loss or enjoys a big
ﬁnancial gain. Two of the most established judgment heuristics predict that, following good
economic news, people under-estimate the likelihood of a very bad future outcome and that,
following bad news, they over-estimate this likelihood. Such beliefs can explain a number of


                                              44
empirical facts, including excess volatility and time-series predictability in aggregate asset
classes.
    The availability heuristic is particularly relevant to beliefs about rare events. As discussed
in Section 4.4, under this heuristic, people judge the likelihood of an event by how easy it is
to recall instances of the event. This implies that, if there has been a ﬁnancial crash in recent
memory, people over-estimate the likelihood of another such crash. Conversely, after many
years with no crash, people under-estimate the likelihood that one will occur (Goetzmann
et al., 2017). Jin (2015) constructs a model of asset prices in which some investors’ beliefs
have this feature. Aside from excess volatility and time-series predictability, the model also
captures an idea emphasized by Marks (2011) and Gennaioli et al. (2012), namely that the
risk of a crash is greatest following a long quiet period with no signiﬁcant downturns: at such
a moment, the availability heuristic leads people to under-estimate the chance of a crash and
hence to take large, levered positions in risky assets; this leaves ﬁnancial markets vulnerable
to bad fundamental news and makes a crash more, rather than less, likely.
     Through a diﬀerent mechanism, the availability heuristic predicts that an individual who
invests in a positively-skewed asset will over-estimate her chance of a right-tail outcome; for
example, when investing in an IPO stock, she will over-estimate her chance of an outsize
return of the kind delivered by Microsoft and Google after their IPOs. The reason is that the
media write about ﬁrms whose stocks post spectacularly good returns after their IPOs, but
not about the many companies with mediocre post-IPO returns. The individual therefore
ﬁnds it easier to recall examples of stocks that performed well after their IPOs, which leads
her to over-estimate her own chance of a good outcome from investing in an IPO. In the same
way, when starting a company, an entrepreneur will over-estimate her chance of success: the
media focus on the few entrepreneurial ventures that succeed wildly and ignore the many
that fail. Entrepreneurs’ beliefs indeed exhibit an optimistic bias of this kind (Astebro et
al., 2014). Such beliefs help explain the low average return to entrepreneurship, and the low
average returns on positively-skewed assets, an empirical fact we return to in Section 7.2.
    The representativeness heuristic also predicts that people will under-estimate the likeli-
hood of a major downturn following good economic news and over-estimate it following bad
news. There are two reasons for this. First, good economic news are not representative of a
model of the economy that features big crashes. Second, as discussed in Section 4.3, repre-
sentativeness leads an individual who sees good economic data to over-estimate the mean of
the distribution generating these data. If she does not change her estimate of the volatility
of the distribution, she will under-estimate the likelihood of a left-tail outcome (Bordalo et
al., 2018a).


6.4    Feelings and beliefs

A person’s mood or emotional state can distort her beliefs. Speciﬁcally, there is clear evidence
from both the laboratory and the ﬁeld that an exogenous stimulus that improves (worsens)

                                               45
mood leads to more positive (negative) beliefs about unrelated events.
   Johnson and Tversky (1983) conduct an experiment in which each participant reads one
of a number of short newspaper articles. Some of these articles describe a happy story;
others, a sad one. After reading their assigned articles, the participants are asked to judge
the likelihood of various undesirable events – for example, the frequency of some speciﬁc
causes of death. The participants who read sad articles make more negative judgments than
a control group, while those who read happy articles make more positive judgments.
   Several studies document analogous results in the ﬁeld. Edmans et al. (2007) ﬁnd that, if
a national soccer team loses a World Cup match, the country’s stock market performs poorly
the following day. Their interpretation is that the disappointing sports news worsens the
national mood, leading people to form more negative judgments about something unrelated,
namely the economy’s future prospects. Similarly, Hirshleifer and Shumway (2003) show
that, if, on a particular day, it is sunnier than expected at the location of a national stock
exchange, the country’s stock market earns an above-average return on that day.
   Kamstra et al. (2003) predict that the stock markets of countries in the northern hemi-
sphere will trend downward as the winter solstice approaches: the fewer hours of daylight
induce a type of depression known as Seasonal Aﬀective Disorder in many people, and de-
pression leads to risk aversion. Using the same logic, they predict that stock markets in the
southern hemisphere will trend downward as the summer solstice approaches. They ﬁnd
evidence consistent with these predictions.
    While these results are speciﬁc in nature, they point to a more general mechanism that
may amplify market ﬂuctuations. If the stock market goes up, this improves the mood of
many investors, leading them to form more positive judgments about the future prospects
of the economy. This, in turn, causes them to push the stock market up still higher.


6.5    Herding and social interaction

In most of the models discussed so far, each investor observes past fundamentals or returns
and uses them, independently of other investors, to form beliefs about the future. Since
many investors are assumed to form beliefs in the same way, these beliefs have a signiﬁcant
impact on asset prices. In reality, however, an individual’s beliefs are probably based not
only on past economic outcomes but also on what she observes other people doing or saying,
and, in particular, on her inferences about the beliefs that underlie other people’s actions
and statements.
   To ﬁx ideas, consider N individuals, i = 1, . . . , N , each of whom has to choose one of
two options, A or B. They make these choices in sequence: individual 1 chooses ﬁrst, then
individual 2, and so on. Each person sees a private, equally strong, signal about which of
the two options is better, and also observes the choices of all the people who went before
her. Banerjee (1992) and Bikhchandani et al. (1992) draw a remarkable result out of this

                                             46
simple setting. Even if all the individuals are fully rational, and this rationality is common
knowledge, the individuals may herd on the inferior choice: they may all choose option A
even if their private signals in aggregate strongly indicate that B is the better choice.27 If we
take A and B to be two investment strategies, this suggests that, even in an economy where
everyone is fully rational, people may pile into assets whose true prospects are weak. This,
in turn, can cause these assets to become overpriced.
     While this result is striking and important, subsequent research has shown that it holds
only under fairly narrow conditions. Summarizing this work, Eyster and Rabin (2010) write:
“...it is probably fair to say that the full-rationality model predicts a relatively limited form
of herding and does so in a relatively limited set of domains... While tempting to use this
literature to help understand dramatic instances of social pathology or mania... this is not
something that the rational-herding literature can readily deliver.”
   A more robust explanation for why people sometimes herd into suboptimal choices comes
from a framework where some individuals are not fully rational. Eyster and Rabin (2010)
return to the setting where N individuals choose in sequence between options A and B. As
before, each individual sees a noisy private signal as well as the choices of the people who
came before her. However, the individuals are not fully rational: when individual k makes
her choice, she fails to recognize that individual j’s choice, where j < k, was based in part on
individual j’s observation of the people who came before her. Instead, individual k thinks
that individual j’s choice was based purely on her private signal.
    Eyster and Rabin (2010) show that this error – a failure to understand what is driving
other people’s choices – can generate ineﬃcient herding in a robust way. The intuition is
clear: if I see ten people choose option A, and I believe that each of those people chose A
because they had private information that A was better, then I will believe that there is
strong evidence for A’s superiority and will choose A myself, even if my own private signal
suggests that B is better. My error is that I fail to recognize that some of the ten people
may have chosen A not because they had private information in its favor but because they
observed others choosing A. If we now think of A and B as investment opportunities, this
framework can help us make sense of episodes where many investors, en masse, pursue a
similar investment strategy, even in the absence of much objective information in favor of
the strategy.
    In ﬁnancial markets, people make decisions not only by observing what others do, but
also by talking to other people about their investments. Han et al. (2018) build a model of
such investor-to-investor communication. There are N investors, each of whom follows one
of two investment strategies. In each period, two randomly-chosen investors meet; one of
  27
    For example, suppose that individuals 1 and 2 receive signals indicating that A is the better choice,
while individuals 3 through N receive signals indicating that B is better. In addition, assume that, when
indiﬀerent, an individual follows her private signal. In this case, everyone chooses A: for i ≥ 3, individual i
understands that the previous choices reveal two signals favoring A; even though her own signal points to
B, she chooses A.


                                                      47
them is randomly designated the “sender,” and the other, the “receiver.” With probability
s(Ri ), the sender tells the receiver what the return Ri on her chosen investment strategy was
in the previous period; s(Ri ) is a positive linear function of Ri ,

                                 s(Ri ) = βRi + γ, where β, γ > 0,

capturing the idea that, because she wants to make a good impression, an individual is more
likely to talk about her investments, the better their performance. If the sender commu-
nicates this information, then, with probability r(Ri ), the receiver switches to the sender’s
investment strategy; r(Ri ) is an increasing and convex function of Ri ,

                         r(Ri ) = aRi2 + bRi + c,           where a, b, c > 0,

capturing extrapolative beliefs: if the receiver hears that a strategy performed well recently,
she believes that it will continue to perform well, a belief that is all the stronger, the higher
the strategy’s recent return. Importantly, receivers do not understand the selected nature of
what they are hearing: they do not realize that senders are more likely to report a strategy’s
return when it is high.
   Han et al. (2018) draw a number of predictions out of this framework. For example, they
show that strategies that invest in volatile and positively-skewed assets spread more rapidly
across the population. In equilibrium, such assets are overpriced. As such, the model oﬀers
a way of understanding the low average return of volatile and skewed stocks.28


6.6     Psychology-free approaches

The approaches discussed in Sections 4 and 5, and thus far in Section 6, have mostly been
rooted in a psychological concept – for example, in the representativeness heuristic, the avail-
ability heuristic, or overconﬁdence. Some behavioral ﬁnance models are able to shed light on
the data without appealing to any speciﬁc psychology. This “psychology-free” approach was
more common in the early years of behavioral ﬁnance research, when economists were wary
of committing to any particular psychological concept. However, even today, it is deployed
in useful ways.
    A common structure for a behavioral ﬁnance model of asset prices, one laid out by
De Long et al. (1990a) and Shleifer and Summers (1990), is one where less than fully
rational investors, often called “noise traders,” are met in the market by more rational
traders known as “arbitrageurs.” Even with no additional psychological assumptions, this
bare-bones framework already yields testable predictions.
  One prediction is that the level of mispricing will be higher for assets whose characteristics
make arbitrage more diﬃcult. A large amount of evidence is consistent with this. For
  28
    See Shiller (1984) for an early discussion of investor communication, and Hong et al. (2004, 2005) for
evidence that social interaction aﬀects investment decisions.

                                                   48
example, most of the cross-sectional anomalies described in Section 2.2 are stronger in the
subset of stocks where arbitrage is more limited – for example, among stocks with lower
market capitalizations, lower liquidity, or higher idiosyncratic volatility.
    To exploit an undervaluation, a rational investor typically buys the mispriced asset. To
exploit an overvaluation, she typically shorts the asset in question. Going short is riskier
than going long: an investor who shorts is exposed to very large potential losses, and the
asset loan may be recalled before the mispricing corrects. This implies that more of the
misvaluation in ﬁnancial markets will involve over - rather than under-valuation. Consistent
with this prediction, investment strategies designed to exploit the anomalies of Section 2.2
are typically more proﬁtable on the short side than on the long side (Stambaugh et al.,
2012). And while bubbles have for decades been a much-discussed phenomenon, there is far
less talk of “negative bubbles,” in other words, of episodes of substantial under -valuation,
suggesting that such episodes are less common.
    Stambaugh et al. (2015) combine two of the points noted above – that idiosyncratic
volatility is a limit to arbitrage and that shorting is riskier than going long – to come up
with an explanation for a puzzling fact from Section 2.2, namely that stocks with high
idiosyncratic volatility have a lower average return. A stylized version of their argument
goes as follows. Divide all stocks into two groups: those with low idiosyncratic volatility
and those with high idiosyncratic volatility. Since it is easier to correct mispricing in less
volatile stocks, assume, for simplicity, that there is no mispricing at all among these stocks.
By contrast, since it is hard to correct mispricing in more volatile stocks, there is signiﬁcant
mispricing among these stocks. However, because it is riskier for an arbitrageur to short
than to go long, this mispricing will primarily take the form of over -pricing rather than
underpricing. As a result, high-volatility stocks will earn an average return that is lower
than that of low-volatility stocks.
    In an early psychology-free model of asset prices, De Long et al. (1990a) consider an
economy with two assets, asset A and asset B, which are claims to the same cash-ﬂow stream.
Asset B diﬀers from asset A in that it is traded in part by noise traders whose demand is
subject to i.i.d. shocks. De Long et al. (1990a) show that, in equilibrium, asset B’s price is
lower, and its average return higher, than those of asset A. The reason is that noise traders’
ﬂuctuating demand for asset B causes the price of that asset to be more volatile. This higher
volatility is an additional risk for investors in asset B, one they are compensated for through
a lower price and a higher average return.
   Lee et al. (1991) use the De Long et al. (1990a) model to address a classic puzzle in
ﬁnance: the fact that, on average, the shares of a closed-end fund trade at a discount to
“net asset value,” the market value of the assets that the fund holds.29 The idea is that
the assets held by closed-end funds correspond to asset A in the De Long et al. (1990a)
  29
    A closed-end fund is a fund that, at inception, raises money from investors and allocates this money to
stocks or other assets. From this point on, the fund’s shares are traded on an exchange – investors wanting
to buy or sell fund shares do so there at the prevailing market price.


                                                    49
model, while the fund shares themselves correspond to asset B, the asset that is subject to
noise trader demand. Closed-end funds are more likely to be traded by unsophisticated retail
investors than are the underlying fund assets; as such, the prices of closed-end fund shares
are aﬀected by the ﬂuctuating optimism and pessimism of these investors. This time-varying
sentiment constitutes an additional risk for holders of fund shares. To compensate for this
risk, closed-end funds trade at a discount to net asset value, just as, in the De Long et al.
(1990a) framework, asset B trades at a discount to asset A.
    Baker and Wurgler (2006, 2007) pursue a diﬀerent psychology-free approach. Rather
than using psychology to identify markers of misvaluation, they proceed empirically: they
propose six measures of the extent to which stock market investors are displaying exces-
sive exuberance, and combine these measures to create a “sentiment index.” The measures,
computed on an annual basis, are: the number and average ﬁrst-day return of IPOs, stock
market turnover, the closed-end fund discount, the equity share (the fraction of equity issues
among all new issues), and the dividend premium (the relative valuation of dividend-paying
ﬁrms as compared to non-dividend payers).
    Baker and Wurgler (2007) show that, consistent with their index capturing excessive
exuberance or pessimism, the value of the index predicts the subsequent stock market return
with a negative sign. Baker and Wurgler (2006) further predict that, when their index takes
a high value, stocks that are harder to arbitrage or harder to value will be more overpriced
and earn a lower average return than stocks that are easier to arbitrage or to value: the
former group of stocks is more aﬀected by investor exuberance. They test this by identifying
hard-to-arbitrage and hard-to-value stocks as stocks with low market capitalizations, stocks
of young and unproﬁtable ﬁrms, more volatile stocks, and stocks that do not pay dividends.
The data are consistent with the prediction: when the value of the index is high (low), these
stocks earn a lower (higher) subsequent return, on average.3031



7      Preferences: Gain-loss utility and prospect theory

Sections 4 to 6 were about belief-based models of asset prices and trading volume. In
Sections 7 and 8, I turn to preference-based models – models that try to make sense of the
data using psychologically richer speciﬁcations of individual preferences, in other words, of
how people evaluate the distribution of future outcomes that they perceive. Most models of
asset prices assume that investors evaluate risk according to the Expected Utility framework,
with a utility function that is increasing, concave, and deﬁned over consumption outcomes.
  30
     Building on evidence that, on average, a person’s mood improves as the week progresses from Monday
to Friday, Birru (2018) predicts that speculative stocks – stocks that are hard to value or to arbitrage – will
perform well (poorly) relative to non-speculative stocks on Fridays (Mondays). The data line up with this
prediction.
  31
     Other psychology-free tests of behavioral ﬁnance models can be found in La Porta et al. (1997) and
Engelberg et al. (2017).


                                                      50
Such models oﬀer compelling explanations for some aspects of the data – for example, the
diversiﬁed portfolios held by many households – but struggle to explain others.
    In Sections 7 and 8, we will see that, by drawing on ideas from psychology to reﬁne our
assumptions about individual preferences, we can make sense of a wider range of facts and
also generate new predictions, some of which have already found empirical support. Much
of the progress has come from incorporating ideas in Kahneman and Tversky’s (1979, 1992)
“prospect theory” into models of investor behavior. I discuss this research in Sections 7.1
through 7.5. In Section 7.6, I review other alternatives to Expected Utility. In Section 8, I
turn to another important idea about preferences, namely, ambiguity aversion.


7.1    The elements of prospect theory

Over the past few decades, researchers have accumulated a large amount of data on attitudes
to risk in experimental settings. These data show that the Expected Utility framework is
not an accurate description of individual decision-making under risk. This has spurred
the development of “non-EU” models which try to capture the experimental evidence in
parsimonious ways. The most inﬂuential of these non-EU theories, and the one that has
been most widely applied in ﬁnance, is prospect theory.
    There are two versions of prospect theory. The “original” prospect theory is laid out
in Kahneman and Tversky (1979). While this version contains all of the theory’s essential
insights, it also has some limitations: it can be applied only to gambles with at most two non-
zero outcomes, and, in some situations, predicts that an individual will choose a dominated
gamble. Tversky and Kahneman (1992) present a modiﬁed version of the theory, “cumulative
prospect theory,” that addresses these weaknesses, and this is the version I present below.
   Consider the gamble
               (x−m , p−m ; x−m+1 , p−m+1 ; . . . ; x−1 , p−1 ; x0 , p0 ; x1 , p1 ; . . . ; xn , pn ),   (19)
to be read as “gain x−m with probability p−m , x−m+1 with probability p−m+1 , and so on,”
where xi < xj for i < j; where x0 = 0, so that x−m through x−1 are losses and x1 through
                        
xn are gains; and where ni=−m pi = 1. For example, a 50:50 bet to win $110 or lose $100 is
written as
                                            1       1
                                   (−$100, ; $110, ).                                (20)
                                            2       2
In the Expected Utility framework, an individual evaluates the gamble in (19) as
                                               n
                                               
                                                    pi U(W + xi ),                                       (21)
                                             i=−m

where W is her initial wealth and U(·) is typically an increasing and concave function. By
contrast, under cumulative prospect theory, the individual assigns the gamble the value
                                                   n
                                                   
                                                        πi v(xi ),                                       (22)
                                                 i=−m


                                                        51
where
                    w(pi + . . . + pn ) − w(pi+1 + . . . + pn )             0≤i≤n
            πi =                                                      for              ,   (23)
                    w(p−m + . . . + pi ) − w(p−m + . . . + pi−1 )           −m ≤ i < 0
and where v(·) is known as the value function and w(·) as the probability weighting function.
Tversky and Kahneman (1992) propose the functional forms

                                          xα                  x≥0
                               v(x) =                   for                                (24)
                                          −λ(−x)α             x<0

and
                                                    Pδ
                                  w(P ) =                         ,                        (25)
                                            (P δ + (1 − P )δ )1/δ
where α, δ ∈ (0, 1) and λ > 1. Figure 2 plots the value function in (24) for α = 0.5 and
λ = 2.5. Figure 3 plots the weighting function in (25) for δ = 0.4 (the dashed line), for
δ = 0.65 (the solid line), and for δ = 1 (the dotted line). Note that v(0) = 0, w(0) = 0, and
w(1) = 1.
   Prospect theory has four components: reference dependence, loss aversion, diminishing
sensitivity, and probability weighting. I take each one in turn.
    Reference dependence. In prospect theory, the individual derives utility not from ﬁnal
wealth levels but rather from gains and losses measured relative to some reference point: the
argument of v(·) in (22) is xi , not W +xi . To motivate reference dependence, Kahneman and
Tversky point to explicit experimental evidence – see Problems 11 and 12 in their 1979 paper
– but also to the design of the human perceptual system: we are more sensitive to changes
in brightness, loudness, or temperature than to the absolute levels of these attributes.
    Loss aversion. Loss aversion is the idea that people are signiﬁcantly more sensitive to
losses – even small losses – than to gains of the same magnitude. It is captured by the
steeper slope of the value function v(·) in the region of losses than in the region of gains, a
feature that, loosely speaking, creates a “kink” at the point of zero gain. Kahneman and
Tversky (1979) infer loss aversion from the widespread aversion to gambles like the one in
(20), a 50:50 bet to win $110 or lose $100. Rabin (2000) shows that, in the Expected Utility
framework, it is diﬃcult, if not impossible, to explain why someone would turn this gamble
down: an Expected Utility individual is almost risk-neutral over small-stakes gambles, and
would therefore want to take a small-stakes gamble with positive expected value like the one
in (20). Loss aversion explains the aversion to this gamble as follows: instead of focusing
on ﬁnal wealth outcomes, the individual pays attention to the potential gains and losses,
$110 and −$100; since she is much more sensitive to the potential loss of $100 than to the
potential gain of $110, she turns the gamble down. In (24), the degree of loss aversion is
determined by the parameter λ. Tversky and Kahneman (1992) estimate λ = 2.25 for the
median participant in their experiments.
   Diminishing sensitivity. While the Expected Utility function U(·) is typically concave
everywhere, the prospect theory value function v(·) is concave only over gains; in the region

                                                52
of losses, it is convex. This combination of concavity and convexity is known as diminishing
sensitivity. Kahneman and Tversky (1979) infer the concavity over gains from the fact that
people are typically risk averse over moderate-probability gains: they usually prefer a $500
gain to a 50% chance of $1000. Similarly, they infer the convexity over losses from the fact
that people are typically risk-seeking over moderate-probability losses: they prefer a 50%
chance of losing $1000 to a certain loss of $500. In (24), the degree of diminishing sensitivity
is controlled by the parameter α. Tversky and Kahneman (1992) estimate α = 0.88 for
their median participant, which implies a mild degree of curvature. More recent studies have
estimated a stronger degree of diminishing sensitivity; the average estimate of α across these
studies is approximately 0.7 (Booij et al., 2010).
    Probability weighting. In prospect theory, the individual does not use objective proba-
bilities, but rather, transformed probabilities obtained from objective probabilities using a
weighting function w(·) such as the one in (25), plotted for speciﬁc values of δ in Figure 3.
In the original prospect theory, the weighting function is applied to the probability density
function – to the probability of gaining exactly $100, or of losing exactly $200. Equation
(23) shows that, in cumulative prospect theory, the weighting function is instead applied to
the cumulative distribution function: to the probability of gaining at least $100, say, or of
losing $200 or more.
    Figure 3 shows that, for low values of P , w(P ) > P . In the original prospect theory, this
implies that the individual overweights low-probability outcomes. In cumulative prospect
theory, it instead implies that she overweights the tails of any distribution she is considering:
from (23), the tail outcomes x−m and xn receive weights of w(p−m ) > p−m and w(pn ) > pn ,
respectively. One motivation for the overweighting of tails – or indeed, the overweighting
of low-probability outcomes – is the fact that people typically like both lottery tickets and
insurance: they prefer a 1 in 1000 chance of $5000 to a certain $5, but also prefer to pay
$5 than to face a 1 in 1000 chance of losing $5000. This combination of behaviors is hard
to explain under Expected Utility because it entails both risk aversion and risk seeking over
a wide range of wealth levels. Prospect theory captures it through the overweighting of
tail outcomes: if the individual suﬃciently overweights the 1 in 1000 chance of winning the
$5000 jackpot, she ﬁnds the lottery attractive, and if she suﬃciently overweights the 1 in
1000 chance of the $5000 loss, she ﬁnds the insurance policy attractive too.
   The simultaneous preference for lottery tickets and insurance motivates the shape of the
weighting function w(·) in Figure 3 in the range of low probabilities. How can we understand
the shape of the function over the full range of probabilities? Gonzalez and Wu (1999) ask
participants, for several values of p, to state the dollar amount such that they would be
indiﬀerent between receiving that dollar amount in cash and taking a gamble that oﬀers
$100 with probability p. Since, under prospect theory, an individual evaluates the gamble
as w(p)v(100), people’s responses allow us to sketch out the weighting function w(·). The
resulting function looks like the one in Figure 3. For example, when p = 0.05, the median
cash equivalent across participants in Gonzalez and Wu’s study is $10, and when p = 0.9, it


                                               53
is $63.
    The transformed probabilities in (23) do not represent erroneous beliefs; rather, they are
decision weights. In the framework of prospect theory, someone who is oﬀered a 0.001 chance
of winning $5000 knows exactly what it means for something to have a 0.001 probability of
occurring; however, when evaluating the gamble, she weights the $5000 outcome by more
than 0.001.
   Equation (25) shows that the degree of probability weighting is determined by the pa-
rameter δ; a lower value of δ implies more overweighting of tails. Tversky and Kahneman
(1992) estimate δ = 0.65 for their median subject.32
    The implementation of probability weighting in cumulative prospect theory, laid out in
(23), is known as a “rank-dependent” formulation. As noted earlier, this formulation gives
cumulative prospect theory two advantages relative to the original prospect theory: it allows
the theory to be applied to gambles with more than two nonzero outcomes, and it ensures that
the decision-maker does not choose a dominated gamble. However, it also has at least one
drawback: direct tests of rank dependence ﬁnd little support for it (Bernheim and Sprenger,
2016). For ﬁnancial economists, the advantages of cumulative prospect theory outweigh the
disadvantages: ﬁnance research almost always uses probability distributions that have more
than two nonzero outcomes, and, in a ﬁnancial setting, the choice of dominated options
can lead to riskless arbitrage opportunities. Not surprisingly, then, cumulative prospect
theory is the version of prospect theory more commonly encountered in ﬁnance. However,
both intuition and explicit modeling indicate that most of the applications of probability
weighting in ﬁnance hold under both the cumulative and original versions of prospect theory
– in other words, they do not rely on rank dependence.33
    Prospect theory is sometimes implemented in conjunction with “narrow framing.” In the
traditional framework where the utility function is deﬁned over total wealth or lifetime con-
sumption, an individual evaluates any new risk by merging it with her pre-existing risks – her
other ﬁnancial risks, house price risk, or labor income risk – and checking if the combination
is an improvement. However, experimental evidence suggests that, when presented with a
new risk, people sometimes evaluate it in isolation, separately from other concurrent risks.
This is known as narrow framing.
  32
     Prospect theory was developed in a setting where people make decisions “from description,” in other
words, where the gambles they are facing are described to them – as ($5000, 0.001), say. Hertwig et al.
(2004) study decisions “from experience,” where people learn a gamble’s distribution by sampling from it.
The overweighting of low-probability tail outcomes is present for decisions from description, but not for
decisions from experience. The root cause of this is not fully understood, and its implications for ﬁnance are
unclear. However, at the very least, it indicates that a person’s mental representation of a gamble aﬀects
her attitude toward it.
  33
     The intuition is this. As we will see later in Section 7, most of the applications of probability weighting
in ﬁnance depend on investors having a strong preference for a positively-skewed return distribution. Such a
preference arises both under the original prospect theory, where people overweight low-probability outcomes,
and under cumulative prospect theory, where they overweight the tails of distributions.



                                                      54
   Tversky and Kahneman (1981) present examples of narrow framing in the laboratory.
More recently, Barberis et al. (2006) argue that even as simple a phenomenon as the
widespread rejection of the gamble

                                          = (−$100, 1 ; $110, 1 )
                                         G
                                                     2         2
is evidence not only of loss aversion, but of narrow framing as well. An individual who is
oﬀered the gamble G    almost certainly has some pre-existing risks. If she is loss averse but
does not engage in narrow framing – in other words, if she merges G      with her pre-existing
risks and is loss averse only over the resulting gains and losses in her overall wealth – then,
as Barberis et al. (2006) show, she is very likely to accept G:  her pre-existing risk moves
her away from the kink in the value function v(·), and when she is away from the kink, she
is no longer averse to G. 34 A plausible explanation for why people do typically turn down G 
is that they engage in narrow framing: an individual who is loss averse over the gains and
           itself will ﬁnd the gamble aversive.
losses in G
    In the context of ﬁnancial markets, a prospect theory individual who exhibits narrow
framing will decide whether and how much to invest in an asset by applying prospect theory
to her potential gains and losses in the asset itself rather than to the gains and losses in
overall wealth that would result from taking a position in the asset. We do not have a
full understanding of why people engage in narrow framing. One possibility is that it is a
heuristic used to simplify complex decisions. It can be diﬃcult for an individual to compute
the distribution of gains and losses in overall wealth that would result from combining a new
risk with her pre-existing risks. She therefore adopts a heuristic whereby she takes on the
new risk if its own distribution of gains and losses is appealing, something that is easier to
determine.
    Prospect theory contains insights that seem very relevant to ﬁnancial decision-making.
However, any attempt to incorporate these insights into a more traditional ﬁnance frame-
work faces a fundamental diﬃculty. In prospect theory, the individual derives utility from
“gains” and “losses.” This is certainly consistent with the way many people talk about their
investment decisions: their willingness to buy an asset appears to depend heavily on how
much money they think they can make or lose by doing so. The problem is that it is not clear
exactly which gains and losses people have in mind. Is it gains and losses in consumption,
in ﬁnancial wealth, or in the value of speciﬁc components of wealth? Is it annual gains and
losses or gains and losses measured at some other frequency? Does a gain mean a return
that exceeds zero, or one that exceeds the risk-free rate or the return the investor expected
to earn?
  34
     An example may be helpful. Consider an individual who is loss averse with a piecewise-linear value
function v(·) that is twice as steep in the region of losses as in the region of gains, who is facing the pre-
existing risk ($30000, 12 ; −$10000, 12 ), and who is oﬀered gamble G. This individual will accept G   because
                                               1        1        1           1
the utility of the combined gamble (30100, 4 ; 29900, 4 ; −9890, 4 ; −10100, 4 ), namely 5007, is higher than the
utility of the pre-existing risk, namely 5000.



                                                       55
   There are no consensus answers to these questions. Researchers are exploring several
plausible deﬁnitions of “gain” and “loss” and trying to determine which of them explains the
widest range of facts and makes predictions that ﬁnd support. One promising speciﬁcation
takes the gains and losses to be annual dollar changes in ﬁnancial wealth. In this speciﬁcation,
then, the “reference point” that the individual compares her current wealth to in order to
determine her most recent gain or loss is her wealth one year in the past.
   In Sections 7.2 and 7.3, I discuss applications of prospect theory to the cross-section of
average returns; Section 7.2 focuses on static models and Section 7.3 on dynamic models. In
Section 7.4, I discuss applications of prospect theory to aggregate asset classes.


7.2    Prospect theory and the cross-section: Static models

Why do some ﬁnancial assets have higher average returns than others? In a model with
rational investors and no frictions, diﬀerences in average returns across assets are due to
diﬀerences in risk. In the benchmark rational model of the cross-section of returns, the
CAPM, the risk of an asset is measured by its beta; in this model, then, an asset’s average
return is determined by its beta and by its beta alone. This prediction has not fared well:
as noted in Section 2.2, several ﬁrm-level characteristics predict stock returns in the cross-
section, even after controlling for beta. In light of the poor performance of the CAPM,
it is natural to ask: Can we improve our understanding of the cross-section of returns
using a model that makes more realistic assumptions about the way people evaluate risk –
speciﬁcally, one in which investors evaluate risk according to prospect theory, rather than
Expected Utility?
    Barberis and Huang (2008) incorporate prospect theory into an otherwise traditional
model of the cross-section. There are two dates, date 0 and date 1, and J + 1 assets: a risk-
free asset with a ﬁxed return and J risky assets whose payoﬀs have a multivariate Normal
distribution. If investors had Expected Utility preferences, assets would be priced in the way
described by the CAPM. Barberis and Huang (2008) assume instead that investors evaluate
risk according to cumulative prospect theory: for each possible portfolio strategy, they use
equations (22)-(25) to compute the prospect theory value of the distribution of gains and
losses that would result from that portfolio strategy, and then choose the strategy with the
highest prospect theory value. Here, an investor’s gain or loss is her wealth at time 1 minus
her wealth at time 0 scaled up by the gross risk-free rate. Investors therefore do not engage
in narrow framing: they evaluate gains and losses in overall wealth, not gains and losses
in the value of individual stocks. The scaling by the risk-free rate makes the model more
tractable, but may also be psychologically accurate: investors may only think of their change
in wealth at time 1 as a true “gain” if it is greater than what they would have earned by
allocating all of their time 0 wealth to the risk-free asset. Finally, investors have identical
preferences – the values of α, δ, and λ in (24) and (25) are the same for all of them.
   It turns out that this initial prospect theory model does not deliver any novel predictions:

                                              56
as in the case where investors have Expected Utility preferences, the CAPM holds and
average returns are determined by beta and beta alone.35
    To generate a more useful prediction, Barberis and Huang (2008) move away from the
multivariate Normal payoﬀ structure. They introduce one additional asset into the economy:
a positively-skewed asset in small supply whose return is independent of all other asset
returns. If investors had Expected Utility preferences, the expected return on this new
asset would slightly exceed the risk-free rate. Barberis and Huang (2008) ﬁnd that, when
investors have prospect theory preferences, a diﬀerent result obtains: the positively-skewed
asset earns an average return substantially below the risk-free rate. As such, the prospect
theory framework generates a novel prediction: that an asset’s own skewness – even its
idiosyncratic skewness – is priced. This contrasts with the Expected Utility framework,
where, in the presence of skewed assets, a diﬀerent quantity, an asset’s coskewness with the
market portfolio, is priced.
    The equilibrium in the economy with prospect theory investors involves heterogeneous
holdings. It is easier to think about this in the case where there is a short-sale constraint,
although the main results do not depend on such a constraint. In equilibrium, some investors
hold the J multivariate Normal assets and no position at all in the positively-skewed asset,
while other investors hold both the J multivariate Normal assets and a large, undiversiﬁed
position in the skewed asset. These heterogeneous holdings are not the result of heteroge-
neous preferences – all investors have the same preferences – but rather reﬂect non-unique
global optima. On the one hand, holding a large position in the skewed asset decreases an in-
vestor’s utility: the undiversiﬁed position increases the volatility of her portfolio, which, due
to loss aversion, is unappealing. On the other hand, holding a large position in the skewed
asset increases the investor’s utility by making the distribution of her future gains and losses
in wealth more positively skewed: since, under probability weighting, she overweights tail
outcomes, such a distribution is very attractive. In equilibrium, the expected return of the
skewed asset adjusts so that these opposing forces cancel out, leaving the holders of the
skewed asset with the same utility as the non-holders and allowing the market in the asset
to clear.
   In summary, the equilibrium expected return of the skewed asset in Barberis and Huang’s
(2008) model is low because, by holding a suﬃcient amount of the skewed asset, some
investors are able to add skewness to the distribution of their gains and losses in wealth.
Due to probability weighting, this is very appealing. The investors are therefore willing to
pay a high price for the skewed asset and to accept a low average return on it.
    Researchers have used this framework to make sense of a number of empirical facts. In
Section 2.2, we noted that the long-term average return of IPO stocks is lower than that
of a control group of stocks. Why is this? One interesting feature of IPO stock returns is
that they are highly positively skewed: most IPO stocks deliver unimpressive returns in the
 35
      See Levy et al. (2011) for a detailed discussion of this result.



                                                        57
years after the oﬀering, but a small handful perform extraordinarily well. According to the
prospect theory framework, then, IPO stocks should earn a low average return. Green and
Hwang (2012) present evidence consistent with this theory of average IPO returns.
   Another fact noted in Section 2.2 is that stocks with high past idiosyncratic return
volatility have a lower average return than stocks with low past idiosyncratic return volatility.
One explanation of this builds on the fact that stocks with high past idiosyncratic volatility
have higher idiosyncratic skewness in their subsequent returns; under the prospect theory
framework, this explains why these stocks have a lower average return. Boyer et al. (2010)
present evidence in support of this view.
    In the same way, prospect theory can help us make sense of the low average return on
distressed stocks, stocks traded oﬀ the main exchanges, and out-of-the-money options on
individual stocks: all of these assets have positively-skewed returns. It can also explain dif-
ferences in valuations between conglomerate ﬁrms and matched portfolios of single-segment
ﬁrms: empirically, these diﬀerences line up with diﬀerences in the skewness of conglomerates
and single-segment ﬁrms.36
   Some papers directly test the prediction that stocks with more positively-skewed returns
have a lower average return. Boyer et al. (2010) use a regression model to predict a stock’s
future return skewness, while Conrad et al. (2013) infer a stock’s expected skewness from
the prices of the options that are traded on the stock. Both papers ﬁnd support for the
prediction.37
   The more robust prediction of the Barberis and Huang (2008) model is that positively-
skewed assets have a low average return. If investors can sell short, the model further
predicts that negatively-skewed assets earn a high average return. This prediction can be
used to make sense of the high average return on merger arbitrage strategies (Wang, 2016),
high-quality corporate bonds, and so-called catastrophe bonds, all of which have negatively-
skewed returns.
    The prospect theory model can also be used to think about the concentrated positions
that some households have in speciﬁc assets: in the model, some investors take an undiver-
siﬁed position in a positively-skewed asset so as to give themselves a chance of a big gain in
wealth, something that, under probability weighting, is very appealing. Mitton and Vorkink
(2007) provide evidence for this view using data on the stock holdings of individual investors:
they ﬁnd that the stocks held by investors with less diversiﬁed portfolios are more positively
skewed than the typical stock.
  36
     See Mitton and Vorkink (2010), Boyer and Vorkink (2014), Conrad et al. (2014), and Eraker and Ready
(2015) on conglomerate ﬁrms, stock options, distressed stocks, and stocks traded oﬀ-exchange, respectively.
  37
     In related work, Kumar (2009) shows that stocks with low prices, high past idiosyncratic return volatility,
and high past idiosyncratic return skewness have a low average return, while Bali et al. (2011) show that
stocks with a high maximum daily return over the past month have a low average return. One interpretation
of these ﬁndings is that investors perceive stocks with these characteristics as having positively-skewed
returns.


                                                      58
    The Barberis and Huang (2008) model assumes broad framing, as do traditional models of
asset prices. However, narrow framing may also play a role in the pricing of stocks: investors’
demand for a stock may depend, to some extent, on their evaluation of the stock’s own return
distribution. A model that incorporates both prospect theory and narrow framing delivers
a prediction similar to that of the Barberis and Huang (2008) model, namely that assets
with more positively-skewed returns have a lower average return: a stock with positively-
skewed returns is attractive to a prospect theory investor who frames narrowly because, as
a consequence of probability weighting, the investor overweights the right tail of the stock’s
return distribution. As such, a model with narrow framing can likely also address the
empirical patterns discussed above. Barberis and Huang (2001), Grinblatt and Han (2005),
Li and Yang (2013), and Barberis et al. (2016) investigate the implications of narrow framing
for asset prices; I come back to some of these papers in the next section.
    The prospect theory framework is not the only one in which an asset’s idiosyncratic skew-
ness is priced. A similar prediction can be derived from a model where investors manipulate
their beliefs (Brunnermeier and Parker, 2005); from the Expected Utility framework, if the
utility function has a convex segment (Mitton and Vorkink, 2007); and from another non-EU
model, salience theory, which I come back to in Section 7.6.
    The predictions discussed in this section are driven by preferences, not beliefs: the in-
vestors in Barberis and Huang’s (2008) model have correct beliefs about returns – for exam-
ple, they correctly perceive the return distribution of the typical IPO stock – but, because
they overweight tail outcomes in their decision-making, they pay a premium for positively-
skewed assets. An alternative view is that these assets are overpriced because investors
over-estimate the likelihood of a right-tail outcome. In Section 6.3, I noted that there is a
psychological basis for such beliefs. An open question asks how much of the average return
on skewed assets is driven by investor preferences, as opposed to beliefs.


7.3     Prospect theory and the cross-section: Dynamic models

In the applications of prospect theory discussed in Section 7.2, it was probability weighting
that played the most important role. Loss aversion also entered the picture, but there was
no mention at all of diminishing sensitivity. Diminishing sensitivity does have interesting
implications for asset prices, but to see them, we have to move beyond one-period models to
dynamic models.38
   The applications of diminishing sensitivity to asset prices build on a link between prospect
theory and an aspect of trading known as the disposition eﬀect. This is the ﬁnding that
individual investors, as well as some institutional investors, have a greater propensity to sell
  38
    The reason for this is that diminishing sensitivity becomes important when an investor evaluates a
distribution that consists primarily of gains, or primarily of losses. This is not the case in a one-period
model that involves only one decision, the initial purchase decision: when a risky asset is ﬁrst purchased, it
exposes the investor to both potential gains and potential losses.


                                                     59
stocks trading at a gain relative to purchase price than stocks trading at a loss (Shefrin and
Statman, 1985; Odean, 1998b). It is diﬃcult to explain this as the result of fully rational
thinking. For example, one rational hypothesis is that individuals sell prior winner stocks
because they have information that these stocks will subsequently perform poorly, and hold
on to prior loser stocks because they have information that these stocks will subsequently
perform well. The data reject this view, however: Odean (1998b) ﬁnds that the prior winners
that individuals sell subsequently perform better than the prior losers they hold on to.
    A long-standing idea, ﬁrst articulated by Shefrin and Statman (1985), is that prospect
theory, and speciﬁcally its diminishing sensitivity component, can explain the disposition
eﬀect. An informal summary of the argument goes as follows. If an investor buys a stock
which then goes up, this brings her into the “gain” region of the value function in Figure
2; if the stock instead goes down, this brings her into the “loss” region. Since the value
function is concave over gains but convex over losses, it appears that the investor is more
risk averse after a gain than after a loss, and hence more likely to sell after a gain. Notice that
this argument assumes stock-level narrow framing, as do all the applications of diminishing
sensitivity I discuss below.39
   Barberis and Xiong (2009) try to formalize the argument in the previous paragraph and
ﬁnd that this is not as easy as one might think. In their model, an investor trades a risk-free
asset and a single risky asset over T + 1 dates, t = 0, 1, 2, . . . , T , and derives prospect
theory utility at time T from the diﬀerence between her time T wealth, WT , and her initial
wealth scaled up by the gross risk-free rate, W0 RfT . They ﬁnd that, while the diminishing
sensitivity component of prospect theory does make it more likely that the investor will
exhibit a disposition eﬀect, the loss aversion component pushes in the opposite direction:
it makes it more likely that she will exhibit the reverse of the disposition eﬀect, in other
words, display a greater propensity to realize losses rather than gains. The model predicts a
disposition eﬀect only if the diminishing sensitivity eﬀect overcomes the loss aversion eﬀect.
In a two-period model (T = 2), and for Tversky and Kahneman’s (1992) estimates of the
parameters of the value function in (24), namely α = 0.88 and λ = 2.25, this is not the
case: α = 0.88 represents a mild degree of diminishing sensitivity while λ = 2.25 represents
a strong degree of loss aversion, and so the loss aversion eﬀect dominates. The investor
therefore exhibits the reverse of the disposition eﬀect.
    Why, in Barberis and Xiong’s model, does loss aversion lead to the reverse of the dispo-
sition eﬀect? Consider an investor whose value function exhibits only loss aversion and no
diminishing sensitivity, so that it is piecewise-linear with α = 1 and λ > 1. For simplicity,
suppose also that, in each period, the return on the risky asset, a stock, can take one of two
  39
     A very common error, both in popular accounts of behavioral ﬁnance but also in academic studies, is
to say that loss aversion is at the root of Shefrin and Statman’s (1985) explanation of the disposition eﬀect.
Their argument is based on diminishing sensitivity, not loss aversion: it relies on the prospect theory value
function’s concavity over gains and convexity over losses, not on the kink in the value function at the point
of zero gain. The statement “people don’t realize losses because of loss aversion” may sound plausible, but
it is completely incorrect as a summary of Shefrin and Statman’s hypothesis.


                                                     60
equiprobable values. Because the investor is loss averse, she is willing to buy the stock at
time 0 only if it has a high expected return – if it oﬀers a 50% chance of a gain of $10, say,
and a 50% chance of a loss of $5. For an investor with a piecewise-linear value function, how
risk averse she is after a gain or loss depends on how far she is from the kink at the origin.
Since, after the gain, she is twice as far from the kink as she is after a loss, she is actually
more risk averse after the loss. This, in turn, means that it is after a loss that she is more
likely to sell shares of the stock.
    Subsequent to Barberis and Xiong’s (2009) ﬁndings, researchers have identiﬁed a number
of ways in which prospect theory can generate a disposition eﬀect. First, it may be that
the degree of diminishing sensitivity for the average person is stronger than that estimated
by Tversky and Kahneman (1992). Indeed, more recent experimental work has typically
generated estimates of α lower than 0.88 (Booij et al., 2010). Real-world investors may also
be less loss-averse than Tversky and Kahneman’s (1992) laboratory participants: very loss-
averse people are unlikely to open a brokerage account in the ﬁrst place. Second, in Barberis
and Xiong (2009), the reference point that the investor uses to deﬁne her “gain” or “loss” is
her (scaled) initial wealth. If the reference point instead adjusts gradually over time, or if it
is based on expected wealth rather than initial wealth, prospect theory leads to a disposition
eﬀect more readily (Meng and Weng, 2017; Andrikogiannopoulou and Papakonstantinou,
2018). Finally, it may be that, rather than deriving utility from her trading proﬁt over some
ﬁxed interval of time, the investor instead derives utility directly from realized gains and
losses: if she buys shares of a stock at $40 and then, a few months later, sells some of the
shares, she derives utility from the realized gain or loss at the moment of sale (Barberis and
Xiong, 2012; Frydman et al., 2014). Ingersoll and Jin (2013) show that, when coupled with
prospect theory, such “realization utility” can generate a robust disposition eﬀect.
   Overall, it is reasonable to say that there is a link between prospect theory and the
disposition eﬀect, although this link needs to be constructed carefully. The applications of
diminishing sensitivity to asset prices build on this link.
   Grinblatt and Han (2005) observe that, if many investors display a disposition eﬀect,
there will be momentum in stock returns. Suppose that a stock goes up a lot in value.
Since many investors exhibit a disposition eﬀect, the stock is subject to signiﬁcant selling
pressure as it rises; this slows the price rise and causes the stock to become undervalued.
Subsequently, the stock earns a high average return as the undervaluation corrects. A high
past return therefore predicts a high future return, consistent with the empirical ﬁnding of
momentum.
    If many investors exhibit a disposition eﬀect, then, this generates momentum in stock
returns. But we also noted that, under some conditions, prospect theory can generate a
disposition eﬀect. Putting these two insights together, it follows that, if many investors
make decisions according to prospect theory, this can explain why we see momentum in
stock returns. The full logic is: if a stock goes up in price, this brings its holders into the
gain region of the value function, while if the stock goes down, this brings its holders into the

                                               61
loss region of the value function. Since the value function is concave over gains and convex
over losses, the prospect theory investors sell the stock more heavily after a gain than after
a loss. The stock is therefore more undervalued after a prior gain. As a consequence, its
subsequent return is higher, on average, after a prior gain.
    Grinblatt and Han (2005) do not explicitly derive momentum from prospect theory.
Instead, they derive it from the disposition eﬀect and then point out that prospect theory
is a possible source of the disposition eﬀect. Li and Yang (2009) formalize the link between
prospect theory and momentum: they show that, in an economy where some investors
make decisions according to prospect theory, asset returns can indeed exhibit momentum.
Speciﬁcally, there is momentum in asset returns so long as investors’ degree of diminishing
sensitivity is suﬃciently strong. This is broadly consistent with the partial equilibrium
results of Barberis and Xiong (2009): only when the degree of diminishing sensitivity is
suﬃciently strong will the prospect theory investors exhibit the disposition eﬀect that is
needed to generate momentum.
    Wang et al. (2017) propose a diﬀerent application of diminishing sensitivity to asset
prices. Using a numerical example, they argue that, if we take the subsample of stocks that
are trading at a gain relative to purchase price for their average investor, we should see a
positive relationship between volatility and average return in this subsample: if a stock is
trading at a gain, this brings its investors into the concave region of the value function; since
the investors are risk averse in this region, they require a higher average return on more
volatile stocks. Conversely, among stocks trading at a loss relative to purchase price for
their average investor, there should be a negative relationship between volatility and average
return: if a stock is trading at a loss, this brings its holders into the convex region of the
value function; since the investors are risk-seeking in this region, they require a lower average
return on more volatile stocks. Wang et al. (2017) test these predictions using two measures
of whether a stock is trading at a gain or at a loss – one developed by Grinblatt and Han
(2005) and another developed by Frazzini (2006). The data line up in the predicted way:
under both measures of gain or loss, the relationship between volatility and average return
is positive for stocks trading at a gain and negative for stocks trading at a loss.


7.4    Prospect theory and the aggregate stock market

The models discussed in Sections 7.2 and 7.3 suggest that prospect theory is useful for
thinking about the cross-section of average returns. But can it help us understand the
behavior of the aggregate stock market?
    In a famous application of prospect theory in ﬁnance, Benartzi and Thaler (1995) argue
that this theory can provide an explanation of the equity premium puzzle described in
Section 2.1. They propose that, when considering an investment in the stock market, people
bring to mind the historical distribution of annual stock market returns; and similarly that,
when considering an investment in the bond market, people bring to mind the historical

                                               62
distribution of annual bond market returns. Benartzi and Thaler (1995) focus on the annual
frequency on the grounds that people track returns on an annual basis, perhaps because
they do their taxes once a year or because they receive their most comprehensive brokerage
statements at the end of the year.
    Benartzi and Thaler’s main result is that the prospect theory value of the historical
distribution of annual U.S. stock market returns, computed by applying equations (22)-(25)
for the preference parameters estimated by Tversky and Kahneman (1992), is approximately
equal to the prospect theory value of the historical distribution of annual U.S. bond market
returns. On the one hand, the greater volatility of stock market returns serves to lower
their prospect theory value relative to that of bond market returns: a loss-averse individual
strongly dislikes volatility. On the other hand, the much higher average return of the stock
market – the high historical equity premium – serves to increase the prospect theory value
of the stock market relative to that of the bond market. Benartzi and Thaler’s result shows
that these two forces cancel out, suggesting that the stock market earns a high average return
so that it can be competitive with the bond market in the eyes of prospect theory investors:
if the equity premium were any lower, these investors would strictly prefer the bond market
and would be unwilling to hold the available supply of stocks.
   Benartzi and Thaler (1995) do not incorporate the insights of prospect theory into an
equilibrium model, one where asset prices are determined endogenously. Barberis et al.
(2001) take up this task. They consider an economy with a riskless asset and a risky asset
in which an inﬁnitely-lived representative investor has the preferences40
                                   ∞
                                   
                                          tCt1−γ        −γ
                               E         ρ       + b0 C t ρt+1 v(Xt+1 ) ,                            (26)
                                   t=0     1−γ

where

                                   Xt+1 = St (Rt+1 − Rf,t )                                          (27)
                                                  X            X≥0
                                   v(X) =                for       .                                 (28)
                                                  λX           X<0

The ﬁrst term in (26) is the traditional speciﬁcation of investor preferences, one based on
lifetime consumption utility. The second term is new, and is inspired by the reference
dependence element of prospect theory, whereby people derive utility from gains and losses;
speciﬁcally, this term captures the idea that the investor also derives utility from annual
gains and losses in her ﬁnancial wealth. The gain or loss between time t and t + 1, denoted
Xt+1 , is deﬁned as the investor’s ﬁnancial wealth at time t + 1 minus her ﬁnancial wealth at
time t scaled up by the gross risk-free rate. To see how this leads to (27), suppose that the
value of the investor’s holdings of the risk-free asset and the risky asset at time t are Bt and
St , respectively, and that the gross returns of the two assets between t and t + 1 are Rf,t and
  40
   Equation (26) is a special case of the preferences considered by Barberis et al. (2001). I describe the
more general speciﬁcation they use later in this section.

                                                    63
Rt+1 . The investor’s gain or loss in ﬁnancial wealth between t and t + 1 is then

                           Xt+1 = (Bt Rf,t + St Rt+1 ) − (Bt + St )Rf,t
                                   = St (Rt+1 − Rf,t ).                                              (29)

The scaling by the risk-free rate makes the model more tractable but may also be psycho-
logically accurate.
   The speciﬁcation in (26) captures only the reference dependence and loss aversion compo-
nents of prospect theory: the value function v(·) in (28) is piecewise-linear; for tractability,
again, diminishing sensitivity and probability weighting are ignored. The parameter ρ is
                             −γ
the time discount rate and C t is a scaling term based on aggregate consumption C t which
ensures that the two components of preferences remain similarly important even as wealth in
the economy grows. Finally, b0 is the weight the investor puts on the gain-loss utility term.
    Barberis et al. (2001) embed the speciﬁcation in (26) in an endowment economy. They
ﬁnd that, for values of loss aversion λ drawn from experimental studies, and for values of b0
that put substantial weight on the gain-loss utility term, the equilibrium equity premium is
large – as high as 6% per year for high values of b0 . The investor recognizes that her stock
market holdings will lead to large annual ﬂuctuations in ﬁnancial wealth, which, due to loss
aversion, will be unpleasant. As compensation, she requires a high average return on the
stock market.41
    De Giorgi and Legg (2012) incorporate both loss aversion and probability weighting into
an analysis of aggregate stock market prices.42 The introduction of probability weighting
leads to an equity premium that is even higher than that generated by loss aversion alone.
The reason is that the aggregate stock market is negatively skewed: it is subject to occasional
large crashes. Stock market investors are therefore exposed to a small chance of a large drop
in ﬁnancial wealth. Under probability weighting, they overweight this left-tail outcome,
which makes the stock market all the less appealing. As a result, they require a high equity
premium in order to hold the market supply of stocks.
   Barberis et al. (2001) show how a modiﬁcation of the preferences in (26) can address
not only the equity premium puzzle, but also the excess volatility and predictability of stock
market returns. Motivated by experimental evidence of Thaler and Johnson (1990), they
propose that an investor’s degree of loss aversion λ is not constant, but rather varies over time
based on the past gains and losses that the investor has experienced: if she has experienced
gains in recent years, she is less loss averse going forward, while if she has experienced losses,
  41
     Gneezy and Potters (1997), Thaler et al. (1997), and Beshears et al. (2017) use laboratory and ﬁeld
experiments to explore the link between loss aversion and investment decisions. Easley and Yang (2015) and
Guo and He (2017a) build models where investors with traditional preferences interact with prospect theory
investors.
  42
     De Giorgi and Legg (2012) do not incorporate probability weighting into the speciﬁcation in (26), but
rather into a diﬀerent gain-loss utility speciﬁcation proposed by Barberis and Huang (2009) and recently
improved by Guo and He (2017b).


                                                   64
she is more loss averse. Barberis et al. (2001) capture this by redeﬁning the value function
v(·) in (28) as
                                           X            X ≥0
                            v(X, zt ) =             for         ,                       (30)
                                           λ(zt )X      X <0
where
                                 λ(zt ) = λ + k(zt − 1),           k > 0,                               (31)
and where zt is the time t measure of the investor’s past gains and losses, with higher values
of zt indicating larger prior losses.43
    One way to think about the speciﬁcation in (30)-(31) is that it captures the investor’s
capacity for dealing with bad news. Following substantial gains in ﬁnancial wealth, the
investor may feel psychologically stronger – more able to deal with any bad news that comes
along in the near future. In eﬀect, she is less loss averse. Conversely, following substantial
losses in ﬁnancial wealth, she may feel psychologically shaken up, and hence less able to
handle any additional bad news that comes along. In eﬀect, she is more loss averse.
    Such shifts in loss aversion oﬀer a way of thinking about the volatility and predictability
of stock market returns. After good cash-ﬂow news that pushes the value of the stock market
up, the investor becomes less loss averse; she is therefore willing to pay an even higher price
for the stock market, thereby generating excess volatility, and to accept a lower average return
on the stock market going forward, thereby generating time-series predictability. After bad
cash-ﬂow news that depresses the value of the stock market, the investor becomes more loss
averse; she pushes the stock market even further down and requires a higher average return
on it going forward.44
    To motivate the convex segment of the prospect theory value function, Kahneman and
Tversky (1979) present evidence of risk-seeking in the domain of losses: a 50% chance of a
$1000 loss is typically preferred to a certain loss of $500. Barberis et al. (2001), guided in
part by evidence of Thaler and Johnson (1990), assume risk-aversion in the domain of losses:
after experiencing a loss, the individual becomes more averse to potential future losses. These
ideas are not contradictory. Kahneman and Tversky (1979) show that someone who is facing
the possibility of a loss will take risk in an eﬀort to avoid the loss. Barberis et al. (2001)
propose that someone who has already taken a loss – someone who has admitted to herself
and to others that she has taken a loss and has experienced the pain of this admission – will
subsequently be more risk averse.
   Imas (2016) articulates this view and tests it experimentally. Participants in the ex-
periment are oﬀered a sequence of gambles. In one condition, the participants settle their
accounts in cash after each gamble is played out; in another condition, they settle their ac-
counts at the end, after all the gambles have been played out. The idea is that a participant
  43
    Equations (30) and (31) are a slightly simpliﬁed version of Barberis et al.’s (2001) speciﬁcation.
  44
    See Cohn et al. (2015) for experimental evidence of countercyclical risk aversion similar to that assumed
by Barberis et al. (2001).


                                                     65
who has to settle her account along the way is forced to “accept” any intermediate loss she
experiences. Consistent with the view outlined in the previous paragraph, Imas (2016) ﬁnds
that a participant who experiences an intermediate loss in the round-by-round settlement
condition subsequently takes less risk, as compared to a participant in the settle-at-the-end
condition who also experiences an intermediate loss.45
    When the term “prospect theory” is mentioned, it is often concepts like loss aversion that
come to mind. However, the most radical feature of the prospect theory-inspired speciﬁcation
in (26) may not be loss aversion, but rather that, in contrast to the vast majority of dynamic
models of stock market prices, the investor derives utility not only from consumption, but
also from gains and losses in ﬁnancial wealth.
    Models in which investors derive utility from gains and losses in ﬁnancial wealth, or even
from gains and losses in speciﬁc components of their wealth, appear to be helpful for under-
standing the data. But how can we motivate such speciﬁcations? One motivation is based on
the concept of “mental accounting,” which refers to the way people think about, keep track
of, and evaluate their ﬁnancial performance (Thaler, 1999). When an individual invests in
ﬁnancial markets, her primary goal is typically to achieve good consumption outcomes for
herself in the future. To check that she is on track for good consumption outcomes, she
monitors her ﬁnancial wealth on a regular basis – every year, say. If, at the end of the year,
she sees that her ﬁnancial wealth has gone up in value, she treats this as good news – an
indication that she is on track for good consumption outcomes in the future. And precisely
because it is good news, it is natural that this increase in ﬁnancial wealth generates a burst
of positive utility for her at the moment she observes it. Conversely, if, at the end of the
year, the individual sees that her ﬁnancial wealth has gone down in value, this is bad news –
a sign that she is not on track for good consumption outcomes in the future – and precisely
because it is bad news, it plausibly generates a burst of negative utility at the moment she
observes it. If changes in ﬁnancial wealth do create these bursts of utility, the individual
may take them into account when allocating her portfolio. This, in turn, motivates the
speciﬁcation in (26).


7.5     Prospect theory applications: Summary

Prospect theory oﬀers a more accurate description of risk attitudes than Expected Utility,
at least in experimental settings. As such, it has the potential to advance our understanding
of asset prices and investor behavior. To some extent, it is delivering on this promise. The
research reviewed in Sections 7.2 through 7.4 shows how prospect theory sheds light on a wide
range of facts and makes novel testable predictions. It is particularly helpful for thinking
about average returns on ﬁnancial assets. For example, it oﬀers a simple explanation for
  45
    Lian et al. (2018) present evidence of another risk-taking phenomenon, “reaching for yield,” whereby
investors take more risk when interest rates are low. Using a model of He and Zhou (2011), they show that
prospect theory can capture this behavior.


                                                   66
both the high average return on the aggregate stock market and the low average return on
positively-skewed assets.
   In the 1990s, prospect theory research in ﬁnance focused on the loss-aversion element of
the theory. The applications of loss aversion – to understanding the high equity premium
and why many households do not participate in the stock market – are inﬂuential and have
stood the test of time. However, in recent years, there have not been many new ﬁnance
applications of loss aversion. Over the past decade, it is instead probability weighting and
diminishing sensitivity that have received more attention.
    Most implementations of prospect theory in ﬁnance use a “backward-looking” reference
point: they posit that, when computing her gain or loss, the investor compares her current
ﬁnancial wealth to her past ﬁnancial wealth. This historical reference point is often assumed
to adapt over time: at time t, the investor compares her current wealth to wealth at time
t − 1, but at time t + 1, she compares her current wealth to wealth at time t.
   Koszegi and Rabin (2006, 2007) advocate “forward-looking” reference points. In the
ﬁnance context, this could mean that an investor computes her gain or loss at time t by
comparing her current wealth to the wealth she expected to have at that point. Such reference
points have not been extensively explored in ﬁnance. It is not clear how plausible they are:
the high degree of uncertainty about assets’ expected returns may mean that expectation-
based reference points are not commonly used by real-world investors. Nonetheless, recent
work by Pagel (2016) and Meng and Weng (2017) suggests that they may be relevant in
some circumstances.46
   Specifying the reference point is just one of the diﬃculties facing prospect theory imple-
mentations in ﬁnance. A broader challenge is deﬁning the “gains” and “losses” that are the
carriers of value. Notice that the models discussed in Section 7 adopt somewhat diﬀerent
deﬁnitions. For example, in some models, investors derive utility from gains and losses in
ﬁnancial wealth, while in other models, they derive utility from gains and losses in individual
assets. There may be good reasons for these diﬀerent assumptions. However, there is a clear
need for a theory that can give guidance on which gains and losses investors focus on in any
particular setting. Developing such a theory is an important open challenge.


7.6       Other alternatives to Expected Utility

The eﬀort to model investor preferences in a more accurate way has been inﬂuenced primarily
by prospect theory. However, other non-EU theories have also been applied in ﬁnance in
useful ways. These include disappointment aversion, rank-dependent expected utility, and
salience theory.
       In disappointment aversion, a framework due to Gul (1991), the individual puts more
  46
    See O’Donoghue and Sprenger (2018) for a comprehensive discussion of reference points in economic
decision-making.

                                                 67
weight on outcomes that lie below the certainty equivalent of her future wealth distribution.
Informally, she is loss averse relative to a speciﬁc reference point, namely this certainty
equivalent. Disappointment aversion has been used to think about the high historical equity
premium and household non-participation in the stock market (Epstein and Zin, 2001; Ang
et al., 2005; Routledge and Zin, 2010; Dahlquist et al., 2016).
    Rank-dependent expected utility, due to Quiggin (1982) and Yaari (1987), modiﬁes the
Expected Utility framework to allow for probability weighting: the individual does not use
objective probabilities, but rather transformed probabilities obtained from a weighting func-
tion g(·). Speciﬁcally, the general gamble in (19) is evaluated as
                                        n
                                        
                                              πi U(W + xi ),                                 (32)
                                       i=−m

where
               πi = g(p−m + p−m+1 + . . . + pi ) − g(p−m + p−m+1 + . . . + pi−1 ),           (33)
and where the most common forms for g(·) are g(P ) = P φ , for φ ∈ (0, 1], and the form used
in cumulative prospect theory, namely
                                                    Pδ
                                  g(P ) =                         .                          (34)
                                            (P δ + (1 − P )δ )1/δ
As with disappointment aversion, this speciﬁcation has been used to think about the eq-
uity premium and non-participation in the stock market, but also about the concentrated
positions some individuals have in skewed assets (Epstein and Zin, 1990; Polkovnichenko,
2005).
    Salience theory is described in Bordalo et al. (2012). In this theory, context matters: the
value an individual assigns to a gamble depends on which other gambles she is comparing it
to. Suppose that there are N gambles, indexed by i, and S states, indexed by s, and that
the payoﬀ of gamble i in state s is xi,s . To evaluate gamble i, the individual ranks the payoﬀs
{xi,s }s=1,...,S by their salience. The salience of xi,s can be measured as
                                           |xi,s − xs |
                                                            ,                                (35)
                                        |xi,s | + |xs | + θ
                         
where θ > 0 and xs = N      i=1 xi,s /N. This captures the idea that state s is more salient for
gamble i if the gamble’s payoﬀ in that state is very diﬀerent from the mean payoﬀ of the
other gambles in that state. Suppose that, for gamble i, state s has salience rank ki,s , where
ki,s is an integer that ranges from 1 for the most salient state to S for the least salient state.
The individual then evaluates the gamble as
                                         S
                                      1 
                                            ps δ ki,s U(xi,s ),                              (36)
                                      Δ s=1
where ps is the probability of state s, δ ∈ (0, 1], and Δ is a normalizing factor that ensures
that the sum of the weights on the S possible outcomes equals one. The weight on the

                                                 68
most salient state is therefore adjusted by δ/Δ, while the weight on the least salient state
is adjusted by δ S /Δ; as such, more salient states receive more weight. One immediate
consequence is that a lottery-like gamble is appealing: the state in which the gamble pays a
jackpot is overweighted because, in this state, the gamble’s payoﬀ is very diﬀerent from that
of the comparison gambles.
   Bordalo et al. (2013) present a model of asset prices in which investors evaluate risk
according to salience theory. A type of narrow framing is assumed: salience theory is applied
at the level of individual assets, rather than at the portfolio level. One of the model’s
predictions is that an asset’s idiosyncratic skewness will be priced. In Section 7.2, I noted
that prospect theory makes a similar prediction and used this prediction to make sense of
a range of facts about asset prices. Salience theory can likely also address these empirical
patterns. Other potential applications are the equity premium and value premium puzzles.
Cosemans and Frehen (2017) test some of the predictions of salience theory for asset prices,
with supportive results.47



8        Preferences: Ambiguity aversion

Economists have long distinguished between situations of “risk,” where the decision-maker
does not know the future payoﬀ of an investment but is able to assign probabilities to
the various possible outcomes, and situations of “ambiguity,” where she does not feel able
to assign probabilities to these outcomes. An important idea is that people are averse to
situations of ambiguity in a way that they are not to situations of mere risk.
    Research on ambiguity aversion has its origin in the Ellsberg paradox (Ellsberg, 1961).
In a simple version of the paradox, there are two urns: Urn C, where “C” stands for Certain,
and Urn U, where “U” stands for Uncertain. Urn C has 100 balls in it; 50 of them are red
and 50 are black. Urn U also has 100 balls in it; each ball in this urn is either red or black,
but the proportion of balls of each color is not known. Participants in an experiment are
asked to choose between the following two bets:
       Bet R1: A ball will be drawn from Urn C. You will receive $100 if it is red.
       Bet R2: A ball will be drawn from Urn U. You will receive $100 if it is red.
Participants are separately asked to choose between the following two bets:
       Bet B1: A ball will be drawn from Urn C. You will receive $100 if it is black.
  47
    Other preference speciﬁcations that researchers have explored are horizon-dependent risk aversion,
whereby the individual is more averse to an imminent risk than to a distant one (Eisenbach and Schmalz,
2016; Andries et al., 2018); and regret aversion (Michenaud and Solnik, 2008; Frydman and Camerer, 2016).
Hartzmark and Shue (2017) present evidence of a perceptual distortion known as a “contrast eﬀect”: in-
vestors perceive a given earnings surprise to be less impressive if the previous day’s earnings surprises were
particularly positive.



                                                     69
   Bet B2: A ball will be drawn from Urn U. You will receive $100 if it is black.
   The modal participant choices are R1 and B1 (Becker and Brownson, 1964). This is
labeled a paradox because these choices are not consistent with any beliefs a participant
might have about the proportion of red balls in Urn U: the choice of R1 over R2 is consistent
with a belief that fewer than 50% of the balls in Urn U are red, while the choice of B1 over
B2 is consistent with a belief that more than 50% of the balls in Urn U are red. Subsequent
experiments have checked that participants are not simply indiﬀerent between R1 and R2,
or between B1 and B2.
    The leading hypothesis for understanding participant behavior in the above experiment
is the ambiguity aversion hypothesis, which states that people are averse to situations of
ambiguity – again, situations where they do not feel able to assign probabilities to future
outcomes. Urn U is an example of such a situation: it is not known what fraction of balls
in the urn are red. Due to ambiguity aversion, then, participants are reluctant to bet on it.
   Over the past 30 years, a lot of eﬀort has gone into developing mathematical models of
ambiguity aversion, and there are now several models to choose from, as well as vigorous
debates about their relative merits. Three of the best-known frameworks are models with
multiple priors (Gilboa and Schmeidler, 1989); smooth ambiguity models (Klibanoﬀ et al.,
2005); and models of robust control (Hansen and Sargent, 2001).
    Suppose that there is an uncertain outcome X, and that the individual does not feel able
to describe X by a single probability distribution. In the multiple-priors framework, she
brings to mind many candidate probability distributions – many “models” of X. She then
chooses the action that maximizes the minimum Expected Utility she could obtain under
any of these candidate probability distributions:

                                     max min EU(X).                                        (37)
                                    action models
In the case of the Ellsberg paradox, an individual may bring to mind 101 diﬀerent models of
Urn U, where, under model i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 100}, there are i black balls and 100 − i red balls
in the urn. The framework in (37) then leads her to choose R1 over R2 but also B1 over B2:
for action R1, min EU(X) is 0.5U(100), while for action R2, min EU(X) is zero, with the
minimum attained for i = 100; similarly, for action B1, min EU(X) is 0.5U(100), while for
action B2, min EU(X) is zero, with the minimum attained for i = 0. The multiple-priors
framework therefore captures the observed behavior in the Ellsberg paradox.
   In the multiple-priors framework, the model that is “worst” for the individual – in the
case of action R2, this is model i = 100, for which none of the balls in Urn U is red – has
a outsize impact on the individual’s choice, perhaps more than is plausible. The smooth
ambiguity and robust control frameworks both try to address this by having the individual
put less weight on models that are, in some sense, more extreme.
   Ambiguity aversion has been applied in ﬁnance in a number of ways (Epstein and Schnei-
der, 2010). It may explain why many households do not participate in the stock market:

                                              70
the return of the stock market is more ambiguous than the return on a bank deposit or a
Treasury Bill; if an individual is suﬃciently ambiguity averse, she may not invest in the stock
market at all (Dow and Werlang, 1992). A similar logic provides a way of thinking about the
high historical equity premium: if investors are ambiguity averse, they will require a much
higher average return on the stock market than on Treasury Bills (Maenhout, 2004).
    Ambiguity aversion has also been used to think about the under-diversiﬁcation in many
household portfolios (Goetzmann and Kumar, 2008). Individuals tilt their portfolios toward
domestic stocks rather than foreign stocks (French and Poterba, 1991); toward stocks of
locally-headquartered ﬁrms rather than stocks of ﬁrms located further away (Ivkovic and
Weisbenner, 2005; Seasholes and Zhu, 2010); and toward the stock of the company they work
for (Benartzi, 2001). One explanation for these ﬁndings is that individuals are ambiguity
averse and view the returns of the domestic stock market, locally-headquartered stocks, and
their own company stock as less ambiguous than the returns of foreign stock markets, distant
stocks, and non-company stocks, respectively (Uppal and Wang, 2003).
   Ambiguity aversion may also amplify ﬁnancial crises (Krishnamurthy, 2010). After bad
economic news that pushes asset prices down, investors may feel that the level of ambiguity
about future economic outcomes has gone up – in informal terms, that the future is now
more uncertain. This increase in perceived ambiguity pushes asset prices even further down.
    Ambiguity aversion is a topic where there has been enormous eﬀort on the theoretical
front – on developing formal, mathematical models – but less progress on the empirical side.
The paucity of empirical research is unfortunate; it means that there is still relatively little
direct evidence that ambiguity aversion matters for investor decisions or asset prices. The
applications described above are promising, but there are other plausible explanations of
non-participation, under-diversiﬁcation, and crisis ampliﬁcation.
    One way to make empirical progress is to leverage developments in psychology. While
ambiguity aversion remains the leading explanation of the Ellsberg paradox, another hypoth-
esis, the “competence hypothesis,” can also address it (Heath and Tversky, 1991). According
to this framework, an individual is ambiguity averse when she does not feel “competent” to
evaluate the probability distribution of future outcomes, but ambiguity-seeking when she
does feel competent. Here, “competence” refers to how much the individual feels she knows,
relative to what could be known. The competence hypothesis explains the Ellsberg paradox
by positing that, when thinking about the uncertain Urn U, the individual does not feel
competent: there is something important that could be known about the urn that she does
not know. As a consequence, she is ambiguity averse.
   Heath and Tversky (1991) and Fox and Tversky (1995) present extensive evidence in sup-
port of the competence hypothesis – for example, that the same individual can be ambiguity-
averse in one situation but ambiguity-seeking in another, depending on her feelings of com-
petence. One of their most striking ﬁndings is how easy it is to alter a person’s attitude
to ambiguity by manipulating her feelings of competence, either by contrasting a situation


                                              71
the person is thinking about with other, more ambiguous situations, or by reminding her of
other people who are more or less competent than she at evaluating a particular source of
uncertainty. The richness of the competence hypothesis may inspire new predictions in the
realm of ﬁnance that can be brought to the data.
   Some of the applications of ambiguity aversion can also be addressed using a related
but distinct notion from psychology, namely that people have a preference for things that
are familiar (Huberman, 2001). A concrete version of this is the “mere exposure eﬀect” –
the ﬁnding that mere exposure to someone or something makes us like that person or thing
more than justiﬁed based on informational considerations alone (Zajonc, 1968; Bornstein,
1989). In one experimental demonstration of this eﬀect, participants with no knowledge of
the Chinese language are shown a sequence of Chinese characters. Some of the characters
appear just once in the sequence, others two times, others ﬁve times, and others ten times.
For each unique character, the experimenter asks participants whether the character connotes
something positive. The striking ﬁnding is that, on average, participants associate characters
that appear more often with a more positive meaning (Zajonc, 1968).
    The potential applications of the mere exposure eﬀect overlap with those of ambiguity
aversion. In particular, it oﬀers an explanation for the instances of under-diversiﬁcation
where people tilt their portfolios toward domestic stocks, locally-headquartered stocks, and
their own company stock. We are exposed, on a daily basis, to our home country, our local
region, and the company we work for. The mere exposure eﬀect may then lead us to view
investments that are linked to these more favorably than we should.
    How does ambiguity aversion diﬀer from the mere exposure eﬀect in its predictions?
Consider an investor in, say, Brazil. The ambiguity aversion hypothesis predicts that this
investor will tilt her portfolio toward the U.S. stock market: from a statistical perspective,
there is less ambiguity about the distribution of U.S. stock market returns because of the
many years of high quality data about it. By contrast, the mere exposure eﬀect predicts that,
since the Brazilian investor is exposed more often to her home country, she will tilt toward
the Brazilian stock market. The available evidence is more consistent with the prediction of
the mere exposure eﬀect.



9    Bounded rationality

Sections 4 through 6 reviewed belief-based models of asset prices, while Sections 7 and 8
covered preference-based models. I now discuss a third approach to improving the psycho-
logical realism of our models of ﬁnancial markets, one that takes account of human cognitive
limits.
    The traditional framework for thinking about asset prices assumes that, as soon as a
piece of news is released, investors attend to it immediately, determine straight away what
it implies for the prices of ﬁnancial assets, and adjust their portfolios without delay. Given

                                             72
the large volume of news that is released on a weekly or even daily basis, and given how
diﬃcult it can be to discern the implications of this news, it is unlikely that, for all its
impressive abilities, the human brain can do what the traditional framework assumes that
it does. There are surely limits to how quickly a person can gather, process, and react to
complex information.
   The bounded-rationality approach to economic decision-making takes these cognitive
limits seriously, and proposes a framework where people optimize subject to constraints on
their mental processing capacity. According to this framework, when people act the way
they do, they are doing the best they can, given their cognitive limits; these limits prevent
them from doing any better.
    In this section, I describe some bounded-rationality approaches to understanding asset
prices. The most prominent idea in this area is inattention – the notion that, because of
the brain’s ﬁnite processing capacity, investors are unable to attend promptly to all relevant
information – but I also discuss another concept, categorical thinking.48
    While the bounded-rationality approach is helpful for understanding investor behavior,
it also faces a challenge. According to this framework, investors are optimizing subject to
cognitive constraints; given these constraints, it is not possible for them to act in a more
rational way. The diﬃculty with this view is that, in many cases, real-world investors could
do better without imposing any additional demands on their mental processing capacity:
the more rational thing to do is often just as easy to implement, and sometimes easier to
implement, than what they are currently doing.
    An example may be helpful. The data suggest that some investors have poor market
timing: they increase their exposure to the stock market following good returns, just when,
perhaps because it is overvalued, the market has a low expected return; similarly, they de-
crease their exposure to the stock market following low returns, just when, possibly because
it is undervalued, it has a high expected return (Friesen and Sapp, 2007). These investors
could do better by implementing a strategy that is no more cognitively demanding than what
they are currently doing, namely, the opposite of what they are currently doing: increasing
their exposure to the stock market following poor returns and decreasing their exposure
following good returns. For another example, recall that many investors allocate substantial
sums to actively-managed mutual funds, even though these funds underperform index funds
on average after taking fees into account. These investors could do better without impos-
ing any additional burden on their mental processing capacity: the more rational strategy,
investing in index funds, is easier to implement than what they are currently doing.
    The bounded-rationality framework may therefore not be the best way to think about
certain aspects of investor behavior: investors often fail to take actions that would not
  48
   Other kinds of bounded rationality in ﬁnance that I do not discuss in detail here are nominal illusion
(Modigliani and Cohn, 1979); confusion about dividends (Hartzmark and Solomon, 2018); and additive as
opposed to proportional thinking (Shue and Townsend, 2018).



                                                   73
only improve their ﬁnancial outcomes but that are actually easier to implement than what
they are currently doing. The psychology-based models of Sections 4 through 8 are a more
promising way of understanding these aspects of behavior: according to these models, people
have deeply-held psychological heuristics which make it hard for them to embrace rational
courses of action and instead lead them astray. For example, the representativeness heuristic
may lead an investor to increase her exposure to the stock market after good returns and to
reduce it after poor returns, while overconﬁdence may lead her to believe that, even if index
funds beat actively-managed funds on average, she has the ability to pick out in advance the
few active funds that will beat the index.
   Despite this challenge, the bounded-rationality approach is helpful for thinking about
some empirical facts in ﬁnance. I now describe some of the research in this area.


9.1    Inattention

The brain’s ﬁnite processing capacity suggests that real-world investors will not be able to
immediately attend to every piece of news that is relevant to the prices of ﬁnancial assets.
Rather, it will take them some time to gather, process, and react to this information. A
basic prediction of this “inattention” framework is that asset prices will underreact to news.
    Inattention-driven underreaction oﬀers a simple explanation for post-earnings announce-
ment drift – the fact, described in Section 2.2, that, if a ﬁrm announces unexpectedly good
(poor) earnings, its stock price not only moves up (down) on the day of the announcement,
but keeps rising (falling) in the weeks thereafter. According to the inattention view, in-
vestors do not all have the cognitive capacity to immediately ﬁgure out the implications of
an earnings announcement for the ﬁrm’s future prospects; it can take them days if not weeks
to complete the task. As a result, on a day with good earnings news, the stock price reacts
in a muted way; only over the next few weeks, once more investors have had a chance to
think through the implications of the announcement, does the stock price ﬁnally rise to the
level that properly reﬂects the news.
    The inattention hypothesis has found support in empirical tests. DellaVigna and Pollet
(2009) show that, on average, there is more post-earnings announcement drift when a ﬁrm
announces earnings on a Friday; the interpretation is that, with the weekend coming up,
investors are less attentive. Firms appear to exploit this: a larger fraction of the earnings
news announced on Fridays is bad news. Hirshleifer et al. (2009) show that, on average,
there is more post-earnings announcement drift when a ﬁrm announces earnings on the same
day as many other ﬁrms; a natural interpretation is that, due to the simultaneous arrival
of news from many diﬀerent ﬁrms, it takes investors more time to process each individual
announcement.
    Earnings announcements are not the only kind of news that investors appear to underre-
act to because of inattention. Others are: information about a ﬁrm’s customers (Cohen and


                                             74
Frazzini, 2006); news about demographic shifts (DellaVigna and Pollet, 2007); information
about the quality of a ﬁrm’s R&D investments (Cohen et al., 2013); the absence of news
about the status of a merger bid (Giglio and Shue, 2014); foreign-market news (Huang,
2015); changes to a ﬁrm’s 10-k statement (Cohen et al., 2016); and, more broadly, news that
is harder to process (Cohen and Lou, 2012) or that is released on a gradual basis (Da et al.,
2014a).
    The work of DellaVigna and Pollet (2007) on demographic shifts is instructive. For a
stylized example that illustrates the idea in their study, suppose that, in 2018, a large number
of babies are born in the U.S. This implies that, six years later, say, there will be higher than
usual demand for toys. If investors are attentive, they will push up the stock prices of toy
companies in 2018, when the information pointing to higher future demand ﬁrst appears. If
they are not attentive, however, they will push up the stock prices of toy companies only
later – perhaps only in 2024 when the increased demand for toys becomes too obvious to
ignore. DellaVigna and Pollet (2007) show that stock market investors are inattentive: a
strategy that, when demographic news is released, buys (shorts) the stocks of ﬁrms that
stand to beneﬁt (lose) from the demographic shift earns positive excess returns. Their study
also gives us a sense of how inattentive investors are: stock market prices do properly reﬂect
the implications of demographic shifts for ﬁrms’ cash ﬂows over the next ﬁve years; it is
the implications of these shifts for cash ﬂows more than ﬁve years out that are not fully
incorporated into prices.49


9.2     Categorization

A basic feature of the way humans think – one that likely evolved to help us navigate
a complex world – is that we put things into categories and form beliefs at the level of
these categories (Rosch and Lloyd, 1978). It is plausible that such category-based thinking
occurs in ﬁnancial markets, too. There are thousands of individual securities and investment
funds, and it is impossible for investors to have an informed opinion about each and every
one. Investors may therefore simplify their decision-making by putting ﬁnancial assets into
categories and forming beliefs about the future performance of these assets at the category
level. The frequent use of labels such as “value stocks,” “growth stocks,” “small-cap stocks,”
and “quality stocks” is consistent with such category-based thinking.
   Barberis and Shleifer (2003) study asset prices in an economy where some investors put
assets into categories and form beliefs about the assets’ future returns at the category level.
These category-based investors are also extrapolators: their belief about the future return
  49
    Da et al. (2011, 2014b) construct measures of investor attention and relate these to trading activity
and asset returns. Attention is likely strongly aﬀected by media coverage, and a sizable literature examines
the impact of the media on ﬁnancial markets (Tetlock, 2007; Engelberg and Parsons, 2011; Tetlock, 2015).
While I have focused here on empirical work, there is growing interest in models of inattention; see Gabaix
(2018) for a review.



                                                    75
of an asset category is a positive function of its recent past return. The model makes several
predictions – for example, it predicts medium-term momentum and long-term reversal in
category-level returns. However, its more novel contribution is to oﬀer a behavioral theory
of comovement.
    In an economy with rational investors and no frictions, the price of an asset is the rational
expectation of its future cash ﬂows, discounted at a rate that properly accounts for the risk
of these cash ﬂows. Comovement in the returns of a subset of all risky assets is then due
to one of two things: correlated news about the level of the assets’ future cash ﬂows, or
correlated news about the riskiness of these cash ﬂows.50
    The sources of comovement identiﬁed by the rational, frictionless framework likely explain
a lot of the comovement in actual asset returns. Nonetheless, there are numerous instances
where asset returns appear to comove more than can be explained by these fundamental
sources. For example, the returns of value stocks with low price-to-earnings ratios comove
strongly, as do the returns of small-cap stocks, but it has proven diﬃcult to link these return
correlations to comovement in fundamentals (Fama and French, 1995). Commodity returns
comove in ways that are not explained by changes in current or expected future values of
macroeconomic variables (Pindyck and Rotemberg, 1990). The returns of closed-end mutual
funds comove with the returns of small-cap stocks even when the funds’ holdings consist
of large-cap stocks (Lee et al., 1991). And the returns of closed-end country funds – funds
whose shares are traded in the U.S. but which invest in foreign ﬁrms – comove as much with
the returns of the market where they are traded (the U.S.) as with the returns of the market
where their investments are located (Hardouvelis et al., 1994; Bodurtha et al., 1995).
    The model of comovement proposed in Barberis and Shleifer (2003) can explain some of
these patterns. In this model, returns of assets in the same category comove more than can
be explained by fundamentals. Suppose that “small-cap stocks” is a category in the minds of
many investors and that this category has recently performed well. Since these investors are
also extrapolators, they become bullish about the future return of the small-cap category and
therefore increase their holdings of the assets in this category. By hitting all small-cap stocks
in tandem, this demand shock generates comovement in the returns of small-cap stocks over
and above any comovement caused by fundamentals. In the same way, this framework can
explain the common factor in the returns of value stocks, small-cap stocks, and commodities.
    Barberis et al. (2005) point out that, under the category-based view of comovement,
after a stock is added to the S&P 500 index, its returns should start comoving more with
the returns of the other stocks in the S&P 500. Under the traditional view, however, there
will be an increase in return comovement only if, after inclusion, there is an increase in the
comovement of the included ﬁrm’s fundamentals with the fundamentals of ﬁrms already in
the S&P 500, something that there is little evidence of. Barberis et al. (2005) test their
  50
     News about future interest rates or changes in risk aversion, the two other forces that aﬀect asset prices
in rational models with no frictions, generate comovement in the returns of all risky assets, rather than just
a subset of them.


                                                      76
prediction using a bivariate regression – speciﬁcally, a regression of the return of the included
stock on the return of the S&P 500 and the return of stocks not in the S&P 500. They ﬁnd
that, after inclusion, consistent with category-based comovement, there is an increase in
the coeﬃcient on the ﬁrst independent variable (the S&P 500 return) and a decrease in the
coeﬃcient on the second (the non-S&P 500 return).
   Other papers also provide evidence of category-level comovement. For example, Green
and Hwang (2009) show that there is comovement in the returns of stocks with similar prices.
There is continued debate about whether the ﬁndings in these papers truly reﬂect “excessive”
comovement or whether they should instead be attributed to comovement in fundamentals
(Chen et al., 2016).



10      Discussion and Conclusion

Research on psychology-based approaches to thinking about asset prices began in earnest in
the 1990s. In relative terms, then, the ﬁeld is young: the traditional approach to studying
asset prices, based on models with fully rational investors, has been pursued intensively since
the 1960s. As such, it is too early to draw ﬁrm conclusions about the value of behavioral
models of asset prices. Still, on some dimensions, these models have clearly been useful:
they have shown that a few simple assumptions about investor psychology explain a wide
range of important facts – facts about asset market ﬂuctuations, trading volume, bubbles,
and the performance of investment strategies – and lead to concrete new predictions.
    In this survey, I have emphasized three frameworks that, based on the research to date,
appear particularly helpful for thinking about asset prices and trading volume. These are
the extrapolation framework (Section 4), the overconﬁdence framework (Section 5), and the
gain-loss utility framework inspired by prospect theory (Section 7). The three frameworks
are not necessarily in competition with one another, in part because they have somewhat
diﬀerent applications. The extrapolation framework explains excess volatility and time-series
predictability in aggregate asset classes; momentum, long-run reversal, and the value pre-
mium in the cross-section; and the formation and collapse of asset bubbles. Overconﬁdence,
by generating disagreement across investors, can address the high volume of trading in ﬁnan-
cial markets; when coupled with a short-sale constraint, it further explains the coincidence
of high valuations and heavy trading that we see in the data. Gain-loss utility and prospect
theory help us understand assets’ average returns: the high average return on the aggregate
stock market, but also the low average return on positively-skewed assets such as IPOs,
out-of-the-money options, and volatile stocks.
    The psychological assumptions that are prominent in ﬁnance overlap partially but not
fully with those invoked in other areas of economics. Reference dependence, loss aversion,
overconﬁdence, and inattention have all been applied both in ﬁnance and elsewhere in eco-
nomics. But while the representativeness heuristic and probability weighting have been


                                               77
heavily exploited in ﬁnance, their use in other areas of economics is more limited. And while
hyperbolic discounting has been applied extensively outside ﬁnance, it has had little traction
in the ﬁeld of asset prices. These diﬀerences are due to the pre-eminent role of risk in ﬁnance.
The focus on risk means that probability weighting – an aspect of how people process risky
outcomes – is relevant in ﬁnance, while hyperbolic discounting – a feature of time, not risk,
preferences – is less so.
    The research reviewed in this article takes a “positive” approach: it uses psychology-
based models to make sense of observed facts. But what are the “normative” implications
of these models? If the models are on the right track, what should a rational investor do?
    The models described here appear to point to an active trading strategy for rational
investors, one where these investors tilt their portfolios toward low price-to-earnings stocks
and gently time the stock market to take advantage of return predictability. However, most
ﬁnancial economists, including behavioral ﬁnance specialists, instead advise households to
follow a passive strategy – for example, to invest in index funds. Why is this? One reason
is that, until recently, most of the investment vehicles that would allow households to take
advantage of mispricing have been unappealing: after fees, the average actively-managed
fund underperforms index funds. However, in just the past few years, new ﬁnancial products
have appeared that exploit mispricing in more cost-eﬀective ways – many of these products
mechanically buy and sell assets with the characteristics listed in Section 2.2 – and economists
are beginning to recommend them as good investment options. These new products are
attracting large ﬂows from institutional investors and are drawing interest from households
too.
    Researchers entering behavioral ﬁnance today are often unaware that the ﬁeld was con-
troversial when it emerged in the 1980s and 1990s. The controversy was due in part to
academic politics – to resistance from people who had spent their lives working on the tra-
ditional framework only to see their legacy threatened by an upstart paradigm. However,
some of the controversy was rooted in reasonable scientiﬁc critiques of the new ﬁeld. One
of these is the arbitrage critique, which has now been addressed by the work on limits to
arbitrage discussed in Section 3.
    A second critique of behavioral ﬁnance which was regularly voiced in the 1990s is the
“lack of discipline critique.” It posits that, because there are many ways in which people
depart from full rationality, it is too easy to ﬁnd “explanations” for observed facts by ﬂipping
through the pages of a psychology textbook. In a 1998 paper, Eugene Fama predicted that we
would soon see a profusion of psychological assumptions in ﬁnance – 30 diﬀerent assumptions
to explain 30 diﬀerent facts, say (Fama, 1998).
    Twenty years later, it is striking to see that Fama’s prediction has proven false, and his
concerns unfounded. While researchers are investigating a variety of psychological assump-
tions, the center of gravity in behavioral ﬁnance lies in a small number of ideas, primarily
the three I picked out above – extrapolation, overconﬁdence, and gain-loss utility. The lack


                                              78
of discipline critique is heard less often these days. One reason for this is that there has
been a concerted eﬀort to not simply posit explanations for known facts, but to test the new
predictions of these explanations. But another reason is precisely that researchers have kept
their focus on a small set of psychological concepts.
    A long-term goal of behavioral ﬁnance research is to converge on a “uniﬁed” psychology-
based model of investor behavior – a model that, in a parsimonious way, makes psycholog-
ically realistic assumptions about both beliefs and preferences, and has broad explanatory
power. It is too early to know what this model will look like, but the research to date makes
it possible to speculate about its form. Relative to the traditional framework based on ratio-
nal beliefs and Expected Utility preferences, one behavioral alternative posits extrapolative
rather than rational beliefs, and modiﬁes preferences to incorporate gain-loss utility and
elements of prospect theory. In this framework, an individual thinking about investing in
an asset ﬁrst forecasts the gains and losses in ﬁnancial wealth that could result from doing
so, and bases this forecast on the asset’s past returns, especially those in the more recent
past; in this way, her behavior combines extrapolation with a focus on potential gains and
losses. The individual then evaluates this perceived distribution of future gains and losses
as suggested by prospect theory, putting more weight on the tails of the distribution and on
potential losses as opposed to gains. There is, as yet, very little work on models that couple
extrapolative beliefs with gain-loss utility.51 However, the research discussed in this article
suggests that such models will explain a broad set of facts about average returns, volatility,
and predictability.52
   While extrapolative beliefs and gain-loss utility are both helpful for understanding the
data, they both also raise fundamental questions that have not been fully answered: Why
do people extrapolate, and how do they extrapolate? For example, how far back do people
look when forming judgments about the future, and why? And if, when making investment
decisions, people think about the gains and losses that could result, how do they deﬁne these
potential gains and losses?
     Over the past three decades, the eﬀort to build psychologically accurate models of in-
vestor behavior and asset prices has followed one particular approach: incorporating ideas
from the area of psychology known as judgment and decision-making – ideas such as repre-
sentativeness, availability, overconﬁdence, and prospect theory – into otherwise traditional
ﬁnance models. I have argued in this article that this approach has been fruitful. However,
it is also unnecessarily narrow in scope: it focuses largely on the work of Daniel Kahneman
and Amos Tversky – work that, while very inﬂuential, represents only a sliver of the ﬁeld
of psychology. Beyond the work on judgment and decision-making, there are large tracts
of research in psychology on attention, memory, and emotion, not to mention a rapidly
  51
     One exception is Liao and Peng (2018), who propose, and test, a theory of volume based on the interaction
of extrapolative beliefs and realization utility.
  52
     It might seem that this uniﬁed framework neglects the insights of research on overconﬁdence, but this is
not the case. As noted in Section 5.1, the extrapolation framework implicitly incorporates overconﬁdence,
in that extrapolators fail to learn anything from the fact that other investors are willing to trade with them.


                                                      79
growing ﬁeld known as decision neuroscience, that economists have not connected to very
much. It seems important to do so, and I expect that researchers will take up this task more
energetically in the years ahead. A related goal is to unify the models of human behavior
that are emerging across the social and natural sciences. Researchers in economics, ﬁnance,
psychology, and neuroscience are proposing models of how people form representations of
the world and of how they make choices based on these representations. These models diﬀer
from one another. It is important to understand why they diﬀer – and if there is no good
reason, to unify them.
    In the 1990s, when behavioral ﬁnance became an active area of inquiry, conferences for
both academics and practitioners staged debates between proponents of traditional models
and advocates of behavioral models. These debates were memorable and often entertaining,
but they did little to advance the cause of science. Recognizing this, researchers on both
sides gave up the verbal jousting and focused instead on writing down models of their ideas
and taking these models to the data. To the extent that behavioral ﬁnance has ﬂourished, it
is because of this approach: it has produced models that explain important facts in simple,
intuitive ways and make predictions that have found support in the data. I expect that the
ﬁeld will continue to follow this approach in the years ahead, and that this eﬀort will further
advance our understanding of investor behavior in ﬁnancial markets.



11     Appendix

Derivation of equations (3), (4), and (5)

   At time t, each extrapolator’s objective is
                                                         e
                                max
                                  e
                                    Ete (−e−γ(Wt +Nt (Pt+1 −Pt )) ).
                                 Nt


If, for simplicity, the extrapolator assumes that the conditional distribution of Pt+1 − Pt is
Normal with variance σε2 , his ﬁrst-order condition implies

                                               Ete (Pt+1 − Pt )
                                      Nte =                     .                         (38)
                                                     γσε2

Coupling (38) with the beliefs in equation (2) gives equation (3).
   At time t, each fundamental trader’s objective is
                                                         f
                               max
                                f
                                   Etf (−e−γ(Wt +Nt (Pt+1 −Pt )) ).
                                Nt


As for the extrapolator, the ﬁrst-order condition leads to

                                              Etf (Pt+1 − Pt )
                                      Ntf   =                  .
                                                    γσε2

                                                  80
At time T − 1, the fundamental trader sets ETf −1 (PT ) = DT −1 , so that
                                                 DT −1 − PT −1
                                     NTf −1 =                  .
                                                     γσε2
From the market-clearing condition

                                     μe NTe −1 + μf NTf −1 = Q

we obtain
                                             μe 2 e        γσε2 Q
                            PT −1 = DT −1 +     γσ N    −                                      (39)
                                             μf ε T −1       μf
                                             μe        γσ 2 Q
                                    = DT −1 + f XT −1 − εf .
                                             μ          μ

   Recall that fundamental traders are boundedly rational: they do not understand how
extrapolators form beliefs but instead assume that, in future periods, extrapolators will hold
the risky asset in proportion to their weight in the population. From (39), this implies

                                                       μe 2     γσε2 Q
                           ETf −2 (PT −1 ) = DT −2 +     γσ Q −        ,
                                                       μf ε      μf
so that
                                            DT −2 − γσε2 Q − PT −2
                                 NTf −2   =                        .
                                                     γσε2
From the market-clearing condition

                                     μe NTe −2 + μf NTf −2 = Q

we obtain
                                        μe 2 e                     1
                        PT −2 = DT −2 +   f
                                            γσε NT −2 − γσε2 Q(1 + f )
                                        μ                         μ
                                          e
                                        μ                       1
                               = DT −2 + f XT −2 − γσε2 Q(1 + f ).
                                        μ                       μ
Continuing the backward induction in this way leads to equations (4) and (5).



12        References
Abreu, D., Brunnermeier, M. (2002). “Synchronization risk and delayed arbitrage.” Journal of
Financial Economics 66, 341-360.
Adam, K., Marcet, A., Beutel, J. (2017). “Stock price booms and expected capital gains.” American
Economic Review 107, 2352-2408.
Alti, A., Tetlock, P. (2014). “Biased beliefs, asset prices, and investment: a structural approach.”
Journal of Finance 69, 325-361.

                                                  81
Amromin, G., Sharpe, S. (2014). “From the horse’s mouth: economic conditions and investor
expectations of risk and return.” Management Science 60, 845-866.
Andries, M., Eisenbach, T., Schmalz, M. (2018). “Horizon-dependent risk aversion and the timing
and pricing of uncertainty.” Working paper.
Andrikogiannopoulou, A., Papakonstantinou, F. (2018). “History-dependent risk preferences: evi-
dence from individual choices and implications for the disposition eﬀect.” Working paper.
Ang, A., Bekaert, G., Liu, J. (2005). “Why stocks may disappoint.” Journal of Financial Economics
76, 471-508.
Ang, A., Hodrick, R., Xing, Y., Zhang, X. (2006). “The cross-section of volatility and expected
returns.” Journal of Finance 61, 259-299.
Asness, C., Moskowitz, T., Pedersen, L. (2013). “Value and momentum everywhere.” Journal of
Finance 68, 929-985.
Astebro, T., Herz, H., Nanda, R., Weber, R. (2014). “Seeking the roots of entrepreneurship:
insights from behavioral economics.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28, 46-69.
Augenblick, N., Lazarus, E. (2018). “Restrictions on asset-price movements under rational expec-
tations: theory and evidence.” Working paper.
Bacchetta, P., Mertens, E., van Wincoop, E. (2009). “Predictability in ﬁnancial markets: what do
survey expectations tell us?” Journal of International Money and Finance 28, 406-426.
Baker, M., Wurgler, J. (2006). “Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns.” Journal
of Finance 61, 1645-1680.
Baker, M., Wurgler, J. (2007). “Investor sentiment in the stock market.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 21, 129-151.
Baker, M., Wurgler, J. (2012). “Behavioral corporate ﬁnance: an updated survey.” In: Constan-
tinides, G., Harris, M., Stulz, R. (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, vol. 2. North
Holland, Amsterdam.
Bali, T., Cakici, N., Whitelaw, R. (2011). “Maxing out: stocks as lotteries and the cross-section of
expected returns.” Journal of Financial Economics 99, 427-446.
Ball, R., Gerakos, J., Linnainmaa, J., Nikolaev, V. (2015). “Deﬂating proﬁtability.” Journal of
Financial Economics 117, 225-248.
Banerjee, A. (1992). “A simple model of herd behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107,
797-817.
Banerjee, S. (2011). “Learning from prices and the dispersion in beliefs.” Review of Financial
Studies 24, 3025-3068.
Banerjee, S., Kremer, I. (2010). “Disagreement and learning: dynamic patterns of trade.” Journal
of Finance 65, 1269-1302.
Bansal, R., Yaron, A. (2004). “Risks for the long run: a potential resolution of asset pricing
puzzles.” Journal of Finance 59, 1481-1509.
Bansal, R., Kiku, D., Yaron, A. (2012). “An empirical evaluation of the long-run risks model for
asset prices.” Critical Finance Review 1, 183-221.
Banz, R. (1981). “The relation between return and market value of common stocks.” Journal of
Financial Economics 9, 3-18.
Barber, B., Odean, T. (2001). “Boys will be boys: gender, overconﬁdence, and common stock


                                                82
investment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 141, 261-292.
Barberis, N., Huang, M. (2001). “Mental accounting, loss aversion and individual stock returns.”
Journal of Finance 56, 1247-1292.
Barberis, N., Huang, M. (2008). “Stocks as lotteries: the implications of probability weighting for
security prices.” American Economic Review 98, 2066-2100.
Barberis, N., Huang, M. (2009). “Preferences with frames: a new utility speciﬁcation that allows
for the framing of risks.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 33, 1555-1576.
Barberis, N., Shleifer, A. (2003). “Style investing.” Journal of Financial Economics 68, 161-199.
Barberis, N., Thaler, R. (2003). “A survey of behavioral ﬁnance.” In: Constantinides, G., Harris,
M., Stulz, R. (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, vol. 1. North Holland, Amsterdam.
Barberis, N., Xiong, W. (2009). “What drives the disposition eﬀect? An analysis of a long-standing
preference-based explanation.” Journal of Finance 64, 751-784.
Barberis, N., Xiong, W. (2012). “Realization utility.” Journal of Financial Economics 104, 251-271.
Barberis, N., Huang, M., Santos, T. (2001). “Prospect theory and asset prices.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 116, 1-53.
Barberis, N., Huang, M., Thaler, R. (2006). “Individual preferences, monetary gambles, and stock
market participation: a case for narrow framing.” American Economic Review 96, 1069-1090.
Barberis, N., Mukherjee, A., Wang, B. (2016). “Prospect theory and stock returns: an empirical
test.” Review of Financial Studies 29, 3068-3107.
Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. (1998). “A model of investor sentiment.” Journal of Financial
Economics 49, 307-345.
Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., Wurgler, J. (2005). “Comovement.” Journal of Financial Economics 75,
283-317.
Barberis, N., Greenwood, R., Jin, L., Shleifer, A. (2015). “X-CAPM: an extrapolative capital asset
pricing model.” Journal of Financial Economics 115, 1-24.
Barberis, N., Greenwood, R., Jin, L., Shleifer, A. (2018). “Extrapolation and bubbles.” Journal of
Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Baron, J. (2000). Thinking and Deciding. Cambridge University Press.
Barsky, R., De Long, J.B. (1993). “Why does the stock market ﬂuctuate?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 108, 291-311.
Basu, S. (1983). “The relationship between earnings yield, market value and return for NYSE
common stocks: further evidence.” Journal of Financial Economics 12, 129-156.
Becker, S., Brownson, F. (1964). “What price ambiguity? Or the role of ambiguity in decision-
making.” Journal of Political Economy 72, 62-73.
Benartzi, S. (2001). “Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401(k) accounts to company
stock.” Journal of Finance 56, 1747-1764.
Benartzi, S., Thaler, R. (1995). “Myopic loss aversion and the equity premium puzzle.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 110, 75-92.
Benjamin, D., Moore, D., Rabin, M. (2017). “Biased beliefs about random samples: evidence from
two integrated experiments.” Working paper.
Benjamin, D., Rabin, M., Raymond, C. (2015). “A model of non-belief in the law of large numbers.”
Journal of the European Economic Association 14, 515-544.


                                                83
Bernard, V., Thomas, J. (1989). “Post-earnings announcement drift: delayed price response or risk
premium?” Journal of Accounting Research (Supplement), 1-36.
Bernheim, D., Sprenger, C. (2016). “Direct tests of cumulative prospect theory.” Working paper.
Beshears, J., Choi, J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. (2017). “Does aggregated returns disclosure
increase portfolio risk-taking?” Review of Financial Studies 30, 1971-2005.
Beshears, J., Choi, J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. (2018). “Household ﬁnance.” Forthcoming in:
Bernheim, D., DellaVigna, S., Laibson, D. (Eds.), Handbook of Behavioral Economics, vol. 1.
North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D., Welch, I. (1992). “A theory of fads, fashion, custom, and cultural
change as informational cascades.” Journal of Political Economy 100, 992-1026.
Birru, J. (2018). “Day of the week and the cross-section of returns.” Forthcoming, Journal of
Financial Economics.
Black, F. (1972). “Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing.” Journal of Business 45,
444-455.
Blanchard, O., Watson, M. (1982). Bubbles, rational expectations, and ﬁnancial markets. In:
Wachtel, P. (Ed.), Crisis in the Economic and Financial Structure: Bubbles, Bursts, and Shocks.
Lexington Books.
Bodurtha, J., Kim, D., Lee, C.M. (1995). “Closed-end country funds and U.S. market sentiment.”
Review of Financial Studies 8, 879-918.
Booij, A., van Praag, B., van de Kuilen, G. (2010). “A parametric analysis of prospect theory’s
functionals for the general population.” Theory and Decision 68, 115-148.
Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A. (2012). “Salience theory of choice under risk.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 127, 1243-1285.
Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A. (2013). “Salience and asset prices.” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 103, 623-628.
Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A. (2018a). “Diagnostic expectations and credit cycles.” Jour-
nal of Finance 73, 199-227.
Bordalo, P., Coﬀman, K., Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A. (2014). “Stereotypes.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 131, 1753-1794.
Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., La Porta, R., Shleifer, A. (2017). “Diagnostic expectations and stock
returns.” Working paper.
Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Ma, Y., Shleifer, A. (2018b). “Overreaction in macroeconomic expec-
tations.” Working paper.
Bornstein, R. (1989). “Exposure and aﬀect: overview and meta-analysis of research, 1968-1987.”
Psychological Bulletin 106, 265-289.
Bouchaud, J-P., Kruger, P., Landier, A., Thesmar, D. (2018). “Sticky expectations and the prof-
itability anomaly.” Forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Boyer, B., Vorkink, K. (2014). “Stock options as lotteries.” Journal of Finance 69, 1485-1527.
Boyer, B., Mitton, T., Vorkink, K. (2010). “Expected idiosyncratic skewness.” Review of Financial
Studies 23, 169-202.
Brunnermeier, M., Nagel, S. (2004). “Hedge funds and the technology bubble.” Journal of Finance
59, 2013-2040.


                                                 84
Brunnermeier, M., Oehmke, M. (2013). “Bubbles, ﬁnancial crises, and systemic risk.” In: Con-
stantinides, G., Harris, M., Stulz, R. (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, vol. 2. North
Holland, Amsterdam.
Brunnermeier, M., Parker, J. (2005). “Optimal expectations.” American Economic Review 95,
1092-1118.
Campbell, J.Y. (2018). Financial Decisions and Markets. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
New Jersey.
Campbell, J.Y., Cochrane, J. (1999). “By force of habit: a consumption-based explanation of
aggregate stock market behavior.” Journal of Political Economy 107, 205-51.
Campbell, J.Y., Shiller, R. (1988). “The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future dividends
and discount factors.” Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-228.
Campbell, J.Y., Shiller, R. (1998). “Valuation ratios and the long-run stock market outlook.”
Journal of Portfolio Management 24, 11-26.
Case, K., Shiller, R., Thompson, A. (2012). “What have they been thinking? Homebuyer behavior
in hot and cold markets.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2012, 265-315.
Cassella, S., Gulen, H. (2018). “Extrapolation bias and the predictability of stock returns by
price-scaled variables.” Forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.
Chen, H., Singal, V., Whitelaw, R. (2016). “Comovement revisited.” Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 121, 624-644.
Choi, J., Mertens, T. (2013). “Extrapolative expectations and the equity premium.” Working
paper.
Cohen, L., Frazzini, A. (2006). “Economic links and predictable returns.” Journal of Finance 63,
1977-2011.
Cohen, L., Lou, D. (2012). “Complicated ﬁrms.” Journal of Financial Economics 104, 383-400.
Cohen, L., Diether, K., Malloy, C. (2013). “Misvaluing innovation.” Review of Financial Studies
26, 635-666.
Cohen, L., Malloy, C., Nguyen, Q. (2016). “Lazy prices.” Working paper.
Cohn, A., Engelmann, J., Fehr, E., Marechal, M. (2015). “Evidence for countercyclical risk aversion:
an experiment with ﬁnancial professionals.” American Economic Review 105, 860-885.
Coibon, O., Gorodnichenko, Y. (2012). “What can survey forecasts tell us about inﬂation rigidi-
ties?” Journal of Political Economy 120, 116-159.
Collin-Dufresne, P., Johannes, M., Lochstoer, L. (2016). “Asset pricing when ‘this time is diﬀer-
ent’.” Review of Financial Studies 30, 505-535.
Conrad, J., Dittmar, R., Ghysels, E. (2013). “Ex ante skewness and expected stock returns.”
Journal of Finance 68, 85-124.
Conrad, J., Kapadia, N., Xing, Y. (2014). “Death and jackpot: why do individual investors hold
overpriced stocks?” Journal of Financial Economics 113, 455-475.
Cooper, M., Gulen, H., Schill, M. (2008). “Asset growth and the cross-section of stock returns.”
Journal of Finance 63, 1609-1651.
Cosemans, M., Frehen, R. (2017). “Salience theory and stock prices: empirical evidence.” Working
paper.
Cutler, D., Poterba, J., Summers, L. (1990). “Speculative dynamics and the role of feedback


                                                85
traders.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 80, 63-68.
Da, Z., Engelberg, J., Gao, P. (2011). “In search of attention.” Journal of Finance 66, 1461-149.
Da, Z., Engelberg, J., Gao, P., (2014b). “The sum of all FEARS: investor sentiment and asset
prices.” Review of Financial Studies 28, 1-32.
Da, Z., Gurun, U., Warachka, M. (2014a). “Frog in the pan: continuous information and momen-
tum.” Review of Financial Studies 27, 2171-2218.
Da, Z., Huang, X., Jin, L. (2018). “Extrapolative beliefs in the cross-section: what can we learn
from the crowds?” Working paper.
Dahlquist, M., Farago, A., Tedongap, R. (2016). “Asymmetries and portfolio choice.” Review of
Financial Studies 30, 667-702.
Daniel, K., Titman, S. (2006). “Market reactions to tangible and intangible information.” Journal
of Finance 61, 1605-1643.
Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D., Subrahmanyam, A. (1998). “Investor psychology and security market
under- and overreactions.” Journal of Finance 53, 1839-1885.
Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D., Subrahmanyam, A. (2001). “Overconﬁdence, arbitrage, and equilibrium
asset pricing.” Journal of Finance 56, 921-965.
Das, S., Kuhnen, C., Nagel, S. (2017). “Socioeconomic status and macroeconomic expectations.”
Working paper.
De Bondt, W., Thaler, R. (1985). “Does the stock market overreact?” Journal of Finance 40,
793-808.
De Giorgi, E., Legg, S. (2012). “Dynamic portfolio choice and asset pricing with narrow framing
and probability weighting.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 36, 951-972.
De Long, J.B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L., Waldmann, R. (1990a). “Noise trader risk in ﬁnancial
markets.” Journal of Political Economy 98, 703-738.
De Long, J.B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L., Waldmann, R. (1990b). “Positive feedback investment
strategies and destabilizing rational speculation.” Journal of Finance 45, 375-395.
DeFusco, A., Nathanson, C., Zwick, E. (2018). “Speculative dynamics of prices and volume.”
Working paper.
DellaVigna, S., Pollet, J. (2007). “Demographics and industry returns.” American Economic Re-
view 97, 1667-1702.
DellaVigna, S., Pollet, J. (2009). “Investor inattention and Friday earnings announcements.” Jour-
nal of Finance 64, 709-749.
Diether, K., Malloy, C., Scherbina, A. (2003). “Stock prices and diﬀerences of opinion: empirical
evidence that stock prices reﬂect optimism.” Journal of Finance 57, 2113-2141.
Dow, J., Werlang, S. (1992). “Uncertainty aversion, risk aversion, and the optimal choice of
portfolio.” Econometrica 60, 197-204.
Dunning, D., Heath, C., Suls, J. (2004). “Flawed self-assessment: implications for health, educa-
tion, and the workplace.” Psychological Science in the Public Interest 5, 69-106.
Dunning, D., Meyerowitz, J., Holzberg, A. (1989). “Ambiguity and self-evaluation: the role of
idiosyncratic trait deﬁnitions in self-serving assessments of others.” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 57, 1082-1090.
Easley, D., Yang, L. (2015). “Loss aversion, survival, and asset prices.” Journal of Economic Theory


                                                86
160, 494-516.
Edmans, A., Garcia, D., Norli, O. (2007). “Sports sentiment and stock returns.” Journal of Finance
62, 1967-1998.
Edwards, W. (1968). “Conservatism in human information processing.” In: Kleinmutz, B. (Ed.),
Formal Representation of Human Judgment. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Ehling, P., Graniero, A., Heyerdahl-Larsen, C. (2018). “Asset prices and portfolio choice with
learning from experience.” Forthcoming, Review of Economic Studies.
Eisenbach, T., Schmalz, M. (2016). “Anxiety in the face of risk.” Journal of Financial Economics
121, 414-426.
Ellsberg, D. (1961). “Risk, ambiguity, and the Savage axioms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
75, 643-69.
Engelberg, J., Parsons, C. (2011). “The causal impact of media in ﬁnancial markets.” Journal of
Finance 66, 67-97.
Engelberg, J., McLean, R.D., Pontiﬀ, J. (2017). “Anomalies and news.” Journal of Finance, forth-
coming.
Epstein, L., Schneider, M. (2010). “Ambiguity and asset markets.” Annual Review of Financial
Economics 2, 315-346.
Epstein, L., Zin, S. (1990). “First-order risk aversion and the equity premium.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 26, 387-407.
Epstein, L., Zin, S. (2001). “The independence axiom and asset returns.” Journal of Empirical
Finance 8, 537-572.
Eraker, B., Ready, M. (2015). “Do investors overpay for stocks with lottery-like payoﬀs? An
examination of the returns of OTC stocks.” Journal of Financial Economics 115, 486-504.
Eyster, E., Rabin, M. (2010). “Naive herding in rich-information settings.” American Economic
Journal: Microeconomics 2, 221-243.
Eyster, E., Rabin, M., Vayanos, D. (2018). “Financial markets where traders neglect the informa-
tional content of prices.” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Fama, E. (1991). “Eﬃcient capital markets: II.” Journal of Finance 46, 1575-1617.
Fama, E. (1998). “Market eﬃciency, long-term returns, and behavioral ﬁnance.” Journal of Finan-
cial Economics 49, 283-306.
Fama, E. (2014). “Two pillars of asset pricing.” American Economic Review 104, 1467-1485.
Fama, E., French, K. (1988). “Dividend yields and expected stock returns.” Journal of Financial
Economics 22, 3-25.
Fama, E., French, K. (1992). “The cross-section of expected stock returns.” Journal of Finance 47,
427-465.
Fama, E., French, K. (1995). “Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and returns.” Journal
of Finance 50, 131-155.
Fox, C., Tversky, A. (1995). “Ambiguity aversion and comparative ignorance.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 110, 585-603.
Frankel, J., Froot, K. (1990). “Chartists, fundamentalists, and trading in the foreign exchange
market.” American Economic Review 80, 181-185.
Frazzini, A. (2006). “The disposition eﬀect and underreaction to news.” Journal of Finance 61,


                                                87
2017-2046.
Frazzini, A., Pedersen, L. (2014). “Betting against beta.” Journal of Financial Economics 111,
1-25.
Frazzini, A., Israel, R., Moskowitz, T. (2015). “Trading costs of asset pricing anomalies.” Working
paper.
French, K. (2008). “Presidental address: the cost of active investing.” Journal of Finance 63,
1537-1573.
French, K., Poterba, J. (1991). “Investor diversiﬁcation and international equity markets.” Amer-
ican Economic Review 81, 222-226.
Friesen, G., Sapp, T. (2007). “Mutual fund ﬂows and investor returns: an empirical examination
of fund investor timing ability.” Journal of Banking and Finance 31, 2796-2816.
Froot, K., Dabora, E. (1999). “How are stock prices aﬀected by the location of trade?” Journal of
Financial Economics 53, 189-216.
Frydman, C., Camerer, C. (2016). “Neural evidence of regret and its implications for investor
behavior.” Review of Financial Studies 29, 3108-3139.
Frydman, C., Barberis, N., Camerer, C., Bossaerts, P., Rangel, A. (2014). “Using neural data to
test a theory of investor behavior: an application to realization utility.” Journal of Finance 69,
907-946.
Fuster, A., Hebert, B., Laibson, D. (2012). “Natural expectations, macroeconomic dynamics, and
asset pricing.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 26, 1-48.
Fuster, A., Laibson, D., Mendel, B. (2010). “Natural expectations and macroeconomic ﬂuctua-
tions.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 24, 67-84.
Gabaix, X. (2012). “Variable rare disasters: an exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in macro-
ﬁnance.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 645-700.
Gabaix, X. (2018). “Behavioral inattention.” Forthcoming in: Bernheim, D., DellaVigna, S., Laib-
son, D. (Eds.), Handbook of Behavioral Economics, vol. 1. North Holland, Amsterdam.
Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A. (2010). “What comes to mind?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125,
1399-1433.
Gennaioli, N., Ma, Y., Shleifer, A. (2016). “Expectations and investment.” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 30, 379-431.
Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. (2012). “Neglected risks, ﬁnancial innovation, and ﬁnancial
fragility.” Journal of Financial Economics 104, 452-468.
Giglio, S., Kelly, B. (2017). “Excess volatility: beyond discount rates.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 133, 71-127.
Giglio, S., Shue, K. (2014). “No news is news: do markets underreact to nothing?” Review of
Financial Studies 27, 3389-3440.
Giglio, S., Maggiori, M., Stroebel, J. (2016). “No-bubble condition: model-free tests in housing
markets.” Econometrica 84, 1047-1091.
Gilboa, I., Schmeidler, D. (1989). “Maxmin expected utility with a non-unique prior.” Journal of
Mathematical Economics 18, 141-53.
Gilovich, T., Vallone, R., Tversky, A. (1985). “The hot hand in basketball: on the misperception
of random sequences.” Cognitive Psychology 97, 295-314.


                                                88
Glaeser, E., Nathanson, C. (2015). “Housing bubbles.” In: Duranton, G., Henderson, V., Strange,
W. (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics. North Holland, Amsterdam.
Glaeser, E., Nathanson, C. (2017). “An extrapolative model of house price dynamics.” Journal of
Financial Economics 126, 147-170.
Glaser, M., Weber, M. (2007). “Overconﬁdence and trading volume.” The Geneva Risk and Insur-
ance Review 32, 1-36.
Gneezy, U., Potters, J. (1997). “An experiment on risk taking and evaluation periods.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 112, 631-645.
Goetzmann, W., Kumar, A. (2008). “Equity portfolio diversiﬁcation.” Review of Finance 12, 433-
463.
Goetzmann, W., Kim, D., Shiller, R. (2017). “Crash beliefs from investor surveys.” Working paper.
Gonzalez, R., Wu, G. (1999). “On the shape of the probability weighting function.” Cognitive
Psychology 38, 129-166.
Green, T.C., Hwang, B-H. (2009). “Price-based return comovement.” Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 93, 37-50.
Green, T.C., Hwang, B-H. (2012). “Initial public oﬀerings as lotteries: skewness preference and
ﬁrst-day returns.” Management Science 58, 432-444.
Greenwood, R., Hanson, S. (2013). “Issuer quality and corporate bond returns.” Review of Finan-
cial Studies 26, 1483-1515.
Greenwood, R., Hanson, S. (2015). “Waves in ship prices and investment.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 130, 55-109.
Greenwood, R., Shleifer, A. (2014). “Expectations of returns and expected returns.” Review of
Financial Studies 27, 714-746.
Greenwood, R., Shleifer, A., You, Y. (2018). “Bubbles for Fama.” Forthcoming, Journal of Finan-
cial Economics.
Grinblatt, M., Han, B. (2005). “Prospect theory, mental accounting, and momentum.” Journal of
Financial Economics 78, 311-339.
Grinblatt, M., Keloharju, M. (2009). “Sensation seeking, overconﬁdence, and trading activity.”
Journal of Finance 64, 549-578.
Gromb, D., Vayanos, D. (2010). “Limits to arbitrage.” Annual Review of Financial Economics 2,
251-275.
Guiso, L., Sodini, P. (2013). “Household ﬁnance: an emerging ﬁeld.” In: Constantinides, G., Harris,
M., Stulz, R. (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, vol. 2. North Holland, Amsterdam.
Gul, F. (1991). “A theory of disappointment in decision making under uncertainty.” Econometrica
59, 667-86.
Guo, J., He, X. (2017a). “Equilibrium asset pricing with Epstein-Zin and loss-averse investors.”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 76, 86-108.
Guo, J., He, X. (2017b). “A new preference model that allows for narrow framing.” Working paper.
Haghani, V., McBride, S. (2016). “Return chasing and trend following: superﬁcial similarities mask
fundamental diﬀerences.” Working paper.
Han, B., Hirshleifer, D., Walden, J. (2018). “Social transmission bias and investor behavior.”
Working paper.


                                                89
Hansen, L., Sargent, T. (2001). “Robust control and model uncertainty.” American Economic
Review 91, 60-66.
Hardouvelis, G., La Porta, R., Wizman, T. (1994). “What moves the discount on country equity
funds?” In: Frankel, J. (Ed.), The Internationalization of Equity Markets. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, IL.
Harris, L., Gurel, E. (1986). “Price and volume eﬀects associated with changes in the S&P 500
list: new evidence for the existence of price pressures.” Journal of Finance 41, 815-829.
Harrison, J.M., Kreps, D. (1978). “Speculative investor behavior in a stock market with heteroge-
neous expectations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 92, 323-336.
Hartzmark, S., Shue, K. (2017). “A tough act to follow: contrast eﬀects in ﬁnancial markets.”
Forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Hartzmark, S., Solomon, D. (2018). “The dividend disconnect.” Working paper.
Harvey, C., Liu, Y., Zhu, H. (2016). “... and the cross-section of expected returns.” Review of
Financial Studies 29, 5-68.
He, X., Zhou, X.Y. (2011). “Portfolio choice under cumulative prospect theory: an analytical
treatment.” Management Science 57, 315-331.
Heath, C., Tversky, A. (1991). “Preference and belief: ambiguity and competence in choice under
uncertainty.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 4, 5-28.
Hertwig, R., Barron, G., Weber, E., Erev, I. (2004). “Decisions from experience and the eﬀect of
rare events in risky choice.” Psychological Science 15, 534-539.
Hirshleifer, D. (2001). “Investor psychology and asset pricing.” Journal of Finance 56, 1533-1597.
Hirshleifer, D., Shumway, T. (2003). “Good day sunshine: stock returns and the weather.” Journal
of Finance 58, 1009-1032.
Hirshleifer, D., Li, J., Yu, J. (2015). “Asset pricing in production economies with extrapolative
expectations.” Journal of Monetary Economics 76, 87-106.
Hirshleifer, D., Lim, S., Teoh, S.H. (2009). “Driven to distraction: extraneous events and underre-
action to earnings news.” Journal of Finance 64, 2289-2325.
Hong, H., Sraer, D. (2013). “Quiet bubbles.” Journal of Financial Economics 110, 596-606.
Hong, H., Sraer, D. (2016). “Speculative betas.” Journal of Finance 71, 2095-2144.
Hong, H., Stein, J. (1999). “A uniﬁed theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and overreaction
in asset markets.” Journal of Finance 54, 2143-2184.
Hong, H., Stein, J. (2007). “Disagreement and the stock market.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
21, 109-128.
Hong, H., Kubik, J., Stein, J. (2004). “Social interaction and stock market participation.” Journal
of Finance 59, 137-163.
Hong, H., Kubik, J., Stein, J. (2005). “Thy neighbor’s portfolio: word-of-mouth eﬀects in the
holdings and trades of money managers.” Journal of Finance 60, 2801-2824.
Hong, H., Lim, T., Stein, J. (2000). “Bad news travels slowly: size, analyst coverage, and the
proﬁtability of momentum strategies.” Journal of Finance 55, 265-295.
Huang, X. (2015). “Thinking outside the borders: investors’ underreaction to foreign operations
information.” Review of Financial Studies 28, 3109-3152.
Huberman, G. (2001). “Familiarity breeds investment.” Review of Financial Studies 14, 659-680.


                                                90
Ikenberry, D., Lakonishok, J., Vermaelen, T. (1995). “Market underreaction to open market share
repurchases.” Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181-208.
Ilmanen, A. (2011). Expected Returns: An Investor’s Guide to Harvesting Market Rewards. John
Wiley & Sons, New York.
Imas, A. (2016). “The realization eﬀect: risk-taking after realized versus paper losses.” American
Economic Review 106, 2086-2109.
Ingersoll, J., Jin, L. (2013). “Realization utility with reference-dependent preferences.” Review of
Financial Studies 26, 723-767.
Ivkovic, Z., Weisbenner, S. (2005). “Local does as local is: information content of the geography
of individual investors’ common stock investments.” Journal of Finance 60, 267-306.
Jegadeesh, N., Titman, S. (1993). “Returns to buying winners and selling losers: implications for
stock market eﬃciency.” Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.
Jin, L. (2015). “A speculative asset pricing model of ﬁnancial instability.” Working paper.
Jin, L., Sui, P. (2018). “Asset pricing with return extrapolation.” Working paper.
Johnson, E., Tversky, A. (1983). “Aﬀect, generalization, and the perception of risk.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 45, 20-31.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A. (1972). “Subjective probability: a judgment of representativeness.”
Cognitive Psychology 3, 430-454.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A. (1973a). “On the psychology of prediction.” Psychological Review 80,
237-251.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A. (1973b). “Availability: a heuristic for judging frequency and probabil-
ity.” Cognitive Psychology 5, 207-232.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A. (1974). “Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and biases.” Science
185, 1124-1131.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A. (1979). “Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk.” Econo-
metrica 47, 263-291.
Kamstra, M., Kramer, L., Levi, M. (2003). “Winter blues: a SAD stock market cycle.” American
Economic Review 93, 324-343.
Kindleberger, C. (1978). Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises. Basic Books.
Klayman, J., Soll, J., Gonzalez-Vallejo, C., Barlas, S. (1999). “Overconﬁdence: it depends on how,
what, and whom you ask.” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 79, 216-247.
Klibanoﬀ, P., Marinacci, M., Mukherji, S. (2005). “A smooth model of decision making under
ambiguity.” Econometrica 73, 1849-1892.
Koszegi, B., Rabin, M. (2006). “A model of reference-dependent preferences.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 121, 1133-1165.
Koszegi, B., Rabin, M. (2007). “Reference-dependent risk attitudes.” American Economic Review
97, 1047-1073.
Krishnamurthy, A. (2010). “Ampliﬁcation mechanisms in liquidity crises.” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 2, 1-30.
Kuchler, T., Zafar, B. (2017). “Personal experiences and expectations about aggregate outcomes.”
Working paper.
Kumar, A. (2009). “Who gambles in the stock market?” Journal of Finance 64, 1889-1933.


                                                91
La Porta, R., Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. (1997). “Good news for value stocks: further
evidence on market ineﬃciency.” Journal of Finance 52, 859-874.
Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. (1994). “Contrarian investment, extrapolation, and risk.”
Journal of Finance 49, 1541-1578.
Lamont, O., Thaler, R. (2003). “Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock
carve-outs.” Journal of Political Economy 111, 227-268.
Landier, A., Ma, Y., Thesmar, D. (2017). “New experimental evidence on expectations formation.”
Working paper.
Lee, C., Shleifer, A., Thaler, R. (1991). “Investor sentiment and the closed-end fund puzzle.”
Journal of Finance 46, 75-109.
Lehmann, B. (1990). “Fads, martingales, and market eﬃciency.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
105, 1-28.
LeRoy, S., Porter, R. (1981). “The present-value relation: tests based on implied variance bounds.”
Econometrica 49, 97-113.
Levy, H., De Giorgi, E., Hens, T. (2011). “Two paradigms and Nobel Prizes in economics: a
contradiction or coexistence?” European Financial Management 18, 163-182.
Li, Y., Yang, L. (2013). “Prospect theory, the disposition eﬀect, and asset prices.” Journal of
Financial Economics 107, 715-739.
Lian, C., Ma, Y., Wang, C. (2018). “Low interest rates and risk taking: evidence from individual
investment decisions.” Working paper.
Liao, J., Peng, C. (2018). “Price and volume dynamics in bubbles.” Working paper.
Loughran, T., Ritter, J. (1995). “The new issues puzzle.” Journal of Finance 50, 23-50.
Lundeberg, M., Fox, P., Punccohar, J. (1994). “Highly conﬁdent but wrong: gender diﬀerences
and similarities in conﬁdence judgments.” Journal of Educational Psychology 86, 114-121.
Maenhout, P. (2004). “Robust portfolio rules and asset pricing.” Review of Financial Studies 17,
951-983.
Malmendier, U. (2018). “Behavioral corporate ﬁnance.” Forthcoming in: Bernheim, D., DellaVigna,
S., Laibson, D. (Eds.), Handbook of Behavioral Economics, vol. 1. North Holland, Amsterdam.
Malmendier, U., Nagel, S. (2011). “Depression babies: do macroeconomic experiences aﬀect risk-
taking?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 373-416.
Malmendier, U., Pouzo, D., Vanasco, V. (2017). “Investor experiences and ﬁnancial market dy-
namics.” Working paper.
Markowitz, H. (1952). “Portfolio selection.” Journal of Finance 7, 77-91.
Marks, H. (2011). The Most Important Thing: Uncommon Sense for the Thoughtful Investor.
Columbia University Press.
McLean, R. D., Pontiﬀ, J. (2016). “Does academic research destroy return predictability?” Journal
of Finance 71, 5-32.
Mehra, R. (2008). “The equity premium puzzle: a review.” Foundations and Trends in Finance 2,
1-81.
Mehra, R., Prescott, E. (1985). “The equity premium: a puzzle.” Journal of Monetary Economics
15, 145-161.
Meng, J., Weng, X. (2017). “Can prospect theory explain the disposition eﬀect? A new perspective


                                                92
on reference points.” Management Science, forthcoming.
Michenaud, S., Solnik, B. (2008). “Applying regret theory to investment choices: currency hedging
decisions.” Journal of International Money and Finance 27, 677-694.
Milgrom, P., Stokey, N. (1982). “Information, trade, and common knowledge.” Journal of Economic
Theory 26, 17-27.
Miller, E. (1977). “Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion.” Journal of Finance 32, 1151-1168.
Mitchell, M., Pulvino, T., Staﬀord, E. (2002). “Limited arbitrage in equity markets.” Journal of
Finance 57, 551-584.
Mitton, T., Vorkink, K. (2007). “Equilibrium under-diversiﬁcation and the preference for skew-
ness.” Review of Financial Studies 20, 1255-1288.
Mitton, T., Vorkink, K. (2010). “Why do ﬁrms with diversiﬁcation discounts have high expected
returns?” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45, 1367-1390.
Modigliani, F., Cohn, R. (1979). “Inﬂation, rational valuation, and the market.” Financial Analysts
Journal 35, 24-44.
Modigliani, F., Miller, M. (1958). “The cost of capital, corporation ﬁnance, and the theory of
investment.” American Economic Review 48, 261-297.
Moore, D., Healy, P. (2008). “The trouble with overconﬁdence.” Psychological Review 115, 502-517.
Morris, S. (1996). “Speculative investor behavior and learning.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
111, 1111-1133.
Nagel, S., Xu, Z. (2018). “Asset pricing with fading memory.” Working paper.
Novy-Marx, R. (2013). “The other side of value: the gross proﬁtability premium.” Journal of
Financial Economics 108, 1-28.
Novy-Marx, R., Velikov, M. (2015). “A taxonomy of anomalies and their trading costs.” Review
of Financial Studies 29, 104-107.
O’Donoghue, T., Sprenger, C. (2018). “Reference-dependent preferences.” Forthcoming in: Bern-
heim, D., DellaVigna, S., Laibson, D. (Eds.), Handbook of Behavioral Economics, vol. 1. North
Holland, Amsterdam.
Odean, T. (1998a). “Volume, volatility, price, and proﬁt when all traders are above average.”
Journal of Finance 53, 1887-1934.
Odean, T. (1998b). “Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?” Journal of Finance 53, 1775-
1798.
Pagel, M. (2016). “Expectations-based reference-dependent preferences and asset pricing.” Journal
of the European Economic Association 14, 468-514.
Pastor, L., Veronesi, P. (2009). “Learning in ﬁnancial markets.” Annual Review of Financial
Economics 1, 361-381.
Pindyck, R., Rotemberg, J. (1990). “The excess comovement of commodity prices.” Economic
Journal 100, 1173-1189.
Polkovnichenko, V. (2005). “Household portfolio diversiﬁcation: a case for rank-dependent prefer-
ences.” Review of Financial Studies 18, 1467-1502.
Pouget, S., Sauvagnat, J., Villeneuve, S. (2017). “A mind is a terrible thing to change: conﬁrmatory
bias in ﬁnancial markets.” Review of Financial Studies 30, 2066-2109.
Quiggin, J. (1982). “A theory of anticipated utility.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organiza-


                                                93
tion 3, 323-43.
Rabin, M. (2000). “Risk aversion and expected utility theory: a calibration theorem.” Econometrica
68, 1281-1292.
Rabin, M. (2002). “Inference by believers in the law of small numbers.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117, 775-816.
Rabin, M., Schrag, J. (1999). “First impressions matter: a model of conﬁrmatory bias.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114, 37-82.
Rabin, M., Vayanos, D. (2010). “The gambler’s and hot hand fallacies.” Review of Economic
Studies 77, 730-778.
Rosch, E., Lloyd, B. (1978). Cognition and Categorization. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, New
Jersey.
Rosenberg, B., Reid, K., Lanstein, R. (1985). “Persuasive evidence of market ineﬃciency.” Journal
of Portfolio Management 11, 9-17.
Routledge, B., Zin, S. (2010). “Generalized disappointment aversion and asset prices.” Journal of
Finance 65, 4-32.
Scheinkman, J., Xiong, W. (2003). “Overconﬁdence and speculative bubbles.” Journal of Political
Economy 111, 1183-1219.
Seasholes, M., Zhu, N. (2010). “Individual investors and local bias.” Journal of Finance 65, 1987-
2010.
Shefrin, H., Statman, M. (1985). “The disposition to sell winners too early and ride losers too
long.” Journal of Finance 40, 777-790.
Shiller, R. (1981). “Do stock prices move too much to be justiﬁed by subsequent changes in
dividends?” American Economic Review 71, 421-436.
Shiller, R. (1984). “Stock prices and social dynamics.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
1984, 457-510.
Shleifer, A. (1986). “Do demand curves for stocks slope down?” Journal of Finance 41, 579-90.
Shleifer, A. (2000). Ineﬃcient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Shleifer, A., Summers, L. (1990). “The noise trader approach to ﬁnance.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 4, 19-33.
Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. (1997). “The limits of arbitrage.” Journal of Finance 52, 35-55.
Shue, K., Townsend, R. (2018). “Can the market multiply and divide? Non-proportional thinking
in ﬁnancial markets.” Working paper.
Sloan, R. (1996). “Do stock prices reﬂect information in accruals and cash ﬂows about future
earnings?” Accounting Review 71, 289-315.
Smith, V., Suchanek, G., Williams, A. (1988). “Bubbles, crashes, and endogeneous expectations
in experimental spot asset markets.” Econometrica 56, 1119-1151.
Soll, J., Klayman, J. (2004). “Overconﬁdence in interval estimates.” Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 30, 299-314.
Stambaugh, R., Yu, J., Yuan, Y. (2012). “The short of it: investor sentiment and anomalies.”
Journal of Financial Economics 104, 288-302.
Stambaugh, R., Yu, J., Yuan, Y. (2015). “Arbitrage asymmetry and the idiosyncratic volatility


                                               94
puzzle.” Journal of Finance 70, 1903-1948.
Tetlock, P. (2007). “Giving content to investor sentiment: the role of media in the stock market.”
Journal of Finance 62, 1139-1168.
Tetlock, P. (2015). “The role of media in ﬁnance.” In: Anderson, S.P., Stromberg, D., Waldfogel,
J. (Eds.), Handbook of Media Economics, vol 1b. North Holland, Amsterdam.
Thaler, R. (1999). “Mental accounting matters.” In: Kahneman, D., Tversky, A. (Eds.), Choice,
Values and Frames. Russell Sage Foundation, Cambridge.
Thaler, R., Johnson, E. (1990). “Gambling with the house money and trying to break even: the
eﬀects of prior outcomes on risky choice.” Management Science 36, 643-660.
Thaler, R., Tversky, A., Kahneman, D., Schwartz, A. (1997). “The eﬀect of myopia and loss
aversion on risk-taking: an experimental test.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 647-661.
Timmermann, A. (1993). “How learning in ﬁnancial markets generates excess volatility and pre-
dictability in stock prices.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 1135-1145.
Tirole, J. (1985). Asset bubbles and overlapping generations. Econometrica 53, 1071-1100.
Titman, S., Wei, K.C., Xie, F. (2004). “Capital investments and stock returns.” Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 39, 677-700.
Tversky, A., Kahneman, D. (1971). “Belief in the law of small numbers.” Psychological Bulletin
76, 105-10.
Tversky, A., Kahneman, D. (1981). “The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice.”
Science 211, 453-458.
Tversky, A., Kahneman, D. (1992). “Advances in prospect theory: cumulative representation of
uncertainty.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5, 297-323.
Uppal, R., Wang, T. (2003). “Model misspeciﬁcation and underdiversiﬁcation.” Journal of Finance
58, 2465-2486.
Wachter, J. (2013). “Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock market volatil-
ity?” Journal of Finance 68, 987-1035.
Wang, B. (2016). “Probability weighting and asset prices: evidence from mergers and acquisitions.”
Working paper.
Wang, H., Yan, J., Yu, J. (2017). “Reference-dependent preferences and the risk-return tradeoﬀ.”
Journal of Financial Economics 123, 395-414.
Xiong, W. (2013). “Bubbles, crises, and heterogeneous beliefs.” In: Fouque, J-P., Langsam, J.
(Eds.), Handbook for Systemic Risk. Cambridge University Press.
Xiong, W., Yu, J. (2011). “The Chinese warrants bubble.” American Economic Review 101, 2723-
2753.
Yaari, M. (1987). “The dual theory of choice under risk.” Econometrica 55, 95-115.
Yan, H. (2008). “Natural selection in ﬁnancial markets: does it work?” Management Science 54,
1935-1950.
Zajonc, R. (1968). “Attitudinal eﬀects of mere exposure.” Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology 9, 1-27.




                                                95
Table 1. Firm-level characteristics with predictive power for stock returns in the
cross-section. The “+” and “-” signs indicate whether the characteristic has positive or
negative predictive power.



                            Characteristic
                            Past three-year return      -
                            Past six-month return       +
                            Past one-month return       -
                            Earning surprise            +
                            Market capitalization       -
                            Price-to-fundamentals ratio -
                            Issuance                    -
                            Systematic volatility       -
                            Idiosyncratic volatility    -
                            Proﬁtability                +




Table 2. Parameter values for a model of extrapolative beliefs.



                                   Parameter   Value
                                      D0        100
                                       σε        3
                                       Q         1
                                       T         20
                                      μf        0.3
                                      μe        0.7
                                       γ        0.1
                                       θ        0.7




                                          96
        100

        98

        96

        94

        92
price




        90

        88

        86

        84

        82

        80
              2        4           6           8          10         12
                                       time




Figure 1. Asset price dynamics under extrapolative beliefs. The solid line
plots the price of a risky asset following good news at time 2 about its future cash
ﬂow. Some investors in the economy, “extrapolators,” form beliefs about the asset’s
future price change as a weighted average of its past price changes, while other
investors, “fundamental traders,” base their demand on the diﬀerence between price
and the present value of the asset’s future cash ﬂow. The dashed line plots the price
of the risky asset in an economy where all investors are fundamental traders.




                                              97
       4


       3


       2


       1
v(x)




       0


       -1


       -2


       -3


       -4
         -2   -1.5   -1   -0.5    0      0.5     1      1.5     2
                                  x




Figure 2. The prospect theory value function. The ﬁgure plots the value
function proposed by Tversky and Kahneman (1992) as part of their cumulative
prospect theory, namely, v(x) = xα for x ≥ 0 and v(x) = −λ(−x)α for x < 0, for
α = 0.5 and λ = 2.5.




                                         98
        1

       0.9

       0.8

       0.7

       0.6
w(P)




       0.5

       0.4

       0.3

       0.2

       0.1

        0
             0     0.2          0.4           0.6          0.8            1
                                        P




Figure 3. The prospect theory probability weighting function. The ﬁgure
plots the probability weighting function proposed by Tversky and Kahneman (1992)
as part of their cumulative prospect theory, namely, w(P ) = P δ /(P δ + (1 − P )δ )1/δ ,
for three diﬀerent values of δ. The dashed line corresponds to δ = 0.4, the solid line
to δ = 0.65, and the dotted line to δ = 1.




                                               99
