NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
IN MACROECONOMICS

Stanley Fischer

Working Paper No. 2473

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1987

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Support from the Lynde and
Harry Bradley Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged.

NBER Working Paper #2473
December 1987

Recent Developments in Macroeconomics

ABSTRACT

liii s

core

paper surveys much of modern macroeconomics. The focus

ncr oec onorni c I

is on the

uc, of the reasons for macr occonomi c {l uc tuat ions and

sometimes persistent unemployment. To provide continuity and porspectiv on
how pr omi

si rig

resercti leads

of the past turned out, the paper starts by

summarizing developments since the Barro-Fischer (i976) survey

enunc. Sections III arid IV develop in some

detail

of

monctary

the current

representations of the two basic approaches to macroeconomics: the equilibrium
business cycle approach arid new Keynesianism respectively. Brief sketches of
developments in several areas of research in Section V broaden the coverage.
Section VI contains concluding comments.

Stanley Fischer
S- 9035

The World Bank
1818 H Street
Washington, DC 20433

Revised, December 1987.

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN MACROECONOMICS.

Stanley

Underlying

the existence of

Fischer.1

macroeconomics a; a separate field of

study are the phenomena of economy-wide fluctuation; of output arid prices, and
sometimes persistent high level; of unemployment. Two

basic view; of

macroeconomic behavior have persisted even a; conceptual innovation; and the

application

of more powerful analytic and empirical

significant change;
One

technique; have brought

in macroeconomic;.

view and school of thought, associated with Keynes5 Keynesian; and

new Keynesian;, is that the private economy is subject to coordination

failures

that

fluctuation;

can produce excessive levels

of

unemployment and excessive

in real activity. The other view, attributed to classical

economists, and espoused by monetarists and equilibrium business cycle
theorists, is that the private economy reaches as good an equilibrium a; is
possible

given government policy.
Any two—fold division of a complex, large and developing field of

study is inevitably a caricature, which cannot do justice to the subtleties of
the views of different individuals at a moment of time, the intricacies of the

1Departmerit of Economic;, MIT, and Research Associate, NBER. This survey
will appear in the Economic Journal.
I am grateful to Olivier Blarichard,
Rudiger Dornbusch, Andrew Oswald, Danny Quab, Julio Rotemberg, and the
referees for helpful comments and/or discussions, and the National Science
Foundation for research support.
I am especially indebted to Olivier
Blanchard, for I draw freely in this survey on material contained in our
forthcoming book (1988).

2

development

of the field over time, and the remarkable range of research

topics that fall
the

the headi rq of macroeconomic;. For instance, al though

under

prot.agonists in the sixties were Keynesians and monetarists.,

e)gtities

are new Keynesians and equilibrium business

in the

cycle theorists, there

is

a clear sense in which the views of Milton Friedman or Karl Brunner and Allan

Meltz er are closer to

those

of Keyriesi arts

than those of equilibrium busi ness

cycle theorists.2 Nonetheless, the caricature captures the essence of
macroeconomic controversies and provide; a useful organizing framework within
which to attempt a survey of a field that is too large for such an enterprise.
It appears that

macroeconomics as such ha; not been surveyed. The

classic 1962 Harry Johnson survey is of monetary economics.; Barro and Fischer
(1976) also survey monetary economics, though their definition of the

is

subject

sufficiently broad to encompass disequilibrium theory, which is more

macroeconomics than monetary economics. Rotemberg (1987) and Blanchard (1988)
each provide excellent survey; of part of the material discussed in this
paper.

The focus in this survey is on the

core issue, of the reason; for

macroeconomic fluctuations and sometimes persistent unemployment. To provide

continuity, arid perspective on how promising research lead; of the past turned

out, I start by summarizing in Sections 1

and 11 development; since the Barro—

Fischer survey. The core of the survey Is contained in Section; III and IV
2Niltori Friedman's theoretical framework (1970) is close to the standard
lS—L.M model; Brunner and Meltzer's (1976) basic analytic model is not
dissimilar to Tobin'; (1969) three asset model. Friedman's view of the
macroeconomy as adjusting slowly and unpredictably to monetary policy is
very far from the modern real business cycle view that monetary policy
plays at most a minor role in macroeconomic fluctuations and that markets
are continually in equilibrium.
3Fischer (1987) also contains survey—like material.

3

which describe the current representations of the two basic approaches to
macroecoriomi cs the

respectively.

equil i br i uni busi ness cycle appr och and new

brief sketches of developments in several areas of research in

Section V broaden the perspective on the field.
concluding
I.

yresi Uii m

Section VI contidris

comments.

tI_4LLI!±'
Barro—Fischer (1976, written in 1975) describe their survey as

complementary with Harry Johnsons 1962 paper. This survey in turn can be
regarded as complementary with Barro—Fi scher ,

which classified resear cli nto

seven topics.

LtiTheoro 4

Mo ny_Demand.

Theoretical

work on the demand for money was a declining industry in

1975, and there has been only a brief subsequent revival. Akerlof and
tilibourne (1980) develop a target—threshhold model of the demand for money,

related to s—S models (Muller—Orr, 1966), in which money balance; adjust
passively to inflows and outflows of cash until they hit a lower bound, at
which point the balance is
show that

very

restored

to a higher level. Akerlof and Milbourre

the short—run income elasticity of money demand in this model is

small, so long as the target and threshhold stay fixed, and argue that

their model accounts for the very small short run income elasticities of
demand found in empirical studies.
The collapse of the empirical demand for money function in the U.S.
(6oldleld, 1976; Rasche, 1987) led to a largely empirical reexamination of the

basics of money demand. Most attention has been commanded by the work of

4

Barnett and others (e.g. Barnett, Offenbacher and Spirtdt, 1954) creating

Divisia aggregated money stock measure;. The change in the Divisia quantity
ii;dex s equal to a weighted sum of the changes of the component;, with the
weights corresponding to the share of spending on that component of the
aggregate.

In the case of monetary asset;, the spending on a particular

component is priced at user cost, equal to the difference between the maximum
expected holding period yield available in the economy and the expected yield
on the particular asset——It thus corresponds closely to the notion of non—

pecuniary returns. The Divisia aggregates are contrasted with the simple sum

aggregates such as M, which weight components of each measure equally. The
empirical success of the new measures has been mixed. Monetary targetting in
terms of Divisia aggregates is complicated by the fact that the aggregates
themselves depend on interest rates, so that achieving a targetted Divisia
aggregate implies achieving a specific level of a non—linear function of

different asset stock; and interest rates. Poterba and Rotemberg (1987)
develop and estimate a more explicit related approach in which money and other
assets enter the utility function, with differing liquidity characteristics
and risk premia accounting for interest differentials.

Technical and regulatory changes and induced changes in definitions of
the money stock are responsible for many of the shifts in the demand for money
function (Porter, tlauskopf and Simpson, 1979). Nonetheless, these shifts have
significantly reduced belief in the efficacy of a constant growth rate
monetary rule and in monetarism.

Even though interest rate control; have been lifted, there is more
deregulation of the United States financial system to come, far instance in

interstate and international banking. Whether stability will return to the

dmard for ncney f uricti on,
sonic Divisia

aggregate,

for

any

of the

convent

i cinal monetary acigregates

or

as deregulation of the banking and financial systems

slow;, recriairis to be seer. Continued deregulation and technical progress in

the payments mechanism——heading in the direction of, but not reaching, the
cashless society——are likely to make for future unpredictable arid significant

changes in velocity.

In the 1976 survey this

topic

was devoted largely to the question of

the effect of an increase in money growth on capital intensity. Whereas Tobin
(1965) showed in a nor—mai ni i ng tnodel

that a

hi gher

growth rate of money

produced both more inflation and higher capital intensity——and thus a lower
real

interest rate, money in Sidrauski's optimizing model (1967) is

superneutral in the sense that higher rates of inflation do not affect steady
state capital intensity and thus the real interest rate.

The effect of higher inflation in reducing the real interest rate is

known as the Mundell-Tobin effect. In fact, the mechanisms that produce this
effect in Mundell (1964) and Tobin (1965) are not identical.

In Mundell, a

higher inflation rate reduces real balances and thereby, through a wealth
effect, consumption; the interest rate fall; to ensure goods market
equilibrium.

In Tobin new money is introduced into the economy through

transfer payments, the net real value of which is (g—n)m, where g is the
growth rate of nominal balances, i

the inflation rate, and m is real balances.

In the steady state (g—ii) is equal to the economys growth rate (assuming
unitary income elasticity of money demand) which is independent of the

6

in

latiori rate, whereas m fall; with the ir4lation rte. The real value of

monetary transfer; thus falls with the inflation rate, reducing consumption
demand

that

arid the real

interest rate.

both these effects

Back—of —the—envelope cal cul ati ens suggest

are empirically very small.

Subsequent analysis showed that dynamic adjustment toward; the steady
state capital stock is typically faster in the Sidrauski model the higher the
growth rate of money, thus reinstating the Mundell—Tobin result in the
Sidrauski model, at least for the adjustment path (Fischer, 1979).

of results on the relationship between capital intensity and

A variety

inflation have

been obtained in other model; of money, including for instance Stockman's
(1981) model with

a Clower constraint in which investment good; have to be

paid for with cash in advance. The cost of investing rise; with the inflation
rate, and inflation therefore reduce; capital intensity. However this result
is not robust to the precise details of the assumed Clower constraint (Abel,

1985). In overlapping generation; model; inflation generally reduces capital
intensity (e.g. Weiss, 1980).

The most important development in this area is the incorporation of
detail; of the tax system into the analysis of the effects of inflation on
interest rates and capital accumulation (e.g. Feldstein and Summer;, 1978).
Mainly because inflation erode; the value of depreciation allowance;, these
generally indicate that It reduce; capital intensity and capital accumulation.
Tax effect; also disturb the Fisher effect on nominal interest rate;, implying
that

the nominal rate should rise more than one—for—one with inflation i the

after-tax real rate is to remain constant (FEldstein, i976).

7

The empirical evidence supports the view that inflation adversely

affects capital accumulation; in a cross—section of countries, the predominant
relationship between inflation and the share of investment in GN' is regati ye

(Fischer,

1983).

Empirical evidence on the Fisher effect has had an unusually checkered

history. After Fama's striking 197 demonstration that, on the assumptions of
a constant real interest rate and rational expectations, the Fisher effect

held one—for-one in the U.S. for the period 191—1973, it soon became clear

that the result was period specific (Begg, 1977). Further, the tax ef4ects
should have produced a greater than one—for—one effect of inflation on nominal

interest rates. Subsequently Summers (1952) showed that cx post decadal
average real interest rates have a strong negative correlation with inflation,
and argued that this implied that ex ante rates are also negatively related to
anticipated inflation.4
Changes in the real interest rate in the United States in the first
half of the 1980's were in the direction implied by Summers' regressions.
Indeed, it was common to account for the high real rates as a regular feature
of disinflations——which while true is hardly an explanation.

The high real

rates of the early 19B0's made the assumption of a constant ex ante real rate

implausible if the rational expectations hypothesis is maintained.

4However McCallum (1984) has pointed out problems with the Summers
argument. See also the subsequent debate between Summers and licCallum in

the July 1986 Joal of Monetary Economics.
It is always possible and possibly plausible to account for high long
rates as consistent with unchanged real rates at the start of a
disinflation, but high short rates cannot be consistent with an unchanged
ex ante real rate,

8

ar

e Cost s o f Inflatin

ptimumQuantity of Pt ony and In{lp

N nance.
By 1975 the Phelps (1973) analysis of the inflation tax in the context
of

optimal tax analysis was becoming well known. Subsequent work was directed

to answeri rig the questi on of whether there were condi tion; under which the

tax would not be used, so that the optimum quantity of money

inflation

result——that the nominal interest rate should be driven to zero——would still

hold.
model

Drazen (1979) showed, using a representative family infinite horizon

that there was no general

result depending

presumption that money should

be taxed, the

on cross—elasticities of demand between real balances and

other goods. Faig (1985) proved in the case where money is

intermediate good, that it would

be

modelled as an

optimal not to tax it. The question of

how optimally to finance government spending among bonds, money issue arid

taxes received was analyzed by Helpman and Sadka (1979).

The topic of the welfare cost; of inflation

received

empirical

attention. The conclusion of attempts to enumerate and quantify the costs of

inflation
even

in

(Fischer and Modigliani, 1978 Fischer, 19B1) was that the costs of

moderate inflation could in practice amount to one

or two percent of 6NP

developed economies, but that these cost; were largely the result of

institutional

non—adaptation to inflation.

As inflations in several countries rose to three digit annual rates in
the 19BOs, monetary financing of budget deficits became
analysis

central to the

of the inflationary process. Seigniorage revenue can amount to

several percent of

6NP for governments

operating at high rates of

inflation,

and could thus be an important factor in the perpetuation o4 high inflation in
countries with rudimentary tax systems.

9

As a result of the Laffer curve, there may be two inflation

rates at

which a given amount of seigniorage revenue can be collected. The stability
propErties

typically

of the two equilibria differ, the high inflation equilibrium
being stable under rational expectations.

(Bruno arid Fischer, 1987;

Sargent and Wallace, 1987). Governments could then find themselves operating
at an unnecessarily high inflation rate.
Despite the fact that ;ei gni or age per se can produce si gni i cant

amounts of revenue for the government, the inflation tax analysis that focuses

on seigniorage may be seriously misleading. The eynes-Dlivera—Tanzi (1980)
effect whereby tax revenues decline at high inflation rates6 reduces the
revenue effect; of iriflati on on government revenues. Remarkably,

Israeli

net

in the

case there is evidence that on net inflation reduced government

revenues during parts of the inflationary period, because the government was a
net creditor on nominal terms and debtor on real terms (Sokoler, 1987).

These

considerations strongly suggest that something other than rational revenue
considerations is driving the money—creation process in high inflation
economies; one possibility is that the government ha; put in place a set of
operating rules that leaves money creation a; the residual source of
gover nmerit finance,7

Disequilibrium Theory.

In 1975 disequilibrium theory was a live area of research that had

already produced insights, particularly into the notion of effective demand,
'The effect is more likely a function of the change than the level of the
inflation rate, for once the inflation level stabilizes tax rates are
usually adjusted.
7Mmnkiw (1987) examines the determination of the inflation rate in the
United States from an optimal tax viewpoint.

10

into

the fact that

behavior in any one market depends on whether other markets

clear, arid into the effect; of charges in the real wage on the macro

equilibiurm. The distinction between classical unemployment, resulting from
too high real wages, arid Keynesian unemployment, resulting from a lack of

aggregate demand, which can be clearly understood from standard disequilibrium
models, also proved useful, for example in empirical analyses of the European
unemployment problem (Bruno and Sach;, 1985).
Beyond those insights, and despite

the elegant statement of the

approach in Malinvaud (1976) and other contributions reviewed in Drazen
(1980), interest in disequilibrium theory ha; waned. The difficulty, already
evident in 1975, wa that the careful maximi:ing analysis that underlay the

derivation of demand and supply functions at given prices was not extended to
price dynamics itself.

If there is a successor to disequilibrium theory, it

is the new Keynesian analysis to be reviewed in Section IV, where price and
quantity determination are treated symmetrically.
Sen e r a lEgiHbriu m A p p roach toMDnetarTheory.

The "general

equilibrium" discussed under this heading in the 1976

survey was the equilibrium of the assets markets, with attention focussed on
the Brainard—Tobin supply and demand framework for asset pricing and the
analysis of monetary policy.

That approach has been integrated with the

capital asset pricing model, in an attempt to identify the effects of changes

in asset supplies on risk premia (e.g. B. Friedman, 19B5; Frankel, 1985).
The modern approach to asset pricing deploys various forms of the
capital asset pricing model, mainly derived through representative consumer
models (e.g. Lucas, 1978; Breeden, 1979; Cox, Ingersoll and Ross, 1985).

11

Asset supplies are exogenous
closed

form solutions

in the Lucas inode1 it is difficult to obtain

for asset

prices

in models in which supplies are

endogerous. The Lucas model ha; been used for ;tudyi ng relative asset returns
(Campbell, 1986) and the size of the equity premium (Mehra and Prescott,

1985); Mehra and Prescott's result; raise the question of whether the
historical size of the equity premium can be rationalized in such models.
The term structure has continued as an active area of research,, with

the development of rational expectations econometrics making formal testing of
the joint hypothesis of the expectations theory of term structure and rational

expectations possible. The recent literature is surveyed by Shiller (1987)
who

states that there has been much progress in urderstandi ng the term

structure in the last twenty years, but that empirical work has

produced very

little consensus.

The New Microfoundations of Money.

Covered under this heading was fundamental work attempting to explain
the need for and use of money (e.g. Brunner and Ileltzer, 1971; <urz, 1974;

Starr1 1974). Lucas (1980) and Townsend (1980) have pursued models in which

the

lack of a double coincidence of

making
has

wants necessitates the

exchanges, but by and large work

use of an asset for

on the reasons for the use of money

not gone much further than it had in 1975. Rather the modern trend ha;

been to impose

the use of money on the model, rather than to allow it to

emerge from within the model.
There are tw approaches: the Clower or cash—in—advance constraint;
and money in the utility function. The Clower constraint imposes the
requirement that money has to be used in making some or all transactions. The

12

usual cash—in-advance

constraint

n discrete time

model; is

that current

income is not available for making current purchases, so that money for this

period; purchases has to be held from the end of the previous period. By
imposing unitary velocity on money holding this rules out the important
systematic effects of inflation and interest rate; on money holding.

Lucas and Stokey (1987) restore interest elasticity to money holding
in a cast—in—advance constraint model by introducing a distinction between
credit and cash goods, the former of which can be purchased with an interest
free one period loan,

the latter requiring the use of cash.

Shifts

in demand

between cash and credit goods as their relative prices change then make it
possible for in4lation to produce

distinction

systematic effects on velocity. However the

between cash and credit goods is unlikely to be independent of the

inflation rate and interest rates. Svensson (1985) relaxes the unitary
velocity assumption by assuming that individuals face uncertainty about their
spending and have to decide on money holdings before the uncertainty is
resolved.

The Clower constraint has also been imposed in general equilibrium
continuous time models (Jovanovic, 1982; Romer 1986) where lump sum

transaction; cots generate a demand for money, as in the original partial

equilibrium Baumol—Tobin models. There is a Clower constraint in the
innovative continuous time model of Diamond (1984), in which both multiple and
inefficient equilibria arise from the increase in the efficiency with which
sellers search for buyers when

there are more buyers. The constraint ha; been

used constructively to explain asset pricing anomalies (Svensson, 1985;
Townsend, 1987) and price level determinacy with pegged nominal interest rates
(Woodford, 1985).

13

The money in the utility or

production

function approach has the

benefit of greater generality in producing a demand for money.

Indeoci as the

theory of revealed preference shows, specifying that a good enters the utility
or production function is merely the assumption that there is a demand for

that good. Restrictions on the demand function emerge from the functional
forn of the utility function and from

the precise way in

which money balances

are put into the utility function (Feenstra, 1986).

The longest section of the 1976 survey discusses the rational
expectations hypothesis and its applications in monetary models.

i

sample

Phillips curve along Lucas (i973) lines, but more explicitly enphasiing
intertemporal substitution on both the supply and demand sides, is presented
and used both to illustrate the information assumptions needed to generate a
Phillips curve in an equilibrium model and the monetary policy ineffectiveness
theorem.

The 1976 survey draws a clear distinction between the rational

expectations hypothesis as a theory of expectations, and the type of

equilibrium model in which the hypothesis was typically embodied at the tse.
Rational expectations has indeed become the dominant expectations hypothesis
in nacroecoromics, despite the evidence by I(ahnemari and Tversky (1g83) of

systematic errors in expectations, and repeated failures of Joint tests of

rational expectations and subsidiary hypotheses. The rational expectations
hypothesis is the dominant paradigm because it is the natural benchmark model
of

expectations and because the

technology now exists to do rational

expectations econometri cm.

eor, what is almost the same thing, because there is as yet no clear way
of choosing among alternative assumptions.

14

osever , the need to couple

the

WE

form of the

rational

expect at ions

assuffption—-that individual; make the optimal use of the information available
to th i---with

an explicit learning model is well reccgri:ed, Dc Canic (1979)

showed convergence to rational expectations for a plausible learning process;

the topic has been the subject of considerable recent research, e.g. fray and
Savin (1986), Harcet and Sargent (1986), and will no doubt generate further
result; on condition; for convergence to a rational expectations equilibrium,
and the nature of the alternative equilibria.

The further difficulty of dealing with the rational expectations
assumption in a many-agent model in which each agent's expectations depend on
his beliefs about the expectations of others ha; been wrestled with by Frydman

and Phelps (1983). The problem of infinite regress can be cut through by
assuming each agent's expectations of actual outcomes is correct. However in
situation; such as the inception of an inflation stabilization program, the
process of learning about the new situation where there are other agents whose
actions depend on their beliefs is neither conceptually nor in practice

straihtf or ward.
The subsequent

history of the Phillips curve component of the Lucas

model is discussed in the next section.

I I. MnyandEgi ii b r I
The

sC y c 1 e T e or y.

Lucas (1973) Phillips

model for almost a decade.

Lucas (1972) is a more

dominant equilibrium

curve model was the

The distinguishing features

fully

specified

general

the model are that

equilibrium model

generates a non—exploitable Phillips curve tradeoff.
thi; model contains multiple equilibria.

of

that

It is possible that

LI

it builds

the Phillips curve on imperfect information, and

that

the exposition

though not necessarily the structure of the modal emphasizes a monetary cause
of

economic fluctuations.
A

third feature distinguishes the

model as a prototype equilibrium

models prices move instantly to clear markets which are fully competitive.

By

contrast, Phillips (1958) rationalized his curve as an expression of the
If the expectations of

response of wages to labor market disequilibrium.

individuals in the Lucas model were correct, the equilibrium would be a Pareto
optimum.

More even than the assumption of equilibrium, it is the assumption

of competition that distinguishes the equilibrium business cycle approach from
other analyses of economic fluctuations.1°

Lucas derived several important results in his 1973 paper. The first
is the Phillips curve—but result; there Is a tradeoff between output and

inflation, but the tradeoff is only with unanticipated inflation. This
implies the policy ineffectiveness results later developed by Sargent and

Wallace (1975), that monetary policy has no real effects in models of this

type. This was the main empirical implication of the model tested by later
researchers.

The third result is that the slope of the Phillips curve in the Lucas
model

consists of a combination of a structural parameter, the elasticity of

supply in each market, and a
an

variance ratio that is

apparently structural parameter, the slope of

change if policy changed in a

soEquilibrium

affected by policy.

Thus

the Phillips curve, would

particular way.' Such possibilities are at the

theorists frequently rely on the result that a Pareto
optimum can be supported by a competitive equilibrium to analyse quantity
movements in representative agent models without having to examine price
behavior.
111n the 1973 article Lucas attempted to test this implication using
internati anal cross—sectional data.

16

heart of Luca;s famous econometric policj evaluation

critique (1976),

which

asserts that b,cau;e apparently structural parameter; may charge when policy
changes, ei;tirig econometric model; cannot be used to ;tudy alternative
policy regimes.
The

policy

evaluation critique has had a devastating impact on both

econometric policy evaluation and the seriousness with which large scale
nacroeconometric models are treated by researchers, at least in the United
States.

Into the mid—seventies, serious academic researchers were putting

major effort; into large—scale models state—of—the—art empirical versiori; of
major behavioral functions were as likely to be found in the MRS (MIT—Penn—
SSRC) model as anywhere.

Such model; are now routinely dismissed as 'subject to the Lucas

critique—-though remarkably, that critique has not been shown to be of any
empirical significance in accounting for the failures of the econometric

models in the seventies. Lucas himself (e.g. 1976) has repeatedly referred to
the massive empirical failure of these model; in including a long—run

inflation—unemployment tradeoff that was falsified in the seventie;.t But
that was a failure of

theory,

which was repaired in the late sixties,

following work by Friedman and Phelps, by adding the expected inflation rate

to the Phillips curve. The 1973 supply shock also led to an underprediction
of inflation in the major models, but that has nothing to do with the Lucas
critique——unless the Lucas critique is reduced to the statement that models
are inevitably misspecified.

'2See also Lucas and Sargent (1978) who refer to "empirical failure on a
grand scale" and the evaluation of that claim by Blanchard (1988).

47

From a

interest

ior

theoretical viewpoint, the Lucas (1972 and 1973)

its demonstration

of the information-conveying role of prices.

Lucas included two disturbances arid ore source
price

in the local market. Some

of

of informati on about them"the

the subsequent theoretical developments

elaborated on the information structure, for example by

adding a capital

market. The basic result in models in which money would be

information

is that it

will

... 11 rOijI II—tL1.
tL - .J
I

disturbances

I.

P

of

model is

neutral with full

be neutral (non—superneutrality, such
Z 1.L
AT
LII?!

1

—

..1. JUI P'
4., A
AlIT Oi mLA
UT I A—
LLII—
I. ..L

as the

£,

Ulii..l I 7

in the economy; so long as monetary disturbances (which may come

from the demand as well as the supply of money) cannot be fully identified,
unanticipated changes in money will have real

effects.

Despite the elegance and intellectual power of the

original model,

subsequent intensive theoretical development, and some empirical successes,
the imperfect information about current monetary variables approach to the
monetary business cycle has met with severe difficulties. The basic problem

is that It is difficult to believe that a lack of information about current
nominal variables, particularly the price level, can be the source of monetary
non—neutrality, when the lags in producing money stock and price level data
are

be

of the order of weeks. Further, if those lags were important, they could
reduced to seconds. It would be entirely possible to produce an on—line

estimate of the current price level at

low

cost by providing terminal; to

businesses, which would enter price changes as they took place. The failure

of the DPI futures market set up in the United States in 19B also sugqests

that short term aggregate price level uncertainty is
in

the U.S. economy.

not a significant problem

Geyond this problem, enpiri cal

support for the model was riot robust.

Despite early work by Barro (1978) indicating that

only unanticipated changes

in the money stock affected output, later research by Gordon (1982) arid

Mishkin (19831 suggested that both anticipated and unanticipated money

mattered. Results by Boschen and Grossman (1982) showi rig that output appeared
to be affected by the currently perceived money stock, and related conclusions
reached by Barro and Hercowitz (1980), coming as they did from proponents

of

the equilibrium approach, had a significant impact on supporters of the
approach.

The Lucas model was set up to model the Phillips curve, or the

apparent association between inflation and output. The non—neutrality of
money is a problem for monetary theory precisely because money is neutral in
most clearly specified models in which markets clear quickly.

If sticky

prices are ruled out on methodological grounds, and the implausibility of the
information assumptions rule out the information—confusion assumption of the
1973 Lucas model, then it becomes difficult (this is an empirical statement)
to provide a convincing theoretical acccount of a causal Phillips curve
relationship.

The most influential demonstration of the real effects of money on

output is no doubt Friedman and Schwart:'s (1963) account of the Great
Depression; their more systematic attempt to address this issue (1963a) by
working with cyclical average data and timing relationships was less
persuasive because of the evident variability of the timing relationships and
the question of causation.

19

Confidence in a causal role of money was increased by Sims' (1972)
result in a two variable (nominal GNP and the money

;toc)

system that money

Granger-tauses output, and by the previously noted results on the e{fct of
unanticipated money on output. However, the disappearance of Oranger
causati or

for money in a vector autoregressi on

rate was added (Sims,

to which the nomi nal

1980) raised doubts about the role of

interest

money, even though

no clear explanation for the latter finding emergecI.1 Combined with the

theoretical difficulties, this 1980 result led to

exploration of the

implication; of endogeneity of the money stock.
Honey may be endogenous either

because central barks pursue

accommodating policies, or because most of the money stock is inside money,
the real volume of which adjusts to the level of economic activity. Tobin
(1970) showed
rules

in

a model of endogenous money that particular money supply

may generate the appearance that money Branger—causes (a concept that

was not yet used in economics) output even in a context where it has no

effects on real output (Tobin presented this result as an example of the post

hoc, ergo propter hoc fallacy).
One approach to modelling

the

role of inside money is to include

transactions services as a factor of production, and to assume that banks are

involved in the production of such services, using labor, capital, and perhaps
outside money

as factors of production (King and Plosser, 1984).' In the

absence of outside money, it is difficult

to

see why the price level or

138oth Rotemberg (1987) and Blanchard (1988) examine and extend the

evidence, concluding that it supports the view that monetary shocks affect
output.
4However there is no inherent reason that outside money is needed in such
a system.

20

inflation

rate a; opposed to real activity is procyclical in ;uch models.

Once outside money is introduced, the behavior of the

price

level follows from

the interactions of the real demand for outside money and the nominal supply:

this approach ii ke that of Tcibin (1970) rd ics on central bank behavior to
determine the correlation between the price level, the money ;tock, and
out put

With regard to money, the equilibrium approach appears to be squeezed
between the theoretical difficulty of finding a route through which monetary
policy can affect output and the fact that changes in aggregate demand do

appear in practice to affect output. The real business cycle approach
sidestcps

the money issue and attempts to account for the major

characteristics of

the cycle in a purely non—monetary framework.

Bus inssCy.çj.

III.

Four sets of stylized facts are the central focus of business cycle
analysis:

.There are fluctuations over time in both employment and unemployment,

correlated across industries, associated with only small changes in the real
wage, and apparently correlated with demand disturbances.
.These fluctuations, along with fluctuations in output, are serially
correlated, which is the essence of the business cycle.
.Cusiness cycle fluctuations appear to be correlated with monetary

disturbances: there is a Phillips curve. The two approaches to building
equilibrium models consistent with this fact have already been described.

21

.Consumption, income, and employment are positively correlated over

the cycle.

The work of Nelson and Ploscer (1982) and subsequent research by among
others Rose (1986), Cochráre (1986), Campbell and Mankiw (1987), and Ciuah

(1987) has cast doubt on the conventional characterization of the cycle s
consisting of serially correlated divergences of output from a smooth trend.
Rather it is argued there is a unit root in the stochastic process for
output—-and that there is little dynamics other than that.

If there were no

dynamics other than the unit root——that is if output followed a random walk,

then it would not be possible to talk of a business cycle in output. However,
Campbell arid Mankiw cannot reject the characterization of output as a second

order hump-shaped process around a deterministic trend. Further, Cochrane
(1986) finds some evidence that the dominant root is less than one.

More fundamentally, even if there were a unit root in output, the
business cycle could be defined as consisting of fluc:tuations of the

unemployment rate about a slowly moving trend. There is little evidence of a
unit root in unemployment, except perhaps for some European countries

(Blanchard and Summers, 1986). Thus the ei'tence of the business cycle does
not seem threatened by the finding of a unit root in the

for

stochastic process

output.

Business cycle theory was a major branch of economics until the
l(eynesian revolution. Early business cycle theorists saw the cycle as largely
self—sustaining, with each boom containing the seeds of the subsequent

recession and slump, the slump in
and boom.

1Haberler
approaches1

The

business cycle

turn

containing the seeds of the recovery

continued to be a subject of research

(1937) contains an authoritative account of the earlier

22

*Oiiing the ner revolution; Samuelson's (1939) multiplier—accelerator
model, Kaldor ';

non—linear cycle (1940), and kic1c' non—linear node); (190)

re all firmly in the Keynesian tradition. The Keynesian revolution did shift
the focus of macroeconomics from the inevitability of the cycle to methods of
improving macroeconomic performance.

During the long expansion of the sixties, it was even po ible to
think that the business cycle had been cured.l& Poor economic performance
during the seventies, reflected in the increased frequency and depth of
recessions, together with the forceful advocacy of Robert Lucas (1977) renewed
interest in the business cycle as a specific field of research.

}.Iut modern

approaches are not a continuation of the main line of earlier business cycle
analysis.
Rather ,

modern tteori ;ts have followed the stochastic approach of

Frisch (1933) and Slutsky (1937), which distinguishes between the shocks that
impinge on the economy, causing variable; to differ from their steady state
values, and the propagation mechanisms that convert the shocks into longer

lived divergences from steady state values.1 The modern approach is
especially convenient for econometric implementation. Further—-and this was
the basic point of Frisch and Slutsky——the time series behavior of economic
variables produced when shocks disturb relatively simple linear difference
equation systems is broadly consistent with business cycle characteristics.

delman and Adelman in 199 showed that the Klein—Goldberger econometric model

No doubt economic fluctuations will always be with us; the cycle would
be cured if deviations from full employment output were small and serially
u n correlated.

7Zarnowitz (1985) compares earlier and later approaches, not always to
the benefit of the latter, which he suggests has become excessively
fragmented.

23

the fprerunner of the Wharton model) generated output movements similar to
those

observed in

the U. S. busires cycle

heri subjected to tochaEtic

di sturbances.
Shocks may hit the economy on the demand side, for instance

stochastic

a

change in private sector or government demand for goods, perhaps

resulting from a change in fiscal or monetary policy. Or they can come from
the supply side, as productivity shocks, or shifts in the supply functions of

factors of production. The shocks, for instance productivity shocks, may be
serially correlated.

A variety of propagation mechanisms can carry the effects of the
shocks

forward through time:

.Because individuals prefer smooth consumption streams, temporarily high
output today generates high saving, thus high investment, and a larger capital
stock

and higher output tomorrow.

.Lags in the investment process may mean that increased investment demand
today increases investment demand and output in future periods as well.

.Firms carry inventories in part to meet unexpected changes in demand. A
demand shock today will cause firms both to draw down inventories and increase
production,

inventories.

arid in future periods they will increase production

to

restore

Thus production will be serially correlated.

.Individuals may work harder when wages are temporarily higher——the
intertemporal substitution of leisure——and thus both magnify the effects of
productivity shocks on current output and tend to produce negative serial
correlation of labor input.

24

.Because it is costly for firms to adjust their labor forces, firms tend to
adjust the

labor

force gradually in response to changes in wages and prices.

.Because individuals may take time to understand the nature of the shocks
hitting them (in particular whether they are permanent or transitory) their
responses to shocks may be distributed over time.

.Because it takes time for individuals to search for and find jobs, shacks to
demand and supply lead to prolonged labor force adjustments.
Both the shocks
preceding

and the propagati or; mechani sms identified in the

paragraphs can be embodied in either market clearing or non—market

clearing cycle models. Proponents of the g_L__çjLt
.p_proach? are distinguished by their view that virtually all business cycle
phenomena are the result of productivity shocks hitting an economy in which
markets are continuously in equilibrium.

In general, though, real business cycle theorists do not examine
markets explicitly, rather drawing on the equivalence of market and planning
solutions to deduce the behavior a-F quantities that would be seen if resources

were allocated optimally. They typically also work with representative agent
models.

In the remainder of this section I concentrate on the real business

cycle approach, best exemplified in the paper by Kydlard and Prescott (1982).
Serial correlation of output in an equilibrium model car; be generated

most simply by assuming that productivity disturbances are serially
correlated——as they undoubtedly are.

A priori it seems reasonable to posit

1Capital accumulation, inventory dynamics and slow adjustment of factors
of production were all components of the MPS model.
198ee for example the case made by Prescott (1986) Summers (1986a)
attacks Prescott's claims for the approach. Fischer Black (1982) was an

early proponent.

4.

that

productivity shocks are a mixture of permanent changes that come from

I mproveme-nt s in knowledge° and transi tory

from the weather.

changes such as those that cce

If factor inputs were constant, any pattern of output

correlation could be derived purely by specifying the stochastic process for

productivity. Kydland and Prescott do assume productivity is serially
correlated, though there is no indication in the description of their results
how much the different shocks and propagation mechanisms in their model each
—

._l-... L. 1..
.l.J4 -..II

.

uVr

3

.Z I 3 UT
.! ..OUpu.
.4- . 4h...
;eI

4.4

about productivity is a satisfactory basis for explaining cyclical and trend
behavior depends on whether independent evidence can be 4ound for the assumed

formulation (McCallum, 1986)). Research attempting to identify supply and
demand disturbances (Shapiro (1987) and Blanchard and Quah (1987)) is
currently under way.

I now briefly discuss propagation mechanisms it will turn out that
the key issue is that of the intertemporal substitution of leisure, without
which shifts in aggregate demand have no impact on output and supply shocks
have no

impact on labor input.

The Ro 1 e of C a p ital.

It is straightforward to obtain a stochastic first order difference
equation for output from an overlapping generations model of two—period lived
people who supply work inelastically in the first period of life and save by

20By definition, the stock of genuine knowledge must always be increasing,
apparently implying that technical knowledge as represented by the
production function should have only positive increments. However,
In the field of
mistakes may be made in choosing technologies to use.
economics, monetarists would argue there was technical regress when the
Keynesian revoluation was adopted, Keynesians would argue there was
technical regress when monetarism temporarily triumphed in the seventies.

26

buying capital that is used up in retirement.

positive productivity shock

in the current period raises output and the income of the employed, therefore
saving,

and therefore future capital stocks. This

produces positive serial

of output, through the supply side.

correlation

However the supply of capital route to serial correlation cannot be

empirically significant.
that

Suppose that

a shock raises GNP this year by IY. and

saving increases by as much as O./. of GWP, With the real return on

capital equal to about IOV., the extra saving would increase output by O.O5 in

the following year, implying very little persistence of the effects of the
productivity shock.

Long and Plosser (1983) develop a simple multi—sector capital nodel.
With an n—sector input—output structure, and a one—period production lag
between inputs and outputs,

of capital

is therefore capable of

dynamic behavior when disturbed by productivity shocks. This

interesting

model too

the system has n roots and

will

not

generate high serial

in output is

Nonetheless, it

correlation

of output unless the share

high.

has long been observed that booms in economic activity

are typically accompanied

by investment booms;

mechanism has for long been

part of

the multiplier—accelerator

most account; of the

cycle. Kydland arid

Prescott (1982) emphasize "time to build"——investment projects require inputs

in several earlier periods before they come into operation. However it is not
clear

to

from their exposition how much

build assumption.

Inventories.

of

their dynamics results from the time

27

it

is well known (see for example Dornbusch—Fischer (1987), Chapter 9)

that inventory decumulation accounts for a significant proportion of the
decline

in

real 6NP in periods following cyclical peaks.

In every post1948

U.S. business cycle except one (198O-Bl), a large part of the decline in
demand during the recession consisted of a decline in inventory accumulation.
The intuitive explanation for the role of inventories is that a
decline in demand causes an inventory build—up, perhaps slowly if producers do
not notice the demand shift immediately, and that production is then cut back

to work off the excess inventories. In a model with a multiplier, this
cutback in production itself reduces demand further, accentuating the decline
in output.

Inventory accumulation is usually motivated in equilibrium models by

production smoothing. Increasing marginal costs of production imply that it
is cheaper to meet shifts in demand by changes in production that are
distributed over several periods than by increasing production solely in the

period of the demand shift.21 A shDck to demand causes an increase in
consumption In the current period, which is met in part by increased

production and in part by drawing down inventories. Then in subsequent
periods production stays high as inventories are restored to their target

level. In the case of cost shocks, a temporary cost reduction should lead to
an increase in output and buildup of inventories, followed by lower output
that allows inventories to return to their target level.

The insight goes back at least to Holt, tiodigliani, tiuth, and Simon
(t97). Blinder and Fischer (.1981) embed production—smoothing based
inventory behavior in an equilibrium model.

28

In the real business cycle approach, which eniphasies productivity

shocks, inventories tend to create negative serial correlation of output. A
favorable temporary productivity shock results in higher output today, pMrt.ly

for consumption and also to build up inventories. Then in future periods
output is lower than normal as the inventories are consumed, creating the
possibility of negative serial correlation of output.

Although inventory dynamics is not helpful in explaining positive
serial correlation in real business cycle theory, I briefly review recent

work. The production smoothing model implies that if shocks are to dmard,
output is smoother than consumption if shocks are to supply, output is more
variable than consuffiption. Several researchers have found that the

variability of production exceeds that of sales or consumption2? implying
either that the production smoothing model is inappropriate or that cost
shocks play a larger role in explaining inventory behavior than most
researchers are willing to allow.

At least two other models have been proposed to account for the

cyclical behavior of inventories. One builds on production lags (Abel, iB;
Kahn, 1986).2 Suppose that the sales process takes at least one period, and
that goods have to be in place at the beginning of any period in which they

are to be sold, and that demand is serially correlated. Then high sales this
period imply that inventories have to be restored, and that production has
also to increase to meet higher than average demand next period.

22See for example Blinder (1984) and West (1985).
2Although the Kahn and Abel models are related, Abel examined conditions
under which production smoothing still took place, whereas Kahn was
looking for conditions that explain the 'excess" volatility of
inventories.

29

A second appr ch, initiated by Blinder (1981), and followed by Caplini
(198) arid Mosser (1986), explores the implications of models

invertory

policy

is

s—S. The

policy

in

which

is to order inventories only when

the

inventory level hits a trigger point, s, and then to order an amount that
restores the inventory level to S.
If the average order size (S—s) is large relative to sales, then this

ordering policy, which is frequently used in practice, creates the possibility

that production can vary more than sales. Whether it does, depends
significantly on the cost function of ultimate suppliers. If the supplier has
constant costs of production, the s—S policy may well lead to more variable

output. Alternatively, suppose demand for the final good were relatively
constant, and that the s—S orders come in quite regularly to the producing

firm. With concave production costs the producing firm would produce smoothly
to meet expected orders, and the s—S policy would determine only where
inventories were held——by producer or by seller——rather than the production

pattern (Caplir, 198).
Intertemporal Labor Supply Substitution.

Both capital accumulation and inventory dynamics undoubtedly play a
role

in business cycle dynamics, and

neoclassical

economies in which

both illustrate that entirely

markets are always in equilibrium cart be

expected to produce serially correlated movements in output around trend. But
none of the models we have developed so far accounts explicitly for the first
stylized fact set out above, the pro—cyclical pattern of hours of labor.
If shocks are assumed not to come from the labor supply function
itself, then the cyclical pattern of labor supply in an equilibrium model is

30

determined

by

the cycli cal behavior of the real wage. The question of whether

the real wage is pro—

or countercyclical has been the subject of research for

_hoy

at least a half—century, since Keynes assumed in the

that

4irms

were always on their demand function for labor.24
Geary and Kerinan (1982) test and are unable to reject the hypothesis
that the

real

wage and employment are independent across a sample of twelve

industrial countries. They show that results on the cyclical properties of
the real wage depend on. whether the CPI or WPI is used to define the real

wage. However the wei ght of the
slightly

evidence by now is that the real wage is

procyclical. Schor (198) finds evidence of

pro—cyclical wages in

nine industriali:ed countries for the period 1955—70, with less

procyclicality

in the subsequent decade. Basing his argument on overtime premia, Bus (1986)

also finds significantly procyclical real wages.
discussion

We shall

in

the

following

assume that the real wage is mildly procyclical, but that it would

require large elasticities of labor supply for these real wage movements to be
interpreted as movements over the cycle along a simple labor supply curve.

There have been three approaches to explaining the cyclical behavior
-

of the real wage. One is to argue that the labor market is not in

equilibrium,

that, for instance, there is always excess supply of labor, and

that the business cycle is driven by shifts in aggregate demand. The pattern
of the real wage then depends on assumptions about pricing.

In the ?rJ_

Theory and early Keynesian models, in which firms were assumed to be always on
a stable demand function for labor, the real wage would be counter—cyclical if

241t is well known that Dunlop (1938) showed the real wage was procyclical
in Fact. Tarshis (1939) is often credited with supporting Durilops
results, though as noted by Blanchard (1987) in fact he showed a negative
correlation between changes in manhours and changes in real wages.

aggregate demand disturbances are the predominant cause of the cycle.

In

mark—up pricing model;, in which the price is a mark—up on the wage, the ri
wage may be independent of the state of the cycle.

The second argues that observed real wage; have very little to do with

the allocation of labor26. The wage is set either to provide insurance to
worker;, or a; part of a long—term bargain between the firm and the worker

and need not vary with employment. Nonetheless, because it is efficient to do
so, work at all times is pushed to the point where the marginal product of
labor is equal to the marginal utility of leisure.

Proponents of equilibrium business cycles have however largely pursued
a third route, the intertemporal substitution (of leisure)__ap_pgach. The
approach, which can be traced to an influential 1969 paper by Lucas and
Rapping, argues that labor supply responds extremely sensitively to transitory
incipient changes in the real wage, and that this high elasticity reduce;

movements in the real wage. Whatever movements there might be in the real
wage could easily be obscured by small disturbances to the supply of labor
functi on.

Consider a person who consumes and works in two periods. The utility
function is:

U(c1,c2,x1,x)

In c —

(l+)_txi

(I+$)—tCIn

C2

1+p
+

— Y(1+)tx2

1

(1)

2When in the 1970'; supply disturbances made their entry into standard
macroeconomic models, it became clear that the cyclical pattern of the
real wage depends on the predominant source of disturbances.
26This is implied by Azariadis (1975) and developed in Hall and Lilien
(1979).

32

where c is consumption, and x± is labor; f3 ) 0. The greater is f3 the greater
is the curvature of the di sutility of labor function and the less wil)in are

individuals to substitute labor (and thus leisure) intertemporally. The
individual maximizes (1) subject to the budget constraint

+ c2/R
where

R

w1x1 + w2x2/R

(2)

is one plus the interest rate.

Solving the resultant first order conditions, the ratio of labor

inputs in the two periods is
1/p

xIx Cw1I(w(1+6)IR)3

(3)

The ratio of labor inputs is determined by the relative wages in the two
periods Wi and w2/R, with an elasticity 11)3 that depends on the curvature of

the disutility of labor function, and which for p small (in which case the
marginal disutility of labor is virtually constant) may be extremely large.

Thus depending on the utility 4unction a small increase in the wage in one
period relative to the wage in the other may cause the individual to work much
more in that period relative to the amount of work done in the other period.

When w1 and W2 change in the same proportion, (3) shows

rio change in the ratio of work done in the two periods.

that there is

It can also be shown

that a proportional increase in wages in the two periods leaves total hours of
work in each period unchanged as the income and substitution effects of the
change in the wage just balance each other. That is, individuals may respond
sensitively to transitory changes in the real wage, while responding not at
all to permanent changes.

33

This result is the essence of the intertemporal substitution
explarati on

of tie behavior of hours of work over the cycle: that indivi duals

respond sensitively to the small pro—cyclical variations that car sometimes be
detected in the real wage. Such variations could

for

instance be caused by

productivity shocks.

Hence if the cycle were driven largely by productivity

or supply shocks, and

if

intertemporal substitution wore to be established as

a major force in determining hours of work, the basic puzzle of large
movements in the quantity of labor could be solved in an equilibrium
framework.

The empi ri cal

evidence on the i ntertemporal substitution hypothesis is

mixed, though mainly unfavorable. Work by sltonJi (1982) and Ashenfelter
(1984) finds little evidence to support strong intertemporal substitution

effects in labor supply. Hecknan and Macurdy (1987) suggest that the evidence
is still in its infancy, and that it is not inconsistent with equilibrium
models that admit considerable worker heterogeneity.
Consumption and

Leisure_ov__Cycl€j

Even if the inter—temporal leisure

substitution explanation of the cyclical behavior of real wages and employment
is accepted, the final stylized fact——the negative covariance of consumption

of goods and consumption of leisure——has to be accounted 4cr. More work is
done in booms than in recessions; there is also more consumption (or at least
purchases of consumption goods) in booms.

2714ote that the real interest rate plays a role in determining the
intertemporal allocation of labor: a procyclical pattern cf the real
interest rate could therefore account for cyclical changes in the quantity
of labor that occur despite constant real wages.

34

The standard utility function used

to study intertempora] allocation

problems is additively separable (over time). 4ssuming both consumption and
leisure

are normal, Barro and King (1984) show that such functions have the

very strong implication that both consumption and leisure should move in the

same direction in response to all disturbances except those that change the
terms of trade between consumption and leisure within a given period, that is
the

real wage.

Without real wage movements the cyclical pattern of

consumption and leisure cannot be explained by the standard form of utility
function.

But since real wage changes are, if at all, only mildly procylical,

the additively separable formulation cannot be a good one——if one insists on
an equilibrium interpretation of the business cycle.
tiankiw, Rotemberg and Summers (1985) Examine the Euler equations

derived from the standard interternporal optimization problem based on a

particular additively separable utility function. Using aggregate time series

data they find no support for the intertemporal substitution model. The
essential problem is the cyclical pattern of leisure and consumption, for they
typically find that one or the other is inferior.

Equilibrium business cycle proponents have suggested two alternatives

to the standard formulation. The first, due to Kydland and Prescott (1982),
allows for habit formation or fatigue in the utility function, by replacing
the leisure argument in the utility function by a distributed lag on leisure.
The second formulation builds on the fact that most variation in hours
takes the form of changes in numbers employed rather than hours per employee.
Staying within the representative agent framework, Hansen (1985) and Rogerson
(1985) have built models in which individuals work either zero hours or full
time (say forty hours).

35

Solving the central planning problem in such an
that

wage' or consumption

properties

of

variability over time

economy, Hansen shows

does riot depend on the

the underlying utility of leisure function. rther , the

cyclical pattern of the wage reflects the properties of the marginal utility
of consumption function

because hours of

and

not the marginal utility of leisure function-"-

work are not

set to equate the marginal utility of leisure2

to the real wage.
What is the market setup corresponding to this central planning

problem? It is that everyone owns a share of the firm or firms in the
economy, and receives the same share of profits in addition, every potential
worker signs a contract with a firm, which guarantees a given utility level in
exchange for the individual 's willingness to work a specified number of hours
if his or her number is drawn.

If there is disutility to work, then each

worker will receive a payment for signing, and an additional payment if he or
she works.

It is not clear what should be regarded as the wage in this setting.
If it is the marginal product of labor, then that may not change over the
cycle——for irstance

if

the utility function is separable, and there is the

appearance of large changes in output with no change in the wage.
Alternatively, if everyone who signs a contract with the firm receives a
payment, and there is an additional payment for those who work, that marginal
payment may be regarded as the wage——and it could be constant over the cycle.
It is also possible though that the wage is measured as the per capita payment

B1{ the utility function is separable between leisure and consumption,
then the marginal utility of leisure at 40 hours of work per week is
constant.

36

(averaged over employed and unemployed) received from the firm by each worker,

which increases with the aqgregate amount of work done in this model. Further,
if the marginal utility of consumption were decreasing, the average payment
per worker would be even more pro—cyclical. In this case the Harisen—Rogerson
construction also implies a pro—cyclical real wage.

Two issues are relevant in judging the potential value of the

Rogerson—Hansen amendment to the standard equilibrium model. First, it is
necessary to detail the factors determining the length of theworkweek, and
the possibilities of part—time and overtime work.

It is clear that there Is

some fixed cost of taking a Job and thus that the approach starts from a
useful fact; it is also clear that the workweek in fact varies over the cycle,

and that part—time work has become increasingly common, Second, the
implication of full private insurance against unemployment and the fact that
the unemployed are in no way worse off than the employed are both
unsatisfactory, the first because there is very little private unemployment

insurance, the second because it violates everyday observation. Whether by
invoking moral hazard and non—homogeneities of the labor force it becomes
possible to explain the absence of such private insurance ir an equilibrium
model remains to be seer.
The more important lesson of a model of

this

type may be that the

representative agent assumption is unsatisfactory, and that labor force
heterogeneity may play an important role in determining the cyclical pattern

of wages. Suppose that for technological reasons individuals can work either

full time or not at all. Suppose also that workers differ. Then variations
in employment take place at the extensive margin where new individuals enter

37

employment or leave it, rather than at the intensive margin of hour; of work.
Then

the responsiveness of hour; of work to change;

in the real wage have

nothing to do with individual utility function;, but rather with the
di ;tr i but on of reservation wages of those rear the employment mar gin.

Variation in numbers employed across the cycle is reflected also in

the pattern of unemployment. Very little in the equilibrium business cycle
framework addresses the issue of unemploymert.° Indeed,

it

has been common

in this approach to work with the 1CVCI of output a; the key macroeconomic
variable, and to treat unemployment as a secondary

and

not very interesting

i ss u e •
Even if

to

the unemployment issue is left aside,

the equilibrium

approach

the business cycle runs into its greatest problem in the labor market.

Real wages simply do not show the movements that are needed for this theory to
explain the facts, and it is unclear that the assumption of indivisible labor

solve; the problem. What then could explain the fact;? We have already noted
that theories that do not require labor market equilibrium may do the Job.
Alternatively, the reported real wage may not accurately reflect the

marginal product of labor and marginal disutility of work. For instance,
imperfect capital markets may result in firms paying workers a constant real
wage over the cycle, with the allocation of labor nonetheless sensitively
reflecting shift; in the productivity of labor and marginal valuation of time.

7This point is emphasized by Heckean (1984) and Heckman and Macurdy
(1987).

Ham

(1986) argues that the unemployed cannot be interpreted as being on
their labor supply function; in any useful sense.
51This tradition goes back at least to Friedmans Presidential Address
(1968). For an examination of the issue of involuntary unemployment, see
Lucas (1978a).

38

Labor adjustment costs.

The real wage
short

reduce

run

when

may difler from

the

marginal product

of labor it the

there are costs of adjusting inputs.2 Labor adjustment costs

the response

of hours of work to the real wage: the firm changes

its

labor input in response to a transitory shock to productivity or the wage, by
1

ess than it would

shock

without costs of adjustment. in response to a permanent

to the wage or productivity, the firm eventually adjusts all the way,

setting the nargi nal product equal to the wage. But the adjustment tak

t

i me.

With respect to cyclical adjustments to real wage movements, this
model

model.

has exactly the opposite implications to the intertemporal substitution
Costs of adjustment therefore do not help account for the cyclical

pattern of real wages and employment.35
Search une m p 1 oy

Unemployment is modelled in an equilibrium framework as resulting from
search, where the search is not only that of unemployed workers looking for

jobs but aio that of vacancies looking for workers. Mortensen (1970)
develops a search—theoretic unemployment model and derives

an explicit

expression for the natural rate of unemployment as a function of the
determinants of rates of job loss and acceptance. Lucas and Prescott (1974)
present a complete model of the unemployment process generated by stochastic

S'tlodels with labor adjustment costs have been studied by Solow (1965) and
Sargent (1978)
33Pr) extended version of the adjustment cost model is often used in
In that version
explaining the cyclical pattern of labor productivity.
not only are there costs of adjusting the input of labor, but also the
existing labor force may work harder at times of high demand, or may be
used in times of slack on maintenance and other investment-like tasks.

39

shift;

in demand among sector; and a one—period lag by worlers in moving

between sectors. More recently Diamond (1981, 1982) and Pissarides
have developed arid worked with

sophi sti

cated cort 1iUOLI5

(198)

time search model;.

Howitt (1987) is a particularly tractible search model, embodying adjustment
costs

for labor,

arid generating dynamic adjustment of employment and

unemployment to productivity and demand shocks.

One theme o4 modern search theories of unemployment is that because
job matches require an explicit search process, there is no market to set the
wage.

(Mortensen, 1982) Rather it is assumed that the wage is set in a

bargain which divides the surplus from the job between the worker and the
firm.

Typically

equilibrium is inefficient in these models, reflecting a

search externality which arises because a worker's decision to search makes it
easier for a firm to fill its vacancy——but there is no direct compensation

from the hiring firm to the searching worker for his or her decision to become
unemployed.

The inefficiency may make a case for unemployment compensation.

In the opposite direction, the congestion externality created for the
unemployed

by the decision of a worker to join their ranks could suggest a tax

on unemployment.

Lilien (1982) argued that most of the variance of unemployment in the

United States in the period 198—1977 was a result of relative rather than
aggregate shocks to the economy, which set off shifts of workers between

sectors and thereby affected the aggregate unemployment rate. Abraham and
Katz (1986) and Murphy and Topel (1987) question this interpretation of the

34Sargent (1987) presents several search theoretic models, mostly from the

side

of the worker or consumer.

40

data: the former because differing supply and demand elasticities in any event

imply di erences

sectoral

rt

responses to aggregate shocks, and be ause the

behavior of vacancies is inconsistent with the relative disturbance

hypothesis; the latter because rising unemployment is in fact a ocited with
a decline in the mobility of labor between sectors.

More direct evidence on the role of search in unemployment comes from

surveys showing that the time of the unemployed is mostly spent waiting. The
notion

that

individuals can search more efficiently when they are unemployed,

and therefore optimally enter unemployment to seek new Jobs has little

They could as well be working at MacDonalds. The theory

empirical support.

of search unemployment might thus be replaced by a theory of optimal wait
unemployment3 which would presumably stress the influence of aggregate demand
on the creation of job opportunities.

i

I V. The New-Kjnes an

tVALL £ciiiti n

Q W ittjpr.

Evaluating the contribution of the GeneraL Thegy_, Keynes remarked
that the disappearance of the notion of aggregate demand for almost a century
was an

198G).

extraordinary episode in the history of economic thought (Patirikin,
Much of the sophisticated development of the microeconomic foundations

of macroeconomics in the 1950s, such as the permanent income—life cycle
theory of consumption, inventory and portfolio theories of the demand for
money, and flexible accelerator theories of investment3 elaborated or the
determinants of demand.

41

There have been significant

developments

in the

empirical

modelHriq of

aggregate demand since 1975, though no real departures from earlier

theoretical approaches. The

life

cycle—permanent income consumption function

remains the mainstay of consumption theory, with new testing methods having

developed following the key contribution of Hall (1978). Hall tested the
implications of the Euler equation or first order condition for intertemporal
consumer optimization, which under specified conditions implies that

consumption huId follow a random walk.
consumption

is excessively variable or

It is not yet clear whether

excessively smooth, the issue turning

whether detrended income follows a stationary process or not. Empirical

on

work on liqui dity constraints and other causes
the

of

potential deviations from

permanent income hypothesis has turned to cross—sectional data (e.g.

Zeldes, 1985). Tobins Q theory of investment has received much attention and

is

widely used, though empirical results relating investment to stock prices

are still far from satisfactory (Summers, 1981).

The last decade has seen real progress in the theory of aggregate

supply on Keynesian lines. The Phillips curve was exactly the empirical
construction the Keynesian model needed to model the supply side, endogenizing
the

dynamics of the wage rate and the price level. But the theory of aggregate

supply underlying the Phillips curve remained underdeveloped.

Although

Phillips (1958) and Lipsey (1960) both explained the Phillips curve as an
application of the law of supply and demand, the law itself lacked

microfoundations. Arrow (1959),

discussing price setting, argued that the

assumption of competition made explicit study of price—determination
difficult.

For a review of the issue;, see Hall (1988).

42

The Fr

man—Phtlps addition of the

expected rate of

inflation to the

Phillips

curve both

stimulated further work on the microfouridations cf price

setting,

and tended

to focus the reasons for the real effects of shifts

demand on

output

in

on errors in expectations. By 1970, Phelps arid Winter were

able to announce in the landmark Phelps volume that a 'landing on the non—

Wairasian continent has been made". The papers in the Phelps volume were
mainly earc.h theoretic, and implied that anticipated changes in prices would

have no effects on output. The radical implications of that

result

did rot

become clear until Lucas (1972, 1973) combined the Friedman—Phelps Phillips
curve with the asriumption of rational expectations.

The cciritributions of Fischer (1977) and Taylor (19B0)37 clarified the

distinction between the implications of rational expectations and of wage or
price stickiness in accounting for real effects of money and aggregate demand
on output.

In each case sticky nominal wages determined in long—term labor

contracts were the source of nominal inertia. Each model implied a potential
stabilizing role for monetary or aggregate demand policy even in the presence
of rational expectations, and provided a framework for examining the dynamic
effects of changes in policy on prices and output.

8Nordhaus (1972) worked on the microfoundations of the Phillips curve,
showing that there was no necessary inconsistency between markup pricing
and competition.
7Phelps and Taylor (1977) also showed that nominal disturbances could
produce real effects in a rational expectations setting with sticky
prices.

For simplicity adjustment in both models is built entirely or the
dynamics of wages and prices.
In practice, other propagation mechanisms,
such as inventory adjustment arid others described in Section II above,
affect the dynamic adjustment of the economy to demand and supply shocks.

43

Contractual

wace setting allows for

potentially

interesting price and

output dynamics in reaponse to disturbances to supply or demand. Particularly
in

the Taylor mode), where workers are concerned over relative wages and wges

are held at a constant level throughout each contract, wage leapfrogging can

produce protracted adjustments3. Because the dynamics depends siqnifcantly
on whether contracts are staggered or co-ordinated, there has been extensive

investi gation of the determinants of the staggering structure4'. Eince rel
world contracts are co—ordinated in some countries (e.g. Japan) and staggered
in others, it is likely that both structures may be stable, depending on

the

predominant sources of disturbances to the economy (Fethke and F'olicano,
19B6). The

investigated

efficiency of different staggering structures ha also been
(e.g. Ball, 1986).

Although the contract wage setting approach has been fruitfu] ,

it

too

lacks microfoundations. In particular, as pointed out by Barro (1977), it
leaves open the question of why quantities are determined by demand.4' tiore
generally, the fundamental question posed by any non—equilibrium approach to

fluctuations

in which wages or prices are sticky is why, if fluctuations are

economi cally

costly, private agents do not make arrangements that avoid such

costs. 42

The noti on that there must be some market failure, an externality or

39Calvo (1983) develops a very tractable contract model.
40These are reviewed in Blanchard (1988).

4tFischer used the irrLJheory assumption that firms are always on the
demand curve for labor, while Taylor assumed markup pricing and the
aggregate demand determination of output.
42Lucas (1987) has argued that the costs of aggregate fluctuations, as
measured by the variance of consumption, are small. He asserts that in
the post—World War II period, elimination of
variability of aggregate
consumption around trend would have raised utility, in a representative
agent model, by the same amount as an increase in the level of consumption

all

of one—tenth of one per cent. McCallum (1986) questions this estimate on
the grounds that it assumes the trend is independent of stabilization
policy.

44

coordination failure, is an old one that has not untii recently received
satisfactory formal treatment, despite the suggestive analysis by Okuri

(1981).

When sticky wages are responsible for unemployment, the obvious
question is HWhy

don't

the unemployed bid down wages?" Keynes argued that

wage flexibility would not in any case help maintain full employment, because

of adverse effects of expected deflation on demand and employment. More
recently, de Long and Summers (1986) have re—examined this argument, finding
for some parameter values in the Taylor overlapping contractsmodel that wage

flexibility is indeed destabilizing.4
Solow (1980) forcefully addressed the question of wage stickiness,
arguing that several causes each tend to create sticky wages nd/or prices, and
that the stickiness is a key fact in understanding business cycle

fluctuations. We examine theoretical developments of three of the causes of
wage stickiness that he discussed: long—term labor contracts44, the role of

unions, and efficiency wages. In reviewing these topics, we should note the
distinction between nominal and real rigidity of wages and prices: whereas the

Fischer and Taylor models build on sticky nominal wages or prices, in order to
develop models in which monetary policy has real effects, some of the work to
be reviewed produces real but not nominal price stickiness.
Labor contracts;

Baily

(1974) showed that for any pattern of employment, an

individual without access to the capital markets would prefer more stable to

less stable income. zariadis (1975) examined optimal labor contracts between

4Taylor (1986) claimed on the basis of an emprical analysis comparing
the periods 1891—1914 and post—World War II that greater stickiness of
wages and prices in the United States in the latter period increased the
amplitude of fluctuations given the disturbances affecting the economy.
44This is a much and well surveyed field. See zariadis (1979), Hart
(1983), Rosen (1985), Stiglitz (1986), Hart and Holmstrom (1986),

45

risk averse workers without access to income insurance markets, and risk
neutral firms.,

independent,
stream by

either
einpl

finding

with

the

that the

real wage in

the

optim1 contract was s.tit.e-

firm essentially smoothing the individuals consumption

paying a constant real wage. Aariadis assumed that workers worked

full time or not at all, and that firms made payments only to the

eyed, the urenpi eyed receiving unemployment compensation or some other

source

of income.

The Bail y—A:ar i adi s result seemed to provide a reason for stickiness

of real wages and variability of real outputs with real wages sticky rather
than increasing with output, perhaps increases in demand would call forth a
greater Increase in output than in competitive markets. However, it turns out

that

with constant marginal utility of income, output in the 4:ariadis model

would be the same in each state of nature as in a competitive labor market.4
Further, if payments could be made

to

the unemployed, employed and unemployed

workers in the Azariadis model would receive the same income and the employed
would envy the unemployed.

Insight into the output results in the Azariadis model was provided by

Hall and Lilieri (1979), following an earlier contribution cf Leontief (194)
in any bargaining situation
contract

between workers and a firm, the employment

should in each state of nature satisfy the efficiency condition that

the margi nal value product of labor be equal to the margi nal disutility of
work. The terms of compensation can then be set separately, and do not

necessarily imply that the wage

is equal

to

the

marginal value product of

labor in each state.

workers utility functions are such as to produce an upward sloping
labor supply curve, employment varies more with labor contracts than in a

45Jf

competitive

market.

46

The mid—seventies approach, which built labor contracts around
di f{erer;ce; in risk—aver sion and access to capital markets, does not iccount

for the fact that firms st employment decisions. The later asymmetric
information approach assume; that the firm knows the state of nature but the

worker does not.4 The

firm and the employees agree on an optimal contract

nature.

that speci 11 es wage—employment conbi nati on; in each state of

of the asymmetric information,
compatibility

8ecause

contracts have to satisfy an incentive

constraint whereby the firm doe; not have an incentive to

misrepresent the state.
These contracts do imply that the

firm sets the employment level.

In

general they do not satisfy the ex post efficiency condition, and thus can
account for departures from Wairasian quantity levels. However, it also turns
out that

unless firms

are more risk averse than workers, optimal asymmetric

information contracts generally imply more employment in bad states of natures

than would occur in a competitive non—contract labor market. This——together
with

the

difficulty of deriving results-—has led to some discouragement over

the contract route to explaining economic fluctuations.47 Nonetheless, the
fact that asymmetric information——which certainly exists——makes for
inefficient employment levels, is itself an important result.

Unions

The labor contracting approach to wage and output determination

assumes that there is free entry into the labor pool attached to each firm,
When workers are unionized, the union may control access to

force,

the firm's labor

and may have its own utility 4unction.4

4See the surveys noted above; Hart and Holmstrom provide a concise
summary.
Grossmn, Hart and Maskin (1983) have embedded asymmetric information
labor contracts in a general equilibrium model and shown that shocks that
change the variance of a variable relevant to firms' employment decisions
may affect the aggregate level of employment.
4EFor surveys on unions, see Farber (19B6), Oswald (1966) and Pencavel
(1986).

47

McDonald and Scilow (1981) showed that in contracts between a union

(with given membership) and a firm, and given certain assumptions on the
determinants of the bargaining outcome,

the behavior of the real wage ever the

cycle is determined by the cyclical behavior of the
for

wage elasticity of demand

labor. Thus with a constant elasticity of labor demand, the rel wage

would be invariant over the cycle, so long a; not all

members of the union

were employed. This is another potential reason for real wage stickiness.
However, as noted by McDonald and Below, their model is partial

equilibrium and

deals with wage and quantity

Unemployment occurs within the

determination in a single period.

period when the demand for labor is low. But

the average level of unemployment in a succession of one—period models
realizations would depend on the dynamics of the reservation wage.

If unions

are to produce a higher average rate of unemployment than would occur in
competitive markets, they have somehow to maintain a higher reservation wage
than the competitive wage.

If unions succeed in obtaining high wages that cause unemployment in
the short run, the dynamics of employment depends on whether it is possible

for a non—unionized ;cctor to develop. The existence of a pool of unemployed
workers provide; the opportunity for new firms to undercut existing firms by

employing the current unemployed at wages below union rates. If this process
works slowly, the presence of unions may account for slow adjustment of
unemployment towards the natural rate.

If unions rigorously control entry,

they may be responsible for permanently higher unemployment..

There has been much interest, particularly in Europe, in using union
models or related insider—outsider model; to explain per;istent high

48

unemployment (Lindbeck and Snower, 1984). Unions may be able to affect the
average

level of ureiploymert if they control

key issue

entry into the workforce.

The

then is what is the union utility function. For instance, if unions

are concerned only with the interests of their current membership, they may
totally ignore the unemployed1 and can produce long—term unemployment
(Blanchard and Summers1 1986),

Tti policy implications of insider—outsider models are not

unambiguous. Presumably they justify open shop legislation and other steps to
break union control over entry into the work{orce; alternately, Layard (19B6>
argues for subsidi:ation of the unemployed outsiders to allow them to break
iii

E+ficency_Wges

The

efficiency wage hypothesis is that the wage affects

worker productivity.49 In underdeveloped countries1 low wages may impair
strength and concentration and raising the wage may reduce the unit cost of
the effective labor input.

There are several rationales for the efficiency wage hypothesis even

where physical strength is not an issue. The simplest is the sociological
explanation, that firms that pay higher wages generate a more loyal and

therefore more productive wrk force. In the shirking model (e.g. Shapiro and
Stiglitz, 1984) firms can only imperfectly monitor worker performance.

Workers who are caught shirking can be punished only by being fired, in which

case they receive the alternative wage. By paying wages above the alternative
rate, firms provide an incentive to workers not to shirk. One criticism of
this model is that shirking can also be prevented by alternative mechanisms,
such as the posting by workers of performance bonds.

49Katz (1986) presents an excellent survey and empirical examination of
the efficiency wage hypothesis.

49

The

shi rkir;g

modEl provides an e>planation for

dual labor markets, in

which higher wages are paid for primary jobs than for second.ry (in which

shirbrg is difficult) perhaps even for workers with

the sane abihty.

Whether the shirking model generates unemployment depends on how large the
secondary market is relative to the primary; certainly it is possible to
generate wait unemployment in a dual labor market if workers are willing to
work

at the primary but not

the secondary wage (Hall, 1975).

The implications of efficiency wage theories for macroeconomic

fluctuations depend on their ratioriale.1 Solow (1979) showed that the wage
may be constant (at the unit labor cost minimizing level) in an efficiency
wage eodel ,

In underdeveloped econcimi es this would peg the r el wge at

level determined by physical efficiency. In the shirking model, the
efficiency wage would be set as a differential above the secondary wage.

It

would not then prDvide a justification for sticky real or nominal wages
without further explanation for the stickiness of the secondary wage, or some
explanation of why the primary wage itself was sticky.
it

is, if arythi ng , the

In both these case;,

real wage rather than the nomi ral wage that would be

stick y.

Sociological

theories that build on the adverse effects of wage cuts

on morale could account for either nominal or real wage stickiness. Casual
observation certainly supports the notion that wage cutting has ar adverse

effect on morale, but the deep reasons for that are unclear. Conceivably this
is a self—justifying convention. Alternatively, relative wages may affect

5Iat: (1986) discusses also turnover, adverse selection, and union threat
effiency wage models.
1Start (1984) builds an almost—textbook style keynesian model with an
efficiency wage as the only departure from a classical model.

morale', and wage stickiness may result from the difficulty of co-ordinatirg

wage cuts across decentralized firms
Summa!1: With one

efficiency

possible

exception, contract theory, union

wage models, nd

wage theories account for real rather than noninal wage rigidity.

The possible exception is the nominal wage version of the argument that wage
cutting reduces worker morale——but this hypothesis

restating

amounts to little

more than

the puz:le of the apparent inflexibility of wages.4

The

union and efficiency wage models may also help account for

unemployinent'. To the extent that they produce both unemployment and rigid
real wages, they also account for the fact that cyclical changes in the rato
of employment are accompanied by only small changes in the real wage,

Sticky

Prices.

The Keynesian tradition and the Phillips curve emphasize nominal wage

stickiness. Strictly interpreted, the aggregate supply theories outlined

above account for real wage stickiness. Coordination problems-—the ct that
given other wages and prices, any change in a wage is a change in both the
real and relative wage——could perhaps generate nominal wage stickiness out cf
real

wage stickiness. However, coordination problems fail to explain why all

2Certainly

observation of the economics profession suggests a keen
interest in relative wages, and sometimes discontent over relative wage
reductions that are also absolute wage increases.
This is the General Theory argument that the aggregate wage level may be
sticky because workers concerned with their relative wages resist cuts in
their own wages which, given other wages, would imply a reduced relative
wage.

54Nominal wage cuts in the early eighties in the United States certainly
establish that nominal wages are not completely inflexible downward, but
those cuts nonetheless appear to have been regarded as excepti onal rather
than the establishment of a new norm.
Bulow and Summers (1986) press the case for the efficiency wage as an
explanation of unemployment and other ailments.

wages are not routinely indexed. The conclusion is either that the original
enphasi s on nominal wage sti ckiriess was misplaced, or that nomini] wage

stickiness still awaits an explanation. The preoccupation with nominal wage
rigidity could be misleading though, a reflection of hysteresis in the
development of macroeconomic models, for rigid real wages are also a real

world problem with important macroeconomic consequences (e.g Iruno and Sach,
1985).

tiore recently the emphasis has shifted from sticky wages to sticky

prices. The new approaches generally start from a now widely—used model of
imperfect competition in

and Stiqlitz (1977) .

the goods markets that builds on the work of Dixit
That imperfect competition is widespread is suggested

both by observation and by the work of Hall (1986) on markups in U.s.
industry.

Imperfect competition_gL_LLLbriurj

The General

Theor and the

monopolistic or imperfect competition revolutions occurred simultaneously.
The notion that there should be close connections between them Is an old one,

but the connection has only recently been made explicit. The intuitive reason
there may be a link is that the (eynesian assumption that suppliers are always
willing to sell more if demand at the existing price increases is a

characteristic of a monopolistic equilibrium. The reason to doubt the link,
at least in the case of nominal disturbances, is that monopolistic equilibrium
determines a set of relative prices, which will surely be invariant to nominal
shocks.

'See also Hart (1982) and Weitzman (1982). I draw here on Blanchard and
Fischer (1988, Chapter 7), which in turn is based on Blanchard and
Kiyotaki (19B7).

52

The following general equilibrium model monopolistic competition

can

be used to make both points. There are n producer—consumErs, each consuming
all goods but

producing only one, with the following utility functions:
(1—v

(1) U (C /1)

C (t'h /P) / C 1— ) )

—

Cd/b) Y

1 > >0; d>0; p 1

($1 ) / (0/ (0-1)

(1 / (i-e))

(E C

where C

n

and

((1/n) E

(1—0) (1/ (1—0))
P

Utility depends positively on consumption, C and on real money
balances t11/P, and negatively on the output of good i, Y. The production of
good i uses labor; the labor input enters the utility function in the form
shown either because production is subject to diminishing returns or because

labor is subject to increasing marginal disutility. The consumption of all
goods enters the utility function symmetrically.

The utility function implies a constant elasticity of substitution
between goods, equal to 0.

Constant terms in the utility function are

introduced for convenience. Feal money balances enter the utility function,
and play a key role in transmitting effects of money stock disturbances to
demand.

Each

(2)

individual faces the budget constraint

E PC + M = PY 4 M

where 1. is intial holdings of nominal balances.
7Ball and Rorner (1987) derive the same results using a Clower constraint.

Work ng from the first

order conditi ens o4 the consumer, ard maki rig

facing each producer can be shown to be

some substitutions, the demand curve

(3)

(Ps/P)

(/(1—)n) (MIP)

(F'.IP)

(tl'IP)

where unsubocripted variables represent aggregates.

Producer i sets price to maxinie utility, taking the

actions of other

producers (their prices) as given. This implies the relative price:

(4)

P IF'

E ( (d/

(1 / ( 1@ (p—i))

p—I
(E—1 I I (P1 IF')

3

So long as there are increasing marginal costs of production
(p ) 1), an increase in (t'l'/P) results in both a higher relative price and

higher output. With constant costs of production an increase in (M'/P) would
result in no change in the relative price, and an increase in output.

Finally, recognizing the symmetry, all relative prices are equal to
one, which implies from (4) the equilibrium value of the aggregate price level
F',

and the

level

of output of each producer:

(1/ (1-p))
P1'

(1 / (p—I)

I

Note first that in equilibrium the quantity theory holds: the nominal
price level is proportional to the money stock.

if

It is also true though

that

P1' were to increase, and producers for some reason were to keep their

nominal prices constant, the utility of each would increase. This is because
price exceeds marginal cost. That is the source of an aggregate demand

externality: if prices are fully flexible, each producer raises price when the
money stock rises, and all producers acting

demand and

together

thereby reduce aggregate

welfare.

TePAYMinsiaht

The

derivative

of the profit {uncton

of a

price setting

firm with respect t price is zero at the optimum. Thus divergences of price
from the optimum produce only second order reductions of profits. Parkin
(1986), Akerlof and

Yellen

(1985) and Mankiw (1985> observed that, combined

with even small costs of changing prices, this

implies

that changes in demand

may lead monopolistically competitive firms not to change price and instead to

satisfy demand.°
Thus shifts in aggregate demand may lead to changes in

output.

Further, the increase in demand may make everyone better off, in a first order
way, because of the excess of price over marginal cost in the initial
situation.

More precisely, the PAYM insight is that if all firms are at their
optimal price, and there are some fixed costs of changing price, a
sufficiently small increase in aggregate demand will lead to a welfareincreasing expansion of output.

Cost; of price change are often described as menu
physical cost of resetting a price.

costs,

implying a

It is difficult to think of many goods

for which such costs could be non—trivial. There may be a fixed decision cost

to the firm of reconsidering the price it charges for a particular good. Dr
there may be a loss of goodwill for firms that change price. Okun (1981)
argued that the goodwill cost is incurred by firms that change prices in

-Rotemberg (1987) named this the F'AYM insight.

55

response

to demand shocks, but not by firms whose price rises merely pass cost

rasts or to customers..
The

ass.uupti on in these cases s that there

changing price.

is a fixed cost to

Rotemberg (1982) investigates the effects on price and output

dynamics of quadratic costs. of price change. Whereas. with

fixed

costs of

changing price, a large enough shift in demand will produce small effects on
output because most firms will adjust price, with quadratic costs of price
change, larger shifts in demand cause larger changes in output.
More careful examination of the PYM insight raises. several other

interesting issues. First, there may be multiple equilibria. In response to
a given shift in demand, both no change in price by any firm and full response
in price by all firms may be Nash equilibria (Rotemberg, 1987; Ball and Romer,
19B7).

In this sense, Ball and Romer argue that sticky prices may represent a

coordination failure.9 Second, there is the question of why firms would find
it more costly to adjust price than quantity. Changing production plans too
appears to involve decision costs. One possibility for a large firm selling
to

sophisticated

buyers in

that

whereas

the production decision is internal

and has to be made daily, the price decision ha to be communicated to a large
group of actual and potential buyers, and is thus more costly.
Third, there is

the

question of the effects of aggregate demand shifts

on output and prices when not all firms are at their optimum price at any one

time.

Caplin and Spulber (1986) show that if firms are uniformly distributed

over the interval in which prices are set, and if the firms follow s—S pricing
policies60, then the distribution is maintained even after demand changes, and

See also Cooper and John (1985) on coordination failures.
'°Barro (1972) introduced s—S pricing rules for a monopolist. Sheshinski
and Weiss (1977) show that if the aggregate price level is increasing at a
constant rate, and if there are fixed costs of changing price, then it is
optimal for firms to use an s—S pricing policy in which relative price is
allowed to drop to a level s before being adjusted upwards to level S.
See Rotemberg. (1987) for discussion of optimal pricing policy.

the average

appears to

price leve] charges smoothly in response to demand changes.
destroy the effects of the PAYtI insight

This.

that produces Keynesian

results in the monopolistic competition model. owever, the Cap1in-pulber

result

is not robust either to the effects of discrete shock changes in the

money stock (Rotemberg, 1967), or to the possibility that prices. may

fall

as

well as rise (Dlanchard, 1988).

It is not yet known what form optimal pricing behavior takes when the

aggregate price level is not growing steadily. An interesting result has been
obtained by Tsiddon (1986), who examines. the adjustment to an unexpected

change in the aggregate inflation rate. When the inflation rate falls, the s—
S range falls. This means that at the moment of the change, a number of fl nis
find themselves below the new optimal s, and should therefore raise price to

the new S. Some firms will be above the new 8; they however may find it
optimal to let their excessively high price be eroded by inflation rather than

adjust it. The implication is that a reduction in the growth rate of money
may initially lead to an increase in the price level.

Blanchard (1988) draws the distinction between
state dependent pricing rules, such as the s—S rule, and tine—dependent rule;,

in which prices are reset at particular time;. The extent of time dependency
varies across firms, for example between firms that print catalogs and those

that sell perishables. Further, even for firms that usually set prices at
particular times, large shocks may well disturb the regular pattern.'

£lTime dependent wage setting appears to be relatively more widespread
than time—dependent price setting.

57

Nonetheless,

it is interesting to e:plore the inplicatiorts c1 tinip-

key issue for dynamics in this case, as in the

dependency of price setting.

price

case of wage setting, is whether

setting is staggered cr synchronized.

Olanchard (1903) has used a stage of processing model to show how even short
lag; in

adjusting

prices can produce long aggregate lags if price setting is

staggered.

ilSO as in the case of wage setting, the question of the stability of
the staggering structure arises.

If an increase in the aggregate price level

increase; the desired price of a given firm, price staggering is unlikely to

be stable. For instance, where prices are fixed for two period;, if more than

period;, those wh adjust

half the prices re adjusted in even

price in odd

periods have an incentive to move their adjustment to the even period—-because
the price rise that they observe after the first period causes them to want to

raise price. Of course, price adjustments are not synchronized in practice
the

staggering may to some

extent be due to seasonality and the non—

synchronization to the idiosyncratic shocks hitting the firm (Ball and

Romer,

1986).

It

is not

competition model outlined above why
output

when demand increases.

called

forth

by increases in

obvious in the monopolistic

worker/firm; are willing to

supply more

In that model, increase; in labor input are
the

real

wage, with

larger

implying greater

sensitivity of the real wage to output.
If

real

were close to one,

wage. But if

were

close

output would change without
to

much change in the

one, equilibrium business cycle theory

would have no difficulty accounting for the observed real wage—employment

relationship. New Iseynesianc have taken two alternative routes in explaining
the cyclical behavior of the

real

wage

in

monopolistic competition models.

$larichard and Kiyotaki (1987) model each worker as a monopolistilIy
competitive seller of labor.

At

their

optimum quantity of labor sold, worktrs

suffer little change in utility from working slightly more or less. That

could explain the cyclical real—wage employment relationship if all variations
in labor input were in hours, but

is

less persuasive when

a considerable

part

oc the variation takes the form of unemployment of the worker.
A1:erlof and

'(ellen

(1985) instead assume monopolistic competition in

the goods markets and an efficiency wage model in the labor markets. The real

ccristart at

wage is held
goods

the effi ci ant level ,

are translated into shifts in

V.

output

arid var

i ati otis in demand 1cr

at the same real wage.

_e lop m ants.

In

have not so

this section I briefly

review recent developments in areas

that

far been discussed.

Nult i p 1 _ljija.
There

equilibria.

are now crariy rational expectations models with multiple
There is

nothing exceptional in the result that changes in

expectations affect the equilibrium of the economy; the interesting feature is
that those changed expectations (animal spirits) may be correct and thus self—

iu;tilying. This is a rigorous Justification of the notion that optimism

itself

may be sufficient to create a boom, or that all we have to fear is fear

itself.

62Rotemberg (1987) categorizes and concisely reviews these models, which
include contributions by A:ariadis (1981), Cass and Shell (1983), Diamond
and Fudenberg (1962) and Shlcifer (1986),

59

Rotemberg (19B7) review; the varieties of multiple rquilitriik and
their implications. Among the striking results are those by Kehoc and Levine
(198), showing an extreme multiplicity of equilibcia in overlapping
generations models; by Grandmont (1985) showing that deterministic cycles of

virtually any order can—-under some restrictions on utility functions-be
generated as rational expectations equilibria in an overlapping geriertions
model with money a; the only asset; and by Robert; (1986) producing a
multiplicity of unemployment equilibria at talrasian prices.
Policy analysis appears difficult when it is not clear at which
equilibrium the model will start, nor to which equilibrium a policy change or

other shocks will move it. One possibility is that multiple equilibria
enhance the role of policy, because the government may be able to provide some
focus for expectations about which is the relevant equilibrium (for instance

the full employment equilibrium). An alternative view is that models with
multiple equilibria are incomplete, awaiting the improved specification that
will remove the multiplicities.
Credit Rationing.

The recent concentration on the aggregate supply question 0

why

output varies with only small variations in real wages has supplanted a
similar earlier question, of how monetary policy affects real activity when
interest rate movements are relatively small.

In part the earlier question

has been obscured because interest rate movements——both nominal and real—-have
become much larger in the 1970's and 1980's than in earlier decades; in
addition, doubts have arisen about the effects of monetary policy on real
output, as the rise of the real business cycle approach testifies.

60

Participants

ri credit markets believe that credit is rationed, in

sense that individuals or firms cannot

typically borrow as much

the

as they want

to at the going interest rate. Credit rationing was part of the transmission
mechanism for monetary policy in the MIT—Penn—SSRC model; with sticky interest

rates, monetary policy affects the availability
volume of investment

Credit

without necessarily

rationing is

of

bank credit arid thus the

affecting interest rates.

certainly understandable when

interest rates are

controlled, say by usury ceilings. But credit is likely to be rationed even
without interest rate controls, for at least two reasons arising from

incomplete information under uncertainty.4 First is adverse selection: as
interest rates rise, banks are likely to attract riskier borrowers. The
second is moral hazard: as interest rates rise, borrowers tend to undertake
more risky project5.

In each case an increase in the interest rate may reduce

the banks expected return; the bank therefore rations credit.

innovative

In his

thesis, Keeton (1979) demonstrates these two effects. He also

draws a distinction between Type I and Type 11 rationing: the former applies
when each indivi dual receives less than the amount he or she would wart at the

going interest

rate; the latter when among identical individuals some are

rationed and some are not.

6:llen (1987) provides a comprehensive survey of the credit rationing
literature. Stiglitz and Weiss (1987) review their earlier
contributions arid criticisms of them.
64The case for the importance of credit market phenomena, arising from
imperfect information, in accounting for economic fluctuations and the
apparent role of money in them has been made most vigorously by
Greenwald and Stiglitz (1987).

61

Although

c.redi t reti On ng pr oduce; the

appearance of nor cler I

markets, it does not necessarily imply an inefficient

allocation

(EngHsh, 1986). Along similar lines, Yotsuuka (1987)

credit

of rurces

shows that

even with

rationing, Ricardian equivalence may hold.
The

sense that credit rationing is an i mportarst component of the

monetary mechanism was reinforced by the findings of Friedman (1983) that the
debt—GNP ratio was among the most stable of macro ratios, HoweVer, in an
example of Goodhart or Murphy's Law, the debt—6NP ratio
previous
for

began

to diverge from

behavi or shortly after the Federal Reserve started arnounci rig

tar gets

the growth rate of debt.
Bernanke (1983), re—examining the Great Depression, argues that the

increased cost of financial intermediation was largely responsible for the
of investment, Beyond the effects of credit on demand, Blinder

collapse

(1985) claims that credit rationing affects aggregate supply. This is a
variant on the familiar Keyserlirsg—Patman—Cavallo—and—many—others argument

that higher interest rates are inflationary because they increase costs, A
sophisticated

general equilibrium model of credit rationing and its impact on

the macroeconomy ha been developed by Bernanke and Gertler (1987), who start
from asymmetric information between borrowers and lenders and show that firms'
balance sheets matter, and that in some circumstances government bailouts of
weak firms may be appropriate.
Banki

n.
Fana (1980) and Fischer Black (1975) re—examined the theory of the

banking firm, providing an
operator

of

abstract view of its

role, as portfolio manager and

the accounting system. By and large this so—called new view of

62

bnH rig

rio implications for the monetiry

had

mechanism beyond those already

clear from Patinkin (196).
The common literary

notion that bank

runs may be self—justifying

prophecies was confirmed by Diamond and Dybvig (1983), who also discussed how

deposit insurance could he a self—denying prophecy. King (1983) assessed

issues that have to be faced in analyzing the

theoretical

nineteenth

century

question of whether a competitive banking system with free entry would be
viable——an issue that the banking deregulation movement makes more than
academic.

Shiller

(1979) inaugurated a

protracted and fierce debate over the

issue of excess volatility of the stock market. The simple—minded observer

watching the U.S. stock market rise by a factor of almost three
and

1987 asks whether anything objective

increase, or whether some

responsible

It

between 1982

could possibly account for that

bubble or other irrationality might he

•

was Shiller's considerable achievement to propose a way of

answering that question because a rational stock price is the present
discounted value of dividends, the variance of stock prices should be related
to characteristics of the joint stochastic processes for dividends and the

discount factor. Shiller assumed the discount factor constants and argued

that stock prices fluctuated excessively. The Shiller tests were rapidly
applied to the term structure of interest arid exchange rates with asset

pricestypically being found to fluctuate excessively.

(1986) describes and
'6This sentence appears in the

65Jacklin

extends subsequent developments.
September 1987 first draft of this paper.

63

The subsequent debate seemed to pit fice conomlsts against
matroecoriomi st; ,

with

the advantage hi {ti rig over

ti ne to fi Tianco. '' The

issue is the stationarity of the dividend process; most recent work tends to

find that the stock market does rot necessarily fluctuate excesively (see for
example t(leidon (1986) and Marsh and Merton (1986)), though anomalies remain
in stock price behavior.

At the sane time as the empirical literature on excess volatility
developed, so did a theoretical literature on the possibility of bubbles in
asset prices.

bubble is a self—justifying departure of the stochastic

process for an asset price from its fundamentals, and is another example of

multiple equilibria. At a given rate of return1 r, on an asset, the expected
value of the bubble component of price has to grow at rate r. The first
bubbles were deterministic: but a bubble could typically not be expected to
grow at rate r if the economy was efficient, because it would eventually come

to dominate the economy. Blanchard (1979) produced partial equflibrium
examples of stochastic or bursting bubbles which would be expected to grow at
rate r

but would almost

equilibrium,

surely have burst by some point.

Tirole (1985) has shown

inefficient equilibria in which

that

In general

bubbles can exist only in

the growth

rate exceeds the interest rate, and

that bubbles tend to be welfare—increasing.
Rcardi an Equivalence and Fiscal Pol i

'7Thjs sentence too was written before October 1987; it remains to be
seen how Black Monday will affect both the statistical and the polemical
debates.

64

Barro
question

(1974) inaugurated another protracted debate,

this

one over the

of whether individual; treat government bonds as net wealth.

Patinkin (196, p289) had discussed the implication; of the issue for the
neutrality of money and the effects of open market operations on interest
It seemed clear that if the

rate;.

paid

off

debt floated by

the government is to be

by future generations, then the future taxes implied by current debt

would riot

4fst

the asset value of the debt. Barros contribution was to

show that finite lived individuals concerned about the welfare of their
descendent; might nonetheless behave as effectively infinitely lived, and thus
take into account the taxes to be levied on future generations.

although the

issue was posed as 'i; the debt wealth", the answer

is

also key to the questions of whether in fully neoclassical models fiscal
policy

affects real

interest rates, whether federal budget deficits affect

national saving and the trade account, whether open market operations are
neutral, whether social security affects the capital stock, and so forth.
Bernheim (1987) present; an account of the analytic arid empirical

literature it is clear that there are many reasons that Ricardian equivalence
could fail to hold, ard it is also clear that the evidence at this stage is
insufficient to change the prior views of most economists by very much.

Poterba and Summers (1987) argue that the concentration on finite hori:ons is
misleading, in that typically most of the debt will be paid off by those

currently alive, The U.S. fiscal policy experiment of the early 1980';
should, one might hope, have settled

the issue once—for—all: the major change

in the deficit raised real interest rates and did not increase private saving.
However that is only one episode, and its influence in regressions appears
insufficient to reject Ricardian equivalence (Evans, 1987).

Barqent and Wallace; (1B1) startling claim that aonctary

{inancinq

of a government budget deficit could produce a higher inflat.ion rate than

financing increased the awareness of the intertemporal implication;

monetary

of the government budget constraint. The argument is that if

ul t mately be financed by money printing, then

the deficit will

the mccuiul at ion of i

nt crest on

the debt will require higher seigriorage revenue jr the future—-which would
imply a higher steady state inflation rate with bond financing, arid could even

imply higher inflation now. The subsequent debate clarified not only the
reasonably general conditions under which the result holds, but also the
relationship between budget deficits and inflation (Drazcn and Helpman, 1986),
which

depends on the policies that are expected to be used to reduce the

deficit to a sustainable level.
Index ati on.

In 1974 Milton Friedman returned from Brazil convinced that indeatior
would protect the real economy from monetary disturbances and thereby reduce

the cost; of inflation. Bray (1976) and Fischer (1977) confirmed that
indexation

indeed neutralized the effect; of monetary shocks on

variables;

indexatiori in

the capital market; iould also neutrali:e

the effect;

of nominal shocks. But indeation might amplify the real effect; of real
shocks to the economy.

Given the clear result; on indexation and nominal shock;, the minimal
adoption

Evidently

of indexation in private contract; remains difficult to explain.
there are major advantages to

captured by existing models.

nominal contracting that

are not

One possibility is that nominal shock; account

for only a small part of the uncertainty about the outcomes o contracts,

66

which, together with small costs of adding complexity to contract;, prevent;
index ation.

The experience of accelerating inflation in heavily indexed economies
such as Brazil and Israel ha; been a chastening experience for proponents of
indexation.

The fact that high inflation reflects problems in policy making

was not taken sufficiently into account; if as a result of indexation the
real effects of inflation are reduced, the result may be an increase in the

rate of inflation to achieve similar real effects.
Weitzman'; much-discus;ed proposal that workers take part of their
compensation as a share of profits bears some similarity to indexing of the

wage to profits, at the firm level. Weitzan (e.g. 1986) argue; that firms
are more willing to hire labor in a profit—sharing scheme, which would enhance

macroeconomic stability. The extent to which superior Japanese unemployment
experience reflect; their bonus system is a key issue in evaluating profit-

sharing. There has been intensive examination of the issue in Britain, where

incentives for profit—sharing have been provided in the budget.

The TheorLf Growth.

Pi{ter rapid development in

the 4fties arid sixties, the theories of

economic growth and capital received relatively little attention for almost
two decades, despite the absolutely central importance of growth to economic

performance. The Ramsey—Solow and Samuelson's overlapping generations models
became workhorses of micro—based macroeconomics, but the theory of growth a;

Blanch4lower and Oswald (1986), who present evidence that profit—
sharing has been widely used in Britain, and Estrin, Grout and Wadwhani
(1987) take a sceptical view o4 the stabilizing and other beneficial
effects of profit—sharing.

67

such was neglected. The worldwide growth slowdown made it inevitable that
interest in growth would revive, though neither theory nor intensive

empirical

work has yet provided a persuasive explanation for the slowdown. Recent work
has emphasized the role of economies

of scale in

the growth process (e.g.

Romer, 1987).

The Theory_of Policy.

The rational expectations revolution in macroeconomic; and game theory

have combined to produce a far more sophisticated approach to the analysis of
pal icy than was state—of—the—art a decade ago. A key paper here is Kydland
and Prescott (1977), which introduced the problem of dynamic inconsistency of
optimal policy and argued that the dynamic inconsistency arising irom
discretionary policy—making could be prevented by adopting policy rules.
Developing the game theory approach, Prescott (1978) dismIssed the use of
optimal control theory for the design of optimal policy on the grounds that
economic agent; do not respond mechanistically to changes in policy rules.
The game theoretic approach to policy makes if possible to model
notions such as reputation and credibility that have long been staples of
policymakers'

own discussions of their actions.? The predictive content of

these applications, as opposed to their usefulness in providing insights,
remains to be developed. Barro and Gordon (1983) showed that discretionary
monetary policy—making could produce an inflationary bias, but subsequent
developments that allow for reputational effects have weakened that result;
nor is it clear how to test it.

69This large and rapidly growing literature receives little space here
because it has been surveyed at length by, among others, Fischer (1986)
and Rogoff (1987).

68

VI Concluding_Comment.

Any comparison of the contents of this survey with that of Barro arid
Fischer (1976)
breadth

must conclude that there has been a tremendous increase in the

and depth of macroeconomics in the past decade. Technical progress

from the side of both theory and econometrics has made It possible to address
and illuminate issues that were simply too difficult before——such as the
excess volatility of asset prices, the macroeconomic implications of
monopolistic competition, coordination problems in the macroeconomy, bank
runs, and the existence of multiple equilibria, to pick

just a few examples.

There is no question that macroeconomics is far more microeconomics
based than it used to be.

In a sense the microeconomic foundations of macro

in equilibrium models of

now exist,

equilibrium

the Prescott—Kydland type in

the

approach, and in models such as the Akerlof—Yellen model in the

post—Keynesian approach. But to a considerable extent the earlier notion that
once the microeconomic foundations had been laid, a set of standard macro
models

could be used, has not been justified. Rather the tendency has been to

build a variety of

micro—based models, each making or emphasizing a specific

point.
A

three equation macromodel ,

consisting of

aggregate supply equation is frequently used.
LM

the IS—LM apparatus plus an

In the simplest version the IS—

side is reduced to the quantity equation or a Clower constraint, and a

Lucas aggregate supply equation, or one in which exogenous productivity shocks

drive output, is added.

In the more Keynesian versions, velocity becomes a

69

functi on

of the nterest r ate, arid there is more detail on the demand side.

In terms of this model, there has been advance in testing of the aggregate

demand side (e.g. Hall

(197B) on consumption)

understanding of the structural determinants

but not to the same extent in
of demand; there has been real

progress in analysis of the financial markets, though not necessarily in

understanding of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy; ard there is
greater understanding of the theoretical underpinnings of the supply side.

Has macroeconomics progressed? Yes; there has been remarkable
progress in understanding many theoretical issues, some specified above, that

were only imprecisely understood before. There has also been progress in
understanding the
And

yet: there is

macroeconomics,

fluctuations,
untruths

structure

of the

basic macro model.

greater not less confusion at the business end of

in understanding the actual causes of macroeconomic

and in applying

macroeconomics to policy-making. Revealing

is of course progress, and it is possible that the greater

uncertainty that now exists is part of the process of rubble—clearing that
precedes the erection of a new structure.

Probably it is not, Rather there are two factors at work, One is the
increasing realization of the extraordinary difficulty of settling disputes

with econometric evidence. Take for instance the issues of Ricardian

equivalence and excess volatility of asset prices. Both are quite
fundamental,

both have been the subjects of intensive

empirical scrutiny, but

neither has yielded to the time series evidence brought to bear.

70

What the implications of the lack of cutting power of time series
macroeconoftetric; may be remains to be seen. The use of panel data,
statistical

events studies as in

finance, and careful case studies of

particular episodes, are all obvious possibilities.

The ;ecnd factor is that

it

ha; become fashionable, at least in

the

United States, to claim that economists have little to say on the policy
issues of the day, beyond recommending institutional reforms, That is the

comparative advantage of some. But it would not be progress for
macroeconomi ;ts
arguing

in general to

that while we

answer the question of

avoid current policy issues, for instance by

can (perhaps) design a
whether

good budget rule, we cannot

the budget deficit should be cut now or

not.

The decision will be made, one way or the other, and the abdication of serious
nacroeconomists leaves the policy advice business to those either ignorant or
unscrupulous enough to claim full understanding of the issues.
Macroecoromists will not be able seriously to participate in such analyses
without the use of models, small or large, that attempt to quantify the impact
of policy decisions.

Finally one has to ask where the field is heading. There are two
correct answer;. One is that the field is no longer a field, that it is too
big for any researcher to describe her or himself a; a specialist in it, and
that much of macroeconomics will gradually meld into subspecialties and partly
be absorbed in existing fields.

The second is that macroeconomics will continue just as long as
macroeconomic fluctuations. If one further takes the (appropriate) view that
business fluctuations are not caused by one major set of shocks, nor

71

propagated

rnin1y by a inqle inportant mecharrn, then

progress

will have to

be made in evaluating the significance of each mechanism and 4itting the
pieces

together. That

is what macroeconometr i c models att empt to do; it

also what Kydland and Prescott attempt in their calibrated (1982) model.
Within
chal

such models, the aggregate supply side remains

lenge.

the outstanding

72

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abel, Andrew B. (1985), 11Dynamic l3ehavior of Capital Accumulation in a Cash—
in—Advance Model", Journal of Monetary Economics, 16, 1 (July), 55—71.

(1985). "Inventories, Stock-Outs and Production Smoothing, Review
of Economic. Studies, 52, 283-293.

Abratm, Kather me 8. and Lawrence F. Katz (1986). "Cycl i cal Unemployment:
Sectoral Shifts or Aggregate Disturbances?, Journal of Political Econy,
94, 3 (June), 507-522.
Adelman, Irma and Frank Adelmen (1959). "The Dynamic Properties of the
I(lein—Goldberger Model", Econornetrica, 27, 4 (Oct) , 596—625.

Akr1o4, 6eorg A. nd Ross D. Milbourne (1980). 'The Short Run Demand for
Money", Economic Journal, 90 (Dec.), 885—900.

-

Akerlof , George and Janet Yellen (1985) • "A Near—Rational Model of the
Business Cycle with Wage and Price Inertia", Quarterly Journal of Economics,
100, Supplement, 176—213.
Allen, Linda (1987). "The Credit Rationing Phenomenon: A Survey of the
Literature", Occasional Papers in Business and Finance *7, Salosnon Brothers
Center, New York University.
Altonji, Joseph 6. (1982). "The Intertemporal Substitution Model of Labour
Market Fluctuations: An Empirical Analysis', Review of Economic Studies, 49,
5, Special Issue, 783—824.
Arrow, Kerneth 3. (1959). "Towards a Theory of Price Adjustment', in M.
Abramowit:, et. al. (eds), The Allocation of Economic Resources. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.
Ashenfelter, Orley (1984). "Macroeconomic Analyses and Microeconomic
Analyses of Labor Supply", in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer (eds) , Carnegie—
Rochester Conference Series, Vol. 21.
Azariadis, Costas (1975). "Implicit Contracts and Urederemployment
Equilibria", Jourr'al of Political Economy, 833 6 (Dcc), 1183—1202.

"Implicit Contracts and Related Topics", in Hornstein
The Economics of the Labour Market. London: Her Majesty's Stationery
Office.
(ed) ,

73

(1981). 'Self—Fulfilling Prophecies', Jourral of Economic TheoH,
25, 3 (Dec) ,

380—396.

Daily, Martin N. (1974), "Wages and Employment under Uncertain Demand",

y_pf Economic Studies, 41, 1 (Jan), 37—50.

Laurence (1987) • "External ties from Contract Length" fort hconii rig,
American Economic Review.
Bal I ,

and David Romer (1986). "The Equilibrium and Optimal Timing of
Prices Changes', mirneo, New York University.
(1987). "Sticky Prices as Coordination Failure', NDER Working Paper

2327 (July).
Darriett, William A., Edward ), Oenbacher and Paul A. Spiridt, (1984). "The
New Divisia Monetary Aggregates",
92, 6 (Dec),
1049—1085.

Barro, Robert J. (1972). °A Theory of Monopolistic Price Adjustment', ieview
of Economic Studies, 39, 1 (Jan), 93—110.

(1974). "Are Government Bonds Net. Wealth?", purn_çç_
Economy, 81, 6 (Dec), 1095—1117.
(1977). "Long—Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary
Policy", Journal of Monetary Economics, , 3 (July), 305—316.
(1978). "Unanticipated Money, Output, and the Price Level in the
United States", Journal of Political Econom, 86, 4 (Aug), 549—580.

and David B. Gordon (1983). "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy
in a Natural Rate Model", journal of Political Economy, 91, 4 (Aug) 589—610
and Stanley Fischer (1976). "Recent Developments in Monetary
Theory", Journal
4 Monetary_Economics, 2, 2 (April), 133-167.
and Zvi Hercowit: (1980). "Money Stock Revisions and Unanticipated
Money Growth', Journal of Monetary Economics, 6 (April), 257—267.
and Robert 6. KIng (1984). "Time—Separable Preferences and

Intertemporal—Substitution Models of Business Cycles", u erly AL_Qi
Economics, 99, 4 (Nov) , 817—840.
Begg, David (1977). "Rational Expectations of Inflation and the Behavior of
Asset Returns in a Stochastic Macroeconomic Model', Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Economics, MIT.
Bernanke, Ben (1983). "Non—Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the
Propagation of the Great Depression", American Economic Review, 73, 3
(June) , 257—276.

74

and Mark Gertler (1987). 'Financial Fragility and Economic
Performance', I4DER Working Paper *2318 (July).

Bernheim, 6. Douglas (1967). "Ricardian Equivalence; An Evaluation of Theory
and Evidence", forthcoming,

Bus, Mark 3. (1985). "Real Wages Over the Business Cycle: Evidence from
Panel Data", Journal of Political Economy, 93, 4 (Aug) , 666—689.
Black, Fischer (1975). 'Bank Funds Management in an Efficient Market',
.2, 323-339.

(1982). "6eneral Equilibrium and Business Cycles", NBER Working
Paper *950.

Blanchard, Olivier 3. (1979). "Speculative Bubbles, Crashes and Rational
Expectations', Economics Letters, 3, 387-389.
"Price Pisynchroni2ation arid Price Level Inertia", in R.
Dornbusch and I1.H. Sirnonsen (Eds) ,

inflation,

Debt, and Indeation.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(1988). "Why Does Money Affect Output? A Survey", forthcoming in
B.tl. Friedman and F.H. Hahn (eds) , Handbook of Monetary Economics, North
Hol land.

and Stanley Fischer (1968).

forthcoming.

and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki (1987). "Monopolistic Competition arid the
Effects of Aggregate Demand', American Economic Review, 77, 4 (Sept), 647
666.

and Danny Ouah (1987). "The Dynamic effects of Aggregate Demand and
Supply Disturbances", rnimeo, Department of Economics, MIT.
arid Lawrence H. Summers (1986). "Hysteresis and the European
Unemployment Problem', NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1986, 15—78.

Blinder, Alan S. (1981). "Retail Inventory Behavior and Business
I_Qn_EconDmic4ctivity, 2, 443-505.
Fluctuation;",
(1984). "Can the Production Smoothing Model of inventory Behavior be
aved?', NEiER Working Paper *1257.
(1985). "Credit Rationing and Effective Supply Failure;", NBER
Working Paper *1619.
and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1983). "Money, Credit Constraints, and
Economic Activity", American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 73, 2
(May) 297-302.

75

Boschen, John and Herschel Grossman (1982). "Tests of Equilibrium

croeconomics with Contemporaneous Monetary Data", J__çMtv
Economics, 10 (Nov) , 309—333
Bray, M.M. arid N.E. Gavin (1986). "Rational Expectations Equilibria,
Learning, and Model Specification", Econometrics, 54, 5 (Sept), 1.129—1160.

Breeden, Douglas (1979). "An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with
Financial
Stochastic Consumption and Investment Opportunities", Journal
Economics, 7 (Sept), 265—296.

Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer (1971). 'The Uses of Moneys Money in the
Theory of an Exchange Economy", American Economic Review, 61, 5 (Dec.), 784Brunner ,

805.

"An Aggregate Theory for a Closed Economy", in J. Stein
(ed) Monetarism. New York: North—Holland.

Bruno, Michael, and Stanley Fischer (1987). "Seigniorage, Operating Fules
and the High Inflation Trap", NBER Working Paper No. 2413.
and

Stagflation.

Jeffrey Sachs (1985).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Jeremy I. and Lawrence H. Summers (1986). "A Theory of Dual Labor
Markets with Application to Industrial Policy, Discrimination, and Keynesian
pnomic;, 4, 3 (July), 376—414.
j_L
Unemployment",
Bulow,

Campbell, John Y. (1986) "Bond and Stock Returns in a Simple Exchange
Model", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101, 4 (Nov), 785—803.
and N. Gregory Mankiw (1987). "Are Output FluctuationE
Transitory?", forthcoming, OuarterLy Journal of Economics.
Calvc, Guillermo A. (1963). "Staggered Prices in a Utility—Maximi:ing
Framework", Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 3 (Sept), 383-398.
Caplin, Andrew S. (1985). "The Variability of Aggregate Demand with (S,s)
Inventory Policies", Econometrica, 53, 6 (Nov), 1395—1410.
and Daniel Spulber (1987). "Menu Costs and the Neutrality of
Money", Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Cass, David and Karl Shell (1983). "Do Sunspots Matter?" Journal of
Political Economy, 91, 2, (April), 193—227.
Cochrar,e, John (1986). "How Big is the Random Walk Component in GNP?",
mimeo, University of Chicago.

76

Cooper, Russell and Andrew John (1985). "Coordinating Coordination Failures
in

reyneian Models", Coiwes

Foundation Discussion Paper *745R, Yale

University.
Cox,
the

John C.

Jonathan E. 1ngeroi 1 and

Stephen

A. Ross (1985) • "A

The-or y of

Term Structure of Interest Rates", Econometrica, 53, 2 (March), 385-406.

De Canlo, Stephen (1979). "Rat,ional Expectations and Learning from

93, 1 (Feb), 47-58.

Experience",
Dc Long, 3 •

Flexibility

Bradf ord and Lawrence H. Summers (1986). "is Incr eased PrIce
Destabilizing?" American Economic Review, 76, 5 (Dec) , 1031—

1044.

Diamond, Douglas W. rd

Philip Dybvig (1903). "Bank Rune, Deposit Insurance
and Liquidity", Journal of Political Economy, 91, 3 (June), 401—419.
Diamond, Peter A. (1981). "Mobility Costs, Frictional Unemployment, and
89, 4 (Aug), 790-812.
Efficiency",

LcI_c!y,

(1984).

"tlonoy in Search Equilibrium",

j_ça_,

52, L

and Drew Fudenberg (1902). "An Example of Animal Spirits
Equilibrium", mimmo, Department of Economics, MIT.

Dixit, Avinash and Joseph E. Stiglit (1977). "Monopolistic Competition and
Optimum Product Diversity", American Economic Review, 67, 3 (June) , 297—308.
Dornbusch, Rudiger and Stanley Fischer (1907). Macroeconomic! (4th edition).
New York McGraw Hill.
Drazer,, Allan (1979). "The Optimal Rate of Inflation Revisited", Journal of
Monetary Economics, 5, 2 (April), 231—248.
(1980). ""Recent Developments in r,acroecc'nomic Disequilibrium
Theory", Econometrica, 48, 2 (March), 283—306.

and ElhananHelpman (1986). "Inflationary Consequences of
Anticipated Macroeconomic Policies", NBER Working Paper No.2006.
Dunlop, John T. (1938). "The Movements of Real and Money Wages", Economic_
Journal, 413—434.
English, Wifliam 8. (1986). 'Credit Rationing in General Equilibrium',
CARESS Working Paper 86—20, University of Pennsylvania.
Estrin, Saul, Paul Grout and Sushil Wadwhani (1987>. 'Profit—Sharing and
Employee Share Ownership", Economic Policy, 4 (April) ,13—52.

77

Evari,

Paul (1987). 'Interest Pates and Expected Future Eudget Deficits in
the United States", Journal of Political Econory, 95, 1 (Feb), 34-58.

Faig, Miguel (19). "Optimal Taxation of Money Ealances', mirneo, Economic;
Department, Etanford University.
Fama, Eugene F. (1975). "Short—Term Interest Rates a; Predictors of
Inflation", AmericanEconomicReivew, 65, 3 (June), 269-282.

(1B0).

'BanLing in the Theory of Finance", Journal of Monetary

_QQjC., 6, 1, 39—57.
Farber, Henry (1986). "The Analysis of Union Dehavior", in 0. Ashenfslter
and R. Layard (eds) , Handbook of Labor Economics.
Feenstra, Robert C. (1986). 'Functional Equivalence between Liquidity Costs
and the Utility of Money", Journal of Monetary_Economics, 17, 271—291.
Feldstein, Martin (1976). "Inflation, Income Taxes, and the Rate of
Interest", _m
n_conomic Review, 66, 5 (Dec), 809—820.
and Lawrence H. Summer; (1978). "Inflation, Tax Rules, and the
Pa
son Economic Activity, 1, 61-99.
Long-Term Interest Rate', BrDoki

Fethke, Gary and Andrew Policano (1986). "Will Wage Setters Ever Stagger
Decision;?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101, 4 (Nov) , 867—677.
Fischer, Stanley (1977). "Long—Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and
J!y, 85, i (Feb)
the Optimal Money Supply Rule", Journal__of_Polijç L_E
19 1-206.

(1977a). "Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability", in K.
Brunner and A. t'leltzer (eds), Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, Vol. 5.

'Capital Accumuiation or the Transition Path in' a Monetary
Optimi:ing Model",

Econometrica, 47, 6 (Nov) , 1433—1439.

"Towards an Understanding of the Cost; of Inflation: II',
in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer (eds) , The Costs and Consequences of Inflation.
Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 15, 5—42.
"Seigniorage and the Case for a National Money",
of Political Economy, 90, 2 (April), 295—31:3.

'Inflacion y Crecimiento', CuadrnosdeEnomia, 20 (Dee)
267-278.

(1986). "Time Consistent Monetary and Fiscal Policy: A Survey',
mimec, Department of Economics, MIT.

78

(1987). "1944, 1963, and 1985", in P. Dorr'busch, S. Fichr and 3.

-

Bc s on s (e d s),

Cambridge, MA MIT

Press.

arid Franco Modi gli ani (1978) "Towards an Liriderstariding c{ the Real
Effects. and Costs of Inflation", WelwirtschmfUichesArchiv, 810-032.

Frankel,

Jeffrey A. (1985). "Portfolio Crowding—Out Empirically Estimated",

100 (Supplement), 1041-1065.

Friedman, Denjamin M. (1983). "The Roles of Money arid Credit in
Macroeconomic Analysis", in 3. Tobin (ed) , Mecroeconomics,__Prices.nd
Ouantities. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
"Crowding Out or Crowding In? Evidence on Debt-Equity
Substitutability", miaco, Department of Economics, Harvard University.
Friedman,

hilton (1968). 'The Role of

Monetary Policy",

Reivew, 58, 1, 1—17.
(1970). "A Theoretical Framework for Monetary Analysis', Journeilo
Political Economy, 78, 2 (March/April), 193—238.

States,

and Anna 3. Schwartz (1963). A Monetar His.tory
1867—1960. Princeton University Press.

of the United

'Money and Business Cycles",
Statistics, 45, 1 (Part 2, Feb), 32—64.
Fri ;ch ,

Ragnar (1933). 'Fropagati or Problems arid Impulse Problems i r, Dynamic

Economics", in Economic Essays In Honor of Gustav Cassel, 171-205.
Frydman, Roman and Edmund S. Phelps. (1983) (Editors). Individual Forecasting
and Aggregate Outcomes. New York Cambridge University Press.
Geary, Patrick T. arid John Kennan (19S2 . 'The Employment-F:eal wage

Relationship:

An International Study". Journal of Political Econo, 90,

4

(Aug), 854—871.
Gold{eld, Stephen M. (1976). "The Case of the
Papers on Economic Activity, 9, 683—730.

Missing Money", Brookings.

Sordon, Robert 3. (1982). "Price inertia and Policy lrieffectiyene'ss in the
United States, 1890—1980", Journal of Political Economy, 90, 6 (Dcc)
1087—1117.

Grandeont, Jean—Michel (1985). 'On Endogenous Competitive Business Cycles",
Econometrica, 53, 5 (Sept), 995—1046.

79

Gray, JoAnna (1976). "Wage Indeation: A Macroeconomic Approach", Journal of
Monetargconomics, 2, 221-235.
Greenwald, 6rucc and Jose-ph E. Stiglit (1967). "Money, Imperfect
Information and Economic Fluctuations", NGER )?Jorkirlg Paper No. 2188.
Grossman, Sanford, Oliver Hart and Eric Maskin (1983). "Unemployment with
Observable Aggregate Shocks", Journal of Political Economy, 91, 907-928.

Haberler, Oottfried (1937). Prerit and Depression. Geneva: League of
N at i on s.

Hail, Robert E. (1975). "The Rigidity of Wage-s and the Persie-iice of
Unemployment", Brookins Papers on Economic
2, 301—335.

"Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent Income
Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence", Journal of Political Economy., 86, 6 (Dcc),
1978.

(1986). "Market Structure and Macroeconomic Fluctuations",
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 285—338.

(1998). "Consumption", forthcoming in Handbook of Monetary
Economics.
and David Lilien (1979). "Efficient Wage Bargains Under Uncertain
Supply", American Economic Review, 69, 5 (Dec), 868—879.
Ham, John (1986). "Testing Whether Unemployment Represents Intertemporal
Labour Supply Substitution", Review of Economic Studies, 53, 4 (Aug), 559—
578.

Hansen, Gary D. (1985). "Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle", Journal
of Monetary Economic;, 16, 3 (Nov), 309—328.

Oliver (1962). 'A Model of imperfect Competition with keyresiar
Features", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 97, 1 (Feb), 109—138.
Hart,

(1983). "Optimal Labour Contracts Under Asymmetric Information: An
Introduction", Review_of Economic Studies, 50, 3-35.
and Rengt Holm;trom (1986). "The Theory of Contracts", MIT
Department of Economics, Working Paper *418.
Heckman, James 3. (1984). "Comments on the Ashenfelter and Iydlarid Papers",
in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, eds, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, Vol. 21.
and Thomas E. Macurdy (1987). "Empirical Tests of Labor Market
Equilibrium: A Microecoriomic Perspective", mimec, Department of Economics,
University of Chicago.

80

Helpman, Elhanan and Ephrnm Sada (1979), Optima1 Financing of the
Governments Budget: Ta>es, Bonds, or Money", American Economic Review,
152- 160.
Hi c ;,

R •
(1950). A Contributi on to the Theor
Clarendon Press.

John

Oxford:

Trade

Cycle.

Howitt, Peter (1987). "Business Cycles with Costly Search and Recruiting",

forthcoming, uarterly9urnal of Economics.

Jacklin,

L'harles 3. (1986). 'Banks and Risk Sharing: Inst.abilitie and
Coordination", Center for Research in Security Prices, University of
Chicago, Working Paper *185.
Johnson,

Harry 6.

(1962). 'Monetary Theory and Policy", Arneric'Ti Economic

Review, 52, 3 (June), 335—384.
Jovanovic, Boyan (19B2). "Inflation and Welfare in the Steady State",
Journal of Political Economy, 90, 3 (June), 561—577.
Kahn, James (1987). "Inventories and the Volatility of Production",
Economic Review, 77, 4 (Sept), 667—679.
Kaldor, Nicholas (1940). "4 Model of the Trade Cycle", Economic Journal,
78 —9 2.

Katz, Lawrence F. (1986). "Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Explanation",
NBER Macroeconomic Annual, 235—276.

Keeton, William (1979). Eguilu

New York: Garland

Publishing Company.
Kehoe, Timothy 3.

and David K. Levine '1985). "Comparative Statics and
Infinite Horizon Models", Econometrica, 53, 2 (tlarchi

Perfect Foresight in
433—45.

King, Robert 6. (1953). "On the Economics of Private Money", Journal of
Monetary Economics, 12, 1 (July), 127—158.
and Charles I. Plosser (1982). "Money, Credit and Prices in a Real
Business Cycle", American Economic Review, 74, 3 (June), 363—380.

Kleidon, Allan W. (1986). 'Variance Bounds Tests and Stock Price Valuation
Models", Journlof Political Economy, 94, 5 (Oct), 953-1001.

Kydland, Finn and Edward C. Prescott (1977). "Rules Rather than Discretier
The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans", Journal of Political Economy, 85, 3
(June) , 473—492.

81

(1982). "Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations", Econometrica,
50, 6 (Nov) 1345—137b.
—

Kurz, Hordecai (1974). "Equilibrium in a Finite Sequence of Market with
Transaction Costs", Econometrica, 42, 1 (Jan), 1—20.
Layard, Richard (1986). ft

tQ_t_V

Lp_'it. O4ord University

Press.

Leortief, Wassily (1946). 'The Pure Theory of the Guaranteed Annual Wage
Contract", Journal of_Political_Economj, 54 (Feb) , 76-79.

Lilien,

David (1982). "Sectoral Shift; and Cyclical Unemployment", Journal
of Political Economy, 90, 4 (Aug) , 777—793.

Lindbeck, Assar arid Dennis Snower (1984). "Involuntary Unemployment as an
Insider—Outsider Dilemma", Working Paper * 282, Institute for International
Economic Studi es, Un versi ty of Stockholm.

Lipsey, Richard S. (1560). "The Relationship between Unemployment and the
Rate of Chane of Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861-1957: 4
Further Analysis", Economica, 27, (Feb), 1—31,
Litterman, Robert B. and Laurence Weiss (1985). "Money, Real Interest Rates,
and Output: A Reinterpretation of Postwar U.S. Data", Econometrica, 53, 1
(Jan), 129—156.
Long, John B. and Charles I. Plosser (1983). "Real Business
of Political Economy, 91, 1 (Feb), 39—69.

Cycles", Jcwrrial

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (1972). "Expectation; and the Neutrality of Money",
Journal of Economic Theory, 4 (April), 103—124.
(1973) "Some International Evidence on Output—Inflation Tradeoffs",
American Economic Review, 63, (June), 326—334.
"Econometric Policy Evaluatior: A Critique', in K. Brunrier
and A. tlelt:er (eds), The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets, Carnegie—
Rochester Conference Series, Vol. 1.

(1977). "Understanding Business Cycles", in K. Brunner and A.
Melter (eds) , Stabili:ation of the Domestic and International Economy,
Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series, Vol. 5.
(1978). "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy", Ec
1429—1445.
'Unemployment Policy", American
and Proceedings, 68, 2, 353-357.

jce., 46,

Papers

- (1980).

""Equilibrium in a Pure Currency Economy", in J.H. }<areken
Models of Monetaj Economies, Federal Reserve Bank of

arid N. Wall ace (pds) ,

Minneapolis.
(1987). Mi de]s c,{ Du ress Cycles. O{ord: Fiasi I Dl ackwil 1.

and Edward C. Prescott (1974). Equilibrium Search arid
rnal of Economic Theoij, 7, 1 (Jan), 188-209.
Unemployment",
—

and Leonard Rapping (1969). "Real Wages, Employment, and
77, 5, (Dept/Oct), 721—754.
Inflation", QLL

and Thomas J. Sargent (1978). "P1fter <oynesian Economics", in fter
the Phillips Curve: Persistence of High Inflation and High Unemploment,
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
and Stokey (1987). ""Money and Interest in a Cash—in—P1dvance

Economy", _cooetriç, 55, 3 (May), 491-514.
Mark J. 'Choice Under Uncertainty: Problems Resolved and
Unresolved", Journal_of Economic Perspectives, 1, 1 (Summer), 121—154.
Machina ,

Malinvaud, Edmorid (1976). The Theory of Unemployment Reconsidered. New York:
Haisted Press.

Mankiw, N. Gregory (1985). "Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles:
Macroeconomic Model of Monopoly", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100, 2
(May), 529-539.
(1987). "The Optimal Collection of Seigniorage: Theory and
2270 (May).
Evidence", NBER Working Paper

Julio Roteniberg and Lawrence Summers (1985), 'Intertemporal
,
Substitution in Macroeconomics", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100,
,r

L., •'

1

Marcet, P1. and Thomas 3. Sargent (1987). 'Convergence of Least Squares
Learning Mechanisms in Self Referential Linear Stochastic Models', mineo,
Stanford University.
Marsh, Terry A. and Robert C. Merton (1986). "Dividend Variability and
Variance Bounds Tests for the Rationality of Stock Market Prices", American
Economic Review, 76, 3 (June) , 483—498.
McCallum, Bennett 1. (1984). "On Low—Frequency Estimates of Long—Run
Relationships jr Macroeconomics", Journal of Monetary Economics, 14, 1
(July), 3—14.

(1986). "On 'Real' and 'Sticky—Price' Theories cf the Business
Cycle", Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 18, 4 (Nov)1 397—414.

McDonald, Ian and Robert P4. Solow (1961). Wage Bargaining and Empyment",
American Economic Rivew, 71,

(Dec) ,

896—908.

Rajriish ar,d Edward C. Prescott (1985). "The Equity Preniun; A
Puzzle", Journal of__Monetary_Economics, 15, 145-162.
tlehra,

Miller, Merton H. and Daniel Orr, (1966). "A Model of the Demand for Morley
by Firms", Ouartery Journal of Economics, 81, 3 (Aug), 413—435.
Mi shki

n, Frederic S. (1983)

tj_ç_.

t1BEF:

University of Chicago Press.

Mosser, Patricia C. (1986)

"Essays on Inventory Deha.vior and Excess
Volatility", Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Economics, MIT.
Mortenseri, Dale T. (1970). "4 Theory of Wage arId Employment Dynamics', in

E.S. Phelps (ed), bc._cit.
'The Matching Process as a Noncooperative Eiargainir'g

Came", in 3. McCall (cdl The Ecc'nomic of information an_çj.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Mundell, Robert A. (1963). "Inflation and Real Interest", u
Political Economy, 71, 3 (June), 280-283.
Murphy, Kevin P1. and Robert H. Topel (1987). "The Evolution of Unemployment
in the United States: 1968-1965", forthcoming in NBER Macroeconomics AnI1Lua.

Nelson, Charles R. and Charles I. Plosser (1982). "Trends and Random Walks
in Macroeconomic Time Series", 3ournal of Monetary_Economics, 10, 139-162.

Nordhaus, William (1972). "Recent Developments in Price Dynamics", in 0.

(ed), The Econometrics 04 Price Determination. Washirgtori, DC:
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Eckstein

Qkun, Arthur (1981).
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Oswald, Andrew (1986). "The Economic Theory of Trade Unions: An Introductory
Survey", in L. Caimfors and H. Horn (eds), Trade Unions, Waqe
Macroeconomic Stability. London: MacMillan.

Formationd

Parkin, Michael (1986). "The Output—Inflation Tradeoff when Prices are
Costly to Change", Journal of Political Economy, 94, 1 (Feb) , 200-224.
Patinkin, Don (1965). Money, Interest, and Prices. Evanston, Ill: Harper and
Row.

(1988). "John Maynard Keynes", in The New Pa ry_e_.

84

Pencavel, John (1986)."Wages and Employment under Trade Unionim
Microeconomic Models and tiacroeconumic Applications', in L. Caimfors and H.
Nor n

(e d s),

London: MacMillan.

Phelps, Edmund S. 1968). "Money Wage Dynamics and Labor Market
Equilibrium", Journal of Political Economy, 76, 4 (July/Aug) , 687—711.
(1970). (Editor). Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and
Inflation Theory. Hew York: Norton.
and Sidney 6. Winter (1970). "Optimal Price Policy under Atcimistic
Competition", in E.S. Phelps (ed), bc. cit.
(1973). "Inflation in the Theory of Public Finance", Swedish
Journal of Economics, 75, 1 (Jan—March),
arid John B. Taylor (1977). 'Stabilizing Powers of Monetary Policy
under Rational Expectations", Journal of Political Econi, 85, 1 (Nov)
16- 190.

Phillips, A. W. (1958). "The Relation between Unemployment and the Rate of
Change of Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861—1957", Economica, 25
(Nov.) ,

283-299.

Pissarides, Christopher A. (1985). "Short—Run Equilibrium Dynamics of
Unemployment, Vacancies, and REal Wages", American Economic Review, 75, 4
(Sept), 676—690.
Porter, Richard D. , Thomas D. Simpson and Eileen Mauskopf (1979). "Financial

Innovation and the Monetary Aggregates", Brookins Papers on Economic
Activity, 1, 213—229.
Poterba, James and Julio Rotemberg (1987). 'Money in the Utility Function
An Empirical Implementation", in W. Barnett nd K. Singleton (ebs), New
Developments in Monetary Economics. Cambridge University Press.
and Lawrence H. Summers (19B7). "Finite Lifetimes arid the Effects
of Budget Deficits on National Saving", Journal of Monetary Economics,
(Sept).

Prescott, Edward C. (1977). "Should Control Theory Be Used for Economic
Stabilization?, in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer (eds), Carnegie—Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 7.
(1986). "Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement', Federal Reserve
Bank of Minnieapol is

LL_ii,

Fall,

9—22.

Ouah, Danny (1967). "What do We Learn from Unit Roots n Macroeconomic Time
Series", mimEO, Department of Economics, MIT.

Rasche, Robert (1987).

"Velocity

and Money Demand Functions: Do Stable

Brunur and A. Melter (ods)
ati c'rshi ps Exi st'?' {or thcomi rig jr
Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series, Volume 27.
Rd

Roberts, John (1986). "An Equilibrium Modsi with Keynesian Unemployment at
Wairasian Prices", mimeo, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.
Roaersor, Richard (1985). 'lr,divisitle Labor, Lotteries, and Equilibrium",
mimec', Department of Ecoromics, University of Rochester.

Rogoff, Kenneth (1987). "Reputational Constraints on Monetary Policy', in K.
Erunner and A. Melt:er (eds), Bubbles and Other Essaj's. Carnegie—Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol 26. North—Holland.
Romer, David (1986). "A Simple General Equilibrium Version c'f the Baunol—
Tobin Model", !uarterly Journal of Economic;, 101, 4 (Nov) , 663—86.
Romer, Paul ti. (190&). "Increasing Return; and Long—Run Growth",
Political Economy, 94, 5 (Oct) , 1002—1037.

ajpf

Rose, Andrew (1986). "The Autoregressivity Paradox in Macroeconomics", Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Economics, MIT.
Rosen, Sherwin (1985). "Implicit Contracts: A Survey",
Literature, 23, 1144—1175.
Rotemberg, Julio (1987). "The New Keynesian Microfoundation;",
Macroeconomic; Annual.

the Multiplier Analysis and
the Principle of Acceleration", Review of Economics and Statistcs, 21
Samuelson, Paul A. (1939). "Interactions between
(May)

, 75-78,

Sargent,

Rational

Thomas J. (1578). 'Estimation of Labor Demand Schedules Under
Expectation;", Journal c'f

Political

Economy, 86,

(Dcc), 1009—

1044.

(1987). Dynamic Macroeconomic_Theoty. Cambridge, MA Harvard
University Press.
and Neil Wallace (1975). " Rational Expectations, the Optimal
Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule", Journal of
jj_tical Economy, 83, 2 (April) 241—254.

(1981). "Some Unpleasant Monctarist Arithmetic", Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis Ouarterly Review, Fall, 1—17.

06

"Inflation and the 6overnmert Budget Corst r ai nt', iii A.
Razin and E. Sadka feds), Economic_Polity in_Theory_nd_Practice. London:

(1987)

Macmi 1 lan.

, Jul ía

B. C 1985). "Changes in the CycI ical Pattern of Real Wages:
Evidence from Nine Countries, 1955—80", Economic Journal, 95 (June), 452Schor

468.

Shapiro, Carl and Joseph £. Stiglitz (1904). 'Equilibrium Unemployment as a
Worker Discipline Device", American Economic Review, 74 (June), 43.
Shapiro, Matthew D. (1987). "Are Cyclical Fluctuations in Productivity Due
More to Supply Shocks or Demand Shocks?", NBER Working Paper 12147, Feb.

Sheshinski, Eytan and Yoram Weiss (1977). 'Inflation and Costs of Price
Adjustment", Revipw of Economic_Stu.ti, 44, 2 (June) , 267—303.

Robert 3. (1981). "Do Stock

Prices Move To Much to be Justified by
Subsequent Changes in Dividends?" American Economic Review, 71, 3 (June),

Shiller,
421—4:36,

(1987). "The Term Structure of Interest Rates", Yale University,
Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper * 843, (July).
Shleifer, Andre

Econom,
Sidrauski

(1986). "implementation Cycles", Journal of Politic.aL

94, 6 (Dec) ,

1163—1190.

Miguel (1967). "Rati onal Choice and Patterns of )irowth in a

Monetary Economy", American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 57,
(May)

,

534—544

Sims, Christopher (1972). "Money, Income, and Causality",
62, 4 (Sept), 540—552.
(1980). "Comparison cf interwar and Postwar Business cies:
tionetarism Reconsidered", Amerc&n Economic Peview, Papers and Proceedings,
70, 2 (May) , 250—257.

(l9BOa). "Macroeconomics and Reality", Econonetrica, 48, 1 (Jar), 1—
48.

Slutsky, Eugen (1937). "The Summation of Random Causes as the Source of
Cyclic Processes', Econometrica, 105—146.
Sokoler, Meir (1967). "The Inflation Tax on Real Balance;, the Inflation
Subsidy on Credit, and the inflationary Proce;; in Israel', Bank of israel
Economic Review, 59 (April), 1—26.
Solow, Robert M. (1968). "Short—run Adjustment of Employment to Output", in
J.N. Wolfe (cdl, Value, Capital and Growth. Chicago: Aldine.

87

(1979).

Macroeconomics,

'Another Possible Source of Wage Stickiness", QL_p_

Winter, 1, 79—82.

Starr, Ross (1974). "The Price of Money in a Pure Ehan
Taxation", Econometrica, 42, 1 (Jan), 45—54.

Economy with

Startz,

Richard (1984). "Prelude to Macroeconomics", AnericanEciL
Review, 74, 5 (Dec) , 88L—892.
Star tz ,

Ri chard (1986). "Moriopol i ic Conpet iti or as a icairdat i ui

for

Keynesian Macroeconomics", mimeo, University of Washington.
Stiglit, Joseph E. (1986). "Theories of Wage Rigidity", in Fwtkiewic: et
al (edt), Keynes Economic Legacy: Contemporary Economic Thearie. New york:
Praeger.

and Andrew Weiss (1987). "Macro—Economc Equilibrium and Credit
Rationing" NBER Working Paper #2164 (Feb)
Stockman, Alan 5. (1981). "Anticipated Inflation and the Capital Stock ira
Cash—in—Advance Economy', Journal of Monetary Economics, B, 3 (Nov), 387—
393.

Summers, Lawrence H. (1981). "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q—Theory
Approach", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 67—140.
(1983). "The Non—Adjustment of Nominal Interest Rate;: A Study of
the

Fisher Effect", in 3. Tobin (ed) , Macroeccgjj._çs, Prices and Quntit.ies.

Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
"Estimating the Long—Run Relationship between Interest
Rate; and Inflation: A Response to McCallum", Journal of Monetary Economics,
18, 1 (July), 77—86.
"Some Skeptical Observation; on Real Business Cycle
Theory", Federal Reserve Banm of Minneapolis uarterly Revie, Fall, 23—27.
Svensson,

Lars E.O. (1985). "Money and Asset Prices in a Cash—in—Advance

Economy", purnaL of Political Econoqj, 93, 5 (Oct), 919-944.

Tanzi, Vito

(1977),

"Inflation Lags in Collection and the Real Value of Tax

Revenue", IMP Staff Papers, 24, 1.

Tarshis, Lone (1939). "Changes

in

Real and Money Wages", Economic 3our_aL,

150—154.
Taylor, John B. (1980). "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts",
Journal of Political Econoy, 88, 1 (Feb), 1—24.

88

Tirole, Jean (1985). "Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations',

LL8iLLcA, 53,

5 (Sept)

1 07 1 -

11 00.

Tobin, James (l9L5). "Money and Economic Growth", Economctrica, 33, 4 (Oct),

671-684.
(1969). "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory",
Journal of Money, Credit1 and Banking, 1, 1 (Feb), 15-29.

(1970). "Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc", Ouartery Journal of
Economics, 84 (flay), 310—317
Townsend, Robert fl. (19B0). "Models of Money with Spatially Separated
Agents", in J.H. Kareken and N. Wallace Cods), Model; of Monetary Economies,
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
(1987). "Asset—Return Anomalies in

in Journal of Ecp_pjpç_Jpry.

a Monetary Economy", forthcoming

Tsiddon, Daniel (1986). "On the Stubbornness of Sticky Prices", mimee,
Department of Economics, Columbia University.

Weiss, Laurence (1980). "The Effects of Money Supply on Economic Welfare in
the Steady State", Econometrica, 48, 3 (April), 565—576.

Weitzman, Martin L. (1982). "Increasing Returns and the Foundations of
Unemployment Theory", Economic Journal, 92, 4 (Dec) , 787—804.

(1986). "Macroeconomic Implication; of Profit—Sharing", NBER
Macroeconomics_Annual, 291—33!.
West, I(enneth D. (1985). "A Variance Bounds Test of the Linear Duadratic
Inventory Model", NBER Working Paper, 15B1.
Woodford,

Michael (1985). "Interest and Prices in a Cash-in-dvance

Economy", Department of Economics, Columbia University Discussion Paper *

Yot;u:uka, Toshiki (1987). 'Ficardian Equivalence in the Presence of Capital
Market Imperfections', Journal of Monetary Economics, 20, 2 (Sept), 411—436.
Zarnowitz, Victor (1985). "Recent Work on Business Cycles in Historical
uLnal of coromic
Perspective; A Review of Theories and Evidence",

Literature, 23, 2 (June), 523-580.

Zeldes, Stephen (1985). Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Economics, MIT.

