NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMMIGRATION AND REDISTRIBUTION
Alberto Alesina
Armando Miano
Stefanie Stantcheva
Working Paper 24733
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24733

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018

For comments we are indebted to Nicola Gennaioli, Ben Lockwood, Larry Katz, Ilyana Kuziemko,
Mike Norton, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, Andrei Shleifer, Monica Singhal, Guido Tabellini,
Diego Ubfal, Matthew Weinzierl, and seminar participants at AEA, Bocconi, Boston University, Brown,
Harvard, Lund, Mannheim, NBER, Oslo, Sciences Po, UCLA, and Yale. We thank Pierfrancesco
Mei, Davide Taglialatela, Raphael Raux and especially Leonardo D'Amico for outstanding research
assistance. Alesina and Stantcheva are grateful to the Pershing Square Fund for Research on the Foundations
of Human Behavior and the Wiener Center for generous support. Harvard IRB approval IRB17-1154.
This study is registered in the AEA RCT Registry and the unique identifying number is: AEARCTR-0003342.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Alberto Alesina, Armando Miano, and Stefanie Stantcheva. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Immigration and Redistribution
Alberto Alesina, Armando Miano, and Stefanie Stantcheva
NBER Working Paper No. 24733
June 2018, Revised September 2019
JEL No. D71,D72,H2
ABSTRACT
We design and conduct large-scale surveys and experiments in six countries to investigate how natives
perceive immigrants and how these perceptions influence their preferences for redistribution. We find
strikingly large misperceptions about the number and characteristics of immigrants: in all countries,
respondents greatly overestimate the total number of immigrants, think immigrants are culturally and
religiously more distant from them, and are economically weaker -- less educated, more unemployed,
and more reliant on and favored by government transfers -- than is the case. Given the very negative
baseline views that respondents have of immigrants, simply making them think about immigration
before asking questions about redistribution, in a randomized manner, makes them support less redistribution,
including actual donations to charities. Information about the true shares and origins of immigrants
is ineffective, and mainly acts as a prime that makes people think about immigrants and reduces their
support for redistribution. An anecdote about a "hard working'' immigrant is somewhat more effective,
suggesting that when it comes to immigration, salience and narratives shape people's views more deeply
than hard facts.

Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 210
Cambridge, MA 02138
and IGIER
and also NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu
Armando Miano
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
amiano@g.harvard.edu

Stefanie Stantcheva
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 232
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
sstantcheva@fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

The current vitriolic debate about immigration may appear light-years away from the poem
“Give me your tired, your poor,
Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free”
on the Statue of Liberty. The Economist called immigration “the defining issue of the 2016 election” in the
U.S., and it has also been an incandescent campaign topic in many recent European elections. Faced with
immigration, many European countries have experienced intensifying social and political conflicts over how
to design their welfare state. It has often been pointed out that private and public generosity travels less
well across ethnic, linguistic, cultural, and religious lines.1
In this paper, we take two steps. First, we measure the perceptions of and attitudes towards immigration
of citizens born in the country, and, second, we study how these relate to support for redistribution. To
that end, we design and run original, large-scale online surveys on a representative sample of about 24,000
respondents from six countries (France, Germany, Italy, Sweden, the U.K., and the U.S.). These countries
have different welfare states and social attitudes toward redistribution, but have had the immigration issue at
the center of their political arenas. The questions elicit respondents’ detailed perceptions about immigrants,
such as their number, origin, or economic circumstances. We uncover large misperceptions about immigrants.
We also experimentally document a significant link between natives’ attitudes towards and perceptions of
immigration and lower support for redistribution policies.
The survey – which is restricted to natives – begins with detailed background information questions
about respondents’ income, sector of work, family status, zip code, whether he has immigrant parents,
political orientation, and voting. We then ask respondents about their perceptions of immigrants along many
dimensions, which is one of our key contributions. Some perceptions can be verified using actual statistics and
data: the number, the origin, the education, the employment, the poverty of immigrants, and the transfers
they receive. Others are personal attitudes about how hard immigrants work or whether they free-ride on
the system. We define an “immigrant” as somebody legally living in the country of the respondent, but
born abroad, in accordance with the official OECD definition (OECD, 2015). We focus on legal immigrants
because we want to abstract from issues of law enforcement and border control. In Europe, illegal immigrants
represent a very small share of total immigrants; for the U.S., where they represent a larger share, we also
provide a variation of our treatment using total immigrants. We are very careful in the elicitation of
perceptions and employ several survey techniques to make sure that these misperceptions about immigrants
are not simply driven by lack of attention, such as using monetary incentives to incentivize accurate answers
by respondents. To address the often-raised concern in the literature that “people may be wrong about many
things,” we also benchmark (mis)perceptions about immigrants against the (mis)perceptions about natives
by asking respondents the same questions about non-immigrants in their country.
We then survey respondents about their views on their country’s immigration policies. These include:
how much immigration there should be, whether the government should care equally about immigrants and
natives, when immigrants should be eligible for benefits, when they should be able to get citizenship and
vote, and when they would be considered to be truly part of the country. The perception of immigration
and attitudes towards immigration questions are referred to as the “immigration block.”
1 See

Alesina and Glaeser (2004) for a comparison of U.S. versus Europe and Alesina and Giuliano (2011) for a survey.

2

The questions in the “redistribution block” explore respondents’ views about redistributive policies, such
as how to allocate the government’s budget or how much of the total tax burden people with different incomes
should bear. To also take into account private (non-government based) redistribution, as well as to test for
a real effect of the treatments, we tell respondents that they are enrolled in a lottery to win $1,000, but that
before knowing whether they have won, they have to commit a share (zero or positive) of their gain to one
or two charities that help low-income people.
We find that natives have striking misperceptions about the number and composition of immigrants. In
all the countries, the average and median respondents vastly overestimate the number of immigrants. For
instance, in the U.S., the actual number of legal immigrants as defined above is 10%, but the average perception is 36%; In Italy, the true share of immigrants is 10%, but the perceived share is 26%. The misperception
about the size of the immigrant population is widespread among all groups of respondents, including left
and right-wing ones. Respondents also systematically misperceive the composition of immigrants. They
believe immigrants are more likely to come from culturally more distant regions (which are often branded
as “problematic” in the public debate). For instance, respondents starkly overestimate the share of Muslim
immigrants, immigrants from the Middle East and North Africa, and strongly underestimate the share of
Christian immigrants. Misperceptions are pervasive also about the level of education and income of immigrants and about how much they rely on the receiving country’s welfare state. All groups misperceive
immigrants, but respondents who have the largest misperceptions are those with low levels of education
and who work in sectors with more immigrant workers, the non college-educated, women, and right-wing
respondents. While left and right-wing respondents misperceive the share of immigrants to the same extent,
they have very different views about the composition of immigrants and their contribution to the receiving
country.
A major challenge that we overcome is to ensure that these misperceptions about immigrants are not
driven by lack of attention and to properly benchmark them against other misperceptions. Thus, we ask
respondents to also provide their perceptions about natives (e.g., natives’ education, unemployment, or
poverty levels). Respondents are on average more wrong (and systematically too negative) about immigrants
than about natives. We also offer randomized, sizable, and varying monetary incentives for accurate answers
to a subsample of respondents. Misperceptions are virtually unaffected by monetary incentives, suggesting
that respondents truly do not know the correct answers or that they hold on to their views very strongly.2
Furthermore, we measure respondents’ “willingness to pay” for information about immigrants by giving
them the option to pay a randomized amount of money at the end of the survey in exchange for the correct
answers to all the questions about immigrants’ characteristics. Just around 49% of respondents who receive
this option are willing to pay at least 50 cents for the correct information. However, those who have larger
negative misperceptions to start with are also those who are less willing to pay to get the correct information,
conditional on the full set of respondent-level controls that include income and political affiliation, as well
as on the price of the information. This could be because respondents with more inaccurate views are
more confident in their views or in general less open to learning – which could also explain their larger
misperception in the first place. This phenomenon could also represent one of the possible mechanisms
through which misinformation persists. Right-wing respondents, who are in general more negative about
and averse to immigration, are also less willing to pay for the information, even conditional on a given level
of misperceptions.
2 We can also track the time spent on each question to make sure respondents are not searching for the answers online. In
any event, the answers to these questions are very difficult to find online.

3

In the experimental part of this study, we investigate the causal link between immigration perceptions
and redistribution. We randomly treat respondents with three types of treatments that speak to different
aspects of people’s perceptions and attitudes: a priming (or salience) treatment that simply primes people
to think about immigrants; two factual, informational treatments that provide information on the share
and on the origins of immigrants; and an anecdotal treatment that tells a day in the life of a hard-working
immigrant. The priming or salience treatment consists in randomizing the order in which respondents see
the “redistribution block” and the “immigration block.” Thus, this treatment tests whether simply making
the immigration issue more salient to respondents – without any information – affects their answers to
the questions on redistribution. The two informational treatments provide the respondent with data on,
respectively, the actual share and countries of origins of immigrants in his or her country. These treatments
are purely factual, with a neutral tone. Finally, we provide an “anecdote” treatment that tells the story of a
hard-working immigrant. This treatment does not provide any factual data per se, but rather prompts the
treated group to think positively about the life and hard work of one immigrant.
Making the immigration topic more salient to respondents, by showing them the redistribution block
first, makes them significantly more averse to redistribution: they express a lower concern for inequality, a
reduced wish for progressive taxes and redistributive spending, as well as a decline in (real) donations to
charity. Groups which have more negative baseline priors (the non college-educated, especially if they also
work in immigration intensive sectors, and the right-wing) are more sensitive to this priming treatment and
react more negatively to the immigration issue being made more salient to them.
Perhaps surprising at first glance, the information treatments also have a mostly negative effect on support
for redistribution. However, this makes sense in light of the finding that making the immigration issue more
salient to respondents generates a reduction in support for redistribution. The information treatments do
make the issue more salient; and the actual factual information content does not have much power in shifting
either perceptions of immigrants or attitudes towards redistribution. The anecdotal treatment, aimed at
inducing sympathy towards immigrants, seems to move people more than factual information, especially
when it comes to improving support for immigration, but is still unable to overturn the negative priming
effect on support for redistribution.3
Overall, the picture that emerges is that salience and narratives shape people’s views about immigrants
and the resulting attitudes towards policies, perhaps more so than hard facts.
Related Literature: Our paper is mainly related to three strands of the literature. The first is the large
research body on the relationship between cultural and social fragmentation (broader than immigration)
and the welfare state. Many papers, mostly in economics, are reviewed in Alesina and Giuliano (2011)
and in Stichnoth and Van der Straeten (2013). A common result is that public and private generosities
travel less well across racial, ethnic, religious, and nationality groups than they do within these groups.
Earlier empirical papers about immigrants use pre-existing surveys such as the International Social Survey
Programme (ISSP), the World Value Survey (WVS), or the European Value Survey (Senik, Stichnoth, and
Van der Straeten, 2009; Mayda, 2006; Alesina, Murard, and Rapoport, 2019). Our newly designed crosscountry surveys plus experiments allow us to consider a much broader and comprehensive set of perceptions
about immigrants in a standardized, quantitative, and causal manner.
Natural experiments such as waves of migration have been exploited in several papers: Dahlberg, Edmark,
3 We also conducted a follow-up survey in the U.S. to show that the effects on perceptions of the informational treatments
persist after one to three weeks.

4

and Lundqvist (2012) identify a negative impact of refugees on reduced redistribution support in Swedish
localities; Chevalier et al. (2017) consider the effects of the inflow of poor immigrants with voting rights in
West Germany post WWII on redistribution; Card, Dustmann, and Preston (2012) show that compositional
concerns about local amenities and public goods are important in explaining support for immigration; Damm,
Dustmann, and Vasiljeva (2019) estimate the causal impact of refugee migration on electoral outcomes in
Denmark, exploiting a policy that assigned refugees quasi-randomly to different municipalities; Tabellini
(2019) shows that there has been political backlash against immigrants, even if the latter economically
benefit the host community, by exploiting exogenous variation in European immigration to U.S. cities in the
first half of the 20th century.4
The second related literature is the growing work on stereotypes and group identity (Bordalo et al., 2016;
Gennaioli and Tabellini, 2018; Grossman and Helpman, 2018). Our results strongly support the predictions
and implications of this work. When it comes to stereotypes, the misperceptions about immigrants which we
document are examples of them. As the stereotype theory in Bordalo et al. (2016) predicts, the differences
between some characteristics of immigrants and natives are exaggerated. For instance, immigrants are indeed
on average more reliant on transfers and less educated than natives, but respondents tend to too strongly
“stereotype” these characteristics.
Gennaioli and Tabellini (2018) also offer important insights into our survey and experimental results.
Group identity in terms of “immigrant” and “non-immigrant” will cause respondents to rely on group
stereotypes and polarize their beliefs along the distinguishing features of their groups. Shocks that make
immigrants more salient – – as is done in our case by our experimental treatments – cause changes in beliefs
and policies – here, redistribution policies.
Methodologically, we are contributing to a growing literature on online information experiments. The
most recent and closest works are by Kuziemko et al. (2015), Kuziemko et al. (2014), Charité, Fisman, and
Kuziemko (2015), Karadja, Mollerstrom, and Seim (2017), Cruces, Perez-Truglia, and Tetaz (2013), Alesina,
Stantcheva, and Teso (2018), Weinzierl (2017), Weinzierl (2018), and Fisman, Kuziemko, and Vannutelli
(2018).
Two recent papers are closest to ours. Barrera Rodriguez, Guriev, Henry, and Zhuravskaya (2018)
randomly allocate French voters into a control group and three treatment groups: the first receives “alternative” facts on immigration from the far-right presidential candidate’s campaign (Marine Le Pen or MLP);
the second receives true facts on the same issues; the third group receives the alternative facts, followed by
fact-checking. Voters do update their knowledge based on true facts and fact-checking, a result consistent
with ours. Exposing respondents to MLP’s messages increases support for her, with or without fact-checking,
consistent with the idea that increasing the salience of an issue such as immigration will favor the candidate
who puts the issue at the forefront of their campaign. This is very much in line with our finding that
just making respondents think about the issue of immigration (with or without providing any information)
reduces support for redistribution. This paper does not focus on redistribution and is about one specific
populist party’s message in one country. In a US-based survey, Grigorieff, Roth, and Ubfal (2018) study how
giving correct information about five characteristics of immigrants improves support for immigration among
Republicans only; they do not consider redistribution policies.
4 In political science, a long-standing debate focuses on whether anti-immigration sentiments arise purely from economic
considerations or rather from worries about cultural dilution and there is support for both views (Hainmueller and Hopkins,
2010; Hanson et al., 2007; Hainmueller and Hopkins, 2015; Bansak et al., 2016). These papers focus on openness to immigration,
not redistribution policies.

5

Our contributions are, first, to provide new, detailed, and standardized international surveys that combine questions on the perceptions of and attitudes towards immigration, and a range of different policies.
We do this carefully, employing many survey techniques, including monetary incentives, and interactive,
customized question designs. Second we investigate much more detailed and quantitative perceptions, about
not only the number of immigrants, but also their origins, religion, education, work effort, unemployment,
and transfer receipts. This is crucial because, contrary to findings from less detailed questionnaires, it is
not perceptions of the share of immigrants per se that differentiate respondents, but rather their perceived
characteristics. Importantly, we check these perceptions against reality. Third, our three types of treatments
(priming-salience, informational, and anecdotal) allow us to evaluate the causal relation between perceptions
of immigration and preferences for redistributive policies. We thus highlight the role of salience and narratives, as well as stereotypes, when it comes to immigration. Fourth, we investigate the willingness to pay for
information of respondents and how this relates to their characteristics and their more or less extreme views
on immigration.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Our data collection, survey construction, and experimental
design are explained in detail in Section 2. The full survey text is in the Online Appendix. Section 3 describes
the perceptions about immigrants, across countries and respondent characteristics. The findings from the
experimental part of our study are discussed in Section 4. The last section concludes.

2

The Survey, the Experiments, and Data Sources on Immigration

2.1

Data Collection and Sample

We conducted large-scale surveys between November 2017 and February 2018 in six countries: Germany,
France, Italy, Sweden, the U.K., and the U.S. The sample sizes are 4500 for the U.S., 4001 for the U.K.,
4001 for Germany, 4000 for France, 4000 for Italy, and 2004 for Sweden, for a total of 22506 respondents. Only natives (non-immigrants) between 18 and 70 years of age were allowed to take the survey.
We designed the surveys using an online platform; the survey links are then diffused by commercial survey
companies in each country. For the U.S., the respondents were reached through C&T Marketing (http://
www.ctmarketinggroup.com); in the European countries by Respondi (https://www.respondi.com/EN/).
These companies partner with panels of respondents to which they email survey links. Respondents who
click on the link are first channeled through some screening questions that ensure that the final sample is
nationally representative along the gender, age, and income dimensions. Respondents are paid only if they
fully complete the survey. The pay per survey completed was around $3. The average time for completion of
the survey was 27 minutes and the median time was 21 minutes.5 In the U.S., we implemented a follow-up
survey for each respondent, one week after they took the initial one. This allows us to test for the persistence of the treatment effects. We also conducted and additional survey in the U.S. in February 2019 on
1650 respondents to check responsiveness to monetary incentives and measure willingness to pay for correct
information.
The final sample is close to representative in each country. Table 1 shows the characteristics of our main
5 The

full distribution of survey duration is provided in Figure A-4.

6

sample relative to the population in each country.6 Population statistics are from the Census Bureau and
the Current Population Survey for the U.S. and from Eurostat and various national statistical offices for
European Countries, as described in the table notes. By construction, we are almost perfectly representative
along the dimensions of age, gender, and income (binned into four brackets, to mimic the way the quotas
are imposed during the survey). In addition, our sample is also representative on non-targeted dimensions
such as the share of respondents who are married. Our respondents are slightly less likely to be employed
(either part-time or full-time), but not more likely to be unemployed (except to a small extent in the U.S.).
In some countries, such as the U.S., France, and Italy, respondents in our sample are more likely to be
college-educated than the general population. To address these two small imbalances, in Appendix A-10,
we show that all our results are robust to re-weighting the sample so that it is representative along the
employment and education dimensions as well.

2.2

The Survey: An Overview

We now provide a very brief summary of the structure of the survey, and then more detail on those parts of
the survey which are important for understanding the results.
The full survey in English is available in Appendix A-6. The questionnaires in German, Italian, French,
and Swedish can be seen by following the links in the Appendix, which lead to the web interface of the
survey. We enrolled the help of several native speakers for each language to ensure that the translation was
suited to the local culture and understanding.7 Below, text in italic represents actual survey text. Italic
text in square brackets represents the answer options provided to the respondents, if any. For the exposition
here, we provide the text as it is in the U.S. survey.
There are two possible definitions of legal immigrants: i) by citizenship, (i.e., all people legally living in
the country who do not have citizenship), and ii) by country of birth (i.e., all people who legally live in the
country but were born in another country). We use the second one, which is the one most frequently used by
the OECD (OECD, 2015) because it is more comparable across countries, i.e., is not affected by countries’
citizenship policies, which are very heterogeneous. Thus we give the following definition of an immigrant:
“In what follows, we refer to immigrants as people who were not born in the U.S. and legally moved here
at a certain point of their life. We are NOT considering illegal immigrants.”
We focus on legal immigrants for two reasons. First, illegal immigration may pose very different challenges and thus generate different reactions among respondents than legal immigration. Second, it seems
conceptually useful to separate the issue of support for immigration (how many immigrants respondents
think there should be and how receptive their home country should be to them) from the issue of enforcement of immigration laws. We thus decided to not to mix the issues of legal immigration and illegal entry.
This distinction is most relevant in the U.S., where close to 3.5% of the population are illegal immigrants;
in the European countries, the share of illegal immigrants is very small and does not make any substantive
difference to any of the statistics about immigration that we compute. For the U.S., we explain below how
we construct all statistics for legal immigrants. For completeness, we compute the full set of statistics for
total and illegal immigrants as well in the Appendix.
6 Appendix
7 The

Table A-2 reports the characteristics of the additional U.S. sample.
three authors are fluent in four of the five languages.

7

Summary of the Survey Structure
The survey is structured a follows:
1) Background socioeconomic questions about the respondent:
Employment status, family situation, highest education level achieved, household income, political orientation, sector of employment, immigrant parents, zip code, etc.
2) Informational and anecdotal treatments:
We show one of three treatments to randomly chosen subsamples. The first two are information treatments
providing, respectively, the correct information about the share and the countries of origin of the immigrants
in the respondent’s country; the third is an anecdotal treatment, narrating a “day in the life” of a hardworking immigrant.
We then have two blocks of questions, the order of which is randomized, in addition to the randomization
of the information treatments.
3) Immigration block:
The first block includes questions about the perception of immigrants, namely, their share, origins, religions,
economic circumstances, transfers received, and work ethic. Whenever the questions are not already naturally benchmarked, we also ask the respondents about the same characteristics of non-immigrants in their
countries. A subsample of respondents is given monetary incentives for accurate answers. This block also
contains questions about various immigration policies and attitudes towards immigration.
4) Redistribution block:
The other set of questions is about redistributive policies, including the progressivity of the tax system,
and the allocation of government spending. We also investigate the willingness of respondents to donate to
charities and ask about attitudes towards government.

Background Socioeconomic Questions
We collect information on respondents’ gender, age, income, education, sector of occupation, employment
status, marital status, number of children, place of residence, and political orientation. The latter is investigated in two ways. First, we ask respondents to classify themselves in terms of their views on economic
policy, along a spectrum ranging from “very conservative” to “very liberal.” The wording of the question
is adapted to the common political terminology in each country.8 Second, we ask them for which party or
candidate they voted or would have voted (in case they did not vote) in the last presidential (or chancellor)
election.9 If an election was impending at the time of the survey (as was the case for Italy and Sweden), we
also ask which party or candidate they planned to vote for. We also include a question on whether one or
both parents of the respondent were immigrants. Since we collect information on the respondent’s sector of
8 “On economic policy matters, where do you see yourself on the liberal/conservative spectrum?” With options [Very liberal,
Liberal, Center, Conservative, Very Conservative] in the U.S. and the U.K., and [Far left, Left, Center, Right, Far right] in
the other countries.
9 More precisely, we first ask respondents whether they voted in the last elections or not. If they did, we ask them to select
the candidate or party they voted for; if they did not, we ask them to select the candidate or party they would have most likely
supported if they had voted. In some countries, the electoral system is such that people vote for parties. In others, they vote
for candidates. In the U.S. and in France we provide a list of all the presidential candidates. In the other countries we list all
the major parties that together attract more than 95% of the vote and also add an empty field for “Other” where respondents
can write the party that they voted for. Afterwards we classify candidates and parties into Far left, Left, Center, Right and
Far right.

8

employment (and, if they are currently unemployed, on the sector in which they last worked), we are thus
able to classify respondents into “high immigration sectors,” which we define as sectors in which the share
of immigrants is above the national average. The full sector classification is summarized in Appendix A-3.10
The Information and Anecdote Treatments
The randomly chosen treated respondents see one of three treatment videos, which are available on YouTube.11
We provide some screenshots below to give an idea of the design of each treatment.

Figure 1: Information Treatment 1 – “Share of Immigrants”

The first factual, informational treatment, called “Share of immigrants” treatment, informs respondents
about the actual share of immigrants in their country (see Figure 1). To give respondents an accurate view of
how their country ranks among other developed countries, the video also compares this domestic immigrant
share to the immigrant shares of the OECD countries with the lowest and highest shares of immigrants
(Finland, with 6.1% and Switzerland, with 29.1%).
Because the issue of illegal immigration is so salient in the U.S., we run two versions of this treatment for
the U.S.: one shows respondents the share of total immigrants (13.5%), another one shows them the share
of legal immigrants (10%); in the text displayed in each version, it is made clear whether the number relates
to total or legal immigrants. There are several considerations to weigh here. On the one hand, showing
respondents in the U.S. only legal immigrants may still leave them with very large overestimates of the share
of illegal ones; on the other hand, making respondents focus on the gap between legal and illegal immigrants
would make the treatment quite different for the U.S. than for the other countries (where this gap is close
10 For instance, in the U.S., immigration intensive sectors are: Farming, fishing, and forestry; Building and grounds cleaning
and maintenance; Construction and extraction; Computer and mathematical occupations; Production occupations; Life, physical, and social science; Food preparation and serving related occupations; Occupations related to transportation and material
moving; Occupations related to personal care, childcare and leisure; Healthcare support occupations.
11 The links are: https://youtu.be/2bVzfv0a-fE; https://youtu.be/-603kdm_GkA; https://youtu.be/_1SoLYX8OyE.

9

to negligible). We thus decided that it is most rigorous to run the two versions of this treatment on different
samples of respondents and report both sets of results. As we will show, neither version increases support
for redistribution. Since the other two treatments are designed in a more qualitative way, they would not
change noticeably if we also ran a version for total immigrants for each of them (rather than for legal only).
The second factual treatment informs respondents about the origins of the immigrants in their country.
We call it “Origin of immigrants treatment” and it is illustrated in Figure 2. All the countries in the world
are grouped into nine broad areas (North America,12 Latin America, Eastern Europe, Western Europe,
Subsaharan Africa, the Middle East, North Africa, Australia and New Zealand, and Asia). Respondents see
a map, with each region sequentially appearing in a different color (so that there is no doubt about which
region any given country is part of) and a number of “stick men” proportional to the number of immigrants
from that region appearing and moving to the bottom of the screen, where they remain until the end of the
video.
The third video is an anecdote rather than factual information. It shows a “day in the life” of a very
hard-working immigrant woman.13 She works long hours, puts in a lot of effort to also study at night in
order to improve her modest living conditions and that of her children, and hopes to start her own small
business in the future. The video (see the screenshots in Figure 3) walks respondents through the hours of
this immigrant’s day, as indicated by a clock at the top of the screen.

Immigration Block
First, the respondent is asked about what share of the population are immigrants using a slider and a pie
chart as illustrated in Figure 4. When the respondent lands on this page, the pie chart appears fully gray
and the slider is at zero. As respondents move the slider, the pie chart interactively appears in two colors,
one representing the share of U.S. born people, the other the share of foreign born ones. The slider and pie
chart design serves three purposes. First, it is much less tempting to enter round numbers: indeed, as the
histograms in Figure A-5 show, there are relatively few round numbers reported. Second, the interactive
and colored display that reacts in real-time to a respondent’s movements captures his attention. Third,
the pie chart naturally benchmarks the question: respondents are forced to see that, whatever the share of
immigrants they enter, the share of non-immigrants is then 100% minus that.
We then ask respondents what share of the total immigrants in their country come from each of the nine
regions of origin described above. Again, we use a slider plus a pie chart display shown in Figure 5. There
is one slider per region of origin and the pie chart adapts in real-time with different colors for each region.
A sticky map at the top shows the boundaries of each region, with matching colors.
We also ask about the religions of immigrants before turning to questions about the economic circumstances of immigrants, namely, their unemployment levels, their likelihood of having a college education or
of not having completed high school, the share living below the official poverty line, and the government
12 Or

simply “Canada” in the U.S. survey.
are many articles in the media providing examples of very hard-working immigrants. We have combined
several sources and changed the names. Two examples are: The Washington post “They said I was going to work
like a donkey. I was grateful” July 11, 2017 available at https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2017/07/11/
they-said-i-was-going-to-work-like-a-donkey-i-was-grateful and Forbes “6 Immigrant Stories That Will Make You
Believe In The American Dream Again” Oct 4, 2016 available at https://www.forbes.com/sites/monteburke/2016/10/04/
6-immigrant-stories-that-will-make-you-believe-in-the-american-dream-again.
13 There

10

Figure 2: Information Treatment 2 – “Origin of Immigrants”

transfers they get relative to the average native. Importantly, we always also ask about the same statistic
for natives in order to have a comparison point and be able to benchmark the misperceptions.
To give an example, the question about poverty (for the U.S.) reads as follows:
“Out of every 100 people born in the U.S., how many live below the poverty line? The poverty line is the
estimated minimum level of income needed to secure the necessities of life.”
“Let’s compare this to poverty among legal immigrants. Out of every 100 legal immigrants in the U.S. today,
how many do you think live below the poverty line?”
We then ask about perceptions of the work effort of immigrants:
11

Figure 3: Anecdote Treatment – “Hard Work of Immigrants”

“Which has more to do with why an immigrant living in the U.S. is poor?” [Lack of effort on his or her own
part; Circumstances beyond his or her control.]
“Which has more to do with why an immigrant living in the U.S. is rich?” [Because she or he worked harder
than others; Because she or he had more advantages than others.]

Our next question describes two people, “John” and “Mohammed,” who are identical along all dimensions,
except that Mohammed is a legal immigrant. The exact names used are adapted to each country to feature
one native-sounding and one immigrant-sounding name. Respondents are asked whether Mohammed pays
more or less taxes than John and whether he receives more or less transfers. This complements the question
above on unconditional transfers, by holding everything relevant fixed – thus, if respondents respond anything
other than “the same” they are expressing some bias in favor or against the immigrant.
The next set of questions asks about views on immigration policy and cover four areas: 1) the number of
immigrants the respondent believes should be allowed to enter the country and whether or not the current
number is problematic; 2) when immigrants should be eligible for transfers such as welfare payments; 3) when
immigrants should be allowed to apply for citizenship and vote in U.S. elections; 4) when the respondent
would consider an immigrant to be “truly American.”
12

Figure 4: Eliciting Perceptions on the Share of Immigrants

Redistribution Block
This block of questions is about general redistribution towards low income individuals. It never makes any
reference to immigrants. The questions also refer to the “government” in general, not specifically to the
incumbent government. For the U.S. and Germany (the two federal countries in our sample), we explicitly
state that we refer to total spending and taxes at the “federal, state, and local levels.” Our questions are
designed to address two aspects on government intervention, holding the other one fixed: 1) how to raise
the funds needed for government policies and 2) how to spend a given level of funds. We first explain to
respondents that we will ask them separately about how to raise a given tax burden (aspect 1) and then
how to allocate it to the different major spending categories (aspect 2): “For the purpose of these questions,
suppose that the level of government spending is fixed at its current level and cannot be changed.”.
Taxes: To provide more details about aspect 1), respondents are asked to select average income tax rates
for four income groups using sliders: the top 1%, the next 9%, the next 40% and the bottom 50%. The taxes
they select are constrained to raise the current level of revenue in their country. This is illustrated in Figure
A-2.14
Spending: On aspect 2), we ask respondents to allocate 100% of the budget to seven spending categories:
1) Defense and National Security, 2) Public Infrastructure, 3) Spending on Schooling and Higher Education,
4) Social Security, Medicare, Disability Insurance, and Supplementary Security Income, 5) Social Insurance
14 While respondents select tax rates on each of the four groups, a fifth slider at the bottom moves and depicts the fraction
of the revenue target that has been raised. When the revenue target has been met, the slider turns green and a message alerts
the respondent.

13

Figure 5: Eliciting Perceptions on the Origin of Immigrants

and Income Support Programs, 6) Public Spending on Health, and 7) Affordable Housing (see Appendix
Figure A-3). Some of these spending categories are redistributive (in particular, 3), 4), 5), 6), and 7)) while
others are not (i.e., 1) and 2)).
Views of government: We also ask respondents questions about their views on the role and scope of
government. These include whether “income differences between rich and poor people” are a problem or
not; whether to “reduce income differences between rich and poor people the government (at the local, state,
or federal level) has the ability and the tools to do” something or not; whether they generally trust the
14

government to do what is right; and to rate how strongly the government should “concern itself with income
inequality”on a scale of 1 (“Not at all”) to 7 (“Everything in its power to reduce income inequality”).
Donation to charity: To end the redistribution block and to provide an outcome that is not self-reported,
we tell respondents that they have been automatically enrolled in a lottery to win $1,000. Before they know
whether they have won or not, they need to commit to donating none of it, part of it, or all of it to one
or two charities. We selected two charities in each country to be 1) targeted towards low income adults or
children in general and not concerned with immigrants particularly; 2) popular and well-perceived in each
country. They are listed in Appendix A-4. For instance, for the U.S. we chose “Feeding America” and “The
Salvation Army.”15
Layers of Randomization
The order in which the “redistribution block” and “immigration block” are shown to respondents is randomized. Combined with the randomization layer that shows people one of the three videos or no video, this
creates eight treatment or control groups, summarized in Table A-1 in the Appendix. Table 2 shows that
each randomization is balanced along observable respondent characteristics.
Based on these many and detailed survey questions, we define several variables and indices used in our
analysis. We define them as we go and refer to them throughout the text and in the tables and figures. The
reader can refer to their detailed definitions collected in Appendix A-1.
Additional Survey with Monetary Incentives
To ensure that our results are not driven by respondents’ lack of attention or careless answers, we provide
monetary incentives for accurate answers in a sizable additional sample of U.S. respondents. We randomize
whether respondents receive any monetary incentives, as well as the amount received. We also measure
their willingness to pay for accurate information about immigrants. More precisely, at the end of the survey
we ask participants whether they are willing to forfeit part of their potential prize from the lottery in the
redistribution block, in exchange for the correct answers to all the questions about immigrants. We randomize
among different “prices” of information ranging from $0.5 to $10. Only those respondents who agree to give
up part of their potential prize are shown the correct answers; we highlight that this information is difficult
to find online. Respondents are then asked whether they are surprised by the correct answers.

2.3

Data on Immigration Across Countries

Many of our perception questions can be checked against actual data. We construct the empirical counterparts of all the variables for which we elicit perceptions using U.S. and European data. Appendix Section A-2
lists all the data sources and details all the steps in the construction of these statistics (all the raw data and all
our calculations are available in the excel spreadsheet at https://www.dropbox.com/s/136otycl3tnkdsd/
Database_US.xlsx?dl=0). For the U.S., we construct all the statistics for legal immigrants, as well as for
illegal and total immigrants. The former two are not as readily available and, because there is some uncertainty surrounding the characteristics of illegal immigrants, we provide bounds for each statistic, using
15 We

also tried to pick charities without a religious connotation whenever possible.

15

several different data sources. These calculations may prove useful for future researchers as well. In the
paper, all statistics regarding U.S. and European immigrants refer to legal immigrants only.16

2.4

Ensuring High Quality Responses

In addition to providing monetary incentives for accurate answers and to benchmarking views about immigrants to views about natives, we employ several more techniques to ensure high quality responses. In the
survey’s landing page – the consent page, depicted in Appendix Figure A-1 – we warn respondents that “responding without adequate effort may result in [their] responses being flagged for low quality” and that their
pay for the survey may be withheld. We also attempt to make them feel involved and socially responsible
by emphasizing that we are non-partisan researchers seeking to advance social studies. We highlight that
it is “very important for the success of our research that you answer honestly and read the questions very
carefully before answering.”
Questions are designed so as to prevent as much as possible careless answers: for instance, percentages
are constrained to add up to 100% and respondents cannot move to the next page before they satisfy this
constraint; whenever possible, we let the respondents move sliders, the values of which are shown in real-time
on the pie charts. Questions are initialized in a neutral way, with sliders at zero and the pie charts fully gray
(i.e., not showing any of the answer categories). We keep track of the time spent by the respondent on the
survey as a whole, as well as on individual questions. Thus, we can flag respondents who spend too little
time on either the full survey or on one of the questions about immigrant perceptions. For instance, only 1%
of our respondents completed the survey in less than 6 minutes or spent less than 11 seconds on the question
about immigrants origins. We also have the number of clicks on each page. For the benchmark sample, we
drop respondents in the top 2% and bottom 2% of the survey time distribution. We checked that none of
our results are affected by trimming these outliers. These results are available on demand. The distribution
of survey duration is depicted in Figure A-4.
Just before the questions on immigrant perceptions, we strategically place an attention check question.
We ask respondents whether they have paid careful attention to the preceding questions and whether they
honestly believe that we should count their responses in our analysis. Almost all respondents (99.5%)
answer that yes. This type of questions is used to prompt the respondents to pay attention to the subsequent
questions of the survey. Its purpose is fulfilled regardless of whether the respondents answer honestly (Meade
and Craig, 2012).
In addition, we ask respondents whether they thought that our survey was biased towards either left-wing
or right-wing opinions. Only 16.8% of respondents say they felt some bias, out of which 10.6% thought it
was left-wing biased and 6.2% thought it was right-wing biased. Dropping respondents who felt the survey
is biased strengthens our treatment effects somewhat. Finally, we implement a number of ex-post checks
based on suspicious answer patterns that are indicative of carelessness, which we detail in Section 3.2.

3

Perceptions of Immigration

We now describe all the perceptions about immigrants, focusing on some key results. For a more comprehensive overview, Table A-3 reports average perceived values and actual values for each country and for
all perception-related variables, as well as the corresponding medians and interquartile ranges. Table A-4
16 In

European countries the estimated number of illegal immigrants is very small.

16

provides the same information, but by respondent groups.17 All these descriptive statistics are based on the
control group, namely the respondents who did not see any of the video treatments.

3.1

Misperceptions: Share, Origins, Economic Circumstances

The Share of Immigrants
The left panel of Figure 6 shows the average perception of respondents in each country of the share of
immigrants (red squares), as well as the actual share (blue diamonds). The shaded areas represent the 95%
confidence intervals around the average perceptions.
The discrepancy between perceptions and reality is striking. With the exception of Sweden, the average
respondent in all countries thinks the share of immigrants is at least twice as high as it is in reality. In the
U.S., respondents believe that there are on average 36.1% immigrants, when the actual share of immigrants
is 10%. In Italy, the share of immigrants is 10%, but respondents believe it is 26.4%. Swedish respondents
are the most accurate, but still substantially inaccurate: the actual number of immigrants is 17.6% (the
highest among the countries sampled), but the average perception is 27%. The median respondent perceives
a lower share than the average respondent, indicating some right-skewness in the distribution of perceptions.
However, even the median respondent starkly overestimates the share of immigrants. In fact, it is only
respondents at the 25th percentile of the perception distribution that are somewhat closer to reality.
The complete distribution of misperceptions on the share of immigrants is in Figure A-5. Misperceptions
are defined as the perceived value minus the actual value. There is a share of respondents who believe the
share of immigrants is very high. However, even if we exclude respondents whose misperception is in the top
20%, we still get very substantial misperceptions, as was already clear by looking at the median respondent:
the average perceived share of immigrants excluding the top 20% is 27% in the U.S., 23% in the U.K., 22%
in France, 19% in Italy, 22% in Germany, and 20% in Sweden. We also get very substantial misperceptions
even if we exclude respondents who spent too little time on the this question.18
The right panel of Figure 6 shows the average misperceptions of respondents grouped according to several
personal characteristics (all countries pooled), listed on the y axis. The shaded areas represent the 95%
confidence intervals around the average perceptions. The groups are: those who work in high immigration
sectors and have a college degree; those who work in high immigration sectors, but have no college degree;
the college-educated; the non college-educated; high-income respondents; low-income respondents; those
who have an immigrant parent; those who do not have an immigrant parent; the young; the older ones;
male vs. female; and left-wing vs. right-wing. While most of these characteristics are self-explanatory, we
provide more detail on two of them. First, as explained above, we classify respondents into high immigration
sectors based on whether their current sector of employment (or their last sector, if they are currently
unemployed), has an immigrant share higher than the national average. Within low and high immigration
sectors, we distinguish between respondents with college education and those without. Left-wing and rightwing respondents are classified based on their voting in the last election. Our classification of all parties into
left, right, and center is shown in Appendix A-1. The results are robust to classifying respondents based on
their views on economic policy issues (ranging from very conservative to very liberal).
17 Appendix A-10 re-weights the sample to make it fully representative also along the non-targeted dimensions of employment
and education.
18 The average perceived share of immigrants excluding those who spent less than 12 seconds on this question is 35% in the
U.S., 30% in the U.K., 28% in France, 24% in Italy, 30% in Germany, and 26% in Sweden.

17

There are three key findings. First, respondents in all groups think there are substantially more immigrants than there actually are – in no group is the average misperception lower than 15 percentage points.
Second, some groups of respondents have substantially higher misperceptions than others. These are respondents who are low educated in high immigration sectors, the non college-educated, those with an immigrant
parent, the young, and women. Third, there is no difference in the average perception of the share of immigrants for left and right-wing respondents. However, as we will see below, the misperceptions about the
characteristics of immigrants are very correlated with the political orientation of the respondents.
Why are misperceptions so large? In this paper, we do not explain their source, but can address several
conjectures. One possibility is that respondents mistakenly include in their estimates illegal immigrants.
If this is the main reason for the large misperception, it must be the case that respondents are inflating
the number of illegal immigrants to improbably large proportions: in the U.S., the actual share of illegal
immigrants is 3.5% and in the European countries, it is generally less than 0.5% of the population. It
could also be that people confuse immigrants with minorities which have been in the country for several
(sometimes many) generations. This may signal genuine lack of knowledge, or, alternatively an attitude that
all minorities are “foreigners,” despite having been in the country for many generations. To check whether
this is the case in Figure 7 we compare respondents’ perceptions of the share of immigrants to the actual
number of first plus second generation immigrants. In no country, with the exception of Sweden, is this
addition enough to close the gap between perceptions and reality. For instance, in the U.S. the share of
first plus second generation immigrants is 25.4%, still below the average perceived share of 36%. In Italy,
immigration is a more recent phenomenon, so the number of second generation immigrants is very small.
However, the average perceived share of immigrants is similar to the average of France and Germany, which
have a higher share of second generations. Finally, the omnipresence of the immigration issue in the media
may simply make it very salient, leading people to starkly overestimate the share of immigrants actually in
their country. This will be consistent also with our experimental finding below that informational or anecdotal
treatments that talk about immigrants (and, hence, make the topic more salient for treated respondents)
without providing information about their actual share increase the perceived share of immigrants.
The Origins and Religions of Immigrants
Respondents misperceive not only the total share of immigrants in their country, but also their origins and
religions, as shown in Figure 8.19 Respondents in all countries think that immigrants come disproportionately
from non-western countries, such as the Middle East, Subsaharan Africa, or North Africa, often branded
as “problematic” in the public debate. They underestimate the share of immigrants coming from countries
that are culturally closer to theirs. In particular, U.S. respondents very sharply overestimate North African
and Middle Eastern immigrants, as do Italian, U.K., and Swedish respondents. France overestimates Middle
Eastern immigrants by a factor of two, but slightly underestimates North African immigrants (of which there
are substantially more than in all other countries in our sample). In Germany, respondents overestimate
the share of North African immigrants by a factor of eight, but are exceptionally accurate on the share of
Middle Eastern immigrants, perhaps because they are very aware that the large Turkish minority, to which
they are accustomed, are not immigrants.
In all countries except France, respondents also very significantly overestimate the share of Muslim
19 The complete set of perceptions about the fraction of immigrants that come from each possible origin region and their
religion are shown in detail in Table A-3 (by country) and Table A-4 (by respondent characteristics).

18

immigrants. The largest misperceptions along this dimension are in the U.S. – where respondents believe
that the share of immigrants who are Muslim is 23%, while the reality is closer to 10% – and in Sweden
— where the perceived share of Muslims is 45%, while the reality is 27%. The U.K., Italy, and Germany
overestimate the share of Muslim immigrants by between 10 and 14 percentage points. In all countries,
without exception, respondents strongly underestimate the share of Christian immigrants (the religion of
the majority of people living in our sample countries), by at least 20 percentage points and often by much
more.
These misperceptions are systematic: there is no group of respondents that does not overestimate the
share of Muslim immigrants and underestimate the share of Christian immigrants. Those who have the
largest misperceptions are the non college-educated, especially if they also work in an immigration-intensive
sector, and the older, the female, and the right-wing respondents.

Unemployment and Education of Immigrants
We now turn to the misperceptions of economic circumstances of immigrants relative to natives. Panel A
of Figure 9 compares the perceived share of highly-educated immigrants and that of highly-educated nonimmigrants, where highly-educated is defined as having at least a college degree. The misperception about
natives is always more positive than that about immigrants, whether it is due to respondents overestimating
the share of highly-educated natives (as is the case in Sweden, Italy, Germany, and France) or underestimating
the share of highly-educated immigrants (as is the case in the U.S. and the U.K.). Panel B shows that left
and right-wing respondents have similar misperceptions about natives, but right-wing respondents have
significantly more negative misperceptions about immigrants.
Panel B of Figure 9 considers perceptions about unemployment and highlights the importance of benchmarking. In all countries, respondents vastly overestimate the share of immigrants and natives that are
unemployed. It seems likely that respondents do not understand the distinction between unemployed and
out of the labor force, although we do state it clearly.20 This is not surprising given that the difference between a discouraged individual who is not searching for a job and the officially unemployed person is subtle.
But although respondents vastly overestimate both immigrants’ and natives’ unemployment, they always
perceive a larger unemployment rate for immigrants. In Germany, the misperception of unemployment is
30 percentage points for immigrants and 15 percentage points for natives; in Italy it is 27 percentage points
for immigrants and 24 for natives; in Sweden, it is 21 percentage points for immigrants and 10 percentage
points for natives. In addition, while left and right-wing respondents overestimate the unemployment rates
of natives by the same amount, right-wing respondents overestimate the unemployment rate of immigrants
significantly more.

Work Effort of Immigrants
Panel A of Figure 10 plots the share of respondents who say that immigrants are poor because of a lack
of effort rather than due to circumstances beyond their control in each country (the red squares). We
compare this to the share of respondents who believe that poverty is due to lack of effort for everyone,
immigrant or not, which is elicited in Alesina, Stantcheva, and Teso (2018) (the blue diamonds) for all the
20 “By

unemployed we mean people who are currently not working, but searching for a job (and maybe unable to find one)”

19

same countries, except Germany.21 In France and Italy people have a more negative attitude towards poor
immigrants than they do towards poor people in general. In the U.K. and Sweden, there is no difference in
views about immigrants and natives. In the U.S., views are slightly more positive towards immigrants. Even
for natives, U.S. respondents put much more weight on individual responsibility in shaping outcomes and,
perhaps because of that, assess better the hurdles stacked against immigrants when they have to make it out
of poverty. Right-wing respondents are much more likely to believe that immigrants are poor because of lack
of effort. These patterns fit well with earlier findings (see our literature review above) that U.S. respondents
are much more likely to associate poverty with lack of effort than do European respondents (especially those
from France and Italy) and that right-wing respondents are more inclined to blame poor people for their
own fate. Despite these variations in views on the merits of poor immigrants, views on the merits of rich
immigrants are strikingly consistent across countries.
Panel B of Figure 10 show the perceptions related to immigrants and natives for being rich because of
one’s own effort (as opposed to exogenous advantages) by country and by core respondent characteristic.
In all countries, respondents agree that, if an immigrant is rich, it must be mostly because of their own
effort. Respondents also agree that this is more true for immigrants than it is for natives. In Italy, the gap
is particularly large: while Italians believe that only 17% of the rich people are rich because of their own
effort, they think that 70% of rich immigrants are rich due to their own merit. The U.K. and France have
less extreme, but still similar patterns. This may reflect the beliefs of Italians especially, but also French
and English respondents, that the system is penetrated by family connections and social advantages, which
maintain rich dynasties at the top even though they are not the ones who worked hardest. Consequently,
because immigrants by construction lack these inherited advantages and sticky social classes, the (possibly
very few) rich immigrants must have put in a lot of effort to become rich.
Immigrants and the Welfare State
An important consideration respondents may have is whether immigrants benefit more from redistribution
than natives. Figure 11 addresses this question in two ways. First, Panel A shows that in all countries, a
significant proportion of respondents believe that an average immigrant receives more than twice as much
in government transfers as an average native; the share of respondents who believe this is 15% in the U.S.,
Italy, and Sweden, and close to 25% in France. Those who think immigrants benefit more on average
from government transfers are the non college-educated, women, lower income respondents, and right-wing
respondents. There are two potential explanations for this result. On the one hand, people may think that
immigrants legitimately receive more transfers because they are on average poorer than natives. On the other
hand, they may have a bias towards immigrants and believe that they receive more from the government
not because they are poorer but because they are favored by the welfare system and/or take advantage of
it. To disentangle these two factors, Panel B plots the share of respondents who say that “Mohammed” gets
more transfers or pays more taxes than “John.” John and Mohammed are described to be exactly the same
except for the fact that one of them is an immigrant. In all countries except Sweden, a substantial share of
respondents say that Mohammad receives more transfers and/or pays less taxes, especially in France, Italy,
and the U.S.. The right panel shows that, again, it is low-educated respondents in high immigration sectors,
those without college education, those who do not have immigrant parents, the old, and especially right-wing
21 To give a sense of attitudes in Germany for comparison, the Appendix Section A-9 describes German respondents’ answers
to a question from the German General Social Survey (ALLBUS/GGSS, 2014), inquiring about the importance of several
factors, including luck and hard work, for one’s success.

20

respondents that are significantly more likely to say Mohammed gets more on net from the government. In
a smaller pilot, we randomized the name of the immigrant that was given in this question between a name
that sounded i) North American (“Jack”) in the U.S. and Western European for the European countries;
ii) Hispanic in the U.S. and France (“Miguel” and “José”) and Eastern European in the other European
countries; iii) Muslim (“Mohammed” or “Ibrahim”). The bias against immigrants was apparent with all the
name variations used.
Summing up: Perceptions of immigrants’ conditions and redistribution
Figure 12 shows the perception of poverty of natives and immigrants. Poverty is defined relative to disposable
income after government taxes and transfers. With the exception of Sweden where misperceptions for natives
and immigrants are small, in all other countries the level of poverty for both natives and immigrants is
misperceived upwardly. This seems consistent with the idea spread by recent “populist” parties, which is
grounded in very pessimistic views about the conditions of the “common man” relative to the elites. For our
purposes the relevant result is that respondents overestimate the share of natives that live in poverty to a
greater extent than they do for immigrants. Thus, combining all previous results, it seems that respondents
think that immigrants are less educated than natives, work less (are more “unemployed”), and yet end
up less poor at least in part because they are believed to be favored by the welfare system and benefit
more from government redistribution. Consistent with this, it is the same groups that hold more negative
misperceptions about immigrants that also overestimate the poverty rate of natives more relative to the one
of immigrants.

3.2

Robustness Checks and Monetary Incentives

Ex-post checks
To make sure that our results are not driven by careless answers, we implement a number of ex-post checks
that consist in flagging some respondents and then re-estimating all our results on a “reduced sample” that
excludes flagged respondents. The three flags refer to i) respondents in the top 2% and bottom 10% of the
time spent on a given question; ii) clearly suspicious patterns in respondents’ answers that are indicative of
carelessness, such as entering “0” or “100” to questions about shares (reported in Panel A of Table A-5 in the
Online Appendix); iii) inattentive participants which are identified by computing a Response Pattern Index
as in Meade and Craig (2012): this index represents the share of answers to qualitative questions for which
the respondent selected answers in the same position – ordered as first, last or middle. Careless respondents
are more likely to just mechanically select the option in the same position in every question to get to the end
of the survey more quickly. As reported in Panel B of Table A-5, few respondents systematically select the
same-positioned answer options; we flag those with a Response Pattern Index greater than or equal to 0.8.
Appendix Tables A-6 and A-7 report misperceptions by country and by group estimated on this “reduced”
sample. They are very close to the misperceptions estimated in the benchmark sample, showing that the
(few) inattentive respondents do not drive the aforementioned patterns.
Monetary incentives
Another possible concern about survey results in general is that respondents may not put in enough effort
when answering, because they lack external incentives to do so, above and beyond their intrinsic motivation.
21

To a randomly selected subsample of participants, we provide monetary incentives of varying amounts.
More precisely, at the beginning of the immigration block and on top of each question about immigrants’
statistics, respondents see a bold and highlighted message announcing that the five respondents whose guesses
are closest to the true statistics will receive an additional monetary award. We design this incentive as a
tournament to be able to offer substantial rewards randomized between $5, $10, $20, $30. To summarize
the results, we also construct a “Misperception Index” following the methodology in Kling et al. (2007) that
consists of an equally weighted average of the z-scores of misperceptions, with signs oriented so that a higher
index means that respondents are more biased in a negative way towards immigrants.22 Appendix Table A-8
looks at the overall effect of being offered any positive monetary incentive at all. Regardless of the size of
the award and controlling for respondent characteristics, incentives do not seem to be effective at reducing
misperceptions, as shown in Table 3.
Willingness to pay for information
Recall that at the end of the additional U.S. survey we ask participants whether they are willing to forfeit
part of their potential prize from the lottery in order to receive the correct answers to all the questions about
immigrants. We randomize the price of that information between the options $0.5, $1,$2, $5, and $10. 49% of
respondents are willing to pay at least 50 cents to receive the correct information about immigrants; the share
willing to pay $10 is 45%. Column (1) of Table 4 shows the characteristics that correlate with willingness
to pay for information. Respondents with a higher misperception index (i.e., more negative perceptions of
immigrants) are less willing to pay for the true information, conditional on its price, on income, and other
respondent characteristics. Possible explanations for this are that respondents with more extreme views
are more confident in their views or less interested in seeking out information and learning, which could
also explain their more inaccurate views in the first place. Even conditional on the level of misperception,
right-wing respondents, women, non college-educated, and younger respondents are less willing to pay for
correct information. To some extent, these results could provide some explanation for why stereotypes about
immigrants persist. Respondents with more incorrect views, i.e., with more negative stereotypes, are the
least interested in learning the truth, whatever the reason for this may be.
For those respondents who are willing to pay and receive the accurate information, 51% say they are
surprised by it. As is natural, participants with a higher misperception index are more likely to be surprised.
In the open-ended feedback box, respondents declare to be particularly surprised by the share of Christian
immigrants and the share of highly-educated immigrants.

3.3

Attitudes Towards Immigration Policies

Figure 13 depicts the share of respondents by country (Panel A) or group (Panel B) who agree with the
following statements (from bottom to top): i) Immigration is not a problem; ii) Immigrants should be eligible
for benefits at most three years after arrival; iii) Immigrants should be allowed to apply for citizenship at
most five years after arrival; iv) The respondent would consider an immigrant to be truly “American” as soon
as they get citizenship; v) The government should care equally about everyone living in the country whether
born there or not. There are varied patterns of attitudes towards immigration in different countries. In the
U.S., people believe strongly that immigrants should be considered “truly American” as soon as they become
22 Variables included in the index are the perceived share of Muslim immigrants, share of Christian immigrants, share of
unemployed immigrants, share of low-educated immigrants, share of highly-educated immigrants, share of poor immigrants.

22

citizens, and that they should get citizenship relatively soon. They are also most likely to say immigration
is not a problem and relatively likely to say that the government should care equally about everyone in the
country. However, and consistent with their generally lower support for benefits, they are the least likely to
say that immigrants should be eligible for benefits soon. In contrast, in European countries, especially in
France, Italy, Germany, and, to a lesser extent in the U.K., respondents are less likely to say the government
should care equally about everyone, that immigrants should be allowed to apply for citizenship soon, or
that they will be considered as truly part of the country upon citizenship. Very few respondents (around a
fifth) say that immigration is not a problem in their country. Overall, the U.S. is the country that is most
supportive of immigration and France, Italy, and Germany are the least supportive ones.
The groups with more negative perceptions of immigrants also hold the more negative attitudes towards
immigration policies, as shown in Panel B. Left-wing respondents are the most favorable to immigration,
right-wing respondents the least favorable. The non college-educated are consistently less supportive than
the college-educated, across all dimensions. Those without college in immigration-intensive sectors are more
averse to immigration than either people in high immigration sectors in general, or the non college-educated
in general. On the other hand, those with college in high immigration sectors are weakly more supportive
than those with college. This large heterogeneity even within immigration intensive sectors is clear in the
public debate too; recall in the U.S. the outcry in Silicon Valley (an example of a highly-skilled, immigrantintensive area) during President Trump’s travel bans.

4

Immigration and Redistribution: Experimental Evidence

Our experimental part contains three types of treatments: a priming (or salience) treatment, two factual,
informational treatments, and an anecdotal treatment. These three types of treatments appeal to different
aspects of people’s perceptions and views and comparing their effects sheds light on the links between
immigration and redistribution.
The priming or salience treatment consists in randomizing the order in which respondents see the “redistribution” and the “immigration” blocks. Thus, this treatment tests whether simply making the immigration
issue more salient to respondents – without any information – affects their answers to the questions on redistribution. The two informational treatments provide data on, respectively, the share of immigrants and their
countries of origin. These treatments are purely factual, without any judgment or specific tone. Finally, we
provide an “anecdote” treatment that tells the story of a hard-working immigrant. This treatment does not
provide any factual data per se, but rather prompts the treated group to think positively about the life and
hard work of one immigrant.

4.1

Salience and Priming Treatment: Making Respondents Think About Immigrants

The effects of the order treatment are shown in the first line of Table 5. Those who are shown the immigration
questions first become more averse to redistribution, as captured by their preference for a less progressive
income tax system and less budget allocated to the social safety net. They also believe inequality is less of
a serious problem and donate less to charity. The magnitudes are economically significant; being prompted
to think about immigrants reduces the preferred top income tax rate by around 2 percentage points, which
corresponds to 5% change relative to the control group mean and 90% of the gap between left and right-wing
23

respondents. It also increases the preferred tax rate on the bottom 50% by around 1 percentage point,
corresponding to 8% of the control mean and around the full size of the gap in preferred bottom 50% tax
rate between left and right respondents. The share of respondents who say inequality is a serious problem
declines by about 3 percentage points, which represents around 5% of the control group mean and 13% of
the gap between left and right-wing respondents.23 There is also a consistent effect on the desired share
of the budget to be allocated to “social” spending, i.e., on the social safety net and on health. Seeing the
immigration block first reduces desired social spending by an amount equivalent to 22.7% of the gap in
desired spending between left and right-wing respondents, or, equivalently, around 2% of the control group
mean.
One distinct pattern to note is the increase in support for education policies, contrary to all other
redistributive policies. Being prompted to think about immigrants increases the desired share of the budget
spent on education by 3% of the control group mean or 40% of the gap in desired spending between left and
right-wing respondents. There are several possible interpretations for this result. One is that natives would
like younger immigrants or their children to be more educated and be able to contribute more to society; the
other is that they may think that education policies will not specifically benefit immigrants who arrive at
later ages. The treatment effects from the informational and anecdotal treatments below will confirm this
pattern.

4.2

The Informational and Anecdotal Treatments

First stage effects on perceptions
The first-stage effects on the key perceptions of immigration of the two informational treatments and the
anecdote treatment are shown in Table 6. Each treatment significantly affects perceptions along the dimension it was designed to do and generally does not shift perceptions along the other dimensions.24
The main result is that factual information about immigrants is not very effective, neither in fully shifting
perceptions towards the truth, nor in changing support for redistribution. Anecdotes such as the “hard work”
one that appeal to emotions and contain a narrative are somewhat more effective.
The “Share of immigrants” treatment reduces respondents’ misperception of the share of immigrants by
5 percentage points (column 1). Given how far perceptions were from reality to start with, this represents a
bit less than one third of the average misperception in the control group. Some respondents may not have
believed the info provided, especially if it clashed with their prior, in an age of “alternative facts.” They
may not have paid sufficient attention to the exact number. Appendix Figure A-5 shows the full histograms
of responses in the control and treatment groups for each country. The “Share of immigrants” treatment
significantly compresses all responses in the treatment group towards zero or low misperceptions. But some
types of respondents – namely those with extreme initial responses – maintain their extreme opinions. Thus
the respondents with the most extreme misperceptions may also be less prone to being convinced about the
truth. Column 2 shows the effects of the treatment on a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent’s misperception
is zero. While only 4% of respondents are correct in the control group, this share increases to 27% among
respondents treated with information on the number of immigrants. In fact, the share of respondents who
23 The answers to all questions about immigration policies and about redistribution are tabulated by country and respondent
characteristics in Table A-10
24 To avoid selecting any variable, but in the interest of saving space, Appendix Table A-12 shows the first-stage effects on
the full range of perception variables.

24

are accurate within 2 percentage points is 34% in the treatment group, as opposed to 10% in the control
group; the share of those who are accurate within 5 percentage points is 49% in the treatment group and
25% in the control group. This treatment does not significantly affect the perceived origin of immigrants,
nor their perceived work ethic, which is as intended. For the U.S., the results for the “legal only” version
of the treatment “Share of Immigrants” in Table A-11 are stronger, understandably so since the number of
legal-only immigrants is lower. The misperception on the share of immigrants is reduced by 13 percentage
points, and the share of respondents who are exactly correct is 42% in the treated group, as opposed to just
6% in the control group. Yet, as we will see below, neither version of this treatment for the U.S. manages to
improve support for redistribution.
The “Origin of immigrants” treatment significantly reduces some of the misperception on the origins
of immigrants. It decreases the misperception of the share of immigrants from the Middle East and North
Africa by 38% relative to the control group (column 3), as well as Muslim immigrants overall by 16% (column
5). It decreases also the misperceptions (equivalent to increasing the perceived shares) of immigrants from
North America, Eastern and Western Europe by 32% (column 4) and Christian immigrants by 10% (column
6). It does not shift the perceived work effort of immigrants (column 7). It does, however, increase the
perceived share of immigrants overall. This will be consistent with our argument below that the informational
treatments have the unavoidable side-effect of making the immigration topic more salient.
The anecdotal “Hard Work” treatment makes treated respondents 5 percentage points less likely to say
that lack of effort is the reason why poor immigrants are poor, which represents a 14% reduction relative to
the control group. There is no effect on the perceptions why rich immigrants are rich – which is consistent
with the fact that the experiment only focused on a poor, hard-working immigrant, and not on wealth
and effort (see Appendix Table A-12). In addition, there is a small effect on the perceived total share of
immigrants, which could again be due to the treatment prompting people to think about immigrants overall.
Persistence
We also ran a follow-up survey in the U.S. one week after each respondent took the survey, to check how
persistent the effects on perceptions were. 25% of the originally surveyed respondents also took the follow up
between one and three weeks after the original survey. There is no strong selection on who took the follow-up;
groups which in general have lower response rates, namely male, high-income, and young respondents are
less likely to take the follow-up (see Appendix Table A-16.)
Table 7 shows the results and confirms that factual information about immigrants is much weaker and
less effective in shifting views than narratives, whether because facts are not as appealing or harder to
remember than narratives, or because people do not believe them. The treatment “Origins of immigrants”
also persistently affects the perceived share of Middle Eastern and North African immigrants (negatively) and
the perceived share of Latin American immigrants (positively). The treatment “Share of immigrants” does
not show persistent effects. But the anecdote treatment displays very strong persistence, with a treatment
effect on respondents who took the first and follow-up survey that is almost identical in the first and follow-up
surveys. Thus, it seems that narratives can stick in people’s minds for longer than hard facts.
Second stage effects on support for immigration and redistribution
It is important to distinguish here between the effects on redistributive policies and those on immigration
policies. Let’s start with the latter, shown in Table 8. The immigration support index is constructed following
25

the methodology in Kling et al. (2007) and consists of an equally weighted average of the z-scores of the
variables related to support for immigration (columns 1 to 5 in Table 8). More support for pro-immigration
policies means a higher corresponding index. The share of immigrants and anecdotal treatments somewhat
increases support for immigration overall, as measured by the immigration support index, driven mostly
by the likelihood of responding that the current level of immigration is less of a problem. This indicates
that the information on the true share of immigrants did at least partially get absorbed by people (even if
imperfectly so, as discussed for the first stage results above). The origins of immigrant treatment barely
has any effect, suggesting that this factual information is not very impactful (as shown by the significant
first stage effects, but that falls short of a full closing of the misperception gaps) or that the true share
of immigrants from different countries still does not improve people’s support for immigration. The “hard
work” anecdote is the one that also increases the likelihood of saying immigrants should get benefits sooner
and that the government should care equally about everyone, suggesting that, rather than facts, it is mostly
the emotional story about a very hard-working immigrant that strikes a chord.
Table 5 shows the effects of the two informational and the anecdote treatments on respondents’ views on
redistribution. The two informational treatments have negative, mostly insignificant effects on redistribution, according to all measures. The anecdotal treatment has positive or negative insignificant effects on our
measures of redistribution. How should we interpret these results? The informational and anecdotal treatments each do two things: First, they unavoidably prime respondents to think about immigration, before
they answer the questions on policies and redistribution. They thus increase the salience of the immigration
topic, which, as we showed has a negative effect on support for redistribution per se. Second, they provide
some factual information or narrative about immigrants, which could in principle reassure respondents. The
overall effect, however, is that the salience is what matters most given the baseline negative views about
immigrants. This makes a lot of sense in light of the earlier results described. As we saw, the first-stage
effects signal that factual information content is not easily transmitted to respondents; in addition the willingness to pay results indicate that respondents with the largest misperceptions are also those less likely to
be willing to pay for information and, perhaps correspondingly, also not be as interested in the information
we provide. On the contrary, the effects of the order treatment showed that salience is a very strong force.
That the effects of the hard work treatment are less negative on balance (despite the fact that this treatment
too makes the immigration issue more salient) suggests that the “hard work” narrative is more powerful
than the facts we provide. Note that there is again the same distinct pattern for education policies that we
pointed out above for the salience treatment, namely that support for spending on education goes in the
opposite direction of the other redistributive policies.

4.3

Heterogeneity

Tables 9 shows the heterogeneity in treatment effects according to four key respondent characteristics, which
we highlighted in Section 3: left and right-wing respondents (Panel A); college and non college-educated
(Panel B); women and men (Panel C); college-educated in immigration intensive sectors and others (Panel
D). We focus here on the effects of the “Order” treatment which is the treatment with the most significant
effect in the overall sample.25
The groups which react most negatively to seeing the immigration block first are generally those with
25 The other treatments did not have differential effects by respondent groups and the overall effects from the full sample
carry over.

26

the most negative priors about immigrants, namely the right-wing, the non college-educated, and the non
college-educated in high-immigration sectors: these groups want less government-driven redistribution (i.e.,
less income tax progressivity, less social spending) and less private charity donations. Note that even leftwing respondents decrease their support for redistribution when they are primed to think about immigrants
first.

4.4

Additional Robustness Checks

To make sure that our results are not driven by careless or extreme respondents, we re-estimate the treatment
effects on our “reduced” sample, where we implement the checks detailed in Section 3.2 – excluding extreme
guesses, dropping respondents with a Response Pattern Index greater or equal than 0.8, and excluding
answers to questions on which respondents spent too little or too much time. We also drop respondents who
felt that the survey was biased (based on their response to the feedback questions at the end of the survey).
These refinements do not significantly change our results.26 The full set of results for these alternative
respondent samples are available on demand.
In a smaller pilot study, we randomize the names given as examples of immigrants in the question about
whether immigrants receive more transfers on net (see Section 3.1). We also randomized the name of the
immigrant whose story is told in the hard work treatment between i) a native-sounding name (“Emma”); ii)
a Hispanic sounding name (“Isabella”) for the U.S. and an Eastern European name for European countries;
and iii) a Muslim-sounding name (“Fatima”). The effects of the “Hard work” treatment were not significantly
different across the three name groups, but the samples were small. Finally, we re-weight the sample to make
it representative also along the two non-targeted dimensions of education and employment (see Appendix
A-10).

5

Conclusion

According to our surveys, respondents from six developed countries have strongly biased views on immigrants.
They think that there are many more immigrants than there actually are, have incorrect views about their
origins, and believe that immigrants are more reliant on the host country’s welfare state, more unemployed,
and less educated than is the case in reality. Respondents exhibit these strong misperceptions even when
they are offered significant monetary incentives to answer correctly. About half of the respondents that
are offered this option are willing to pay to obtain the correct information. But the respondents with the
most extreme misperceptions are those who are less willing to do so. Misperceptions about immigrants,
and the subsequent lack of support for immigration and redistribution, are starkest among three groups of
respondents: the non college-educated, those working in immigration intensive sectors and without a college
degree, and right-wing respondents.
Given the very negative priors that people have of immigrants, our randomized priming or salience treatment that prompts respondents to think about immigrants and their characteristics before asking them
questions about redistribution generates a significant negative effect on support for redistribution. Factual
information about the share and origins of immigrants is not effective in generating more support for redistribution or more positive attitudes towards immigrants; in fact, it also acts as a prime for respondents to
26 Dropping respondents who felt the survey was biased strengthens the significance of the treatment effects, perhaps because
the remaining respondents are more receptive to what they perceive to be non-biased information.

27

think about immigrants, with the ensuing reduction in support for redistribution that the salience treatment
generates. A “hard-work” narrative is somewhat more effective in countering the negative priming effect on
redistribution. Overall, it seems that views on immigration are more sensitive to salience and narratives,
rather than to hard facts.
Our results suggest that much of the political debate about immigration takes place in a world of misinformation and of deeply held negative stereotypes about immigrants. Obviously the amount and nature of
information that citizens receive is endogenous. Anti-immigration parties have an incentive to maintain and
even foster stereotypes, which can lead to a vicious cycle. The more natives are misinformed, the more they
may look for confirmation of their stereotypes in the media. The latter have an incentive to offer information
supporting these views in order to cater to their customers. For instance, immigrants who commit crimes or
who free-ride on the welfare system may receive more media coverage than natives engaging in these same
behaviors; and, conversely, immigrants who live very standard lives similar to natives will receive no coverage. Another implication of our results could be that a focus on immigration issues in the current political
debate – if it does not go hand in hand with correcting the striking misperceptions respondents have about
immigrants – could have the unintended consequence of reducing support for redistribution, in addition to
reducing support for more open immigration policies. Anti-redistribution parties, even those not averse to
immigration per se, can play the immigration card to generate backlash against redistribution.

References
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2011). Preferences for Redistribution. In Handbook of Social Economics,
Volume 1, pp. 93–131.
Alesina, A. and E. Glaeser (2004). Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe: A World of Difference. Oxford
University Press.
Alesina, A., E. Murard, and H. Rapoport (2019). Immigration and Preferences for Redistribution in Europe.
NBER Working Paper No. 25562.
Alesina, A., S. Stantcheva, and E. Teso (2018). Intergenerational Mobility and Preferences for Redistribution.
American Economic Review 108 (2), 521–554.
Bansak, K., J. Hainmueller, and D. Hangartner (2016). How Economic, Humanitarian, and Religious Concerns Shape European Attitudes Toward Asylum Seekers. Science 354 (6309), 217–222.
Barrera Rodriguez, O., S. Guriev, E. Henry, and E. Zhuravskaya (2018). Facts, Alternative Facts, and Fact
Checking in Times of Post-Truth Politics. Paris School of Economics Working Paper. Journal of Public
Economics, R&R.
Bordalo, P., K. Coffman, N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2016). Stereotypes. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 131 (4), 1753–1794.
Card, D., C. Dustmann, and I. Preston (2012). Immigration, Wages, and Compositional Amenities. Journal
of the European Economic Association 10 (1), 78–119.
Charité, J., R. Fisman, and I. Kuziemko (2015). Reference Points and Redistributive Preferences: Experimental Evidence. NBER Working Paper No. 21009.
Chevalier, A., B. Elsner, A. Lichter, and N. Pestel (2017). Immigrant Voters, Taxation and the Size of the
Welfare State. IZA DP No. 11725.
Cruces, G., R. Perez-Truglia, and M. Tetaz (2013). Biased Perceptions of Income Distribution and Preferences
for Redistribution: Evidence from a Survey Experiment. Journal of Public Economics 98, 100–112.
Dahlberg, M., K. Edmark, and H. Lundqvist (2012). Ethnic Diversity and Preferences for Redistribution.
Journal of Political Economy 120 (1), 41–76.
28

Damm, A. P., C. Dustmann, and K. Vasiljeva (2019). Refugee Migration and Electoral Outcomes. The
Review Of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Fisman, R., I. Kuziemko, and S. Vannutelli (2018). Distributional Preferences in Larger Groups: Keeping up
with the Joneses and Keeping Track of the Tails. Mimeo. Journal of the European Economic Association,
R&R.
Gennaioli, N. and G. Tabellini (2018). Identity, Beliefs and Political Conflict. CEPR Discussion Papers
13390.
Grigorieff, A., C. Roth, and D. Ubfal (2018). Does Information Change Attitudes Towards Immigrants?
Representative Evidence from Survey Experiments. Bocconi University Working paper. Demography,
R&R.
Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (2018). Identity Politics and Trade Policy. NBER Working Paper No.
25348.
Hainmueller, J. and D. J. Hopkins (2010). Attitudes toward Highly Skilled and Low-skilled Immigration:
Evidence from a Survey Experiment. American Political Science Review 104 (1).
Hainmueller, J. and D. J. Hopkins (2015). The Hidden American Immigration Consensus: A Conjoint
Analysis of Attitudes toward Immigrants. American Journal of Political Science 59 (3), 529–548.
Hanson, G. H., K. Scheve, and M. J. Slaughter (2007). Public Finance and Individual Preferences over
Globalization Strategies. Economics & Politics 19 (1), 1–33.
Karadja, M., J. Mollerstrom, and D. Seim (2017). Richer (and Holier) than thou? The effect of Relative
Income Improvements on Demand for Redistribution. Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (2), 201–212.
Kling, J. R., J. B. Liebman, and L. F. Katz (2007). Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.
Econometrica 75 (1), 83–119.
Kuziemko, I., R. W. Buell, T. Reich, and M. I. Norton (2014). “Last-place Aversion”: Evidence and
Redistributive Implications. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1), 105–149.
Kuziemko, I., M. I. Norton, E. Saez, and S. Stantcheva (2015). How Elastic are Preferences for Redistribution? Evidence from Randomized Survey Experiments. American Economic Review 105 (4), 1478–1508.
Mayda, A. M. (2006). Who is Against Immigration? A Cross-country Investigation of Individual Attitudes
towards Immigrants. Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (3), 510–530.
Meade, A. W. and S. B. Craig (2012). Identifying Careless Responses in Survey Data. Psychological Methods 17 (3), 437.
OECD (2015). Indicators of Immigrant Integration 2015: Settling In. OECD Publishing, Paris.
Senik, C., H. Stichnoth, and K. Van der Straeten (2009). Immigration and Natives’ Attitudes towards the
Welfare State: Evidence from the European Social Survey. Social Indicators Research 91 (3), 345–370.
Stichnoth, H. and K. Van der Straeten (2013). Ethnic Diversity, Public Spending, and Individual Support for
the Welfare State: A Review of the Empirical Literature. Journal of Economic Surveys 27 (2), 364–389.
Tabellini, M. (2019). Gifts of the Immigrants, Woes of the Natives: Lessons from the Age of Mass Migration.
The Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Weinzierl, M. (2017). Popular Acceptance of Inequality Due to Innate Brute Luck and Support for Classical
Benefit-based Taxation. Journal of Public Economics 155, 54–63.
Weinzierl, M. (2018). Revisiting the Classical View of Benefit-Based Taxation. Economic Journal 128 (612),
F37–F64.

29

Figure 6: Perceived vs. Actual Share of Immigrants

Notes: The left panel shows the average perceived share of immigrants (red squares) and the actual share (blue diamonds) in
each country. The right panel shows the average misperception (perceived minus actual share) of the share of immigrants by
groups. Groups are defined by the indicator variables listed to the left: the mean misperception when the indicator is equal to
1 is represented by the orange or red diamonds. The shaded areas are 95% confidence intervals around the mean.

30

Figure 7: Perceived Share of Immigrants vs. Actual Share of First and
Second Generation Immigrants

Notes: The Figure shows the average perceived share of first generation immigrants (red squares), the actual share of first
generation immigrants (blue diamonds), and the actual share of first plus second generation immigrants (blue circles) in each
country. The shaded areas are 95% confidence intervals around the mean. The share of first plus second generation immigrants
for the U.S. also includes illegal immigrants.

31

Figure 8: Perceived vs. Actual Religion of Immigrants
(a) Perceived vs. Actual Share of Muslim Immigrants

(b) Perceived vs. Actual Share of Christian Immigrants

Notes: Panel A shows the perceived and actual share of Muslim immigrants; panel B shows the perceived and actual share of
Christian immigrants. See the notes for Figure 6.

32

Figure 9:
stances

Misperception of Immigrants’ and Natives’ Economic Circum(a) Misperception of Immigrants’ and Natives’ Share of Highly Educated

(b) Misperception of Immigrants’ and Natives’ Unemployment

Notes: Panel A: The left panel shows the average misperception (perceived - actual share) of the share of immigrant (red squares)
and natives (light blue diamonds) with a college degree in each country; the right panel shows the average misperception of
the share of immigrants (green squares) and natives (blue diamonds) with a college degree by groups. Groups are defined by
the indicator variables listed to the left. The shaded areas are 95% confidence intervals around the mean. Panel B: Average
misperception of immigrants and natives unemployment rate by country (left panel) and by groups (right panel).

33

Figure 10: Views on Immigrants’ Work Effort
(a) % of Respondents who Think Immigrants (or Natives) are Poor due to Lack of Effort

(b) % of Respondents who Think Immigrants (or Natives) are Rich Because of Own Effort

Notes: Panel A shows the share of respondents who think that immigrants who are poor are in that situation because of lack of
effort, by country (left panel) and by groups (right panel). Panel B shows the share of respondents who think that immigrants
who are rich owe this to their own effort. Blue diamonds report the share of respondents who say the same about the general,
non-immigrant population, with numbers coming from Alesina et al. (2018). In the right panel, groups are defined by the
indicator variables listed to the left: the share when the indicator is equal to 1 is shown in orange or in red. The shaded areas
are 95% confidence intervals around the average perception.

34

Figure 11: Are Immigrants the Beneficiaries of Redistribution?
(a) % of Respondents who Think Immigrants Receive at Least Twice as Many Government Transfers
as Natives

(b) % of Respondents who Think Mohammad Receives More on Net

Notes: Panel A shows the share of respondents who think that an average immigrant receives at least twice as many government
transfers as an average native; Panel B shows the share of respondents who think that Mohammad receives more benefits on
net (i.e., either receives more gross benefits or pays less taxes). See the notes for Figure 10.

35

Figure 12: Misperception of Poverty of Immigrants and Natives

Notes: The figure shows misperceptions of the share of immigrants and of natives who live in poverty. See notes for Figure 9

36

Figure 13: Support for Immigration
A: By Country
Govt. should care about everyone

American upon citiz. or before

Imm. allowed to get citiz. soon

Imm. should get benefits soon

Imm. not a problem

.2

.4
.6
Share Answering Yes

.8

US

UK

France

Italy

Germany

Sweden

B: By Core Characteristics
Govt. should care about everyone
American upon citiz. or before
Imm. allowed to get citiz. soon
Imm. should get benefits soon
Imm. not a problem

.1

.3
.5
Share Answering Yes

.7

Left-Wing

Right-Wing

College

No College

H Imm, No college

H Imm, College

No H Imm

Notes: The figure shows the share of respondents answering “Yes” to the questions listed on the vertical axis, by country (Panel
A) and respondent groups (Panel B). Govt. should care about everyone is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent thinks that
the government should care about all the people living in the country (6 and 7 in a scale from 1 to 7). American upon citiz.
or before is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent would consider an immigrant truly “American” at the latest when he gets
citizenship. Imm. allowed to get citiz. soon, Imm. should get benefits soon, and Imm. not a problem, are dummies equal to 1
if the respondent thinks that immigrants should be allowed to apply for citizenship at most five years after arriving, immigrants
should be eligible for benefits at most three years after arriving, and immigration is not a problem.

37

Table 1: Sample Characteristics
US
Pop
Sample
(1)
(2)
Male
18-29 y.o.
30-39 y.o.
40-49 y.o.
50-59 y.o.
60-69 y.o.
Income Bracket
Income Bracket
Income Bracket
Income Bracket
Married
Employed
Unemployed
College

1
2
3
4

0.48
0.24
0.19
0.19
0.20
0.17
0.16
0.19
0.22
0.43
0.51
0.60
0.08
0.51

0.49
0.24
0.20
0.19
0.20
0.17
0.16
0.19
0.22
0.43
0.49
0.70
0.05
0.41

UK
Sample
Pop
(3)
(4)
0.48
0.25
0.19
0.22
0.18
0.16
0.30
0.37
0.12
0.23
0.52
0.68
0.04
0.37

France
Sample
Pop
(5)
(6)

0.48
0.26
0.19
0.21
0.18
0.16
0.31
0.35
0.11
0.23
0.41
0.74
0.05
0.36

0.49
0.23
0.20
0.21
0.20
0.15
0.31
0.33
0.14
0.24
0.42
0.64
0.10
0.51

0.49
0.23
0.20
0.21
0.20
0.15
0.32
0.30
0.14
0.24
0.46
0.65
0.09
0.31

Italy
Sample
Pop
(7)
(8)
0.50
0.20
0.22
0.24
0.18
0.16
0.28
0.31
0.20
0.24
0.58
0.66
0.11
0.36

0.50
0.19
0.22
0.23
0.19
0.17
0.27
0.28
0.19
0.26
0.46
0.57
0.11
0.16

Germany
Sample
Pop
(9)
(10)
0.49
0.23
0.18
0.20
0.23
0.15
0.25
0.30
0.23
0.22
0.48
0.66
0.04
0.27

0.49
0.22
0.18
0.20
0.23
0.17
0.26
0.29
0.23
0.22
0.46
0.75
0.04
0.25

Sweden
Sample
Pop
(11)
(12)
0.50
0.24
0.19
0.20
0.19
0.18
0.33
0.25
0.28
0.17
0.34
0.72
0.04
0.43

0.50
0.24
0.19
0.21
0.18
0.18
0.33
0.29
0.22
0.17
0.33
0.77
0.05
0.36

Notes: This table displays summary statistics from our surveys (in odd columns) alongside nationally representative statistics (in
even columns). Detailed sources for each variable and country are: 1) For the U.S.: The Census Bureau and Current Population
Survey. Income brackets (annual gross household income) are defined as less than $20,000; $20,000-$40,000; $40,000-$70,000;
more than $70,000. 2) For the U.K.: Eurostat Census Data and Office of National Statistics. Income brackets (monthly net
household income) are: less than £1,500; £1,500-£2,500; £2,500-£3,000; more than £3,000, 3) For France: Eurostat Census
Data and INSEE. Income brackets (monthly net household income, in Euros) are: less than 1,500; 1,500-2,500; 2,500-2,000;
more than 3,000; 4) For Italy: Eurostat Census Data, Bank of Italy and ISTAT. Income brackets (monthly net household
income, in Euros) are: less than 1,500; 1,500-,2450; 2,450-3,350; more than 3,350; 5) For Germany: Eurostat Census Data and
GfK Demographics. Income brackets (monthly net household income, in Euros) are: less than 1,500; 1,500-2,600; 2,600-4,000;
more than 4,000; 6) For Sweden: Eurostat Census Data and Statistics Sweden. Income brackets (monthly gross household
income, in SEK) are: less than 33,000; 33,000-42,000; 42,000-58,000; more than 58,000. We count as employed both full-time
and part-time employees. Out of the labor force = 1 - (employed + unemployed).

Table 2: Ability of Covariates to Predict Treatment Status
Order/Salience T

Voted right
Voted left
Male
Young
Immigrant parent
College degree
High income
High immigration sector

Coefficient

P-value

-0.006
0.002
0.009
-0.001
0.009
-0.001
-0.006
-0.005

0.436
0.820
0.168
0.918
0.479
0.887
0.516
0.485

Information T:
Share of Immigrants
Coefficient
P-value
-0.001
-0.003
-0.003
0.009
0.003
0.011
0.001
0.004

0.888
0.668
0.588
0.130
0.738
0.088
0.857
0.518

Information T:
Origins of Immigrants
Coefficient
P-value
0.004
-0.002
0.002
-0.003
0.002
0.001
-0.003
-0.004

0.548
0.758
0.721
0.671
0.875
0.934
0.732
0.537

Anecdote T:
Hard Work of Immigrants
Coefficient
P-value
-0.006
0.009
-0.000
-0.011
-0.013
-0.011
-0.005
-0.002

0.325
0.150
0.999
0.063
0.195
0.087
0.558
0.769

Notes: The table shows the coefficients and p-values from a series of regressions of the form yic = α + βCovariatei + γc + ic ,
where Covariatei is the variable listed in the row and γc are country fixed effects. In the column “Order/Salience T”, yic is
a dummy equal to one if the respondent was shown the immigration block before the redistribution block. In columns “Share
of Immigrants”, “Origins of Immigrants”, and “Hard Work of Immigrants” yic is a dummy equal to one if the respondent saw
the corresponding informational or anecdotal treatment.

38

Table 3: Effect of Monetary Incentives on Misperceptions
All
Immigrants
(misp.)
(1)

Accurate Perception
All Immigrants

N. America, W. and
E. Europe
(misp.)
(4)

Muslim

Christian

(2)

M. East and
N. Africa
(misp.)
(3)

(misp.)
(5)

(misp.)
(6)

$5 Incentive

-0.354
(2.215)

0.0238
(0.0189)

-1.305
(1.220)

0.182
(1.460)

-0.202
(1.446)

1.802
(2.058)

$10 Incentive

2.263
(2.254)

0.0195
(0.0193)

0.0386
(1.242)

-1.024
(1.486)

-1.691
(1.472)

2.559
(2.095)

$20 Incentive

0.907
(2.297)

-0.00218
(0.0196)

-0.340
(1.266)

1.582
(1.515)

-1.350
(1.500)

3.376
(2.135)

$30 Incentive

-1.085
(2.283)

0.00326
(0.0195)

-0.680
(1.258)

-1.136
(1.506)

-1.163
(1.491)

3.416
(2.122)

20.37***
(2.369)

0.0286
(0.0203)

20.02***
(1.305)

13.79***
(1.562)

13.41***
(1.547)

-22.68***
(2.201)

914

914

914

914

914

914

Unemployment
(misp.)
(7)

Low-educated
(misp.)
(8)

High-educated
(misp.)
(9)

Poverty
(misp.)
(10)

Misperception
Index
(11)

$5 Incentive

-0.448
(2.146)

-1.400
(2.337)

2.327
(2.502)

-2.234
(2.258)

-0.0545
(0.0504)

$10 Incentive

-0.916
(2.178)

3.358
(2.378)

5.435**
(2.547)

0.718
(2.298)

-0.0311
(0.0513)

$20 Incentive

1.471
(2.220)

-1.687
(2.424)

1.687
(2.596)

-1.596
(2.342)

-0.0498
(0.0523)

$30 Incentive

2.539
(2.207)

-1.979
(2.410)

3.169
(2.580)

1.345
(2.328)

-0.0458
(0.0520)

16.34***
(2.290)

-0.992
(2.500)

-10.76***
(2.676)

20.83***
(2.415)

0.0399
(0.0539)

913

914

914

914

914

Constant
Observations

Constant
Observations

Notes: The table reports the effect of monetary incentives on misperceptions, computed as perceptions minus actual statistics.
Accurate Perception All Immigrants is a dummy equal to 1 if the absolute value of the respondent’s misperception of the
share of immigrants is less than 1. The Misperception Index is an index summarizing respondents’ misperceptions, constructed
following the methodology in Kling et al. (2007). All variables are detailed in Appendix A-1. Controls included in all regressions
are: indicator variables for gender, age less than 45, having children, being in the top quartile of the income distribution, having
a college degree, political affiliation, having at least one parent not born in the country, working in a high immigration sector.
Sample: respondents who have not seen any informational treatments or the anecdote treatment, additional U.S. survey.
Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

39

Table 4: Willingness to Pay to Receive Correct Information about Immigrants
Panel A
Willing To Pay
(1)

Surprised
(2)

Misperception Index

-0.107***
(0.0318)

0.143***
(0.0474)

Republican

-0.0792**
(0.0338)

0.0158
(0.0513)

Female

-0.0707**
(0.0328)

0.0527
(0.0478)

H. Imm. Sector and No College

0.0822
(0.0509)

0.0140
(0.0796)

H. Imm. Sector and College

0.0690
(0.0426)

0.0150
(0.0590)

No College

-0.112**
(0.0454)

0.0182
(0.0708)

High Income

-0.0317
(0.0410)

0.0122
(0.0589)

Young

-0.0770**
(0.0328)

0.0282
(0.0479)

Immigrant parent

0.125**
(0.0551)

-0.0850
(0.0731)

918

448

Observations

Share Willing to Pay

Panel B
All $0.5
$1
0.49 0.51 0.50

$2
0.53

$5
0.45

$10
0.45

Notes: Panel A reports the determinants of willingness to pay to receive correct information about immigrants (column 1) and
the determinants of being surprised by the information received, conditional on having accepted to pay for it (column 2). In
column 1 the dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondents accepts to forfeit part of its lottery gain to receive
the information. In column 2 the dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent declares to have been surprised
by the information received. All variables are detailed in Appendix A-1. The regression in (1) also includes dummies for the
various “prices” of information, not reported. Sample: respondents who have not seen any informational treatments or the
anecdote treatment, additional U.S. survey. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Panel B
reports the share of respondents who are willing to forfeit part of their lottery gains to receive the information, conditional on
the information “price” reported in each column.

40

Table 5: Treatment Effects on Support for Redistribution
Tax
Top 1
(1)

Tax
Bottom 50
(2)

Social
Budget
(3)

Education
Budget
(4)

Inequality
Serious Problem
(5)

Donation
Above Median
(6)

-1.948***
(0.421)

0.914***
(0.276)

-0.523**
(0.239)

0.443**
(0.174)

-0.0280**
(0.0132)

-0.0479***
(0.0138)

Information T: Share of Immigrants

-0.627
(0.426)

0.0449
(0.280)

-0.456*
(0.241)

0.188
(0.176)

-0.00590
(0.0134)

-0.0165
(0.0140)

Information T: Origins of Immigrants

-0.0662
(0.426)

0.0322
(0.280)

-0.455*
(0.242)

0.170
(0.177)

0.00626
(0.0134)

0.00208
(0.0140)

Anecdote T: Hard Work of Immigrants

0.0772
(0.426)

-0.212
(0.279)

-0.0912
(0.241)

0.340*
(0.176)

0.0158
(0.0134)

0.00910
(0.0139)

Observations
Control mean

19765
37.12

19765
10.94

19745
29.55

19761
16.00

19763
0.59

19765
0.47

Order/Salience T

Notes: The table reports the effect of the Order/Salience treatment, the two information treatments and the anecdote treatment
on the variables in the columns. Outcome variables are described in Appendix A-1. Social and Education budget are winsorized
at the 5th and 95th percentile by country. Controls included in all regressions are: indicator variables for gender, age less than
45, having children, being in the top quartile of the income distribution, having a college degree, political affiliation, having
at least one parent not born in the country, working in a high immigration sector, and country fixed effects. The regressions
also include the interactions between the order treatment and the three other treatments, not reported. Standard errors in
parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Table 6: First Stage Treatment Effects on Perceptions
All
Immigrants
(misp.)
(1)

Accurate Perception
All Immigrants

Information T: Share of Immigrants
Information T: Origins of Immigrants

N. America, W. and
E. Europe
(misp.)
(4)

Muslim

Christian

(2)

M. East and
N. Africa
(misp.)
(3)

Lack of Effort
Reason Poor

(misp.)
(5)

(misp.)
(6)

(7)

-4.864***
(0.422)

0.227***
(0.00563)

-0.248
(0.304)

0.173
(0.357)

0.00857
(0.408)

0.144
(0.396)

0.000297
(0.00912)

2.315***
(0.423)

0.00251
(0.00563)

-4.794***
(0.304)

1.827***
(0.357)

-1.829***
(0.408)

2.456***
(0.396)

-0.000234
(0.00913)

Anecdote T: Hard Work of Immigrants

0.709*
(0.423)

-0.00420
(0.00563)

-0.385
(0.304)

0.378
(0.357)

-0.869**
(0.408)

0.796**
(0.396)

-0.0535***
(0.00912)

Observations
Control mean

19735
17.02

19735
0.04

19747
12.60

19728
-5.56

19761
11.30

19757
-23.98

19721
0.36

Notes: The table reports first-stage effects on (mis)perceptions of immigration. Misperceptions are computed as perception
minus actual statistic. Accurate Perception All Immigrants is a dummy equal to 1 if the absolute value of the respondent’s
misperception of the share of immigrants is less than 1. Appendix A-1 defines all variables. All regressions include the same
controls as Table 5. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

41

Table 7: First Stage Effects: Persistence in Follow-Up (US only)
All
immigrants
(misp.)
(1)
Panel A: First survey who took the follow-up

L. America

Muslim

Christian

(2)

M. East and
N. Africa
(misp.)
(3)

(misp.)
(4)

(misp.)
(5)

(misp.)
(6)

(7)

-7.045***
(2.051)

0.230***
(0.0217)

1.515
(1.032)

-1.016
(1.574)

0.578
(1.302)

3.745*
(2.048)

0.0110
(0.0405)

Information T: Origins of Immigrants

1.671
(2.107)

-0.0214
(0.0223)

-7.220***
(1.060)

15.12***
(1.617)

-3.436**
(1.338)

5.457***
(2.105)

-0.0418
(0.0417)

Anecdote T: Hard Work of Immigrants

1.035
(2.030)
21.29

0.00854
(0.0215)
0.02

1.889*
(1.020)
14.86

0.278
(1.556)
-16.85

1.008
(1.287)
12.08

0.336
(2.025)
-22.66

-0.0889**
(0.0400)
0.45

Information T: Share of Immigrants

-1.369
(1.851)

0.0201
(0.0161)

0.853
(1.023)

-1.303
(1.420)

0.539
(1.229)

3.411*
(1.947)

-0.0124
(0.0401)

Information T: Origins of Immigrants

-1.301
(1.902)

-0.0177
(0.0165)

-2.808***
(1.051)

7.234***
(1.459)

-0.566
(1.263)

2.148
(2.001)

-0.0370
(0.0413)

Anecdote T: Hard Work of Immigrants

-1.246
(1.832)

-0.00130
(0.0159)

1.057
(1.012)

0.640
(1.403)

1.102
(1.215)

-1.584
(1.925)

-0.0822**
(0.0396)

1032
21.08

1032
0.03

1033
15.95

1034
-18.61

1034
11.05

1034
-21.85

1032
0.47

Information T: Share of Immigrants

Control mean

Accurate Perception
All immigrants

Lack of Effort
reason poor

Panel B: Follow-up respondents

Observations
Control mean

Notes: Panel A reports estimates of the first-stage effects in the first-round survey, on the subsample of respondents who also
took the follow up survey. Panel B shows the persistence of treatment effects on that subsample in the follow up survey. See
notes for Table 6. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Table 8: Treatment Effects on Support for Immigration
Imm. Not
A Problem
(1)

Imm. Benefits
Soon
(2)

Imm. Citizenship
Soon
(3)

American
Upon Citizenship/Before
(4)

Govt. Should care
About Everyone
(5)

Imm Support
Index
(6)

Information T: Share of Immigrants

0.0242***
(0.00830)

0.00991
(0.00958)

0.0158*
(0.00856)

0.00508
(0.00936)

-0.00395
(0.0358)

0.0238**
(0.0119)

Information T: Origins of Immigrants

0.00527
(0.00830)

0.00360
(0.00959)

0.000649
(0.00856)

0.00448
(0.00936)

-0.00222
(0.0359)

0.00573
(0.0119)

Anecdote T: Hard Work of Immigrants

0.0252***
(0.00830)

0.0202**
(0.00959)

0.0133
(0.00856)

0.0171*
(0.00935)

0.131***
(0.0358)

0.0463***
(0.0119)

19727
0.25

19749
0.49

19745
0.71

19742
0.62

19754
4.53

19765
0.00

Observations
Control mean

Notes: The table reports the effect of the two information treatments and the anecdote treatment on the variables in the
columns. Outcome variables are described in Appendix A-1. The Immigration Support Index is constructed following the
methodology in Kling et al. (2007), as explained in Section 4.2. All regressions include the same controls as Table 5. Standard
errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

42

Table 9: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects – Order Treatment
Tax
Top 1
(1)
Panel A: Right-Wing vs. Left-Wing

Tax
Bottom 50
(2)

Social
Budget
(3)

Education
Budget
(4)

Inequality
Serious Problem
(5)

Donation
Above Median
(6)

Order/Salience T x Right

-2.156***
(0.641)

0.987**
(0.426)

-0.920**
(0.364)

0.466*
(0.270)

0.00772
(0.0204)

-0.0526**
(0.0212)

Order/Salience T x Left

-1.851***
(0.601)
0.728

0.851**
(0.399)
0.815

-0.316
(0.341)
0.226

0.315
(0.253)
0.682

-0.0575***
(0.0191)
0.020

-0.0480**
(0.0199)
0.875

p-value diff.

Panel B: College-Educated vs. No College
Order/Salience T x College

-1.636**
(0.654)

0.220
(0.434)

-0.487
(0.372)

0.495*
(0.276)

-0.0161
(0.0208)

-0.0575***
(0.0217)

Order/Salience T x No College

-2.195***
(0.540)
0.510

1.396***
(0.358)
0.037

-0.545*
(0.307)
0.904

0.397*
(0.227)
0.785

-0.0356**
(0.0172)
0.470

-0.0406**
(0.0179)
0.547

Order/Salience T x Male

-2.045***
(0.594)

0.910**
(0.394)

-0.485
(0.338)

0.393
(0.250)

-0.00891
(0.0189)

-0.0717***
(0.0197)

Order/Salience T x Female

-1.894***
(0.584)
0.856

0.928**
(0.388)
0.973

-0.557*
(0.332)
0.879

0.479*
(0.246)
0.806

-0.0459**
(0.0186)
0.164

-0.0240
(0.0193)
0.084

p-value diff.

Panel C: Male vs. Female

p-value diff.

Panel D: High Immigration sector/No college vs. Not
Order/Salience T x H imm

-2.590***
(0.732)

1.318***
(0.486)

-0.784*
(0.416)

0.641**
(0.308)

-0.0308
(0.0233)

-0.0814***
(0.0242)

Order/Salience T x Not H imm

-1.710***
(0.506)
0.322

0.747**
(0.336)
0.334

-0.394
(0.288)
0.441

0.332
(0.213)
0.411

-0.0266*
(0.0161)
0.884

-0.0316*
(0.0168)
0.091

37.12
5064

10.94
5064

29.55
5060

16.00
5063

0.59
5064

0.47
5064

p-value diff.
Control mean
Observations

Notes: The Table reports the effects of the Order/Salience treatment, estimated only on the respondents who have not seen any
informational treatment. Panel A reports heterogeneous effects on Left-wing and on Right-wing respondent. The regressions
also include a “Treatment x Center” interaction, not reported. Panel B reports the effects on respondents with a college
degree and respondents without. Panel C reports the effects on male and female respondents. Panel D reports the effects on
respondents working in a high immigration sector who do not have a college degree, and on all the other respondents. “p-value
diff.” is the p-value of the test of equality of treatment effects on the pairs of groups. All regressions include the same controls
as Table 5. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

43

Online Appendix [Not for Publication]
A-1

Variables Definitions

Core Respondents’ Characteristics:
Male: respondent is male.
Female: respondent is female.
Young: respondent’s age is below 45 years.
Old: respondent’s age is above 45 years.
High Income: respondent’s household income is in the top quartile of the household income distribution in
the country.
Low Income: respondent’s household income is not in the top quartile of the household income distribution
in the country.
College: respondent has at least a college degree.
No College: respondent does not have a college degree.
Left-wing: respondent has voted or is planning to vote (in Italy and Sweden) for a party or presidential
candidate classifiable as Left or Far-Left.27
Right-wing: respondent has voted or is planning to vote (in Italy and Sweden) for a party or presidential
candidate classifiable as Right or Far-Right.28
Republican: respondent supports the Republican party (U.S. only)
Immigrant parent: dummy equal to one if at least one of the respondent’s parents is not born in the country.
High Immigration Sector & No College: dummy equal to one if respondent works in an immigration-intensive
sector and does not have a college degree. See Appendix A-3 for details on the sector classification.
High Immigration Sector & College: dummy equal to one if respondent works in an immigration-intensive
sector and has a college degree. See Appendix A-3 for details on the sector classification.
Children: respondent has one or more children.
Perceptions of Immigration
Note: For all cross-country analyses we transform these variables into misperceptions, that is, we subtract
the actual value of the variable in the data from the respondent’s perception; a positive value represents an
overestimation of the actual value, and a negative value represents an underestimation. See Section A-2 for
a description of the data sources.
All Immigrants: perceived share of immigrants (according to the OECD definition of “foreign-born”) in
the country.
Share of Immigrants from ...: perceived share of immigrants born in, respectively, North Africa, Middle
East, Western Europe, Eastern Europe, North America, Latin America, Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, Oceania.
Share of Muslim/Christian immigrants: perceived share of immigrants of Muslim or Christian religion.
Share of Low-Educated immigrants: perceived share of immigrants without a high school diploma (in the
U.S.) or equivalent in other countries.
Share of Low-Educated who are immigrants: perceived share of low educated people who are immigrants.
27 The candidates or parties that we classify as Left or Far-Left are: in the U.S., Clinton and Stein; in the U.K., Labour Party,
Scottish National Party, Sinn Fein, Green Party and Party of Wales; in France, Arthaud, Hamon, Mélenchon and Poutou; in
Italy, Democratic Party (PD), +Europa, Civica Popolare, Five Star Movement, Liberi e Uguali, Potere al Popolo; in Germany,
SPD, Bundnis 90, Die Linke; in Sweden, Socialdemokraterna, Miljöpartiet, Vänsterpartiet, and Feministiskt Initiativ.
28 The candidates or parties that we classify as Right or Far-Right are: in the U.S., Trump and Johnson; in the U.K., Conservative Party, Democratic Unionist Party, Ukip; in France, Dupont-Aignan, Fillon, Le Pen; in Italy, Forza Italia, Fratelli
d’Italia, The League; in Germany, CDU, AfD, ÖDP; in Sweden, Sverigedemokraterna, Liberalerna, Moderaterna, and Kristdemokraterna.

A-1

This perception is computed by combining the perceived share of low-educated immigrants, the perceived
share of low-educated natives, and the perceived share of immigrants in the country.
Share of Highly Educated immigrants: perceived share of immigrants with at least a two-year bachelor degree
in the U.S. or equivalent in other countries.
Share of Unemployed immigrants: perceived share of unemployed immigrants.
Share of Poor immigrants: perceived share of immigrants who live below the poverty line.
Attitudes towards Immigration
Immigrants Poor due to Lack of Effort: dummy equal to 1 if the respondent thinks that an immigrant living
in the country is poor because of lack of effort.
Immigrants Rich because of effort: dummy equal to 1 if the respondent thinks an immigrant is rich because
he has worked harder than others.
Mohammad Gets More: dummy equal to 1 if the respondent thinks that Mohammad receives on net more
than John – either receives more social benefits but pays weakly less taxes, or receives weakly more social
benefits but pays less taxes.
Immigration Support
Imm. Not A problem: dummy equal to 1 if the respondent thinks that immigration is not a problem or not
a problem at all.
Imm. Benefits Soon: dummy equal to 1 if the respondent thinks that immigrants should get social benefits
on the same basis as natives at most three years after they arrive in the country.
Imm. Citizenship Soon: dummy equal to 1 if the respondent thinks that immigrants should be allowed to
apply for citizenship at most five years after they arrive in the country.
American Upon Citizenship/Before: dummy equal to 1 if the respondent would consider an immigrant to
be “truly American” as the latest when the latter gets citizenship.
Govt. Should Care about Everyone: variable ranging from 1 to 7 where 1 means that the respondent thinks
the government should only care about natives in the country and 7 means that he thinks the government
should care equally about all the people living in the country.
Support for Redistribution
Inequality Serious Problem: dummy equal to 1 if the respondent thinks that income inequality is a serious
or very serious problem.
Tax Top1: respondent’s preferred tax rate on the top 1% of the income distribution in his country.
Tax Bottom50: respondent’s preferred tax rate on the bottom 50% of the income distribution in his country.
Social Budget: share of the government budget that the respondent would allocate to health and social safety
net (social insurance and income support programs)
Budget Education: share of the government budget that the respondent would allocate to schooling and
higher education
Donation
Donation above Median: dummy equal to 1 if the respondent’s donation amount is above the median in his
country.
Total % donation: total amount the respondent wishes to donate to the charities, as a percentage of the
potential prize ($ 1000 in the U.S., 1000 pound in the U.K., 1000 euro in France, Italy and Germany, 10000
SEK in Sweden).
Misperception and Immigration Support Indices
Following the methodology in Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007), the Misperception Index consists of an

A-2

equally weighted average of the z-scores of misperceptions with signs oriented so that a higher index means
that respondents are more biased in a negative way towards immigrants. The Immigration Support index
is constructed following the same methodology and summarizes the outcomes variables related to immigration support with signs oriented so that more support for those policies means a higher corresponding
index. Variables are transformed into z-scores by subtracting the control group mean and dividing by the
control group standard deviation, so that each z-score has mean 0 and standard deviation 1 for the control
group. Variables included in the Misperception index are the perceived share of Muslim immigrants, share of
Christian immigrants, share of unemployed immigrants, share of low-educated immigrants, share of highlyeducated immigrants, share of poor immigrants. The Immigration support index includes the z-scores of the
5 variables listed under Immigration Support.

A-2

Definitions, Data Sources and Construction of Actual Statistics about Immigrants

A-2.1

Definitions

Number, Origins and Religion of Immigrants
Share of immigrants: share of foreign-born in the country.
Share of second generation immigrants: share of people born in the country from at least one foreign-born
parent.
Origin of immigrants: share of the foreign-born residents in the country born in, respectively, North America, Latin America, Western Europe, Eastern Europe, North Africa, Middle East, Asia.
Religion of immigrants: share of foreign-born residents in the country who are of, respectively, Muslim and
Christian religion.
Economic Circumstances of Immigrants
Share of Low Educated Immigrants: share of foreign-born population holding a qualification corresponding
to ISCED 2011 levels 0-2 (in European countries) or having no high-school diploma in the U.S..
Share of High Educated Immigrants: share of foreign-born population holding a qualification corresponding
to ISCED 2011 levels 5-8 (in European countries) or having at least an associate degree (two year bachelor
degree in the U.S.).
Unemployment: Unemployment rate among the foreign-born in the country.
Poverty: U.S.: share of foreign-born population having income below the official Poverty Threshold.29 European countries: share of foreign-born population with an adult-equivalent disposable income below the
at-risk-of-poverty threshold, (60% of the national median disposable income).

A-2.2

Data Sources and Construction

A-2.2.1

U.S.

For the U.S., the statics which are readily available refer to total immigrants, both legal and illegal. We
construct our statistics on legal immigrants only using data on the total immigrant population and estimates on illegal immigrants. Given that there is some uncertainty surrounding the characteristics of illegal
immigrants, we provide bounds for each statistic, using several different data sources. All the raw data and
our calculations are available in the excel spreadsheet at https://www.dropbox.com/s/136otycl3tnkdsd/
29 See

https://www.census.gov/cps/data/povthresholds.html

A-3

Database_US.xlsx?dl=0.
Number and Origins of Immigrants
Share of total immigrants: 13.4% (Source: Pew Research Center (2017). Characteristics of the U.S. foreignborn population: 2015)
Share of legal immigrants: 10%, computed as:
Number of foreign born in the U.S. − Number of illegal foreign born
Total U.S. population
• Number of foreign born in the U.S. in 2015 = 43,158,110 (Source: Pew Research Center (2017).
Characteristics of the U.S. foreign-born population: 2015)
• Number of illegal foreign born in the U.S. in 2015 = 11,000,000 (Source: Pew 2017)30
• Total U.S. population in 2015 = 321,418,821 (Source: Pew Research Center (2017). Characteristics of
the U.S. foreign-born population: 2015)
The estimate of the unauthorized immigrant population in 2015 by Pew is consistent with the estimate
provided by the Center for Migration Studies (11,042,503) and close to the estimate of the Migration Policy
Institute for 2014 (11,009,000).
Origins of legal immigrants: for each area X, computed as:
Number of immigrants from area X − Number of illegal immigrants from area X
Number of immigrants in the U.S. − Number of illegals in the U.S.
• Number of immigrants from area X in 2015 – See excel spreadsheet (Source: Pew Research Center
(2017). Characteristics of the U.S. foreign-born population: 2015)
• Number of immigrants in the U.S. in 2015 = 43,158,110 (Source: Pew Research Center (2017). Characteristics of the U.S. foreign-born population: 2015)
• Number of illegal immigrants from area X in 2015 – See excel spreadsheet (Source: Pew 2017)31
• Number of illegals in the U.S. = 11,000,000 (Source: Pew 2017)
The Pew Research Center reports the number of illegal immigrants for all of the regions we consider
in our analysis. However, the aggregate number of illegal immigrants is reported jointly for 1) Europe &
Canada, and for 2) Middle East & North Africa. To obtain the shares of legals/illegals for Western Europe,
Eastern Europe, Canada, the Middle East, and North Africa separately, we attribute them a share of illegal
immigrants in proportion to their share of total immigrants within the larger areas reported by Pew. We
obtain the following shares of legal immigrants: Canada: 2.3%; Western Europe: 7.7%; Eastern Europe:
6.2%; Middle East: 4.15%; North Africa: 0.3%. We can compute a very strict lower bounds by attributing
all the illegals from the larger Pew areas to each of our areas in turn (e.g., attribute all illegals from Europe
& Canada to Canada.) This would lead to the following shares of legals: Canada: 0.9%; Western Europe:
6.8%; Eastern Europe: 5.1%; Middle East: 4.12%; North Africa: 0%. See the excel spreadsheet for the exact
calculations.
30 http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/04/25/as-mexican-share-declined-u-s-unauthorized-immigrant-populationfell-in-2015-below-recession-level/
31 http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/04/25/as-mexican-share-declined-u-s-unauthorized-immigrant-populationfell-in-2015-below-recession-level/

A-4

Second Generation Immigrants
Share of second-generation immigrants: 11.9% (Source: Pew Research Center (2018). Facts on U.S. Immigrants, 2016).
Religion of Immigrants
Data on legal immigrants’ religions are taken directly from a report by the Pew Research Center (2013).32
Unemployment
Unemployment rate for total immigrants: 5.5% (Source: Pew Research Center (2017). Characteristics of
the U.S. foreign-born population: 2015)
Unemployment rate for legal immigrants: 5.5%, computed as:
Number of immigrants unemployed − Number of illegals unemployed
Number of immigrants in labor force − Number of illegals in labor force
• Number of immigrants unemployed in 2015 = 1,495,466 (Source: Pew Research Center (2017). Characteristics of the U.S. foreign-born population: 2015)
• Number of illegal immigrants unemployed in 2015 = 423,124 (Source: Center for Migration Studies.
State-Level Unauthorized Population and Eligible-to-Naturalize Estimates 2015)
• Number of immigrants in the labor force in 2015 = 27,184,775 (Source: Pew Research Center (2017).
Characteristics of the U.S. foreign-born population: 2015)
• Number of illegal immigrants in the labor force in 2015 = 7,721,686 (Source: Center for Migration
Studies. State-Level Unauthorized Population and Eligible-to-Naturalize Estimates 2015)
Using the alternative estimate of illegals unemployed from the Migration Policy Institute (2014) and
estimates of unemployed immigrants from the Pew Research Center (2014), we obtain unemployment rate
= 5% for 2014.
Poverty
Poverty rate for total immigrants: 16.3% (Source: Pew Research Center (2017). Characteristics of the U.S.
foreign-born population: 2015)
Poverty rate for legal immigrants: 13.6%, computed as:
Number of immigrants below the poverty threshold − Number of illegals below the poverty threshold
Number of immigrants in the U.S. − Number of illegals in the U.S.
• Number of immigrants below the poverty threshold = 7,045,815 (Source: Pew Research Center (2017).
Characteristics of the U.S. foreign-born population: 2015
• Number of illegals below the poverty threshold = 2,673,947 (Source: Center for Migration Studies.
State-Level Unauthorized Population and Eligible-to-Naturalize Estimates 2015)
• Number of immigrants in the U.S.= 43,158,110 (Source: Pew Research Center (2017). Characteristics
of the U.S. foreign-born population: 2015)
• Number of illegals in the U.S.= 11,042,503 (Source: Center for Migration Studies. State-Level Unauthorized Population and Eligible-to-Naturalize Estimates 2015)
32 http://www.pewforum.org/2013/05/17/the-religious-affiliation-of-us-immigrants/

A-5

Using the alternative estimate of illegals below the poverty threshold from the Migration Policy Institute
(2014) and estimates of poor immigrants from the Pew Research Center (2014), we obtain poverty rate =
12.3% for 2014.
Education
Share of low educated total immigrants: 27.6% (Source: CPS 2015)
Share of low educated legal immigrants: 22.0%, computed as
Number of immigrants who have not completed high school − Number of illegals who have not completed high school
Number of immigrants 18 and older in the U.S. − Number of illegals 18 and older in the U.S.

• Number of immigrants who have not completed high school = 10,961 (Source: CPS 2015)
• Number of illegals who have not completed high school= 4,414 (Source: Center for Migration Studies.
State-Level Unauthorized Population and Eligible-to-Naturalize Estimates 2015)
• Number of immigrants 18 and older in the U.S. = 39,681 (Source: CPS 2015)
• Number of illegals 18 and older= 9,978,611 (Source: Center for Migration Studies. State-Level Unauthorized Population and Eligible-to-Naturalize Estimates 2015)
Using the alternative estimate for illegals 25 and older from the Migration Policy Institute (2014) and
for immigrants 25 and older from the CPS 2014, we obtain share of low educated = 20.9%.
Share of high educated total immigrants: 35.9% (Source: CPS 2015)
Share of high educated legal immigrants: 41.4%, computed as
Number of immigrants who have at least a 2-year degree − Number of illegals who have at least a 2-year degree
Number of immigrants 18 and older in the U.S. − Number of illegals 18 and older in the U.S.

• Number of immigrants who have at least a 2-year degree= 13,075 (Source: CPS 2015)
• Number of illegals who have at least a 2-year degree= 1,955,770,33 (Source: Center for Migration
Studies. State-Level Unauthorized Population and Eligible-to-Naturalize Estimates 2015)
• Number of immigrants 18 and older in the U.S.= 39,681 (Source: CPS 2015)
• Number of illegals 18 and older= 9,978,611 (Source: Center for Migration Studies. State-Level Unauthorized Population and Eligible-to-Naturalize Estimates 2015)
Using the alternative estimate for illegals 25 and older from the Migration Policy Institute (2014) and
for immigrants 25 and older from the CPS 2014, we obtain share of high educated = 42.8%.
33 The Center for Migration Studies reports joint estimates of illegals with some college or a 2-year degree. To obtain the
number of illegals with a 2-year degree we assume that the splitting between some college and 2-year degree is proportional to
the splitting in the total immigrant population in the CPS. If, instead, we assume that no illegal in the joint category has a
2-year degree, the number of high educated illegals would be 1,467,157, and the share of high educated among legal immigrants
would be 43%.

A-6

A-2.2.2

European countries

Number and Origins of Immigrants
Data on the number of immigrants is from the UN (Trends in International Migrant Stock: the 2017 Revision) for all countries. Data on the origins of immigrants also comes from the UN (Trends in International
Migrant Stock: the 2017 Revision) for Italy, France, the U.K., and Germany. Data on origins for Sweden is
from the OECD (International Migration Database, 2015). Both the UN and the OECD use national censuses as their original sources. For each country, we report here some information on the way these censuses
are conducted and on the population they reach. In Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, and Finland, censuses only
cover legal immigrants. In the U.K., France and Germany, censuses cover both legal and illegal immigrants.
However, i) illegal immigrants are likely to be severely underrepresented in the census, because they typically
have very low response rates to official surveys; ii) estimates of the number of illegal immigrants suggest
that these make up, on average, only around 0.5% of the population in these countries. Thus, none of our
statistics would be affected in a non-negligible way if we tried to impute statistics for legal immigrants only
for the U.K, France, and Germany. We thus use the UN and OECD data without further corrections.
Italy: 2011 Census. They only survey regular (legal) immigrants, that is, those who have a legal permit to stay in the country.34
Sweden: 2011 Census. The census is based on the population register, which takes data from the Swedish
Tax Agency.35 In Sweden only legal immigrants pay taxes.36
Germany: The 2011 Census is based on official registers and complemented by surveys. In Germany, illegal
immigrants were estimated to be between 180,000 and 520,000 (less than 0.5% of the total population) as
of 2014.37
U.K.: 2011 Census. Respondents are not asked about their legal status.38 According to the most recent
estimate, illegal immigrants were 533,000 in 2007, around 0.8% of the total population.39
France: 2011 Census. Respondents are not asked about their legal status, but, as in the U.K., illegal
immigrants have very low response rates and are thus unlikely to be represented in that data. According
to recent estimates from the Ministry of the Interior, in France there are about 300,000 illegal immigrants,
making up around 0.5% of the total population.40
Finland: 2011 Census. The census is based on official registries. Only people with a valid residence permit
(legal) may be registered in the Population Register.41
Switzerland: 2011 Census. The variable related to country of birth in the census is based on official residents’ registers, which do not include illegal immigrants. Thus, all statistics are based on legal immigrants
only.42
Second Generation Immigrants
For France, the U.K. and Italy data for 2017 are not available. Hence, we use the most recent available
34 See Methodological notes to the 2011 Census,
p.
16 https://www.istat.it/it/files/2012/12/volume_
popolazione-legale_XV_censimento_popolazione.pdf
35 See http://www.scb.se/contentassets/8f66bcf5abc34d0b98afa4fcbfc0e060/rtb-bar-2016-eng.pdf, pages 6 and 7.
36 https://www.skatteverket.se/servicelankar/otherlanguages/inenglish/individualsandemployees/movingtosweden.
4.7be5268414bea064694c40c.html
37 http://irregular-migration.net/fileadmin/irregular-migration/dateien/4.Background_Information/4.5.Update_
Reports/Vogel_2015_Update_report_Germany_2014_fin-.pdf
38 See
https://www.ons.gov.uk/aboutus/transparencyandgovernance/freedomofinformationfoi/
illegalimmigrantsintheuk.
According to survey agencies, illegal immigrants have very low response rates in
the U.K. and are, hence not likely to be represented in the statistics derived from census data.
See https:
//www.migrationwatchuk.org/key-topics/illegal-immigration.
39 See https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/gla_migrate_files_destination/irregular-migrants-report.
pdf
40 http://www.observationsociete.fr/population/combien-de-sans-papiers-en-france.html
41 http://www.maistraatti.fi/en/Services/place_of_domicile_and_population_data/Basic-information/
42 See Roberts, C., Lipps, O., & Kissau, K. (2013). Using the Swiss population register for research into survey methodology.
FORS Working Paper Series, paper 2013-1. Lausanne: FORS.

A-7

estimates, under the assumption that the share of second generation immigrant over the total population
remained constant until 2017.
Sweden: 13%. Source: Statistics Sweden, 2017.
Germany: 7.4%. Source: Destatis, 2017, defined as people “with a migration background” born in Germany, with and without German citizenship.
France: 11%. Source: INSEE, 2015.
U.K.: 9.2%. Source: Eurostat, 2014.
Italy: 2.4%. Source: Eurostat, 2014.
Religion of Immigrants
Data are from the Pew Research Center, Global Religious Futures 2010, which is mostly based on national
Censuses. The Pew Research Center has recently published a report on the inflow of Muslim immigrants
in Europe between 2010 and 2016.43 According to the report, Sweden is the country that experienced
the most significant inflow of Muslim immigrants, relatively to its 2010 immigrant population, in particular because of the large inflow of refugees from Middle East.44 The report only focuses on recent immigrants.
Unemployment, Poverty, Education
Data are from the Eurostat Labor Force Survey 2016. The survey covers legal immigrants only.45

A-3

High Immigration Sectors

We define a sector as High Immigration if the share of immigrants working in that sector is higher than the
average share of immigrants employed in the country. The sectors that we classify as High Immigration are
listed here in English for each country. Sectors are described in greater detail and in each original language
online at https://www.dropbox.com/s/rud1ii161d39yxx/sector_list.pdf?dl=0.
• U.S.: Farming, fishing, and forestry, Building and grounds cleaning and maintenance, Construction and
extraction, Computer and mathematical occupations, Production occupations, Life, physical, and social
science, Food preparation and serving related occupations, Occupations related to transportation and
material moving, Occupations related to personal care, childcare and leisure, and Healthcare support
occupations. Source: CPS 2016.
• U.K.: Domestic personnel; Accommodation and food services; Transport and storage; Information and
communication; Administrative and support service activities; Manufacturing; Professional, scientific
and technical activities; Health and social work; Financial and insurance activities. Source: Annual
Population Survey, April 2016 - March 2017 (https://discover.ukdataservice.ac.uk/catalogue?
sn=8197). Sector breakdown criteria: SIC 2007.
• France: Non qualified artisanal workers; Domestic personnel; Merchants and retailer workers; Qualified
artisanal workers; Craftsmen; Agricultural workers; Non qualified industrial workers; Police ad military;
Information, arts and entertainment; Drivers; Teachers and scientific occupations; Industrial workers.
Source: INSEE (Enquete Emploi en continu 2016). Sector breakdown criteria: CSE two digits sectors.
43 Pew Research Center (2017). Europe’s Growing Muslim Population, available at http://www.pewforum.org/2017/11/29/
europes-growing-muslim-population/
44 However, there is some uncertainty around the number of Muslim immigrants in Sweden. The Pew Research Center reports
that about 300,000 Muslim immigrants moved to Sweden between 2010 and 2016, while the Swedish government claims that
in 2017 “The Muslim faith communities have approximately 140 000 members” (See https://www.government.se/articles/
2017/02/facts-about-migration-and-crime-in-sweden/).
45 See http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/microdata/european-union-labour-force-survey

A-8

• Italy: Street and related sales and service workers; Personal care workers; Cleaners and helpers; Food
preparation assistants; Agricultural, forestry and fishery laborers; Laborers in mining, construction,
manufacturing and transport; Building and related trades workers, excluding electricians; Refuse workers and other elementary workers; Personal service workers; Food processing, wood working, garment
and other craft and related trades workers; Market-oriented skilled forestry, fishery and hunting workers; Stationary plant and machine operators; Metal, machinery and related trades workers; Assemblers;
Drivers and mobile plant operators. Source: RCFL Survey, January 2016 - December 2016. Sector
breakdown criteria: ISCO2008.
• Germany: Transport, logistics, protection and security; Commodity production and manufacturing;
Commercial services, trade, sales, hotels and tourism; Construction, architecture, surveying and mapping, and facility technology. Source: Destatis (Mikrozensus 2015).
• Sweden: Hotel and restaurant; Transport; Healthcare and care; Education; Business and financial
operations. Source: Statistics Sweden (Sysselsatta efter näringsgren 2006-2015, Table 3).

A-4

Charities Listed for the Donation Question

We report here the charities we listed in the donation question in each country. See Q32 in Appendix A-6
for the exact wording of the question.
• U.S.: Feeding America, The Salvation Army
• U.K.: Save the Children U.K., The Salvation Army
• France: Les restos du cœur, Emmaüs
• Germany: SOS Kinderdorf, Tafel
• Italy: Caritas, Save the Children Italia
• Sweden: Frälsningsarmén, Majblomman

A-5

Links to Surveys

• Survey U.S.: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_eKEjDcjYFz33eHr
• Survey U.S. version 2: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_bCz2hXK5sjoyAzr
• Survey U.K.: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_0ILUH3So1ChjhPv
• Survey France: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_77K4hoafSeGsuWN
• Survey Italy: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_004wAyEt6lDcE6N
• Survey Germany: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_1GgElOhY9ef75Pf
• Survey Sweden: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_cUvZMTYuYPRiAw5
• Additional Survey U.S. with incentives: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_6eUmUM48VDnbIDH
A-9

Figure A-1: First page of the survey (English version)

A-6

Full U.S. Questionnaire in English

Answer options are in italic, separated by a semicolon.
1. See Figure A-1
Yes, I would like to take part in this study, and confirm that I WAS BORN IN THE U.S. and I am 18
or older ; No, I would not like to participate
2. Were you born in the United States?
Yes; No
3. What is your gender?
Male; Female
A-10

Figure A-2: Question on preferred income tax rates for various income
groups

4. What is your age?
5. What was your TOTAL household income, before taxes, last year? $0-$9999 ; $10000-$14999 ; $15000$19999 ; $20000-$29999 ; $30000-$39999 ; $40000-$49999 ; $50000-$69999 ; $70000-$89999 ; $90000$109999 ; $110000-%149999 ; $150000-$199999 : $200000+
6. Please indicate your marital status.
Single; Married ; Legally separated or divorced ; Widowed
7. How many children do you have?
A-11

Figure A-3: Question on preferred allocation of government budget

I do not have children: 1; 2; 3; 4; 5 or more
8. How would you describe your ethnicity/race?
A-12

European American/White; African American/Black; Hispanic/Latino; Asian/Asian American; Other
9. Were both of your parents born in the United States?
Yes; No
10. [If Yes to Q9] Where was your father born?
[dropdown menu with list of countries]
11. [If Yes to Q9] Where was your mother born?
[dropdown menu with list of countries]
12. What is your ZIP code?
13. Which category best describes your highest level of education?
Eighth Grade or less; Some High School; High School degree / GED; Some College; 2-year College
Degree; 4-year College Degree; Master’s Degree; Doctoral Degree; Professional Degree (JD, MD, MBA)
14. What is your current employment status?
Full-time employee; Part-time employee; Self-employed or small business owner; Unemployed and looking for work; Student; Not currently working and not looking for work; Retiree
15. [If Full-time employee; Part-time employee; Self-employed or small business owner] Are you employed
in one of the following sectors? Check the one that applies. If you have multiple jobs, check the one
that describes your main occupation.
[See Appendix A-1]
16. [If Unemployed and looking for work; Not currently working and not looking for work; Retiree] Even if
you are not currently working, what sector did your latest occupation fall under? Check the one that
applies. If you have had multiple jobs, check the one that describes your main occupation.
[See Appendix A-1]
17. On economic policy matters, where do you see yourself on the liberal/conservative spectrum?
Very liberal; Liberal; Moderate; Conservative; Very conservative
18. In politics, as of today, do you consider yourself a Republican, a Democrat or an independent?
Republican; Democrat; Independent
19. Did you vote in the last presidential election?
Yes; No
20. [If Yes to Q19] In the last presidential election, you supported:
Hillary Clinton; Donald Trump; Jill Stein; Gary Johnson
21. [If No to Q19] Even if you did NOT vote, please indicate the candidate that you were most likely to
have voted for or who represents your views most closely
Hillary Clinton; Donald Trump; Jill Stein; Gary Johnson
22. Before proceeding to the next set of questions, we want to ask for your feedback about the responses
you provided so far. It is vital to our study that we only include responses from people who devoted
their full attention to this study. This will not affect in any way the payment you will receive for taking
this survey. In your honest opinion, should we use your responses, or should we discard your responses
since you did not devote your full attention to the questions so far?
A-13

Yes, I have devoted full attention to the questions so far and I think you should use my responses for
your study; No, I have not devoted full attention to the questions so far and I think you should not use
my responses for your study
In the next two questions, we ask you to think about the total level of funds that the government
raises and spends today on various policies. For the purpose of these questions, suppose that the level
of government spending is fixed at its current level and cannot be changed. We will ask about your
views on two aspects: a. First, on the fair split of the tax burden to raise these funds; b. Second, on
how you think the government should spend these funds.
23. See Figure A-2
24. See Figure A-3
25. Do you think income differences between rich and poor people are:
Not a problem at all; A small problem; A problem; A serious problem; A very serious problem
26. To reduce income differences between rich and poor people, the government (at the local, state, or
federal level) has the ability and the tools to do:
Nothing at all; Not much; Some; A lot
27. Some people think that the government (at the local, state, or federal level) should not care about
income differences between rich and poor people. Others think that the government should do everything in its power to reduce income inequality. Rate on a scale of 1 to 7 on how you feel about this
issue, with 1 being the government should not concern itself with income inequality and 7 being the
government should do everything in its power to reduce income inequality.
Here are several things that the local, state, or federal government might do to reduce income differences
between rich and poor people. Please indicate if you favor or oppose them. Keep in mind that, in
order to finance an expansion of any of these, other types of spending (like spending on infrastructure
and defense, for example) would have to be scaled down or taxes would have to be raised.
28. Would you say that you strongly favor, favor, neither favor nor oppose, oppose or strongly oppose
spending more money on schools in poor neighborhoods?
Strongly favor; favor; neither favor nor oppose; oppose; strongly oppose
29. Would you say that you strongly favor, favor, neither favor nor oppose, oppose strongly oppose spending
more money to provide decent housing for those who cannot afford it?
Strongly favor; favor; neither favor nor oppose; oppose; strongly oppose
30. Would you say that you strongly favor, favor, neither favor nor oppose, oppose or strongly oppose
increasing income support programs for the poor?
Strongly favor; favor; neither favor nor oppose; oppose; strongly oppose
31. How much of the time do you think you can trust our federal government to do what is right?
Almost always; A lot of the time; Not very often; Almost never
32. By taking this survey, you are automatically enrolled in a lottery to win $1000. In a few days you will
know whether you won the $1000. The payment will be made to you in the same way as your regular
survey pay, so no further action is required on your part. In case you won, would you be willing to
donate part or all of your $1000 gain for a good cause? Below you will find 2 charities which help
people in the U.S. deal with the hurdles of everyday life. You can enter how many dollars out of your
$1000 gain you would like to donate to each of them. If you are one of the lottery winners, you will
be paid, in addition to your regular survey pay, $1000 minus the amount you donated to charity. We
will directly pay your desired donation amount to the charity or charities of your choosing. Enter how
much of your $1000 gain you’d like to donate to each charity:
A-14

Feeding America: ... ; The Salvation Army: ...
In what follows, we refer to immigrants as people who were not born in the U.S. and legally moved
here at a certain point of their life. We are NOT considering illegal immigrants.
33. See Figure 4
34. The map here shows you the main regions of the world. The pie chart below represents all legal
IMMIGRANTS currently living in the U.S.. Where do you think these immigrants come from? Move
the sliders to indicate how many out of every 100 immigrants come from each region, in your opinion.
As you move the sliders, the pie chart will adjust to show your responses, reflecting the colors of the
various regions, as in the map. (Your responses must add up to 100)
[See Figure 5]
35. Think again about all of the legal immigrants currently living in the U.S.. What do you think is their
religion? Fill in the boxes below to indicate how many out of every 100 immigrants you think practice
each religion.
Christianity ...; Islam ...; Buddhism ...; Hinduism ...; Other Religions/Atheist ...
36. Out of every 100 people born in the U.S. how many are currently unemployed? By unemployed we
mean people who are currently not working but searching for a job (and maybe unable to find one).
Now let’s compare this to the number of unemployed among legal immigrants. Out of every 100 legal
immigrants how many do you think are currently unemployed?
37. Out of every 100 people born in the U.S., how many have at least a two-year college degree?
Now let’s compare this to the number of college-educated legal immigrants. Out of every 100 immigrants in the U.S. today how many do you think have at least a two-year college degree?
38. Out of every 100 people born in the U.S., how many have not completed high school?
Out of every 100 legal immigrants in the U.S. today how many do you think have not completed high
school?
39. Out of every 100 people born in the U.S., how many live below the poverty line? The poverty line is
the estimated minimum level of income needed to secure the necessities of life.
Let’s compare this to poverty among legal immigrants. Out of every 100 legal immigrants in the U.S.
today, how many do you think live below the poverty line?
40. Some people think that the government (at the local, state, or federal level) should only support people
who were born in the U.S.. Others think that the government should care equally about all the people
living in the country, regardless of their country of origin and regardless of whether they are born in
the U.S.. Rate on a scale of 1 to 7 on how you feel about this issue, with 1 being the government
should focus on supporting people born in the U.S. and 7 being the government should care equally
about everyone.
41. What is your view on the number of legal immigrants from foreign countries who are permitted to
come to the United States to live? Pick the answer that best reflects your view.
The excessive number of legal immigrants today is a very big problem. We should ask many legal
immigrants to leave the country and we should stop accepting new immigrants; The number of legal
immigrants today is a big problem and we should decrease by a lot the number permitted to come to
the U.S. in the future; The number of legal immigrants today is somewhat of a problem and we should
try and decrease a bit the number permitted to come in; The number of legal immigrants today is not
a problem. We should keep letting in the same number of immigrants each year as until now; The
number of legal immigrants today is not a problem at all. We should let even more legal immigrants
come live in the U.S. and increase the number that is permitted to come every year
A-15

42. In your view, how soon after arriving should immigrants be entitled to government assistance such as
Medicaid, food stamps, or welfare on the same basis as citizens?
Immediately, as soon as they arrive; 1 year after; 3 years after; 5 or more years after; only after they
receive citizenship; never
43. As you may know, once immigrants who come into the country receive U.S. citizenship, they are allowed
to vote in all local, state, and federal elections. In your view, when should immigrants who come into
the country legally be allowed to apply for U.S. citizenship?
2 years after arriving; 5 years after arriving; 10 years after arriving; 20 years after arriving; They
should never be allowed to apply for citizenship
44. Suppose someone is not born in the United States but now lives here. At what point would you consider
this person to be “American”?
Immediately, as soon as he arrives; After he has spent 5 years in the U.S.; After he has spent 10 years
in the U.S.; It depends on where he comes from; As soon as he gets citizenship; I would never consider
him to be American, but if his kids were born in the U.S. I would consider them truly American; I
would not consider him or his kids to ever be truly American
45. Which has more to do with why an immigrant living in the U.S. is poor?
Lack of effort on his or her own part; Circumstances beyond his or her control
46. Which has more to do with why an immigrant living in the U.S. is rich?
Because she or he worked harder than others; Because she or he had more advantages than others
47. U.S. born residents receive government transfers in the form of public assistance, Medicaid, child
credits, unemployment benefits, free school lunches, food stamps or housing subsidies when needed.
How much do you think each legal immigrant receives on average from such government transfers? An
average immigrant receives...
No transfers; One third as much as a U.S. born resident; Half as much as a U.S. born resident; As
much as a U.S. born resident; Slightly more than a U.S. born resident; Twice as much as a U.S. born
resident; Three times as much as a U.S. born resident; More than ten times as much as a U.S. born
resident
48. Imagine two people, John and Mohammad, currently living in the U.S. with their families. John is
born in the U.S., while Mohammad legally moved to the U.S. five years ago. They are both 35, have
three children, and earn the same low income from their jobs. In your opinion, does Mohammad pay
more, the same, or less in income taxes than John?
A lot more; More; same; less; a lot less
49. In your opinion does Mohammad, who is an immigrant, receive more, the same, or less government
transfers (such as e.g., public assistance, Medicaid, child credits, unemployment benefits during unemployment spells, free school lunches, food stamps or housing subsidies) than John?
A lot more; More; same; less; a lot less
50. Do you have any friends or acquaintances who were born outside the U.S.?
Yes; No
51. [If Yes to Q50] Where do they come from? (check all that apply)
Canada; Latin America; Western Europe; Eastern Europe; North Africa; Sub-Saharan Africa; MiddleEast; Asia; Australia/New Zealand

A-16

A-7

Additional Information on the Surveys

Table A-1: Randomization Groups
Treatment/Control
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Control
Control
Treatment
Treatment
Treatment
Treatment
Treatment
Treatment

Saw redistribution block before/after
immigration block
Before
After
Before
After
Before
After
Before
After

1
1
2
2
3
3

Notes: “Before” and “After” refer to whether the redistribution block was seen before or after the immigration block.

A-8

Additional Figures and Tables

0

.01

Density
.02
.03

.04

.05

Figure A-4: Distribution of Total Time Spent on the Survey

0

50
100
150
Total time spent on survey (minutes)

200

Notes: The figure shows the distribution of the total time respondents across all countries spent on the survey (truncated at
200 minutes).

A-17

Figure A-5: Misperception of the Share of Immigrants: Control vs. Share
of Immigrants Treatment groups
(a) U.S.

45
40
35
Percent
25
30
20
15
10
5
0

0

5

10

15

20

Percent
25
30

35

40

45

50

Share of Immigrants Treatment Group

50

Control Group

-20

0
20
40
60
80
Misperception share of immigrants

-20

0
20
40
60
80
Misperception share of immigrants

(b) U.K.

45
40
35
Percent
25
30
20
15
10
5
0

0

5

10

15

20

Percent
25
30

35

40

45

50

Share of Immigrants Treatment Group

50

Control Group

-20

0
20
40
60
80
Misperception share of immigrants

-20

A-18

0
20
40
60
80
Misperception share of immigrants

Figure A-5: Misperception of the Share of Immigrants: (Cont.)
(c) France

45
40
35
Percent
25
30
20
15
10
5
0

0

5

10

15

20

Percent
25
30

35

40

45

50

Share of Immigrants Treatment Group

50

Control Group

-20

0
20
40
60
80
Misperception share of immigrants

-20

0
20
40
60
80
Misperception share of immigrants

(d) Italy

45
40
35
Percent
25
30
20
15
10
5
0

0

5

10

15

20

Percent
25
30

35

40

45

50

Share of Immigrants Treatment Group

50

Control Group

0
20
40
60
80
Misperception share of immigrants

0
20
40
60
80
Misperception share of immigrants

A-19

Figure A-5: Misperception of the Share of Immigrants: (Cont.)
(e) Germany

45
40
35
Percent
25
30
20
15
10
5
0

0

5

10

15

20

Percent
25
30

35

40

45

50

Share of Immigrants Treatment Group

50

Control Group

-20

0
20
40
60
80
Misperception share of immigrants

-20

0
20
40
60
80
Misperception share of immigrants

(f) Sweden

45
40
35
Percent
25
30
20
15
10
5
0

0

5

10

15

20

Percent
25
30

35

40

45

50

Share of Immigrants Treatment Group

50

Control Group

-20

0
20
40
60
Misperception share of immigrants

80

-20

0
20
40
60
Misperception share of immigrants

80

Notes: The figure shows the distribution of the misperception of the share of immigrants of respondents in the control group
(left panel) and in the “Share of Immigrants” treatment group (right panel), by country.

A-20

Table A-2: Additional U.S. Survey – Sample Characteristics
US
Sample Pop
(1)
(2)
Male
18-29 y.o.
30-39 y.o.
40-49 y.o.
50-59 y.o.
60-69 y.o.
Income Bracket
Income Bracket
Income Bracket
Income Bracket
Married
Employed
Unemployed
College

1
2
3
4

0.48
0.23
0.20
0.19
0.20
0.17
0.15
0.19
0.23
0.43
0.53
0.64
0.06
0.60

0.49
0.24
0.20
0.19
0.20
0.17
0.16
0.19
0.22
0.43
0.49
0.70
0.05
0.41

Notes: This table displays summary statistics from the additional U.S. survey (in odd columns) alongside nationally representative statistics (in even columns). See notes to Table 1

A-21

Table A-3: Perceptions by Country
Actual

(1)
Share of Immigrants

10.00

Share Immigrants from North Africa

0.30

Share of Immigrants from Middle East

4.10

Share of Immigrants from Western Europe

7.70

Share of Immigrants from Eastern Europe

6.10

Share of Immigrants from North America

2.30

Share of Immigrants from Latin America

42.30

Share of Muslim Immigrants

10.00

Share of Christian Immigrants

61.00

Share of Unemployed Immigrants

5.50

Share of Poor Immigrants

13.60

Share of Low-Educated Immigrants

22.00

Share of High-Educated Immigrants

41.40

Relative Transfers Received

1.23

U.S.
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(2)
(3)
36.08
(0.73)
8.43
(0.23)
12.20
(0.32)
10.88
(0.27)
9.88
(0.23)
9.69
(0.33)
24.42
(0.55)
22.69
(0.50)
39.17
(0.72)
26.39
(0.77)
34.66
(0.76)
28.96
(0.79)
34.86
(0.77)
1.17
(0.06)

Actual

(4)

U.K.
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(5)
(6)

Panel A: Perceptions
31.00
13.40
[20.00, 48.00]
7.00
0.90
[4.00, 11.00]
10.00
5.10
[5.00, 16.00]
10.00
19.00
[5.00, 15.00]
10.00
20.00
[5.00, 13.00]
7.00
2.30
[4.00, 11.00]
20.00
3.90
[12.00, 32.00]
20.00
23.00
[10.00, 30.00]
40.00
58.00
[20.00, 50.00]
20.00
5.70
[8.00, 40.00]
30.00
19.00
[16.00, 50.00]
20.00
16.60
[10.00, 40.00]
30.00
48.80
[15.00, 50.00]
1.00
1.42
[0.33, 1.00]

31.39
(0.64)
9.88
(0.27)
10.84
(0.34)
16.22
(0.43)
23.51
(0.47)
6.10
(0.22)
5.61
(0.19)
33.89
(0.68)
29.45
(0.65)
27.00
(0.78)
29.05
(0.72)
25.58
(0.76)
25.33
(0.69)
1.02
(0.04)

30.00
[15.00, 42.00]
10.00
[5.00, 14.00]
9.00
[5.00, 15.00]
13.00
[7.00, 21.00]
20.00
[14.00, 30.00]
5.00
[2.00, 9.00]
5.00
[2.00, 8.00]
30.00
[20.00, 45.00]
25.00
[15.00, 40.00]
20.00
[8.00, 40.00]
22.00
[10.00, 40.00]
20.00
[8.00, 40.00]
20.00
[10.00, 40.00]
1.00
[0.50, 1.00]

Actual

(7)
12.20
35.30
5.60
29.30
5.20
1.00
3.40
48.00
43.00
16.60
23.80
39.10
28.80
1.39

France
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(8)
(9)
28.81
(0.61)
27.21
(0.50)
10.98
(0.34)
10.94
(0.33)
14.53
(0.34)
5.97
(0.31)
5.69
(0.20)
50.23
(0.72)
24.30
(0.53)
38.79
(0.85)
41.57
(0.82)
51.62
(0.84)
27.36
(0.61)
1.77
(0.08)

Panel B: Attitudes
Immigrants Poor due to Lack of Effort
Immigrants Rich because of Effort
Mohammad Gets More
Observations

0.41
(0.02)
0.67
(0.02)
0.26
(0.01)
960

0.36
(0.02)
0.70
(0.01)
0.18
(0.01)
973

A-22

0.31
(0.01)
0.62
(0.02)
0.34
(0.02)
980

25.00
[14.00, 40.00]
25.00
[18.00, 35.00]
9.00
[4.00, 15.00]
10.00
[4.00, 15.00]
13.00
[8.00, 20.00]
3.00
[1.00, 7.00]
4.00
[2.00, 8.00]
50.00
[30.00, 65.00]
20.00
[10.00, 31.00]
30.00
[15.00, 60.00]
40.00
[20.00, 60.00]
50.00
[30.00, 70.00]
24.50
[10.00, 40.00]
1.00
[1.00, 1.10]

Table A-3: Perceptions by Country (cont.)
Actual

(10)
Share of Immigrants

10.00

Share Immigrants from North Africa

10.20

Share of Immigrants from Middle East

2.90

Share of Immigrants from Western Europe

14.30

Share of Immigrants from Eastern Europe

38.10

Share of Immigrants from North America

0.90

Share of Immigrants from Latin America

9.10

Share of Muslim Immigrants

33.00

Share of Christian Immigrants

57.00

Share of Unemployed Immigrants

14.70

Share of Poor Immigrants

34.90

Share of Low-Educated Immigrants

49.10

Share of High-Educated Immigrants

11.70

Relative Transfers Received

1.29

Italy
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(11)
(12)
26.41
(0.65)
24.90
(0.49)
8.95
(0.25)
6.02
(0.24)
18.63
(0.38)
4.55
(0.26)
9.59
(0.26)
46.95
(0.73)
26.82
(0.63)
41.80
(0.87)
42.86
(0.82)
43.56
(0.84)
18.75
(0.59)
1.34
(0.06)

Actual

(13)

Germany
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(14)
(15)

Panel A: Perceptions
20.00
14.80
[10.00, 35.00]
23.00
1.50
[15.00, 31.00]
8.00
17.30
[3.00, 13.00]
4.00
14.90
[1.00, 9.00]
18.00
42.60
[10.00, 25.00]
2.00
1.10
[0.00, 5.00]
9.00
3.20
[4.00, 13.00]
45.00
30.00
[30.00, 60.00]
20.00
51.00
[10.00, 40.00]
40.00
6.90
[20.00, 60.00]
40.00
20.50
[20.00, 60.00]
40.00
35.10
[20.00, 60.00]
10.00
22.30
[5.00, 30.00]
1.00
0.72
[0.50, 1.10]

30.26
(0.68)
16.02
(0.37)
16.84
(0.45)
13.43
(0.42)
23.45
(0.41)
4.92
(0.20)
5.42
(0.16)
43.89
(0.68)
31.66
(0.61)
39.20
(0.93)
33.53
(0.81)
37.23
(0.80)
21.88
(0.58)
1.13
(0.04)

25.00
[15.00, 40.00]
15.00
[8.00, 21.00]
14.00
[7.00, 23.00]
10.00
[4.00, 20.00]
22.00
[15.00, 30.00]
4.00
[1.00, 6.00]
5.00
[2.00, 8.00]
40.00
[30.00, 60.00]
30.00
[20.00, 45.00]
30.00
[12.00, 60.00]
30.00
[10.00, 50.00]
30.00
[16.00, 50.00]
20.00
[10.00, 30.00]
1.00
[1.00, 1.00]

Actual

(16)
17.60
1.20
23.80
23.60
22.20
1.40
5.50
27.00
61.00
16.10
29.80
33.70
37.90
1.44

Sweden
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(17)
(18)
27.00
(0.81)
12.09
(0.37)
25.09
(0.72)
15.00
(0.71)
13.80
(0.41)
4.74
(0.41)
7.93
(0.32)
44.77
(1.01)
32.67
(0.97)
37.16
(1.14)
25.26
(1.00)
40.88
(1.21)
36.39
(1.01)
1.28
(0.06)

21.00
[15.00, 33.00]
10.00
[7.00, 17.00]
22.00
[15.00, 34.00]
10.00
[4.00, 20.00]
13.00
[8.00, 20.00]
3.00
[1.00, 5.00]
6.00
[3.00, 10.00]
40.00
[30.00, 60.00]
30.00
[16.00, 48.00]
30.00
[15.00, 55.00]
20.00
[10.00, 35.00]
38.00
[20.00, 60.00]
35.00
[20.00, 50.00]
1.00
[1.00, 1.10]

Panel B: Attitudes
Immigrants Poor due to Lack of Effort
Immigrants Rich because of Effort
Mohammad Gets More
Observations

0.31
(0.01)
0.69
(0.01)
0.33
(0.02)
971

0.41
(0.02)
0.60
(0.02)
0.20
(0.01)
973

0.32
(0.02)
0.69
(0.02)
0.01
(0.01)
481

Notes: Panel A reports mean and median perceptions for each country. The standard errors of the means are in parentheses and the interquartile
ranges (25th and 75th percentiles) are in square brackets. The actual value of the statistic for each country is reported in columns (1), (4), (7), (10),
(13) and (16). Panel B reports the mean of each attitude variable for each country and its standard error (in parentheses). Sample: respondents who
were not exposed to any informational treatments or to the anecdote treatment.

A-23

Table A-4: Misperceptions By Respondent Groups
Immigrants
(1)
(2)
College
No College
High Income
Low Income
Young
Old
Male
Female
Left-Wing
Right-Wing
Immigrant Parent
No Immigrant Parent
Knows an Immigrant
Does Not Know any Immigrant
High Imm. Sector & No College
High Imm. Sector & College
Not High Imm. Sector

(3)

Muslim
(4)

(5)

Christian
(6)

Unemployed
(7)
(8)

(9)

Poor
(10)

Low Educ
(11)
(12)

High Educ
(13)
(14)

Transfers
(15)
(16)

15.34
10.00
8.95
7.00
-21.66
-23.00
19.48
(0.45) [0.0;25.0] (0.44) [-3.0;20.0] (0.43) [-37.0;-11.0] (0.53)
19.23
15.80
12.95
10.00
-25.78
-28.00
27.76
(0.37) [3.0;30.0] (0.39) [-3.0;27.0] (0.36) [-41.0;-12.0] (0.48)

13.10
[0.3;34.3]
23.10
[4.3;45.3]

9.82
6.20
3.63
-0.10
-3.33
(0.51) [-9.0;25.1] (0.52) [-14.0;18.4] (0.47)
13.98
9.50
6.30
2.40
-5.54
(0.47) [-7.0;31.2] (0.48) [-14.1;24.9] (0.41)

-6.70
-0.10
[-18.8;11.2] (0.03)
-7.30
0.16
[-21.0;8.3] (0.03)

-0.39
[-0.8;-0.2]
-0.29
[-0.4;0.3]

16.90
11.50
10.33
7.00
-22.63
-26.00
20.66
(0.74) [0.1;26.5] (0.69) [-3.0;22.0] (0.70) [-37.0;-11.0] (0.86)
17.82
14.20
11.54
10.00
-24.42
-27.00
25.15
(0.31) [1.6;27.8] (0.32) [-3.0;25.0] (0.30) [-41.0;-11.0] (0.40)

13.40
[-0.5;35.3]
18.10
[3.4;43.9]

9.79
5.10
4.63
0.90
-5.14
(0.81) [-9.0;25.1] (0.87) [-14.1;20.9] (0.72)
12.79
8.50
5.34
0.90
-4.56
(0.38) [-8.6;29.5] (0.39) [-14.1;22.3] (0.34)

-7.30
[-18.8;8.3]
-6.70
[-18.8;8.6]

-0.13
(0.05)
0.09
(0.03)

-0.39
[-0.8;-0.1]
-0.29
[-0.4;0.3]

19.77
(0.39)
15.32
(0.41)

25.01
(0.49)
23.76
(0.53)

18.40
[3.4;43.9]
14.50
[2.5;43.1]

13.67
(0.48)
10.76
(0.49)

-3.70
[-18.8;11.2]
-8.80
[-21.4;3.3]

0.01
(0.03)
0.10
(0.03)

-0.34
[-0.8;0.3]
-0.29
[-0.4;0.3]

15.52
10.00
11.12
9.50
-22.88
-26.00
22.62
(0.42) [0.0;25.0] (0.42) [-3.0;25.0] (0.41) [-38.0;-11.0] (0.52)
19.73
16.80
11.56
10.00
-25.33
-28.00
26.14
(0.39) [4.2;30.0] (0.41) [-3.0;23.0] (0.37) [-41.0;-12.0] (0.51)

14.30
[1.1;39.9]
19.50
[4.3;44.3]

10.96
6.20
5.68
0.90
-7.03
-8.80
(0.50) [-9.6;26.2] (0.52) [-14.1;23.4] (0.43) [-21.3;6.2]
13.59
9.50
4.79
0.90
-2.37
-2.30
(0.48) [-5.5;30.1] (0.49) [-14.1;20.9] (0.44) [-18.8;11.2]

-0.03
(0.03)
0.14
(0.04)

-0.29
[-0.7;0.3]
-0.29
[-0.4;0.3]

18.01
14.00
9.40
(0.43) [1.2;27.8] (0.41)
18.45
15.00
15.08
(0.44) [2.4;29.0] (0.47)

7.00
-22.94
-26.00
23.24
[-3.0;20.0] (0.41) [-37.0;-11.0] (0.52)
12.00
-26.50
-31.00
27.31
[0.0;30.0] (0.45) [-41.0;-13.0] (0.59)

15.30
[3.1;39.5]
20.20
[4.3;45.3]

13.07
9.50
2.50
-1.60
-2.02
-2.70
(0.50) [-5.5;29.5] (0.50) [-15.1;18.0] (0.46) [-17.3;11.2]
11.82
6.40
8.64
3.40
-8.85
-10.70
(0.57) [-9.0;30.1] (0.59) [-12.0;28.0] (0.48) [-23.8;3.3]

-0.21
-0.34
(0.03) [-0.8;-0.2]
0.38
-0.23
(0.05) [-0.4;0.4]

23.46
20.00
9.79
7.00
-21.66
-23.00
22.10
(0.99) [5.2;36.6] (0.95) [-3.0;22.0] (0.89) [-36.0;-11.0] (1.14)
17.05
12.80
11.51
10.00
-24.39
-27.00
24.67
(0.30) [1.0;26.9] (0.31) [-3.0;25.0] (0.29) [-40.0;-11.0] (0.38)

14.30
[3.1;39.3]
16.50
[3.1;43.4]

11.45
6.40
5.94
-1.10
-2.68
(1.10) [-9.0;26.4] (1.12) [-12.0;21.3] (1.05)
12.38
6.40
5.14
0.90
-4.86
(0.36) [-8.8;29.5] (0.37) [-14.1;22.0] (0.33)

-2.30
-0.10
[-18.8;12.1] (0.06)
-6.70
0.07
[-18.8;8.3] (0.03)

-0.39
[-0.7;0.3]
-0.29
[-0.4;0.3]

16.37
(0.35)
20.27
(0.50)

11.60
[0.4;26.2]
16.60
[4.0;31.6]

10.33
(0.35)
13.37
(0.54)

7.00
-22.47
-23.00
[-3.0;22.0] (0.33) [-37.0;-11.0]
10.00
-27.44
-31.00
[-3.0;27.0] (0.49) [-42.0;-13.0]

21.50
(0.42)
30.29
(0.67)

13.90
[1.5;35.3]
24.50
[5.1;53.1]

10.47
(0.42)
15.97
(0.61)

-5.70
[-18.8;11.2]
-8.80
[-23.4;6.2]

-0.02
(0.03)
0.21
(0.05)

-0.32
[-0.4;0.3]
-0.29
[-0.7;0.3]

20.56
(0.51)
16.49
(0.67)
16.14
(0.40)

17.20
[4.2;30.8]
10.80
[0.2;26.6]
11.20
[0.2;26.0]

12.62
(0.54)
8.40
(0.64)
11.66
(0.42)

10.00
-26.13
-28.00
[-3.0;27.0] (0.50) [-41.0;-13.0]
7.00
-21.84
-23.00
[-5.0;20.0] (0.64) [-37.0;-11.0]
10.00
-23.70
-26.00
[-3.0;23.0] (0.40) [-38.0;-11.0]

28.47
(0.66)
20.96
(0.80)
23.01
(0.51)

23.40
[4.3;45.3]
13.40
[-0.5;34.5]
14.50
[3.1;42.3]

15.16
11.00
7.09
3.40
-7.69
(0.64) [-4.9;35.1] (0.66) [-14.1;26.3] (0.57)
10.41
6.20
4.32
-1.60
-4.11
(0.73) [-9.0;26.0] (0.76) [-12.6;18.0] (0.71)
11.13
6.20
4.25
0.90
-2.82
(0.50) [-9.0;26.4] (0.50) [-15.1;20.9] (0.43)

-8.80
0.17
[-23.8;7.7] (0.05)
-7.30
-0.13
[-18.8;11.2] (0.05)
-6.30
0.05
[-17.8;9.2] (0.03)

-0.29
[-0.4;0.3]
-0.42
[-0.9;-0.2]
-0.29
[-0.4;0.3]

16.60
[3.6;30.0]
10.00
[0.0;25.0]

10.30
(0.41)
12.52
(0.42)

7.00
-24.05
-27.00
[-3.0;22.0] (0.38) [-38.0;-11.0]
10.00
-24.22
-27.00
[-2.0;27.0] (0.40) [-41.0;-11.0]

9.50
[-6.0;31.0]
6.20
[-9.0;26.2]

6.20
[-9.0;26.2]
11.40
[-4.6;35.1]

4.10
(0.48)
6.48
(0.52)

4.10
(0.42)
7.47
(0.66)

0.90
[-14.6;20.9]
0.90
[-13.7;24.9]

-0.10
[-14.1;20.9]
3.40
[-13.6;28.0]

-2.04
(0.44)
-7.59
(0.43)

-2.90
(0.38)
-8.15
(0.54)

Obs.
(17)
2155
3185
872
4470
2826
2516
2615
2727
2452
2146
505
4836
3560
1782
1721
1025
2568

Notes: The table shows the mean (in odd columns) and median (in even columns) misperceptions – computed as perceived minus real – by groups. Groups are defined by the indicator variables listed to the
left. The standard errors of the means are in parentheses and the interquartile ranges (25th and 75th percentiles) are in square brackets. Sample: respondents who were not exposed to any informational
treatments or to the anecdote treatment.

Table A-5: Share of Respondents with Strange Patterns of Answers
Panel A: Extreme Answers
Control
=0
= 100
(1)
(2)
Share of Immigrants
0.001 0.003
Share of Christian Immigrants
0.057 0.006
Share of Muslim Immigrants
0.016 0.020
High Educated - Immigrants
0.018 0.003
Unemployment - Immigrants
0.006 0.014
Poverty - Immigrants
0.020 0.010
High Educated - Natives
0.003 0.004
Unemployment - Natives
0.001 0.007
Poverty - Natives
0.003 0.007

Full sample
=0
= 100
(3)
(4)
0.001 0.004
0.052 0.007
0.017 0.018
0.017 0.004
0.006 0.013
0.019 0.011
0.003 0.005
0.001 0.008
0.004 0.007

Panel B: Response Pattern Indices
Control
≥ 0.6 ≥ 0.8
(1)
(2)
Response Pattern Index - First Option
0.002 0.000
Response Pattern Index - Last Option
0.004 0.000
Response Pattern Index - Middle Option 0.021 0.001

Full sample
≥ 0.6 ≥ 0.8
(3)
(4)
0.002 0.000
0.004 0.000
0.024 0.001

Notes: Panel A reports the share of respondents in the control group (columns 1 and 3) and in
4) who gave extreme answers (= 0 or = 100) to the questions listed on the left; Panel B reports
Response Pattern index for the first, last and middle option is greater or equal than 0.6 and 0.8.
Option is computed as the number of qualitative questions (both in the immigration and in the

the full sample (columns 2 and
the share of respondents whose
Response Pattern Index - First
redistribution block) where the

respondent selected the first option divided by the total number of qualitative questions, and similarly for the other indexes.
The First and Last Option indexes are based on 15 question, the Middle Option index is based on 11 questions – we exclude
questions for which it is difficult to identify a “middle” option (e.g., questions with four options).

A-25

Table A-6: Perceptions by Country – Reduced Sample
Actual

(1)
Share of Immigrants

10.00

Share Immigrants from North Africa

0.30

Share of Immigrants from Middle East

4.10

Share of Immigrants from Western Europe

7.70

Share of Immigrants from Eastern Europe

6.10

Share of Immigrants from North America

2.30

Share of Immigrants from Latin America

42.30

Share of Muslim Immigrants

10.00

Share of Christian Immigrants

61.00

Share of Unemployed Immigrants

5.50

Share of Poor Immigrants

13.60

Share of Low-Educated Immigrants

22.00

Share of High-Educated Immigrants

41.40

Relative Transfers Received

1.23

U.S.
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(2)
(3)
34.72
(0.74)
8.44
(0.22)
12.53
(0.34)
10.82
(0.28)
10.00
(0.24)
8.94
(0.29)
24.33
(0.56)
22.73
(0.49)
38.78
(0.71)
25.72
(0.76)
34.41
(0.78)
28.32
(0.79)
34.88
(0.79)
1.17
(0.06)

Actual

(4)

U.K.
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(5)
(6)

Panel A: Perceptions
30.00
13.40
[19.00, 45.00]
7.00
0.90
[4.00, 10.00]
10.00
5.10
[5.00, 16.00]
10.00
19.00
[5.00, 15.00]
10.00
20.00
[5.00, 13.00]
7.00
2.30
[4.00, 11.00]
20.00
3.90
[12.00, 32.00]
20.00
23.00
[10.00, 30.00]
40.00
58.00
[20.00, 50.00]
20.00
5.70
[9.00, 40.00]
30.00
19.00
[17.00, 50.00]
20.00
16.60
[10.00, 40.00]
30.00
48.80
[20.00, 50.00]
1.00
1.42
[0.33, 1.00]

30.72
(0.66)
9.84
(0.25)
10.98
(0.33)
16.05
(0.42)
23.76
(0.48)
5.66
(0.20)
5.09
(0.16)
33.02
(0.63)
29.64
(0.65)
26.53
(0.81)
29.82
(0.77)
25.50
(0.80)
25.54
(0.73)
1.02
(0.04)

29.00
[15.00, 41.00]
10.00
[5.00, 14.00]
10.00
[5.00, 15.00]
14.00
[8.00, 20.00]
20.00
[14.00, 30.00]
5.00
[2.00, 8.00]
4.00
[2.00, 7.00]
30.00
[20.00, 40.00]
28.00
[15.00, 40.00]
20.00
[8.00, 40.00]
25.00
[10.00, 40.00]
20.00
[10.00, 40.00]
20.00
[10.00, 40.00]
1.00
[0.50, 1.00]

Actual

(7)
12.20
35.30
5.60
29.30
5.20
1.00
3.40
48.00
43.00
16.60
23.80
39.10
28.80
1.39

France
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(8)
(9)
28.82
(0.64)
27.49
(0.50)
11.20
(0.35)
10.92
(0.34)
14.68
(0.34)
5.03
(0.23)
5.26
(0.18)
48.46
(0.68)
24.94
(0.53)
37.17
(0.87)
40.98
(0.83)
51.10
(0.87)
27.45
(0.64)
1.76
(0.08)

Panel B: Attitudes
Immigrants Poor due to Lack of Effort
Immigrants Rich because of Effort
Mohammad Gets More
Observations

0.41
(0.02)
0.67
(0.02)
0.26
(0.01)
841

0.36
(0.02)
0.70
(0.01)
0.18
(0.01)
862

A-26

0.31
(0.01)
0.62
(0.02)
0.34
(0.02)
862

26.00
[15.00, 40.00]
26.00
[19.00, 35.00]
9.00
[4.00, 15.00]
10.00
[4.00, 15.00]
13.00
[9.00, 20.00]
3.00
[1.00, 6.00]
4.00
[2.00, 8.00]
50.00
[30.00, 60.00]
20.00
[10.00, 35.00]
30.00
[15.00, 55.00]
40.00
[20.00, 60.00]
50.00
[30.00, 70.00]
20.00
[10.00, 40.00]
1.00
[1.00, 1.10]

Table A-6: Perceptions by Country – Reduced Sample (cont.)
Actual

(10)
Share of Immigrants

10.00

Share Immigrants from North Africa

10.20

Share of Immigrants from Middle East

2.90

Share of Immigrants from Western Europe

14.30

Share of Immigrants from Eastern Europe

38.10

Share of Immigrants from North America

0.90

Share of Immigrants from Latin America

9.10

Share of Muslim Immigrants

33.00

Share of Christian Immigrants

57.00

Share of Unemployed Immigrants

14.70

Share of Poor Immigrants

34.90

Share of Low-Educated Immigrants

49.10

Share of High-Educated Immigrants

11.70

Relative Transfers Received

1.29

Italy
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(11)
(12)
25.14
(0.64)
24.53
(0.45)
9.23
(0.26)
5.85
(0.23)
18.73
(0.37)
3.90
(0.22)
9.58
(0.26)
45.54
(0.69)
26.84
(0.62)
40.64
(0.89)
42.72
(0.84)
44.05
(0.88)
18.13
(0.58)
1.34
(0.06)

Actual

(13)

Germany
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(14)
(15)

Panel A: Perceptions
20.00
14.80
[10.00, 33.00]
23.00
1.50
[16.00, 30.00]
9.00
17.30
[4.00, 13.00]
4.00
14.90
[1.00, 9.00]
19.00
42.60
[10.00, 25.00]
2.00
1.10
[0.00, 5.00]
9.00
3.20
[4.00, 13.00]
45.00
30.00
[30.00, 60.00]
25.00
51.00
[10.00, 40.00]
40.00
6.90
[20.00, 60.00]
40.00
20.50
[20.00, 60.00]
40.00
35.10
[20.00, 60.00]
10.00
22.30
[5.00, 25.00]
1.00
0.72
[0.50, 1.10]

30.25
(0.71)
16.30
(0.39)
17.03
(0.45)
13.02
(0.42)
23.90
(0.42)
4.43
(0.17)
5.11
(0.15)
43.48
(0.67)
31.74
(0.63)
39.07
(0.97)
34.20
(0.84)
38.06
(0.84)
21.82
(0.60)
1.13
(0.04)

25.00
[15.00, 40.00]
15.00
[8.00, 22.00]
15.00
[7.00, 24.00]
10.00
[4.00, 20.00]
22.00
[15.00, 30.00]
3.00
[1.00, 5.00]
5.00
[2.00, 7.00]
40.00
[30.00, 60.00]
30.00
[20.00, 45.00]
30.00
[15.00, 60.00]
30.00
[15.00, 50.00]
30.00
[20.00, 55.00]
20.00
[10.00, 30.00]
1.00
[1.00, 1.00]

Actual

(16)
17.60
1.20
23.80
23.60
22.20
1.40
5.50
27.00
61.00
16.10
29.80
33.70
37.90
1.44

Sweden
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(17)
(18)
26.23
(0.80)
12.14
(0.37)
25.34
(0.73)
15.34
(0.76)
14.09
(0.41)
3.86
(0.23)
7.64
(0.29)
44.08
(1.02)
32.89
(0.98)
36.71
(1.18)
25.54
(1.03)
40.60
(1.23)
36.70
(1.04)
1.28
(0.06)

21.00
[15.00, 33.00]
10.00
[7.00, 16.00]
23.00
[15.00, 34.00]
10.00
[5.00, 21.00]
13.00
[8.00, 20.00]
3.00
[1.00, 5.00]
6.00
[3.00, 10.00]
40.00
[30.00, 60.00]
30.00
[20.00, 48.00]
30.00
[15.00, 50.00]
20.00
[10.00, 35.00]
40.00
[20.00, 60.00]
35.00
[20.00, 50.00]
1.00
[1.00, 1.10]

Panel B: Attitudes
Immigrants Poor due to Lack of Effort
Immigrants Rich because of Effort
Mohammad Gets More
Observations

0.31
(0.01)
0.69
(0.01)
0.33
(0.02)
876

0.41
(0.02)
0.60
(0.02)
0.20
(0.01)
878

0.32
(0.02)
0.69
(0.02)
0.01
(0.01)
437

Notes: Panel A reports mean and median perceptions for each country. The standard errors of the means are in parentheses and the interquartile
ranges (25th and 75th percentiles) are in square brackets. The actual value of the statistic for each country is reported in columns (1), (4), (7), (10),
(13) and (16). Panel B reports the mean of each attitude variable for each country and its standard error (in parentheses). Sample: respondents who
were not exposed to any informational treatments or to the anecdote treatment, excluding flagged respondents, as explained in Section 3.2.

A-27

Table A-7: Misperceptions By Respondent Groups - Reduced Sample
Immigrants
(1)
(2)
College
No College
High Income
Low Income
Young
Old
Male
Female
Left-Wing
Right-Wing
Immigrant Parent
No Immigrant Parent
Knows an Immigrant
Does Not Know any Immigrant
High Imm. Sector & No College
High Imm. Sector & College
Not High Imm. Sector

(3)

Muslim
(4)

(5)

Christian
(6)

Unemployed
(7)
(8)

(9)

Poor
(10)

Low Educ
(11)
(12)

High Educ
(13)
(14)

Transfers
(15)
(16)

14.43
(0.43)
18.59
(0.36)

10.00
8.17
7.00
[-0.2;24.0] (0.40) [-3.0;20.0]
15.20
12.08
10.00
[3.0;28.8] (0.36) [-3.0;27.0]

-21.46
-23.00
18.93
11.30
9.36
6.00
3.48
-0.10
-3.31
(0.41) [-36.0;-11.0] (0.52) [0.3;33.4] (0.49) [-9.0;25.1] (0.51) [-13.7;18.0] (0.46)
-25.73
-28.00
26.75
23.10
14.42
10.20
6.30
3.00
-5.55
(0.34) [-41.0;-12.0] (0.46) [4.3;44.5] (0.45) [-4.9;31.2] (0.46) [-13.7;24.9] (0.40)

-6.70
-0.10
[-18.8;11.2] (0.03)
-7.30
0.16
[-20.3;8.3] (0.03)

-0.39
[-0.8;-0.2]
-0.29
[-0.4;0.3]

14.87
(0.66)
17.34
(0.30)

10.50
[0.0;25.0]
14.00
[1.6;27.8]

9.65
7.00
(0.63) [-3.0;22.0]
10.68
9.00
(0.30) [-3.0;22.0]

-22.02
-23.00
20.43
13.40
9.68
5.10
4.79
0.90
-5.40
(0.65) [-37.0;-11.0] (0.83) [0.1;34.5] (0.79) [-9.0;25.1] (0.83) [-13.7;20.9] (0.69)
-24.40
-27.00
24.27
16.40
12.91
9.50
5.25
0.90
-4.51
(0.29) [-38.0;-11.0] (0.38) [3.4;43.4] (0.37) [-6.3;29.5] (0.38) [-13.7;21.3] (0.33)

-7.30
[-18.8;7.7]
-6.70
[-18.8;8.6]

-0.13
(0.05)
0.09
(0.03)

-0.39
[-0.8;-0.1]
-0.29
[-0.4;0.3]

18.63
(0.37)
15.24
(0.41)

15.80
[3.2;28.2]
10.00
[0.0;25.0]

9.29
(0.37)
11.76
(0.39)

-24.19
-27.00
(0.35) [-38.0;-11.0]
-23.86
-26.00
(0.40) [-38.0;-11.0]

-2.85
[-17.9;11.2]
-8.70
[-21.0;3.6]

0.02
(0.03)
0.10
(0.03)

-0.34
[-0.8;0.3]
-0.29
[-0.4;0.3]

14.67
(0.40)
19.15
(0.37)

9.00
10.43
8.00
[-0.2;23.4] (0.39) [-3.0;22.0]
16.60
10.60
8.00
[4.2;29.0] (0.37) [-3.0;22.0]

-22.92
-25.00
22.05
14.30
11.41
6.20
5.58
0.90
-7.01
-8.70
(0.39) [-38.0;-11.0] (0.51) [1.3;39.3] (0.49) [-9.0;26.2] (0.50) [-13.7;23.4] (0.41) [-20.3;5.6]
-25.08
-27.00
25.19
19.50
13.35
9.50
4.80
0.90
-2.41
-2.30
(0.35) [-38.0;-12.0] (0.48) [4.3;43.4] (0.46) [-4.9;29.5] (0.47) [-13.7;20.9] (0.43) [-18.8;11.2]

-0.03
(0.03)
0.13
(0.04)

-0.29
[-0.7;0.3]
-0.29
[-0.4;0.3]

17.27
(0.42)
17.62
(0.43)

13.00
[1.0;27.0]
14.40
[2.4;27.8]

8.94
(0.38)
14.13
(0.42)

-22.92
-26.00
22.57
14.50
12.82
9.50
2.62
-1.30
-2.02
-2.30
(0.39) [-37.0;-11.0] (0.50) [3.1;38.4] (0.49) [-4.9;29.5] (0.49) [-15.1;19.4] (0.45) [-17.3;11.2]
-26.47
-28.00
26.33
19.50
12.35
6.40
8.53
3.40
-8.84
-9.70
(0.42) [-41.0;-13.0] (0.57) [4.3;44.5] (0.54) [-8.8;30.1] (0.56) [-11.6;28.0] (0.47) [-23.8;3.3]

-0.21
-0.34
(0.03) [-0.8;-0.2]
0.38
-0.23
(0.05) [-0.4;0.4]

23.06
(0.97)
16.29
(0.28)

20.00
[5.0;36.6]
12.40
[0.8;26.0]

8.98
7.00
(0.83) [-3.0;20.0]
10.69
8.00
(0.28) [-3.0;22.0]

-21.29
-23.00
(0.85) [-33.0;-9.0]
-24.32
-27.00
(0.28) [-38.0;-11.0]

20.96
14.30
11.92
6.40
6.43
0.90
-2.24
(1.07) [3.1;37.5] (1.08) [-8.6;29.4] (1.10) [-12.0;23.2] (1.01)
23.95
15.30
12.44
6.40
5.04
0.90
-4.91
(0.37) [3.3;43.1] (0.35) [-8.5;29.5] (0.36) [-14.0;20.9] (0.32)

-2.30
-0.10
[-18.8;12.1] (0.06)
-6.70
0.07
[-18.8;8.3] (0.03)

-0.39
[-0.7;0.3]
-0.29
[-0.4;0.3]

15.83
(0.33)
19.30
(0.48)

11.60
[0.4;25.6]
15.80
[3.0;30.0]

9.89
(0.32)
11.84
(0.48)

7.00
[-3.0;22.0]
10.00
[-1.0;25.0]

-22.51
-23.00
(0.32) [-37.0;-11.0]
-27.19
-31.00
(0.47) [-41.0;-13.0]

21.21
(0.42)
28.89
(0.63)

13.90
[1.5;35.3]
24.30
[5.1;49.3]

10.52
(0.41)
16.29
(0.58)

6.20
[-9.0;26.2]
11.40
[-3.8;35.1]

4.19
(0.41)
7.27
(0.62)

0.90
[-14.0;20.9]
3.40
[-12.0;26.3]

-3.13
(0.37)
-7.88
(0.52)

-6.40
[-18.8;11.2]
-8.80
[-21.4;6.2]

-0.02
(0.03)
0.21
(0.05)

-0.32
[-0.4;0.3]
-0.29
[-0.7;0.3]

19.79
(0.49)
14.88
(0.62)
15.79
(0.39)

16.80
[4.2;30.0]
10.00
[0.0;24.0]
11.00
[0.2;25.2]

11.77
(0.49)
7.48
(0.57)
10.86
(0.39)

10.00
[-3.0;27.0]
7.00
[-3.0;18.0]
10.00
[-3.0;22.0]

-26.20
-28.00
(0.47) [-41.0;-13.0]
-21.62
-23.00
(0.59) [-36.0;-11.0]
-23.47
-26.00
(0.38) [-37.0;-11.0]

27.45
(0.64)
20.64
(0.79)
22.18
(0.49)

23.10
[4.3;45.3]
13.40
[0.2;34.5]
14.50
[3.1;38.1]

15.52
(0.61)
9.57
(0.69)
11.39
(0.48)

11.00
[-4.8;35.1]
6.20
[-8.9;25.1]
6.40
[-8.8;26.4]

7.22
(0.64)
4.03
(0.73)
4.19
(0.49)

3.40
[-12.0;25.9]
-1.60
[-12.0;16.3]
0.90
[-14.1;20.9]

-7.61
(0.55)
-3.94
(0.70)
-2.96
(0.42)

-8.80
[-23.8;7.7]
-6.70
[-18.8;11.2]
-6.40
[-17.3;8.6]

0.17
(0.05)
-0.13
(0.05)
0.05
(0.03)

-0.29
[-0.4;0.3]
-0.42
[-0.9;-0.2]
-0.29
[-0.4;0.3]

7.00
[-3.0;20.0]
10.00
[-2.0;25.0]

7.00
[-3.0;20.0]
12.00
[0.0;27.0]

24.04
(0.47)
23.27
(0.52)

18.10
[3.4;43.1]
14.50
[3.1;43.1]

13.81
(0.47)
10.96
(0.47)

9.50
[-5.5;31.0]
6.40
[-8.8;26.2]

4.04
(0.46)
6.36
(0.51)

0.90
[-14.1;20.9]
0.90
[-12.6;23.4]

-2.05
(0.42)
-7.33
(0.42)

Obs.
(17)
2152
3182
869
4467
2823
2513
2611
2725
2449
2144
505
4830
3556
1780
1719
1024
2565

Notes: The table shows the mean (in odd columns) and median (in even columns) misperceptions – computed as perceived minus real – by groups. Groups are defined by the indicator variables listed to the
left. The standard errors of the means are in parentheses and the interquartile ranges (25th and 75th percentiles) are in square brackets. Sample: respondents who were not exposed to any informational
treatments or to the anecdote treatment, excluding flagged respondents, as explained in Section 3.2.

Table A-8: Effect of Monetary Incentives on Misperceptions - Pooled

Any Incentive
Constant
Observations

Any Incentive
Constant
Observations

All
Immigrants
(misp.)
(1)

Accurate Perception
All Immigrants

N. America, W. and
E. Europe
(misp.)
(4)

Muslim

Christian

(2)

M. East and
N. Africa
(misp.)
(3)

(misp.)
(5)

(misp.)
(6)

0.432
(1.530)

0.0115
(0.0131)

-0.582
(0.843)

-0.109
(1.010)

-1.087
(0.999)

2.763*
(1.421)

20.46***
(2.366)

0.0283
(0.0202)

20.06***
(1.303)

13.81***
(1.561)

13.37***
(1.544)

-22.66***
(2.197)

914

914

914

914

914

914

Unemployment
(misp.)
(7)

Low-educated
(misp.)
(8)

High-educated
(misp.)
(9)

Poverty
(misp.)
(10)

Misperception
Index
(11)

0.621
(1.480)

-0.405
(1.618)

3.166*
(1.729)

-0.464
(1.561)

-0.0453
(0.0348)

16.32***
(2.287)

-0.881
(2.501)

-10.72***
(2.673)

20.85***
(2.413)

0.0404
(0.0538)

913

914

914

914

914

Notes: The table reports the effect of monetary incentives on misperceptions, pooling all the incentives together. See notes to
Table 3

A-29

Table A-9: Views on Immigration Policies

U.S.
U.K.
France
Italy
Germany
Sweden
Left-wing
Right-wing
College
No College
Young
Old
Imm. Parent
High Income
H. Imm. Sec. & No College
H. Imm. Sec. & College
Not H. Imm. Sec

Imm. Not
A Problem
(1)
0.37
(0.02)
0.19
(0.01)
0.26
(0.01)
0.19
(0.01)
0.23
(0.01)
0.25
(0.02)
0.35
(0.01)
0.12
(0.01)
0.33
(0.01)
0.19
(0.01)
0.28
(0.01)
0.22
(0.01)
0.30
(0.02)
0.28
(0.02)
0.16
(0.01)
0.31
(0.01)
0.28
(0.01)

Imm. Benefits
Soon
(2)
0.39
(0.02)
0.45
(0.02)
0.46
(0.02)
0.51
(0.02)
0.56
(0.02)
0.63
(0.02)
0.59
(0.01)
0.35
(0.01)
0.53
(0.01)
0.46
(0.01)
0.51
(0.01)
0.46
(0.01)
0.55
(0.02)
0.51
(0.02)
0.45
(0.01)
0.56
(0.02)
0.49
(0.01)

Imm. Citizenship
Soon
(3)
0.83
(0.01)
0.73
(0.01)
0.66
(0.02)
0.58
(0.02)
0.69
(0.01)
0.84
(0.02)
0.79
(0.01)
0.62
(0.01)
0.76
(0.01)
0.68
(0.01)
0.72
(0.01)
0.70
(0.01)
0.76
(0.02)
0.70
(0.02)
0.65
(0.01)
0.78
(0.01)
0.73
(0.01)

American Upon
Citizenship/Before
(4)
0.80
(0.01)
0.52
(0.02)
0.64
(0.02)
0.57
(0.02)
0.55
(0.02)
0.61
(0.02)
0.68
(0.01)
0.53
(0.01)
0.68
(0.01)
0.57
(0.01)
0.61
(0.01)
0.62
(0.01)
0.61
(0.02)
0.64
(0.02)
0.55
(0.01)
0.68
(0.01)
0.63
(0.01)

Govt. Should care
About Everyone
(5)
4.68
(0.06)
4.43
(0.06)
4.48
(0.06)
4.35
(0.06)
4.58
(0.06)
4.85
(0.09)
5.07
(0.04)
3.85
(0.04)
4.74
(0.04)
4.39
(0.03)
4.65
(0.03)
4.40
(0.04)
5.00
(0.08)
4.68
(0.06)
4.23
(0.05)
4.80
(0.06)
4.63
(0.04)

Notes: The table reports the mean of the variables capturing views on immigration policies for each group of respondents
or country. See Appendix A-1 for the variable definitions. Sample: respondents who were not exposed to any informational
treatments or to the anecdote treatment. Standard errors in parentheses.

A-30

Table A-10: Views on Redistributive Policies
Inequality
Serious Problem
(1)
0.49
U.S.
(0.02)
U.K.
0.53
(0.02)
France
0.63
(0.02)
Italy
0.62
(0.02)
Germany
0.76
(0.02)
Sweden
0.45
(0.03)
Left-wing
0.71
(0.01)
Right-wing
0.45
(0.02)
College
0.54
(0.02)
No College
0.62
(0.01)
Young
0.59
(0.01)
Old
0.59
(0.01)
Imm. Parent
0.61
(0.03)
High Income
0.50
(0.02)
H. Imm. Sec. & No College
0.61
(0.02)
H. Imm. Sec. & College
0.56
(0.02)
Not H. Imm. Sec
0.58
(0.01)

Tax
Top1
(2)
27.29
(0.57)
35.00
(0.61)
42.18
(0.74)
34.27
(0.76)
42.56
(0.76)
46.55
(0.91)
37.91
(0.47)
35.76
(0.50)
36.84
(0.47)
37.51
(0.43)
36.40
(0.44)
38.13
(0.45)
38.10
(1.03)
34.99
(0.77)
36.03
(0.59)
36.32
(0.71)
38.32
(0.44)

Tax
Bottom50
(3)
9.04
(0.44)
7.52
(0.40)
8.61
(0.41)
11.06
(0.49)
12.69
(0.52)
23.44
(0.69)
10.35
(0.31)
11.70
(0.34)
10.91
(0.32)
11.10
(0.28)
11.74
(0.29)
10.23
(0.31)
11.40
(0.74)
11.27
(0.50)
11.01
(0.38)
11.09
(0.51)
11.02
(0.29)

Social Education
Budget
Budget
(4)
(5)
23.27
14.93
(0.41)
(0.31)
31.34
14.84
(0.42)
(0.25)
30.65
17.41
(0.34)
(0.28)
33.17
13.92
(0.41)
(0.30)
27.32
17.73
(0.34)
(0.27)
34.23
17.74
(0.47)
(0.40)
30.56
16.37
(0.26)
(0.18)
28.26
15.28
(0.28)
(0.20)
29.50
16.63
(0.27)
(0.19)
29.73
15.48
(0.23)
(0.16)
28.86
16.55
(0.25)
(0.18)
30.50
15.29
(0.25)
(0.17)
29.46
16.55
(0.49)
(0.40)
28.96
16.45
(0.45)
(0.31)
29.99
15.02
(0.32)
(0.21)
29.62
16.74
(0.39)
(0.28)
29.42
16.29
(0.25)
(0.18)

Total %
Donation
(6)
36.45
(1.70)
29.78
(1.57)
30.50
(1.52)
27.73
(1.39)
32.19
(1.42)
29.46
(2.31)
33.32
(0.97)
28.74
(1.04)
32.76
(1.05)
30.00
(0.84)
34.00
(0.94)
27.98
(0.90)
31.70
(2.06)
36.39
(1.77)
30.79
(1.15)
35.00
(1.58)
29.93
(0.92)

Notes: The table reports the mean of the variables capturing views on redistribution for each group of respondents or country.
See Appendix A-1 for the variable definitions. Social and Education budget are winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentile by
country. Standard errors in parentheses. Sample: respondents who were not exposed to any informational treatments or to the
anecdote treatment and who have seen the redistribution block before the immigration block.

A-31

Table A-11: U.S. Sample: “Share of Immigrants” Treatment with Legal Immigrants only
Panel A: First Stage Effects on Perceptions

Share of Immigrants
Observations
Control mean

All
Immigrants
(misp.)
(1)

Accurate Perception
All Immigrants

N. America, W. and
E. Europe
(misp.)
(4)

Muslim

Christian

(2)

M. East and
N. Africa
(misp.)
(3)

(misp.)
(5)

(misp.)
(6)

(7)

-13.27***
(1.982)

0.417***
(0.0358)

0.308
(1.026)

0.405
(1.397)

2.013
(1.453)

-5.464***
(1.944)

0.0511
(0.0399)

476
24.78

476
0.06

477
15.31

477
13.19

477
11.78

477
-17.13

476
0.35

Education
Budget
(4)

Inequality
Serious Problem
(5)

Donation
Above Median
(6)

Panel B: Treatment Effects on Support for Redistribution
Tax
Tax
Social
Top 1
Bottom 50
Budget
(1)
(2)
(3)
Share of Immigrants
Observations
Control mean

-0.970
(1.081)

0.144
(0.662)

0.359
(0.809)

-0.0155
(0.610)

0.0107
(0.0430)

0.0119
(0.0455)

477
28.13

477
7.92

477
22.62

477
16.18

475
0.51

477
0.41

Lack of Effort
Reason Poor

Notes: Panel A reports the first-stage effect of the Share of Immigrants treatment on (mis)perceptions of immigration. Panel
B reports the effect of the Share of Immigrants treatment on support for redistribution. See notes to Tables 5 and 6 * p < 0.1,
** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Table A-12: First Stage Effects on Perceptions – Additional Variables
All
immigrants
(misp.)
(1)

North
Africa
(misp.)
(2)

Middle
East
(misp.)
(3)

Western
Europe
(misp.)
(4)

Eastern
Europe
(misp.)
(5)

North
America
(misp.)
(6)

Latin
America
(misp.)
(7)

Muslim

Christian

(misp.)
(8)

(misp.)
(9)

Information T: Share of Immigrants

-4.864***
(0.422)

-0.181
(0.229)

-0.0628
(0.221)

-0.204
(0.218)

-0.0125
(0.240)

0.439**
(0.178)

0.231
(0.204)

0.00857
(0.408)

0.144
(0.396)

Information T: Origins of Immigrants

2.315***
(0.423)

-3.091***
(0.229)

-1.695***
(0.221)

0.372*
(0.218)

2.212***
(0.240)

-0.766***
(0.178)

2.556***
(0.204)

-1.829***
(0.408)

2.456***
(0.396)

Anecdote T: Hard Work of Immigrants

0.709*
(0.423)

-0.303
(0.229)

-0.0824
(0.221)

-0.0802
(0.218)

0.416*
(0.240)

0.0548
(0.178)

0.371*
(0.204)

-0.869**
(0.408)

0.796**
(0.396)

Observations
Control mean

19735
17.02

19756
7.98

19756
4.63

19747
-5.70

19759
-4.48

19744
4.62

19758
-1.98

19761
11.30

19757
-23.98

Unemployment

Poverty

High
Educated
(misp.)
(13)

Relative
Transfers
(misp.)
(14)

Effort
Rich

Mohammad Gets
More

(misp.)
(11)

Low
Educated
(misp.)
(12)

Lack of Effort
Poor

(misp.)
(10)

(15)

(16)

(17)

-1.499***
(0.508)

-0.489
(0.483)

-0.654
(0.503)

-0.0276
(0.404)

0.0391
(0.0338)

0.000297
(0.00912)

-0.0116
(0.00945)

0.000905
(0.00810)

-0.163
(0.508)

0.614
(0.483)

0.417
(0.503)

-0.375
(0.404)

-0.00197
(0.0338)

-0.000234
(0.00913)

-0.00870
(0.00945)

-0.00693
(0.00811)

-2.149***
(0.507)

3.159***
(0.483)

-0.730
(0.503)

-0.912**
(0.404)

-0.0324
(0.0338)

-0.0535***
(0.00912)

-0.00441
(0.00945)

-0.0131
(0.00810)

19732
24.44

19739
12.40

19723
5.35

19729
-4.91

19745
0.05

19721
0.36

19709
0.66

19752
0.24

Information T: Share of Immigrants
Information T: Origins of Immigrants
Anecdote T: Hard Work of Immigrants
Observations
Control mean

Notes: The table reports first-stage effects on an extended set of (mis)perceptions of immigration. Misperceptions are computed
as the perception minus the actual value. See Appendix A-1 for variable definitions. All regressions include the same controls
as those in Table 5. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

A-9

Effort vs. Luck in Germany

To get a sense of the general attitudes towards the importance of luck versus hard work in Germany we look
at the following question from the 2014 wave of the German General Social Survey (ALLBUS/GGSS):

A-32

What is the best way to get to the top in our society? Using the card, please rate the importance of the
qualities and situations. Please tell me for each one how important you think it is for getting ahead in our
society today. [Unimportant, Less Important, Important, Very important].
Figure A-6 reports the share of respondents thinking that the factor listed on the y-axis is important or
very important to make it to the top. Some of these factors (Luck, Corruption, Opportunism, Right Social
Background, Connections, Talent) are mostly related to luck/advantages, others (Industriousness, Initiative,
Education) are more closely linked to hard work.

Figure A-6: What Factors are Important to Make it to the Top?
Corruption
Opportunism
Luck
Right Social Background
Connections
Industriousness
Initiative
Talent
Education
0

.2

.4
.6
Share of respondents

.8

1

Notes: The figure reports the share of German respondents who think that the factor listed on the y-axis is important or very
important to make it to the top. Source: German General Social Survey (ALLBUS/GGSS) 2014. See Section A-9 for details.

A-10

Re-weighted sample

In our sample college-educated and unemployed are slightly over-represented compared to the population of
our countries. As a robustness check, we compute weights to match the unemployment rate and the share
of college educated in the countries of our sample. In order to keep our sample balanced along gender, age,
and income, we also target these variables in constructing the weights.46
In this section we report mean perceptions by country and treatment effects estimated on the re-weighted
sample. Re-weighting observations do not affect significantly our estimates.

46 Hence, for each country, we split the sample into 160 cells based on gender (2) × age (5) × income (4) × unemployed (2)
× college (2), and we compute a weight for each cell.

A-33

Table A-13: Perceptions by Country – Re-Weighted Sample
Actual

(1)
Share of Immigrants

10.00

Share Immigrants from North Africa

0.30

Share of Immigrants from Middle East

4.10

Share of Immigrants from Western Europe

7.70

Share of Immigrants from Easter Europe

6.10

Share of Immigrants from North America

2.30

Share of Immigrants from Latin America

42.30

Share of Muslim Immigrants

10.00

Share of Christian Immigrants

61.00

Share of Unemployed Immigrants

5.50

Share of Poor Immigrants

13.60

Share of Low-Educated Immigrants

22.00

Share of High-Educated Immigrants

41.40

Relative Transfers Received

1.23

U.S.
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(2)
(3)
36.20
(0.75)
8.48
(0.22)
12.19
(0.33)
10.85
(0.27)
9.87
(0.24)
9.69
(0.35)
24.38
(0.57)
22.75
(0.52)
39.09
(0.76)
26.52
(0.80)
35.11
(0.80)
29.25
(0.82)
34.27
(0.80)
1.17
(0.06)

Actual

(4)

U.K.
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(5)
(6)

Panel A: Perceptions
31.00
13.40
[20.00, 48.00]
7.00
0.90
[4.00, 11.00]
10.00
5.10
[5.00, 16.00]
10.00
19.00
[5.00, 15.00]
10.00
20.00
[5.00, 13.00]
7.00
2.30
[4.00, 11.00]
20.00
3.90
[11.00, 32.00]
20.00
23.00
[10.00, 30.00]
40.00
58.00
[20.00, 50.00]
20.00
5.70
[8.00, 40.00]
30.00
19.00
[18.00, 50.00]
20.00
16.60
[10.00, 44.00]
30.00
48.80
[15.00, 50.00]
1.00
1.42
[0.33, 1.10]

31.62
(0.64)
9.84
(0.27)
10.95
(0.35)
16.18
(0.43)
23.44
(0.48)
6.16
(0.23)
5.65
(0.20)
33.91
(0.68)
29.35
(0.65)
27.13
(0.78)
29.37
(0.73)
25.80
(0.77)
25.44
(0.70)
1.02
(0.04)

30.00
[15.00, 43.00]
10.00
[5.00, 14.00]
10.00
[5.00, 15.00]
13.00
[7.00, 21.00]
20.00
[13.00, 30.00]
5.00
[2.00, 9.00]
5.00
[2.00, 8.00]
30.00
[20.00, 45.00]
25.00
[15.00, 40.00]
20.00
[8.00, 40.00]
24.00
[10.00, 40.00]
20.00
[8.00, 40.00]
20.00
[10.00, 40.00]
1.00
[0.50, 1.00]

Actual

(7)
12.20
35.30
5.60
29.30
5.20
1.00
3.40
48.00
43.00
16.60
23.80
39.10
28.80
1.39

France
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(8)
(9)
29.62
(0.67)
26.74
(0.57)
11.44
(0.40)
10.79
(0.36)
14.62
(0.41)
6.11
(0.35)
5.79
(0.22)
50.55
(0.79)
23.79
(0.57)
40.07
(0.95)
42.91
(0.91)
52.57
(0.93)
26.60
(0.65)
1.88
(0.09)

Panel B: Attitudes
Immigrants Poor due to Lack of Effort
Immigrants Rich because of Effort
Mohammad Gets More
Observations

0.41
(0.02)
0.67
(0.02)
0.26
(0.01)
958

0.36
(0.02)
0.70
(0.01)
0.18
(0.01)
973

A-34

0.33
(0.02)
0.61
(0.02)
0.36
(0.02)
980

29.00
[15.00, 40.00]
25.00
[16.00, 35.00]
9.00
[4.00, 15.00]
9.00
[4.00, 15.00]
13.00
[8.00, 20.00]
4.00
[1.00, 8.00]
5.00
[2.00, 9.00]
50.00
[30.00, 65.00]
20.00
[10.00, 30.00]
35.00
[18.00, 60.00]
40.00
[20.00, 60.00]
50.00
[30.00, 75.00]
20.00
[10.00, 40.00]
1.00
[1.00, 2.00]

Table A-13: Perceptions by Country – Re-Weighted Sample (cont.)
Actual

(10)
Share of Immigrants

10.00

Share Immigrants from North Africa

10.20

Share of Immigrants from Middle East

2.90

Share of Immigrants from Western Europe

14.30

Share of Immigrants from Easter Europe

38.10

Share of Immigrants from North America

0.90

Share of Immigrants from Latin America

9.10

Share of Muslim Immigrants

33.00

Share of Christian Immigrants

57.00

Share of Unemployed Immigrants

14.70

Share of Poor Immigrants

34.90

Share of Low-Educated Immigrants

49.10

Share of High-Educated Immigrants

11.70

Relative Transfers Received

1.29

Italy
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(11)
(12)
26.79
(0.72)
25.60
(0.58)
8.98
(0.28)
6.00
(0.26)
18.12
(0.41)
4.56
(0.28)
9.46
(0.28)
47.52
(0.81)
26.54
(0.70)
42.59
(0.97)
43.00
(0.92)
43.48
(0.95)
18.31
(0.62)
1.40
(0.07)

Actual

(13)

Germany
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(14)
(15)

Panel A: Perceptions
20.00
14.80
[10.00, 36.00]
23.00
1.50
[16.00, 32.00]
8.00
17.30
[3.00, 13.00]
4.00
14.90
[1.00, 9.00]
18.00
42.60
[10.00, 25.00]
2.00
1.10
[0.00, 5.00]
9.00
3.20
[3.00, 13.00]
50.00
30.00
[30.00, 60.00]
20.00
51.00
[10.00, 40.00]
40.00
6.90
[20.00, 60.00]
40.00
20.50
[20.00, 60.00]
40.00
35.10
[20.00, 60.00]
10.00
22.30
[5.00, 25.00]
1.00
0.72
[0.50, 1.10]

30.35
(0.68)
16.06
(0.37)
16.87
(0.45)
13.43
(0.42)
23.40
(0.41)
4.90
(0.20)
5.41
(0.16)
43.94
(0.68)
31.61
(0.61)
39.52
(0.94)
33.72
(0.82)
37.42
(0.81)
21.94
(0.58)
1.14
(0.04)

25.00
[15.00, 40.00]
15.00
[8.00, 21.00]
15.00
[7.00, 23.00]
10.00
[4.00, 20.00]
22.00
[15.00, 30.00]
4.00
[1.00, 6.00]
5.00
[2.00, 8.00]
40.00
[30.00, 60.00]
30.00
[20.00, 45.00]
30.00
[12.00, 60.00]
30.00
[11.00, 50.00]
30.00
[17.00, 50.00]
20.00
[10.00, 30.00]
1.00
[1.00, 1.00]

Actual

(16)
17.60
1.20
23.80
23.60
22.20
1.40
5.50
27.00
61.00
16.10
29.80
33.70
37.90
1.44

Sweden
Perceived
Mean
Median
(Stand. Error) [Interq. Range]
(17)
(18)
27.38
(0.83)
12.18
(0.39)
25.52
(0.77)
14.52
(0.69)
13.87
(0.44)
4.64
(0.38)
7.80
(0.32)
45.67
(1.08)
31.63
(0.98)
38.23
(1.20)
25.89
(1.07)
41.16
(1.26)
36.41
(1.05)
1.29
(0.07)

22.00
[15.00, 34.00]
10.00
[7.00, 17.00]
23.00
[15.00, 34.00]
10.00
[4.00, 20.00]
13.00
[8.00, 20.00]
3.00
[1.00, 5.00]
6.00
[3.00, 10.00]
42.00
[30.00, 60.00]
30.00
[15.00, 45.00]
30.00
[17.00, 60.00]
20.00
[10.00, 40.00]
38.00
[20.00, 60.00]
35.00
[20.00, 50.00]
1.00
[1.00, 1.10]

Panel B: Attitudes
Immigrants Poor due to Lack of Effort
Immigrants Rich because of Effort
Mohammad Gets More
Observations

0.31
(0.02)
0.68
(0.02)
0.35
(0.02)
970

0.41
(0.02)
0.59
(0.02)
0.20
(0.01)
971

0.32
(0.02)
0.69
(0.02)
0.01
(0.00)
480

Notes: See notes to Table A-3. Observations are re-weighted to match the distribution of gender, age, income, unemployment and college education
in each country.

A-35

Table A-14: Treatment Effects on Support for Immigration and Redistribution – Re-Weighted Sample
Tax
Top 1
(1)

Tax
Bottom 50
(2)

Social
Budget
(3)

Education
Budget
(4)

Inequality
Serious Problem
(5)

Donation
Above Median
(6)

-2.055***
(0.444)

1.117***
(0.295)

-0.613**
(0.251)

0.451**
(0.186)

-0.0321**
(0.0139)

-0.0439***
(0.0143)

Information T: Share of Immigrants

-0.460
(0.450)

0.123
(0.293)

-0.474*
(0.246)

0.197
(0.182)

-0.0125
(0.0139)

-0.0153
(0.0145)

Information T: Origins of Immigrants

-0.0204
(0.452)

0.107
(0.301)

-0.426*
(0.254)

0.137
(0.182)

0.00445
(0.0138)

0.00158
(0.0145)

Anecdote T: Hard Work of Immigrants

0.232
(0.450)

-0.191
(0.293)

-0.0225
(0.246)

0.326*
(0.178)

0.0111
(0.0137)

0.00728
(0.0144)

Observations
Control mean

20037
34.97

20037
12.11

20017
28.83

20033
16.35

20035
0.56

20037
0.42

Order/Salience T

Notes: See notes to Table 5. Observations are re-weighted to match the distribution of gender, age, income, unemployment
and college education in each country.

Table A-15: First Stage Treatment Effects on Perceptions – Re-Weighted
Sample
All
Immigrants
(misp.)
(1)

Accurate Perception
All Immigrants

Information T: Share of Immigrants
Information T: Origins of Immigrants

N. America, W. and
E. Europe
(misp.)
(4)

Muslim

Christian

(2)

M. East and
N. Africa
(misp.)
(3)

Lack of Effort
Reason Poor

(misp.)
(5)

(misp.)
(6)

(7)

-4.642***
(0.431)

0.220***
(0.00699)

-0.358
(0.332)

0.254
(0.373)

-0.0683
(0.441)

0.0362
(0.411)

0.00201
(0.00962)

2.377***
(0.442)

0.00459
(0.00420)

-4.914***
(0.316)

1.929***
(0.373)

-1.876***
(0.427)

2.247***
(0.410)

0.00549
(0.00968)

Anecdote T: Hard Work of Immigrants

0.826*
(0.425)

-0.00373
(0.00397)

-0.564*
(0.326)

0.591
(0.367)

-0.974**
(0.426)

0.685*
(0.408)

-0.0508***
(0.00943)

Observations
Control mean

20006
17.32

20006
0.04

20019
12.85

19999
-5.86

20033
11.61

20029
-24.31

19992
0.36

Notes: See notes to Table 6. Observations are re-weighted to match the distribution of gender, age, income, unemployment
and college education in each country.

A-36

A-11

Selection in the Follow-up

Table A-16: Ability of Covariates to Predict Participation in the Follow-up
Survey
Has taken the Followup
Coefficient
P-value
Voted right
Voted left
Male
Young
Immigrant parent
College degree
Rich
High immigration sector

-0.005
0.005
-0.126
-0.132
-0.043
0.009
-0.122
-0.020

0.712
0.712
0.000
0.000
0.077
0.504
0.000
0.161

Notes: The table shows the coefficients and p-values from a series of regressions of the form yic = α + βCovariatei + ic , where
Covariatei is the variable listed in the row. yic is a dummy equal to one if the respondent took the follow-up.

A-37

