                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            FEAR AND THE SAFETY NET:
                       EVIDENCE FROM SECURE COMMUNITIES

                                       Marcella Alsan
                                       Crystal Yang

                                     Working Paper 24731
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24731


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 2018, Revised July 2019

We thank seminar participants at UC Berkeley Haas, UC Berkeley Demography, UC Berkeley
Law, University of Colorado Boulder, Stanford, UCSD, UCLA, UC Davis, University of British
Columbia, UC Irvine, Pomona, Princeton, Harvard, University of Texas Austin, the American
Law and Economics Association Annual Meeting, Junior Criminal Law Roundtable, NBER
Summer Institute, Columbia, Northwestern, and NBER Law and Economics for many helpful
comments and suggestions. Barbara Biasi, Adam Cox, Janet Currie, Manasi Deshpande, Will
Dobbie, Mark Duggan, Amy Finkelstein, Josh Gottlieb, Hilary Hoynes, Kevin Johnson, Thomas
Lemieux, Justin McCrary, Alison Morantz, Melanie Morten, Ted Miguel, Shayak Sarkar, Maya
Rossin-Slater, Isaac Sorkin, Reed Walker, and Tara Watson provided early feedback that
improved the work. Morgan Foy, Ashley Litwin, Regina Powers, Matthew Tarduno, and Anlu
Xing provided excellent research assistance. We thank Sue Long of TRAC for assistance with
data under our appointments as TRAC Fellows. The collection of PSID data used in this study
was partly supported by the National Institutes of Health under grant numbers R01 HD069609
and R01 AG040213, and the National Science Foundation under award numbers SES 1157698
and 1623684. We thank the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research and Stanford Health
Policy for funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Marcella Alsan and Crystal Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Fear and the Safety Net: Evidence from Secure Communities
Marcella Alsan and Crystal Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 24731
June 2018, Revised July 2019
JEL No. I14,I3,K00,K37

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper studies how changes in deportation fear induced by the roll-out of Secure
Communities (SC), a far-reaching immigration enforcement program, affected the demand for
safety net programs in the United States. We estimate the spillover effect of SC on the take-up of
federal means-tested programs by Hispanic citizens, who are not themselves eligible for removal.
We find significant declines in SNAP and SSI enrollment, particularly among mixed-citizenship
status households. The response is muted for Hispanic households residing in sanctuary cities.
Our results are most consistent with network effects that perpetuate fear rather than lack of
benefit information, measurement error, or stigma.


Marcella Alsan
Stanford Medical School
Center for Health Policy/PCOR
117 Encina Commons, Room 218
Stanford, CA 94304
and NBER
malsan@stanford.edu

Crystal Yang
Harvard Law School
Griswold 301
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
cyang@law.harvard.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24731
                                                I. Introduction

Active enrollment in safety net programs in the United States is far from complete despite mount-
ing evidence of high returns to health and human capital (Ashenfelter 1983, Currie 2006).1 This
incomplete take-up varies across racial and ethnic groups. In general, Hispanic citizens have lower
participation than African-Americans and non-Hispanic whites across a range of public welfare pro-
grams (Morin, Taylor, and Patten 2012).2 Moreover, the gap between take-up by eligible Hispanics
versus other groups has widened in recent years. For example, between 2005 and 2013, the share
of Hispanics taking up the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) decreased by 12.6
percentage points relative to other groups despite increasing food insecurity for Hispanic households
(Nord, Andrews, and Carlson 2006; Coleman-Jensen, Gregory, and Singh 2014), and the share of
Hispanics taking up Supplemental Security Income (SSI) fell by 14.8 percentage points relative to
non-Hispanics.3
    Many scholars have studied the factors that influence program participation, including trans-
action costs, information, and stigma (e.g. Aizer 2007; Besley and Coate 1992), in addition to
behavioral biases such as inattention and time-inconsistency (Bhargava and Manoli 2015; Madrian
and Shea 2001; Karlan et al. 2016). Widening the lens beyond individual psychology and con-
straints, studies also suggest that social networks influence the take-up of programs in the United
States. For example, Bertrand, Luttmer, and Mullainathan (2000) focus attention on the role such
networks can play in reducing participation costs, potentially via improved information and des-
tigmatization. Dahl, Kostøl, and Mogstad (2014) demonstrate that receipt of welfare programs in
one generation increases receipt in the next, and Borjas and Hilton (1996) find that prior ethnic-
specific program participation predicts take-up by future waves of immigrants, evidence consistent
with the intergenerational transmission of ethnic capital (Borjas 1992). For U.S.-based Hispanic
communities, however, social networks may not only facilitate but also deter program participation
via the spread of fear.
    In this paper, we explore whether deportation fear explains some of the puzzle of incomplete
take-up, specifically for Hispanic Americans. Recent survey evidence suggests that deportation fear
is widespread. In a 2017 survey of residents in Los Angeles County, 37 percent reported being
concerned that they, a friend, or a family member could be deported. Among those who endorsed
such a concern, 80 percent said that they, a friend, or family member would be at greater risk
of being deported by enrolling in a government health, education, or housing program.4 Pedraza
   1
       For evidence on the health and human capital returns, see Almond et al. (2011); Hoynes, Schanzenbach, and
Almond (2016); Bronchetti, Christensen, and Hoynes (2018); Almada and Tchernis (2018); East (2018); Aizer et al.
(2016); Goodman-Bacon (2018b).
     2
       According to Morin et al. (2012), across the six best-known federal entitlement programs, 64 percent of blacks
reported taking up any of these programs compared to 56 percent of whites and 50 percent of Hispanics. Blacks are
also more likely than whites or Hispanics to have received three or more benefits (27 percent for blacks vs. 14 percent
for whites and 11 percent for Hispanics).
     3
       Authors’ own calculations from the American Community Survey. In addition, among households participating
in SNAP, the Hispanic share fell from 13.3 percent in 2006 to 11.8 percent in 2016 (Wolkwitz 2007; Lauffer 2017).
     4
       Data from 2017 UCLA Luskin Los Angeles Quality of Life Index Survey. Specifically, the survey asks the
following two questions: (1) “Switching gears a bit, are you worried that you, a friend of yours or a member of your


                                                          1
and Osorio (2017) show that simply priming Latino respondents on immigration during surveys
led respondents to reduce their stated willingness to engage in public services. These findings
echo other qualitative evidence suggesting Hispanic citizens, themselves immune to deportation,
nevertheless fear that enrollment may reveal personal information on non-citizens in their networks
to immigration authorities. As reported in PBS News Hour, “You don’t want to be the family
member that because you signed up for coverage you’re getting your grandmother, your uncle or
your parent deported.” 5 Yet causal evidence on whether federal enforcement targeting non-citizens
spills over to influence the safety net participation of citizens not at personal risk of deportation
remains thin.
    To make progress on this question, we study the introduction of a far-reaching immigration
enforcement program known as Secure Communities (SC). SC is a federal program administered by
the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agency (ICE) from 2008 to 2014, and re-activated
in 2017. The program empowers ICE to check the immigration status of anyone arrested by local
law enforcement agencies through fingerprint analysis and substantially increases the likelihood that
a non-citizen immigrant will be deported conditional on being arrested. From its activation to its
discontinuance in 2014, SC has led to over 43 million fingerprint submissions, 2.2 million fingerprint
matches, and over 380,000 individuals forcibly removed from the interior. Removals under the
Obama administration’s implementation of SC comprised twenty percent of the approximately two
million total removals during the time period, the highest number in recent U.S. history.6
    As we are focused on the spillover effects of immigration enforcement on Hispanic citizens,
we distinguish between direct and indirect treatment effects, with a focus on the latter. In the
potential outcomes framework, the direct treatment effect is the difference in potential outcomes
for treatment and control groups among individuals who are eligible for treatment (Rubin 1974).
Treatment in our context is defined as immigration enforcement under SC and those eligible for
deportation are non-citizen immigrants.7 Direct treatment effects stem mainly from principal-agent
problems, whereby non-citizen parents forgo signing up their citizen children for benefits out of fear
of revealing themselves. Estimating direct effects has been the subject of several studies in public
health (Vargas and Pirog 2016; Hacker et al. 2011; Vargas and Ybarra 2017) as well as important
work in economics by Watson (2014) and Amuedo-Dorantes, Arenas-Arroyo, and Sevilla (2018).
    In sharp contrast, indirect treatment effects stem from externalities, whereby citizen decision-
makers forgo private benefits out of concern for their non-citizen contacts. In our context, indirect
treatment effects measure the difference in potential outcomes for treatment and control groups
among individuals who are not eligible for deportation (i.e. authorized U.S. citizens), who may
nevertheless be fearful of revealing non-citizen family members, such as spouses or parents, or other

family will be deported from the United States because of their immigration status?” and (2) “Are you worried
that you, a friend of yours or a member of your family will be at a greater risk of being deported by enrolling in a
government health care, education or housing program?”
    5
      See https://www.pbs.org/newshour/health/hispanic-americans-still-arent-signing-obamacare.
    6
      See 2016 Yearbook of Immigration Statistics at https://www.dhs.gov/immigration-statistics/yearbook/2016/
table39.
    7
      By federal law, any non-citizen can be deported, including unauthorized individuals and green card holders.


                                                         2
members of the community. A simple extension to Moffitt’s canonical model of welfare participation
(1983), contained in the Online Appendix, nests both the direct and indirect treatment effects and
formalizes the mathematical distinction between the two of them.
   To estimate spillover effects, we use detailed micro-data on the universe of over two million
detainers (“immigration holds”) issued under SC between 2008 and 2013. These data contain in-
formation on the county of issue, crime severity, and country of origin of each arrested individual.
We combine these data with information on the take-up of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP), otherwise known as food stamps, and take-up of Supplemental Security Income
(SSI). Information on take-up comes from public-use data from the American Community Survey
(ACS) and restricted-use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). We focus on these
federal programs as they have fairly uniform eligibility requirements across locations that exclude
unauthorized individuals, allowing us to estimate indirect treatment effects. SNAP and SSI also
represent two of the largest means-tested programs in the United States and thus are of special in-
terest to economists and policymakers alike. For both safety net outcomes, we examine behavioral
responses among a sample of economically fragile households that are connected with non-citizens,
defined as those in which the head of household earned less than a high school degree.8
   We estimate the impact of SC on program take-up by leveraging the staggered roll-out of SC
across counties together with the fact that Hispanic households were differentially affected. This
latter variation is appropriate since well over 90 percent of detainers issued under the SC program
were for Hispanics. We use a triple-differences framework, interacting race and ethnicity indicators
with timing of SC activation. In doing so, we compare program take-up for Hispanic households
within a given location to take-up for non-Hispanic whites and blacks, net of counties that had not
yet activated, before versus after SC activation. The triple-differences identification assumption is
plausible, requiring that there be no location-specific shocks timed with the staggered SC roll-out
and influencing the dynamic path of safety net outcomes exclusively for Hispanics while sparing
other minority groups.
   SC activation is associated with substantial declines in safety net participation among Hispanic
citizen households. In the ACS, Hispanic-headed families are 2.1 percentage points less likely to
take up food stamps after activation of SC. The take-up rate of food stamps among Hispanic-headed
households in the ACS before activation was 21 percentage points, implying a ten percent decline in
take-up due to SC activation. Hispanic households are also 1.6 percentage points less likely to take
up SSI after SC activation, a 30 percent decline relative to the pre-SC Hispanic mean. We obtain
qualitatively similar results when using the PSID, finding a decline in both Hispanic food stamp
and SSI take-up.
   A number of findings suggest these results are indeed causal. First, consistent with the parallel
trends assumption under our triple-differences approach, we find no sharp changes in the evolution
of our outcome variables prior to SC activation. Second, our preferred specification includes a full
set of race-by-state fixed effects to address the potential concern that states may vary in policies

   8
       We find similar though smaller effects for households with a high school degree and those with some college.


                                                           3
towards minority groups, state-by-year fixed effects to account for changes in state-level immigration
enforcement such as the enactment of omnibus enforcement bills (Amuedo-Dorantes and Arenas-
Arroyo 2017), and race-by-year fixed effects, county-by-time fixed effects, along with state- and
group-specific employment changes during the Great Recession to allow for flexible impacts of the
Great Recession across demographic groups (Kochhar, Fry, and Taylor 2011; McKernan et al. 2014).
Third, we show SC only affected Hispanic Americans – results on program take-up for non-Hispanic
blacks or whites are often oppositely-signed and not statistically significant, consistent with the
notion that the SC program should not affect the behavior of those less likely to be affected by
enhanced immigration enforcement.
    Because our focus is on indirect effects, we examine program participation among heads of house-
holds that are citizens. A ubiquitous challenge for enforcement-related research is that enforcement
itself could alter the veracity and completeness of survey responses. Indeed, Census researchers with
privileged access to Social Security files linked to the ACS find that individuals classified as non-
citizens in administrative records (AR) are less likely to respond to the citizenship question (Brown
et al. 2018). These researchers also document that citizenship misrepresentation is concentrated
among recently arrived foreign-born individuals.9
    To address these measurement concerns, we do not rely exclusively on responses to the ACS
citizenship question to ascribe status. Informed by the Brown et al. (2018) report, we define citizens
as those born in the U.S. or those who have resided in the U.S. for over a decade and are natural-
ized.10 We then gauge the accuracy of this citizenship measure by comparing our survey-derived
naturalization counts to administrative counts published by the Office of Immigration Statistics,
finding that the correlation between the two is 0.94. Furthermore, neither the fraction of Hispanic
citizens in the ACS nor the relevant sample weight responds to the introduction of SC. Inaccurate
reporting of in-kind transfers on surveys, as uncovered by Meyer, Mittag, and Goerge (2018), could
pose additional analytical challenges. Although there exists a sizable difference between state-level
administrative records and ACS-reported SNAP enrollment, we find that immigration enforcement
does not alter the evolution of this gap.
    In the penultimate section of the paper, we explore potential explanations for why Hispanic cit-
izens would reduce their take-up of safety net programs relative to other citizen groups in the face
of immigration enforcement. We report six findings that, taken together, are difficult to reconcile
without invoking fear as the dominant explanatory mechanism. Fear is the subjective likelihood of
an event that brings disutility (Becker and Rubinstein 2011). Whether detention or deportation of
a non-citizen elicits such a response depends on whether the citizen decision-maker is connected to
someone who is deportable. We therefore assess changes in program participation among commu-
nities with a higher share of non-citizens or mixed-status Hispanic-headed households.11 We find

    9
      Note that our proposal to access restricted versions of data in the Federal Research Data Center (FRDC) was
denied by Census due to subject matter.
   10
      Specifically, we define citizenship using the following questions in the ACS: (1) Where was this person born?;
(2) When did this person come to live in the United States?; and (3) Is this person a citizen of the United States?
   11
      Mixed-status households include members that have different citizenship or immigration statuses.


                                                         4
that reductions in safety net take-up are largest among said locations. Second, we find that places
where detainers are more commonly issued against Hispanics for non-violent (e.g. misdemeanors)
than violent crimes exhibit a larger response to SC, suggesting that the failure to target serious
non-citizen offenders generates a stronger behavioral response. Third, locations where deportation
fear rises over the activation period, as measured in Pew survey data, exhibit a heightened response
to the program’s introduction. Fourth, in locations where federal detainers are not uniformly en-
forced (i.e. “sanctuary cities”), SC activation has almost no detectable effect. Fifth, locations with
a higher share of Puerto Ricans and Cubans, groups that face zero to minimal risk of deportation
relative to Hispanics from other countries of origin, have muted responses to SC. Finally, we show
that, following SC activation, Google searches for deportation-related terms across media markets
increased sharply, consistent with at least an awareness of the program if not fear of its potential
consequences.
   One competing explanation for our results is information. Since social networks transmit not
only fear but also detailed programmatic knowledge, reducing the number of co-ethnics who sign up
for a program could leave affected groups poorly informed about benefits. We explore this possibility
following Aizer and Currie (2004) by estimating effects on households that previously took up food
stamps or SSI prior to SC activation. Such households arguably already know how to sign up for
the benefit. Similar to Aizer and Currie (2004), we find that information spillovers are not an
important part of the explanation: Hispanic individuals in households who previously used food
stamps or SSI also substantially reduced their use following SC activation. We also explore but
reject the possibility that compositional changes in the types of Hispanic individuals responding
to survey questions in a given locale due, for example, to migration, are driving the results. In
addition, we fail to find significant effects of SC on employment, suggesting that our findings are
unlikely driven by changes in labor force attachment among Hispanics.
   In sum, our findings suggest that Hispanic citizens respond to recent immigration enforcement by
reducing their safety net participation, likely due to fear of revealing non-citizens in their networks.
Our results imply that deportation fear plays an important role in explaining some of the uptake
gap for Hispanic Americans, with potentially adverse long-term consequences for the health and
well-being of Hispanic families.
   Our paper contributes to research in the fields of economics, law, political science, and public
health. Prior research examining the effects of immigration enforcement focuses on non-citizens – in
particular, the reluctance of unauthorized parents to sign up their citizen children for government
programs. For instance, Watson (2014) and Pedraza and Zhu (2014) find that immigration enforce-
ment suppresses children’s Medicaid enrollment by their non-citizen parents. Similarly, Vargas and
Pirog (2016) find declines in Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) participation, a program legally
available to unauthorized immigrants, among non-citizen mothers. On the other hand, amnesty to
undocumented individuals increases their tax filing and take-up of the Earned Income Tax Credit
(Cascio and Lewis 2019).12 We extend the above literature by providing the first causal estimates

  12
       These empirical studies are complemented by qualitative work regarding fears about the personal risk of detention


                                                            5
of the indirect effect of immigration enforcement on the choice behavior of Hispanic citizens.
    Second, we add to the literature seeking to understand why families sometimes forgo partici-
pation in safety net programs despite high returns (see review by Currie 2006), highlighting that
kinship networks can yield not only benefits, but also impose costs (see review by Cox and Fafchamps
2008; di Falco and Bulte 2011). Third, by providing novel metrics of deportation fear, we contribute
to scholarship that aims to quantify the effect of fear on consumer behavior (Slemrod 1990; Becker
and Rubinstein 2011).
    Our paper proceeds as follows. The next section describes the SC program in detail. Section
III discusses eligibility rules for public programs in the study. Section IV describes our conceptual
framework and Section V outlines our data and identification strategy. Section VI reports the
results, Section VII discusses potential mechanisms, and Section VIII concludes.


                            II. Background on Secure Communities

Secure Communities was an immigration enforcement program administered by ICE from 2008 to
2014 and reactivated in 2017.13 The program was aimed at helping ICE arrest and remove individ-
uals who were in violation of federal immigration laws, including those who failed to comply with
a final order of removal, or those who had engaged in fraud/willful misrepresentation in connection
with government matters. SC had three main objectives: (1) to identify non-citizens at large and
in federal, state, and local custody charged with or convicted of serious criminal offenses who were
subject to removal; (2) to prioritize enforcement actions to ensure apprehension and removal of
non-citizens convicted of serious criminal offenses; and (3) to transform enforcement processes and
systems to achieve lasting results. SC accomplished these goals through an extensive collaboration
between state and local law enforcement agencies, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and
the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
    Typically, when a person is arrested and booked by a state or local law enforcement agency, his
or her fingerprints are taken and submitted to the FBI. The FBI runs these fingerprints in order to
conduct a criminal background check, which is forwarded to the state or local authorities. Prior to
the implementation of SC, non-citizens in violation of immigration laws were identified by inmate
interviews in local jails or prisons, performed by either federal officers under a policy known as the
Criminal Alien Program (CAP) or local officers under formal written agreements with DHS, known
as 287(g) agreements. These interviews were labor-intensive, such that federal and local officials
authorized to conduct these interviews screened less than 15 percent of local jails and prisons, and
in only about two percent of all U.S. counties (Cox and Miles 2013).
    SC improved upon the standard fingerprinting procedure. Under SC, fingerprints received by the
FBI were automatically and electronically sent to DHS. Legally, this information exchange fulfills


or deportation leading undocumented immigrants and their U.S. citizen children to avoid health programs (Yoshikawa
2011; Bean, Brown, and Bachmeier 2015), with the consequence of expanding ethnic and racial health disparities
(Asad and Clair 2018). See also Cruz Nichols, LeBrón, and Pedraza (2018).
   13
      Additional institutional details on the program and its implementation can be found in the Online Appendix.


                                                        6
a 2002 Congressional mandate for federal law enforcement agencies to share information that is
relevant to determine the admissibility or deportability of an individual (8 U.S.C. §1722(a)(2)). The
fingerprints received by DHS were then compared against its Automated Biometric Identification
System (IDENT), a database that stores biometric and biographical information on foreign-born
persons in three primary categories: (1) non-citizens in the U.S. who have violated immigration law,
such as persons who were previously deported and/or overstayed their visas; (2) non-citizens lawfully
in the U.S. but who may be deportable if they are convicted of the crime for which they have been
arrested; and (3) citizens who naturalized after their fingerprints were included in the database
(see Cox and Miles 2014). IDENT contains the fingerprints of suspected terrorists, criminals,
immigration violators, in addition to all travelers when they enter and leave through U.S. airports,
seaports, and land border ports of entry; and when they apply for visas at U.S. consulates. The
IDENT system was created in 1994 to help U.S. border and immigration officials keep criminals
and terrorists from crossing U.S. borders.
   If there was a fingerprint match, ICE relied on both biometric confirmation of the individual’s
identity in addition to other reliable evidence that the individual either lacks immigration status or
is removable under immigration law. If ICE had probable cause for removability, they then issued
what is called a “detainer” (sometimes called an “immigration hold”) on the person. This detainer
requested that the state or local law enforcement agency hold the individual for up to 48 hours to
allow ICE to assume custody for the initiation of removal proceedings. As a result of this detainer
protocol, individuals who may otherwise be released through the local legal system (such as those
whose cases were dismissed or those who were released pre-trial pending criminal proceedings) were
detained via SC. As Cox and Miles (2014) describe, SC substantially increased the likelihood that
a non-citizen would be apprehended by ICE and deported from the country, conditional on being
arrested. According to an official review of SC in 2011, in most cases, people detained by ICE
were subject to immigration enforcement action for reasons independent of the triggering arrest or
conviction, i.e., a fingerprint match may indicate that the person was removable because he or she
entered the country without inspection or overstayed a visa.
   Notably, state and local jurisdictions could not easily opt out of SC. All fingerprints submitted
to the FBI were automatically sent to DHS as a result of the information-sharing partnership,
such that a local jurisdiction could not choose to only submit its fingerprints to the FBI.14 When
SC was first activated, Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napolitano described the program as
follows: “Secure Communities gives ICE the ability to work with our state and local law enforcement
partners to identify criminal aliens who are already in their custody, expediting their removal and
keeping our communities safer.” 15 SC was also described as a partnership between ICE and each
state’s State Identification Bureau, requiring a memorandum of agreement (MOA) between the
ICE acting director and State Identification Bureau officials.16 However, in the spring of 2011,

  14
      See http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/09/30/AR2010093007268.html
  15
      https://www.dhs.gov/news/2010/08/10/secretary-napolitano-announces-secure-communities-deployment-all-
southwest-border.
   16
      See MOA at https://www.ice.gov/doclib/foia/secure_communities/securecommunitiesmoatemplate.pdf.


                                                     7
governors in Massachusetts, New York, and Illinois ended their respective MOAs with DHS. The
three states alleged that the program was not exclusively targeting the most violent offenders and
was hindering community policing. ICE subsequently determined and clarified that the MOAs were
“not required to activate or operate Secure Communities in any jurisdiction.” 17 Shortly thereafter,
John Morton, former Director of ICE, terminated all MOAs in August 2011 in the “Morton Memo,”
stating they had led to “substantial confusion” and that “ICE has determined that an MOA is not
required to activate or operate SC for any jurisdiction ... Once a state or local law enforcement
agency voluntarily submits fingerprint data to the federal government, no agreement with the state
is legally necessary for one part of the federal government to share it with another part.” 18
    Due to various technological constraints, SC was not implemented at once across the entire
country. As noted by Cox and Miles (2013), one of the main technological hurdles was that many
jurisdictions did not have live scan fingerprint devices. We discuss the roll-out of SC and the non-
technological factors that influenced it further below. The program began on October 27, 2008, and
was activated on a county-by-county basis. SC was adopted in most counties by mid-2012 and fully
activated across the entire country on January 22, 2013. Cox and Miles (2013) show that the timing
of activation across counties is most strongly correlated with the Hispanic population, distance from
the Mexican border, and whether a county had a 287(g) agreement with ICE, findings we return to
when discussing our identification strategy below.
    In response to SC, some jurisdictions began to disobey detainer requests from ICE, arguing such
detentions were unconstitutional under the Fourth Amendment, as well as noting concerns that such
practices would discourage immigrant cooperation with local law enforcement. These jurisdictions
became known as “sanctuary cities.” 19
    On November 20, 2014, SC was temporarily suspended across the entire country by DHS policy,
in part due to the resistance from sanctuary cities. After SC was suspended, DHS implemented a
new program called the “Priority Enforcement Program” (PEP). Under PEP, ICE continued to rely
on fingerprint-based biometric data submitted during bookings by state and local law enforcement
agencies. However, ICE was instructed to only transfer individuals who were convicted of specifi-
cally enumerated high priority offenses, individuals who intentionally participated in an organized
criminal gang to further the illegal activity of the gang, or individuals deemed to pose a danger to
national security. In addition, ICE was instructed to only request a detainer if the person in custody
was subject to a final order of removal or if there was other sufficient probable cause to find that
the person was removable. On January 25, 2017, SC was reactivated under Executive Order No.

  17
      http://www.ncsl.org/research/immigration/secure-communities.aspx.
  18
      See pg. 7 of Task Force on Secure Communities: Findings and Recommendations, https://www.dhs.gov/
xlibrary/assets/hsac-task-force-on-secure-communities-findings-and-recommendations-report.pdf.
   19
      The specific policies can vary widely, from prohibiting police officers inquiring about a person’s immigra-
tion status, to not honoring administrative detainers issued by ICE, to restricting information sharing with fed-
eral immigration agents. For an up-to-date map of sanctuary cities and counties across the United States, see
http://cis.org/Sanctuary-Cities-Map and https://www.ilrc.org/local-enforcement-map. Importantly, the number of
detainers could not be meaningfully influenced by sanctuary cities unless they chose to not arrest Hispanic individu-
als. There is no evidence this was a strategy pursued by these jurisdictions. Rather they ignored detainer requests.
See https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/14_1120_memo_secure_communities.pdf.


                                                         8
13768, entitled Enhancing Public Safety in the Interior of the United States. From its inception in
2008 through 2014 and since its reactivation in 2017, SC has led to the deportation of over 400,000
immigrants and continues to increase.


                                      III. Safety Net Programs

In this study, we focus on participation in SNAP and SSI, two of the largest means-tested programs
in the United States. SNAP participation increased from 20 million to 40 million participants
between 1990 and 2010 and reached record levels of spending – $78 billion – in 2011 (CBO 2012).
SSI participation has also grown substantially over time, rising from 4.6 million beneficiaries in 1989
to 8.4 million in 2013, with the federal government paying $54 billion in SSI cash benefits in 2013
(Daly and Burkhauser 2003; Duggan, Kearney, and Rennane 2016). Moreover, both have fairly
uniform eligibility requirements that exclude unauthorized individuals, thus enabling us to measure
indirect treatment effects. We summarize the eligibility requirements below.

    SNAP/Food Stamps: The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), previously
known as the Food Stamp Program, is the largest near cash means-tested transfer program in
the U.S. In 2012, SNAP spending reached $74 billion, exceeding spending on both the Earned In-
come Tax Credit ($64 billion) and Temporary Assistance for Needy Families ($29 billion) (Hoynes
et al. 2016). SNAP is also the only U.S. public safety net program that is universally available
to low-income people without many other restrictions such as being disabled, elderly, or having
children. The program has been credited with helping lift families out of poverty every year and for
acting as a stabilizer during the Great Recession (Tiehen et al. 2012; Ganong and Liebman 2018;
Short 2014; Bitler and Hoynes 2015).
    In order to receive benefits under SNAP, individuals need to meet various federal guidelines.20
In general, households must have an annual income below 130 percent of the federal poverty line.
Further, applicant households must have less than $2,250 in countable resources ($3,500 if someone
is older than 60 or disabled).21
    Immigrants residing in the country without authorization are ineligible to receive benefits. In
contrast, qualified legal immigrants (i.e. green card holders and other qualified aliens such as parolees
and refugees) are eligible for SNAP if they have lived in the U.S. for five years, if they currently
receive disability-related assistance, or if they are children under 18, in addition to the income
and resource limits. To apply for benefits, individuals complete an application in-person or online,
followed by an interview with a SNAP representative. In our context, immigration enforcement
may affect take-up because SNAP applications routinely ask for the names, citizenship status, and
Social Security numbers of all persons in the household, regardless of whether they are applying for
  20
      See https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/eligibility#Resources.
  21
      The household can forego the SNAP income test, however, if all members of the household are receiving TANF,
SSI, or some other state general assistance programs. There is no requirement of employment in most cases, but
applicants have to meet certain work conditions, including registering for work and not voluntarily reducing work
hours. See detailed reviews on safety net requirements for further information. See https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/
eligibility.


                                                        9
benefits. Some states also ask for country of origin, date of entry, and alien registration number
for each person in the household. Using this information, states verify the immigration status
of each household member through DHS via the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements
(SAVE) program, designed to reduce benefit fraud. An example of a state SNAP form is provided
in Appendix Figure A1.
   Almost all states assure applicants that their information will only be used to determine eligi-
bility and will not be shared with ICE. For example, the California Department of Social Services
states that immigration status “can only be used to determine...eligibility, and cannot be used for
immigration enforcement.” 22 Nevertheless, advocacy groups claim that SNAP applications have
declined recently and that this decline has coincided with increased anti-immigration rhetoric. As
a SNAP outreach coordinator for the Latino community noted to the Washington Post, “They’re
staying away from me...I say hi to them, and they avoid me completely. I don’t know what they’ve
been saying amongst themselves. But no one is signing up anymore, and the people who need to
renew are not renewing.” 23

   SSI : Supplemental Security Income (SSI), administered by the Social Security Administration
(SSA), is the largest cash welfare program in the United States (Daly and Burkhauser 2003, Desh-
pande 2016). In addition to federal assistance, which provided a maximum for an individual of $733
per month in 2016, almost one-third of states supplement the federal benefit with state SSI benefits
(Duggan et al. 2016). SSI provides benefits to blind or disabled children, blind or disabled working-
age adults, and individuals 65 or older with no requirement of disability, although its caseload is
increasingly dominated by disabled children and non-elderly adults. Between 1988 and 2013, total
federal benefits paid for SSI disabled children and non-elderly adults nearly tripled, increasing from
$14.6 billion to $44.4 billion dollars in 2013 (Duggan et al. 2016). This program is aimed at provid-
ing an income floor to individuals who are ineligible for Social Security or whose benefits could not
provide a basic living. In fact, for nearly three-fifths of recipients, SSI represents their only source
of income (US SSA 2013). Child participation in SSI has been linked with significant and persistent
reductions in child poverty rates (Duggan and Kearney 2007).
   To be eligible for SSI, individuals must be aged or disabled and meet federally mandated income
and asset limits. In general, individuals with “countable income” over the federal benefit rate are
not eligible for SSI. Individuals must also meet asset limits and have no more than $2,000 in assets
or $3,000 for a couple. Like SNAP, only U.S. citizens, U.S. nationals, or “qualified aliens” are eligible
for SSI. Unauthorized individuals are not eligible for SSI.
   Upon meeting the above requirements, individuals must also meet one of three categorical crite-
ria: age, disability or blindness. Elderly individuals are automatically eligible for SSI based on age
if they are age sixty-five or older. Individuals may receive SSI benefits for blindness if they have

  22
      See http://www.cdss.ca.gov/cdssweb/entres/forms/English/SAWS2ASAR.pdf and http://www1.nyc.gov/
assets/hra/ACCESSNYC/pdf/SNAPKit/english/LDSS_4826A.pdf.
   23
      See https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2017/03/16/immigrants-are-now-canceling-their-food-
stamps-for-fear-that-trump-will-deport-them/?utm_term=.be2800772b3a.


                                                   10
20/200 vision or worse with the use of a correcting lens in their better eye, or if they have tunnel
vision of 20 degrees or less.
    Non-elderly adults with a disability typically apply for SSI through an SSA field office, where
SSA employees determine both income/asset eligibility and disability. State disability examiners,
working with vocational and medical consultants, conduct medical determinations. To meet the
disability determination, a non-elderly adult must demonstrate an inability to engage in substantial
gainful activity by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment that is expected
to result in death or last at least twelve months. The process for disability determination for children
similarly requires that a child has a disability lasting at least twelve months or expected to result
in death. Applicants who are initially rejected may appeal the decision.
    Like with SNAP, immigration enforcement may affect take-up because the SSI application asks
for the names, birthdates, and Social Security numbers of all persons living with the applicant. This
portion of the SSI application is provided in Appendix Figure A2. Questions about household com-
position are taken into account to determine the contribution of the applicant to household expenses
such as rent and utilities and can affect the amount of the SSI federal benefit.24 Anecdotally, being
asked to provide this type of information has invoked fear among certain communities given that
federal benefits-granting agencies, in particular SSA for the administration of SSI, are required to
report to DHS individuals who have undergone a formal determination on a claim who the agencies
know are not lawfully present in the United States.25 However, according to the National Immigra-
tion Law Center, these agencies have clarified that this reporting requirement is only triggered for
individuals seeking benefits and not relatives or household members.26


                                    IV. Conceptual Framework

In the Online Appendix, we adapt Moffitt’s (1983) seminal model of non-participation in social
programs and formalize how immigration enforcement can lead to spillover effects on Hispanic cit-
izens. Agents maximize expected household utility placing weights on each set of family members
– citizens and non-citizens. Instead of a stigma cost associated with participation, however, we
include a deportation cost that is increasing in safety net participation and immigration enforce-
ment. Under this model, the household decision-maker sets the marginal benefit of participation
in federal programs, weighted by the welfare importance of citizen household members, equal to
the marginal deportation cost induced by participation, weighted by the welfare importance of non-
citizen members. Participation thus increases in the size of the program benefit and the weight given
to eligible citizens in the household, but declines with immigration enforcement and the weight given
to non-citizen household members.

  24
      See https://www.ssa.gov/ssi/spotlights/spot-living-arrangements.htm.
  25
      See Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, Public Law 104-193, §404. SSA
also routinely honors requests to share social security number information with DHS and ICE under an information
sharing requirement in the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. §1360(b)). See https://secure.ssa.gov/poms.
nsf/lnx/0203313095.
   26
      See https://www.nilc.org/issues/economic-support/overview-immeligfedprograms/.


                                                      11
    When the household decision-maker is a U.S. citizen, the decision-maker forgoes a personal
entitlement benefit to avoid the deportation cost incurred by close non-citizen contacts – this is
precisely the indirect spillover effect we aim to identify in this paper. By contrast, when the
household decision-maker is an ineligible non-citizen, the decision-maker does not forgo any benefits
for himself. Rather, participation decisions are made on behalf of other household members, such
as enrollment in Medicaid or subsidized school lunches for citizen children. In this scenario, a non-
citizen decision-maker’s decision to enroll others directly increases the decision-maker’s own risk of
deportation.27


                                V. Data and Empirical Framework

Our goal is to estimate the causal effect of immigration enforcement on take-up of various public
services by citizen Hispanic Americans. In this section, we provide an overview of the data sources,
describe our identification strategy to draw causal inference, and address measurement concerns.

                                                    A. Data

SC Data on Detainers and Removals: Through records available to the public, FOIA requests to
ICE, and restricted-use data agreements, we have obtained data on the roll-out of SC as well as
micro-level data on the universe of detainers issued by ICE from 2002 to 2015 in the United States
(US ICE 2015, TRACFED 2016). The detailed information includes the reason for the arrest as
well as the crime level/severity, the date the detainer was issued, the county the detainer was issued
in, the individual’s country of origin, and other individual-level demographics (age and sex). We
also have the universe of individuals who were removed (actually deported) from the country due
to a fingerprint match under SC from 2008 to 2015, in addition to county-level yearly data on the
number of fingerprint submissions and matches under SC from 2008 to 2015.
    Panel A of Figure 1 presents the total number of detainers issued per year and Panel B presents
the cumulative number of detainers issued over the time period. The rapid ramp up in SC is evident
in the time immediately following SC’s launch in 2008. These figures also demonstrate that the
overwhelming majority (93 percent) of detainers are issued against Hispanic individuals. Panel
C presents the ratio of detainers for low-level offenses (e.g. misdemeanor offenses) versus serious,
violent offenses and shows that, over time, SC issued a growing share of detainers for low-level
arrests. While not all detainers are honored by local law enforcement agencies or lead to removal
from the country, there is a strong positive correlation between detainers and removals under SC.
See Appendix Figure A3.
    SC represented a massive increase in immigration enforcement. Appendix Table A1 presents
difference-in-differences estimates of the impact of SC activation in a county on enforcement. Con-
sistent with Cox and Miles (2014), we find that SC activation had no significant effect on offenses
   27
      See Online Appendix D for more detail and the distinction between indirect and direct treatment effects de-
pending on the citizenship status of the household decision-maker. Specifically, compare the participation threshold
                     (λ +λ )·(B )                         λ ·(B )
in the indirect case: i λcn j = γj , to the direct case: λci +λjn = κj .


                                                        12
known to law enforcement. In contrast, we find significant increases in the number of fingerprint
submissions received by ICE, fingerprint matches, and detainers issued post-SC activation. Event
study estimates of the impact of SC on detainers issued are presented in Appendix Figure A4, which
shows a sharp 15 percent increase in the number of detainers issued in the several months post-SC
activation with no discernible trend pre-SC activation.

    American Community Survey: We use publicly available ACS data downloaded from IPUMS-
USA at the University of Minnesota (Ruggles et al. 2019). We focus on the one percent ACS samples
of the U.S. population over the years 2006–2016 for food stamp and SSI take-up. The data include
household characteristics such as food stamp and SSI receipt in the last year and also individual
characteristics like education, natality, and citizenship status. The most detailed level of geography
in the publicly available ACS is the Census-defined Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMA). PUMAs
contain at least 100,000 people and can cross county but not state lines. Because our activation
dates and detainers data are at the county level, we distribute the ACS means at the PUMA level
to counties based off the PUMA population in each county.28

    Panel Study of Income Dynamics: We use data from the restricted-access Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID) from 2005–2015 (PSID 2017). The PSID data are biennial, following heads of
household in every survey round. The data contain detailed information on food stamp and SSI
take-up within the past 12 months and ethnicity by households at the county level. While the PSID
does not ask about citizenship status, we proxy for citizenship status using whether a household head
grew up in the United States versus a foreign country or whether the household head’s mother and
father were both born in the United States. The PSID added immigrants and their adult children
in the 1997 wave and dropped some core families to better reflect the changing demographics of the
United States (PSID 2000). PSID household characteristics include family size, number of children,
household poverty, and head characteristics include employment status and disability.

    Google Trends Data: To measure awareness and perhaps deportation fear in response to SC,
we use data from internet search patterns provided by Google Trends. Google Trends is a publicly
available database that provides information on the relative popularity of search terms for 250
metropolitan areas across the United States at the Nielsen DMA media markets level. As discussed
in Burchardi, Chaney, and Hassan (2018), for each search term i in media market d, the Google
Trends tool provides the normalized share of searches (out of 100) that contain the search term:
                                                                               
                                                share(i, d)
                                                                 1 #(i, d) > T
                                                                              
                           G(i, d) = 100 ·                                                                    (1)
                                              maxδ {share(i, δ)}
where share(i, d) is the share of searches in d that contains i, T is a threshold value of searches that
must be exceeded for Google to permit access to the data, and maxδ {share(i, δ)} represents the

  28
    We use crosswalks provided by the University of Michigan Institute for Social Research and the Missouri Census
Data Center. See http://www.psc.isr.umich.edu/dis/census/Features/puma2cnty/ and http://mcdc.missouri.edu/
websas/geocorr14.html. Appendix Table A3 column 6 repeats the analysis at the PUMA-level.


                                                       13
maximum share of searches that contain i across all media markets δ. Thus, under this expression,
G(i, d) is equal to 100 in the metro area with the largest share of searches containing i and equal
to a positive number smaller than 100 in all other metro areas that have a sufficient number of
searches containing i.
    We use the following commonly searched terms related to the Deportation topic on Google
Trends: deportation, deportacion, immigration, inmigracion, immigration lawyer, abogados de in-
migracion, undocumented, indocumentado. Following the literature (e.g. Burchardi, Chaney, and
Hassan 2018), we take a simple sum of search intensity across all search terms and normalize it by
search terms that are popular in the Hispanic community, such as “deportes” (sports) and “telenov-
elas” (soap operas). This normalization accounts for differential access to the internet for Hispanics
that may vary across geographic units.

                                           B. Empirical Framework

Our triple-differences methodology exploits the staggered roll-out of SC activation across counties
as well as the disproportionate impact of SC on Hispanics within counties. Specifically, we estimate
the change in pre- versus post-SC activation differences in safety net take-up by race/ethnicity in
counties that have activated compared to counties that have not yet activated.
    Using repeated county-level cross-sectional data in the ACS, as well as household-level panel
data from the PSID, we estimate the following specification:29

                  post              post                post
  Yrcst = α + β1 Ict   + β2 (IrH · Ict   ) + β3 (IrB · Ict   ) + Ω0 Xrcst + µc · ItM orton + δst + θrs + κrt
                                                                                                                     (2)
                                                         +Γ01 Xcst + Γ02 (Xcst · IrB ) + Γ03 (Xcst · IrH ) + rcst

where r is race/ethnicity, c is county, s is state, and t is year. Yrcst is the outcome of interest. Yrcst
is the share food stamp or SSI take-up among our sample. In all specifications, we exclude border
counties since enforcement activities began in those counties early and selection could have played
a role in activation (see Cox and Miles 2014), as well as Massachusetts, New York, and Illinois as
these states resisted the activation of SC and attempted to opt-out. We require counties to have at
least one known offense per year, since detainers under SC could not have been issued otherwise,
and to have at least one respondent from each race group. Our final sample includes 2,759 unique
counties from the ACS and 2,260 unique household heads from the PSID.
    In the specification above, IrH and IrB are indicators for Hispanic ethnicity and non-Hispanic
                                                                    post
blacks, respectively. The omitted category is non-Hispanic whites. Ict   is an indicator equal to one
in all county-years after the activation of SC. Almost all counties activated between 2008 to 2013,
with the majority of counties activating between 2010 to 2012. Xrcst includes average log poverty
rate, number of children, the share citizen, and the employment rate that vary across race, county,
and time. We control for these characteristics as they are direct determinants of food stamp or SSI
eligibility.

   29
        We write the equation at the county-level using the ACS data but note the differences for the PSID.


                                                          14
    The Great Recession differentially impacted minority-headed households. For instance, white
families’ wealth fell 26 percent during the Great Recession, while the wealth of black families and
Hispanic families fell by 48 and 44 percent, respectively (McKernan et al. 2014). These differential
wealth effects may have affected food stamp and SSI take-up by race and ethnicity (Flores-Lagunes
et al. 2018). We account for this possibility by explicitly including race/ethnicity-specific state-level
employment changes during the Great Recession in Xrcst .
    State-by-year fixed effects (δst ) are included in our preferred specification to capture state-
specific policies or economic shocks that might influence take-up, such as the enactment of state
omnibus immigration bills or mandated use of E-Verify to check the work authorization of new
hires (Amuedo-Dorantes and Arenas-Arroyo 2017). Such fixed effects also account for differential
state-level effects of federal immigration reforms. We include state-by-race/ethnicity fixed effects
(θrs ) to control for attitudes and policies in each state that differentially affect minority groups.
Race-by-year fixed effects (κrt ) non-parametrically capture yearly shocks that differentially affect
different racial groups, such as changes in economic conditions. Furthermore, we include county
fixed effects (µc ) and their interaction with an indicator for post-Morton Memo (ItM orton ) to capture
unobserved county-level factors that affect take-up differentially before and after the 2011 Morton
Memo which clarified that county participation in SC was not optional.
    Finally, we account for other county-level controls, Xcst , that are not publicly available dis-
aggregated by race at the county-level, but which have been shown to have differential effects on
minority populations, such as crime. Crime statistics are generally not available at the race-county-
year level but crime disproportionately impacts minority communities (Sampson and Lauritsen 1997,
Anwar and Fang 2006, Antonovics and Knight 2009). To allow for these differences, we interact
race/ethnicity indicators with the log number of offenses known to law enforcement (Kochhar, Fry,
and Taylor 2011; McKernan et al. 2014). Our specification for the PSID is similar to Equation 2.
The outcome is an indicator for take-up of food stamps or SSI by individuals in household i. In
the PSID data, household-level controls, Xircst , include demographic characteristics on the head of
household, including number of children, employment status, and log poverty in the past year.
    For the ACS data, we weight all regressions by the total population in the relevant race-county
cell.30 To obtain a similar population-weighted estimate in the PSID, we include all individuals
from each household and use PSID provided sample weights. We explore the robustness of our
results to alternative weighting schemes in Section VII. Standard errors are clustered at the county
level.
    To measure the spillover (indirect) effects of deportation fear, in both ACS and PSID surveys,
we restrict our sample to citizen heads of households, individuals who are not eligible for deporta-
tion. We also restrict the sample to those with less than a high school degree as this represents a
socioeconomic group that likely meets the income and asset requirements for safety net programs
and is more likely to be connected to unauthorized individuals.31
  30
      On footnote 17 of pg. 312, Solon, Haider, and Wooldridge (2015) clarify that this weighting will only perfectly
identify a population average partial treatment effect when the model is fully saturated.
   31
      Authors’ own calculations from the ACS show that the prevalence of mixed-status families is much higher among


                                                         15
      The coefficient of interest in Equation 2 is β2 , which estimates the impact of SC activation on
outcomes of Hispanic households relative to non-Hispanic white households, compared to counties
that have not yet activated. β3 serves as a placebo test, capturing the effect of SC on black
households relative to non-Hispanic white households in counties that have activated versus those
that have not yet activated.
      We also estimate an event study specification, interacting IrH and IrB with a series of time
dummies for each period, relative to the omitted year prior to SC activation. The data include
sufficient observations to estimate up to five time indicators pre-SC and four time indicators post-
SC:
                          X                         X                               X
           Yrcst = α +            β1n (Ic,t=n ) +           β2n (IrH · Ic,t=n ) +              β3n (IrB · Ic,t=n ) + Ω0 Xrcst
                         n6=−1                      n6=−1                           n6=−1                                                   (3)
              +µc ·   ItM orton   + δst + θrs + κrt +        Γ01 Xcst   +   Γ02 (Xcst   ·   IrB )   +   Γ03 (Xcst   ·   IrH )   + rcst .

      In this specification, Ic,t=n is in indicator for each period (other than the year prior to activation
t = −1), such that the β2n coefficients trace the take-up of food stamps for Hispanics in the years
before and after SC activation relative to non-Hispanic whites.32 Similarly, each β3n coefficient traces
the take-up of food stamps for blacks relative to non-Hispanic whites before and after activation.
With this specification, one would expect to see a shift post-activation specifically for Hispanic
households, and not black or white households, if we are measuring the causal effect of SC.

      Identification: The identification assumption underlying our triple-differences approach is that
there are no contemporaneous shocks associated with the activation of SC within a county that only
affect Hispanic households relative to white households, leaving the black-white gap unchanged. In
other words, we assume that any differences in our outcome variables of interest for Hispanic versus
white households would have evolved smoothly absent SC activation, conditional on our set of fixed
effects and controls.
      In addition to testing for pre-trends in the event study analysis, we probe the identifying as-
sumption in three ways. First, we test for pre-SC balance in our covariates and outcomes of interest
between Hispanics and non-Hispanic whites across SC-activation groups in the spirit of our main
specification in Equation 2. Specifically, we regress the mean Hispanic-white difference for each
dependent variable on fixed effects for each activation year group, state fixed effects, log crime, and
the respective black-white difference. Standards errors are clustered at the county level. In column
1 of Table 1, we present F-statistics from a test of the joint significance of the activation year group
fixed effects. Corresponding p-values from these joint F-tests are presented in column 2 of Table
1. In terms of mean level differences, we find minimal evidence of significant differences across each
activation group. Most importantly, we find that there are no significant differences in changes in
Hispanic-white outcomes in the pre-SC period across each activation group. These results support

households where the head has less than a high school degree compared to more educated heads.
  32
     Leads before five years and lags after four years are coded with the first and last groups, respectively, following
McCrary (2007) among others.


                                                                  16
the assertion that the roll-out of SC was not correlated with pre-trends in the differential take-up of
safety net programs across groups.33 Second, we test for balance by estimating our baseline specifi-
cation in Equation 2 where our dependent variables are county-level demographic controls. Results
are presented in Table 6 and we can reject that SC activation affected demographic characteris-
tics differentially for Hispanics relative to whites, with a joint F-test for all demographic controls
yielding a p-value of 0.99.
   Third, we implement a permutation test where we limit our data to pre-activation years and
randomly permute a “pseudo” SC activation year for each county, ensuring that there is at least
one year of data pre- and post-“pseudo” activation year. Using these randomly permuted activation
years, we then estimate our baseline specification, Equation 2, repeating this procedure 500 times.
In Appendix Figure A5, we present the empirical distribution of these placebo effects for β2 , finding
that our actual treatment effects for food stamps and SSI are larger (in absolute value) than 98 to
96 percent of our placebo estimates, respectively. These results suggest that SC activation had a
large and atypical effect on outcomes for Hispanic households.

   Predicted SC Activation: Despite the fact that our triple-differences design does not rely only
on the simple pre- versus post-SC activation differences across counties, it is important to under-
stand the factors that affected the timing of SC activation since non-random timing could still
introduce bias. For instance, if SC preferentially activated in locations where criminal activity
among the unauthorized was on the rise, and such activity decreases program participation, early
activators could have seen a Hispanic-specific decline in safety net take-up regardless of SC, lead-
ing to overestimates of β2 in our main specification (Equation 2). On the other hand, if locations
that activated early were routine targets of immigration enforcement (such as locations close to the
Mexican border), Hispanics in these areas may be relatively insensitive to changes in enforcement
and thus exhibit small decreases in safety net take-up, leading us to underestimate β2 in our main
specification.
   To further understand the timing of SC activation, Figure 2 presents maps that show the timing
of SC activation across counties, revealing that border counties were the earliest places to activate.
These findings are consistent with Cox and Miles (2014), who find that SC activation was not
related to crime – though the purported goal of the program was to remove criminal aliens – rather,
earlier activation was positively correlated with proximity to the border, the presence of a 287(g)
agreement, and the percent Hispanic population.
   We take several steps to reduce selection bias that might be generated by the non-random
timing of SC activation. First, we exclude border areas and three states that actively resisted
SC implementation from our analysis since they might be unique in several ways related to both
immigration enforcement and program participation. Second, we include county interacted with
time to account for features of a county that may affect timing of activation. Third, in robustness
checks described below, we explicitly control for the percent of households that are Hispanic at
  33
    Goodman-Bacon (2018a) suggests an alternative balance test using novel weights when there are many timing
groups and the F-test is underpowered, conditions unlikely to hold in our context.


                                                     17
the county-year level using data from the ACS. Fourth, we review the related literature on SC
and official ICE documentation to identify the criteria that affected roll-out timing. Based on our
review of these documents, discussed in more detail in the Online Appendix, we identify four criteria
that likely affected when a particular county would activate: (1) estimated number of non-citizens,
(2) the distance from the Mexican border, (3) crime rates, and (4) prior county relationships with
ICE as proxied by the presence of a 287(g) agreement. We use these criteria and their high-level
interactions in a cross-section to predict activation year. Figure 3 presents maps that show the
timing of predicted SC activation across counties.
    In robustness checks, we explore the reduced form relationship between predicted activation
and safety net take-up, controlling for our preferred set of fixed effects and baseline controls. We
note that variation in predicted activation year is driven by high-level interactions between the four
criteria, generating plausibly exogenous timing of SC activation. We find nearly identical results
when we use predicted activation compared to actual activation (see Section VI).34

                                                C. Measurement

Measurement of Citizenship: A generic concern with research on immigration enforcement is that
enforcement could alter responses to survey questions regarding citizenship status. While falsely
answering a question on a required government survey is punishable by a fine of up to $10,000,
changes in reporting behavior could compromise our analysis if SC led to missing or misleading
survey responses. We show this is not a concern in practice for five reasons. First, based on a recent
paper from the Census which links administrative records (AR) on citizenship status from Social
Security files to the ACS using personal identification keys (Brown et al. 2018), Hispanics are actu-
ally less inclined than other groups to mis-represent citizenship on the ACS and our identification
relies on across-group comparisons. Moreover, the proportion of AR Hispanic non-citizens reported
as ACS citizens has been steady over the last decade.35
    Second, since most misrepresentation of citizenship occurs among foreign-born individuals who
have recently moved to the United States, Census researchers classify those who report being born
in the United States but missing citizenship status in the AR records as citizens. Thus, for our
main ACS sample, we adopt Brown et al.’s (2018) approach and classify individuals as citizens only
if they were born in the United States or are naturalized citizens who have been in the country
for at least a decade. Furthermore, because AR non-citizens are less likely to respond to the ACS
citizen question, we classify all individuals who fail to respond to the citizenship question as non-
citizens and exclude them from our sample.36 In our PSID sample (where citizenship is not asked),
we similarly classify individuals as citizens if they grew up in the United States or if their mother

   34
      In unreported results, we also follow a different, but related approach in Burgess and Pande (2005) and instrument
for actual activation using each of the four criteria listed above interacted with a linear time trend. While there is
not a strong first-stage relationship (F-statistic = 3.7) under this approach, we find qualitatively similar estimates.
   35
      See Appendix Table A8 Panels (A) to (C) in Brown et al. (2018).
   36
      Brown et al. (2018) find that 5% of AR Hispanic non-citizens skip the citizen question compared to 2% of AR
Hispanic citizens, a pattern that is consistent across other demographic groups.


                                                          18
and father were both born in the United States. This approach yields a conservative sample of
individuals who are most likely to be AR citizens.
    Third, we cross-validate our classification of naturalized citizens using state-year administrative
data from DHS. The correlation between our ACS count of naturalized citizens and the DHS count
is 0.94 (see Appendix Figure A6).37 Fourth, to directly address the concern that there are changes
in reporting of naturalization status and natality, we test and find no evidence that SC activation
affected the share of Hispanics who are U.S. citizens in the ACS (see Section VII). Fifth, we take
advantage of the panel nature of the PSID and rule out that Hispanic household heads changed
their responses to race and natality questions in the aftermath of SC.

    Measurement of Program Take-up: In addition to measurement error associated with reporting
of citizenship, individuals may be fearful of reporting safety net participation. Meyer, Mittag, and
Goerge (2018) emphasize that survey data often does not comport with administrative records
on program participation, with false negatives and positives both possible, though the former is
generally found to be much more important than the latter. Since our main specification relies
on the difference between Hispanic and white-headed households, under-reporting will bias our
estimates if it changes over time in relationship to SC for one particular group. A prominent
explanation for false negatives among Hispanic households is fear related to immigration concerns
(Brown 2015).
    In our context, fear could lead to measurement error in the outcome variable that is correlated
with the introduction of SC.38 To the extent the implementation of SC heightens deportation fear,
our estimates therefore capture both the actual reduction in safety net take-up as well as an increase
in false negatives. Although both effects are of interest, they have very different policy implications.
    To gauge whether under-reporting of take-up responds to SC, we follow the literature and
compare administrative SNAP data where available with survey estimates over time. We use ad-
ministrative SNAP data from a group of states that provide participation information disaggregated
by race and year (California, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Minnesota).39 Similar to other scholars,
we find that ACS estimates of food stamp take-up are generally lower than available official yearly
state-level estimates. Importantly, however, the gap between survey and administrative take-up
does not change post SC for Hispanics or other racial/ethnic groups (see Appendix Table A2).
We also find using our triple-differences specification that the gap between survey and administra-
tive data participation for Hispanics relative to non-Hispanic whites does not change significantly
post-SC (column 4 of Appendix Table A2). These findings suggest that SC had limited effects on
reporting of program participation.


    37
       In unreported results, we also find that the gap between our ACS and DHS counts does not change post SC-
activation.
    38
       Assuming reported participation is less than true participation (participation
                                                                              ^         = participation − f ear), then
           cov(SC,f ear)
β̂ = β − var(SC) where cov(SC, f ear) is likely positive.
    39
       Official disaggregated estimates of take-up of SSI by race/ethnicity are unavailable. See https://www.ssa.gov/
policy/docs/rsnotes/rsn2016-01.html.


                                                         19
                                                   VI. Results

Figure 4 presents our main event study estimates of SC activation on food stamp take-up (Panel
A) and SSI take-up (Panel B) for non-Hispanic whites, non-Hispanic blacks, and Hispanics using
the ACS data, as described in Equation 3. For both non-Hispanic whites and blacks, there is no
noticeable break in the relative flatness of take-up of either safety net program in the five years
pre- and four years post-SC activation. In sharp contrast, coefficients on the interaction of time
to SC and Hispanic are indistinguishable from zero in the years leading up to activation, but then
demonstrate a level shift post-activation, with Hispanic heads greatly decreasing their take up of
both food stamps and SSI over time. Specifically, by four years post-activation, Hispanic households
reduce take-up of food stamps by 5.6 percentage points relative to non-Hispanic whites, a 26 percent
decrease from the pre-period Hispanic mean of 21.8 percent. Similarly, by four years post-activation,
Hispanic households reduce their take-up of SSI by 3.8 percentage points relative to non-Hispanic
whites, a 72 percent decrease from the pre-period Hispanic mean of 5.3 percent. Similar event
studies comparing Hispanics to all non-Hispanics (both white and black) are shown in Figure 5.
    Table 2 presents our main results on safety net take-up in the ACS data. Columns 1 and 2
present results for food stamp take-up and columns 3 and 4 report results for SSI take-up. In
column 1, we find that after SC activation, Hispanic citizen heads of household reduce their take-up
of food stamps by 2.1 percentage points relative to non-Hispanics, a ten percent decrease from the
pre-period Hispanic mean. In column 2, we report the same specification as column 1 but add
an interaction between our black indicator and post-SC indicator. Our main results are virtually
unchanged and we also find a small and insignificant black coefficient post-SC, indicating that SC
did not similarly affect the behavior of minority groups less likely to be affected by immigration
enforcement. In column 3, we find that Hispanic citizen heads of household reduce their take-up
of SSI by 1.6 percentage points after SC activation relative to non-Hispanics, a 30 percent decrease
from the pre-period Hispanic mean. Again, these results remain stable with the inclusion of an
interaction between our black interacted with post-SC indicator, which is small and statistically
insignificant (column 4).
    Our main findings are also qualitatively similar using the PSID data, shown in Table 3. Column
1 and 2 present results for food stamp take-up and columns 3 and 4 present analogous results for
SSI take-up. In column 1, we find that after SC activation, Hispanic citizen households reduce
their take-up of food stamps by 13.8 percentage points relative to non-Hispanic whites, a 40 percent
decrease from the pre-period Hispanic mean of 34.1 percent. We also find reductions in Hispanic
citizen households’ take-up of SSI after SC activation relative to non-Hispanics. In our full sample,
Hispanic households reduce SSI take-up by 1.9 percentage points after SC (column 3), a 50 percent
decrease from the pre-period Hispanic mean of 4.0 percent. While the results for food stamps
and SSI fail to reach conventional levels of statistical significance in the PSID, likely due to the
small sample size, our PSID and ACS estimates are not statistically different from each other.40
   40
     There are several reasons why the magnitudes of our estimates differ slightly between the PSID and ACS samples.
First, after our sample restrictions, the PSID covers only 628 counties versus 2,759 in the ACS and differentially covers


                                                           20
In columns 2 and 4 of Table 3, we find evidence that these decreases in both food stamp and SSI
take-up are driven primarily by households that had previously taken up the benefits. We return to
these results on prior users in Section VII.B when we explore potential mechanisms explaining our
results. Notably, across all our specifications and samples in Table 2 and Table 3, we find evidence
not only of differential decreases in food stamp and SSI take-up for Hispanics, but absolute decreases
for Hispanic households following SC.
    Table 4 presents several robustness checks of our main results for both food stamp take-up
(Panel A) and SSI take-up (Panel B). Column 1 presents results excluding controls for race-by-state
changes in employment during the Great Recession. Column 2 controls for a full set of county-by-
year fixed effects with corresponding event studies shown in Appendix Figure A7. Column 3 presents
results using predicted activation year rather than actual activation year. Column 4 presents results
comparing Hispanics to all non-Hispanics (white and black). Column 5 presents results controlling
for pre-activation trends in program take-up following the approach in Freyaldenhoven, Hansen,
and Shapiro (forthcoming). Column 6 presents results on a sample of citizen household heads with
less than a college degree. Across all alternative specifications and samples, we continue to find
economically meaningful and statistically significant reductions in safety net take-up for Hispanic
households relative to non-Hispanics after SC activation.
    Additional robustness checks are presented in Appendix Table A3. In column 1, we estimate
our main results in the ACS on a sample of counties that matches the PSID in terms of pre-
period take-up rates for Hispanics, finding that our main ACS estimates from Table 2 are nearly
identical in magnitude to our PSID estimates from Table 3 in this matched sample. In column 2,
we consider the fact that food stamp participation may be decided by females within a household.
We find very similar results using a sample of citizen female heads of household or female spouses.
We also find similar results when we exclude citizen heads of households with mixed-status family
members (column 3). These results suggest that our main findings capture a true spillover effect of
deportation fear. In column 4, we find that our results are qualitatively similar to dropping New
York, Los Angeles, Miami, Houston, and Chicago from our sample, cities that have the highest
number of Hispanic immigrants.
    In column 5 of Appendix Table A3, we relax the assumption that Hispanics are only affected
by enforcement in their county by including a spatial lag in SC activation, weighting each county’s
enforcement with an exponential spatial weight matrix that places lower weight on farther locations.
Again, we find that our results are virtually identical with the inclusion of a spatial lag, suggesting
that Hispanic households are most responsive to enforcement within their own county.41 In col-
umn 6, we estimate our results at the PUMA rather than county level to address concerns about
measurement error associated with apportioning ACS PUMA-level attributes to the county level.

large states like California and Texas, whereas the ACS is nationally representative. Second, as discussed earlier,
the PSID specifically added a large wave of immigrant families to the survey in 1997 and thus likely over-samples
immigrant families relative to the ACS. Third, reported food stamp usage is much higher in the PSID versus ACS
sample. When we select an ACS sample that matches the PSID in pre-period mean take-up for Hispanics, we find
nearly identical magnitudes of our estimates (see column 1 of Appendix Table A3.)
   41
      The coefficient on the spatial lag is small and not statistically significant.


                                                        21
We find similar results when we assign the earliest SC activation date to each PUMA, providing
reassurance that our results are not driven by the process of PUMA to county apportionment.
    In column 7, we present results from our main specification where for treated counties that
activate in a particular year, we define control counties as those that activate more than two years
in the future, following Deshpande and Li (forthcoming).42 Finally, column 8 presents results for
a sample of citizen households where the head has some college or more, a sample that has much
lower participation in safety net programs and lower connectedness to non-citizens compared to our
preferred sample. We find that our estimates are much smaller in magnitude in this alternative
sample, suggesting that the effect of SC on program take-up is most concentrated among our fragile
connected sample.
    Finally, Appendix Table A4 explores alternative weighting schemes and alternative controls.
For example, our results are qualitatively similar when we do not use population weights (column
1), and coupled with the results from Appendix Table A3 column 4, suggest the findings are not
driven by a few populous counties. Our results are also robust to including one observation for
each family member in a citizen head household in the ACS, thus capturing the effect of SC at the
individual level rather than household level (column 2). Our results are also very similar controlling
for the share of a county that is Hispanic (column 3) and for the number of Hispanic non-citizens in
each county (column 4), addressing concerns that our results are driven by flows of program-eligible
Hispanics that are correlated with the timing of SC activation.


                                             VII. Mechanisms

In this section, we explore potential mechanisms for our results. We begin by examining the role
fear may have played before turning to other postulated mechanisms, including information and
compositional changes. We also consider the role of changes in reporting behavior.

                                                     A. Fear

SC increased the number of detainers issued and forcible removals from the interior, which may
have increased deportation fear. Indeed, Pew Research Center survey data demonstrate a positive
correlation between respondents knowing someone who was detained and being fearful of the same
fate befalling a family member or close contact (see Figure 6).43 This relationship has also been
  42
      As pointed out in several recent papers on staggered adoption difference-in-differences research designs (e.g.
de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfoeuille (2018) and Goodman-Bacon (2018a)) the two-way fixed effects estimator is
a weighted average of treatment effects, where some of the weights can be negative. Negative weights occur in
situations when the treatment effect is heterogeneous over time. de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfoeuille (2018) develop
an estimator which is valid under these conditions: the Wald-TC, which is the LATE for the switchers (i.e. entities
that change treatment status, compared to the yet to be treated) and provide a Stata command for this estimator in
de Chaisemartin et al. (forthcoming). This approach is similar in spirit to that of Deshpande and Li (forthcoming).
We compute the Wald-TC for both safety net outcomes (e.g. SNAP and SSI) across each demographic group. The
Wald-TC is consistently negative and near to our triple difference estimates for the Hispanic sample. It is generally
near zero for the non-Hispanic black and white samples with the exception of SSI among African-Americans.
   43
      Pew asked the following question in 2010 and 2013: “Regardless of your own immigration or citizenship status,
how much, if at all, do you worry that you, a family member, or a close friend could be deported? Would you say


                                                         22
described in anecdotal evidence with regards to SC activation, as detailed in the 2011 Task Force
Review on Secure Communities (HSAC Task Force 2011).
    To formally explore whether fear may be contributing to the findings reported above, we present
six analyses. First, we use the Google Trends data on deportation-related search terms in English
and Spanish available at the DMA media market level to test whether such searches increase in the
years post-SC activation. We condition on year fixed effects, log neutral searches (such as popular
Hispanic actors/musicians/politicians), and DMA media market fixed effects, clustering standard
errors at the DMA media market level. We find no discernible pre-trend, but a sharp 25 percent
increase in normalized deportation-related searches immediately following SC activation (see Figure
7), consistent with at least an awareness of the SC program if not fear of its potential consequences.44
    Second, immigration enforcement activity directed against those who have committed minor
offenses has also been argued to heighten fear and impede participation in government-associated
activities, as SC led to substantial increases in deportations for individuals arrested for misde-
meanors such as public drunkenness or jaywalking (HSAC Task Force 2011). Our second analysis,
reported in columns 1 and 5 of Table 5, finds that the effect of SC on both food stamp and SSI take-
up is larger in counties where there is a higher proportion of non-violent detainers (often issued for
misdemeanor offenses) to all violent (often issued for assault or murder) plus non-violent detainers.
In counties where that proportion is one (corresponding to the 90th percentile of the distribution),
Hispanic households reduce their take-up of food stamps and SSI by an additional 0.06 and 0.03
percentage points, respectively.
    Third, using the Pew data, we test whether reductions in program participation are higher in
areas with increasing deportation fear measured at the Census division level (the finest geography
available in 2013). We find that a one standard deviation increase in fear is associated with an
additional 1.7 percentage point decline in food stamp take-up (column 2) and a 0.9 percentage
point decline in SSI take-up among Hispanics after SC activation (column 6).
    Fourth, we explore the role of sanctuary cities and counties. As described previously, sanctuary
cities share in common their restrictions on how much local governments cooperate with ICE requests
to detain immigrants. If fear explains our findings, then Hispanic households in sanctuary cities
should have less fear and thus exhibit a lower response to SC. In columns 3 and 7, we interact
our Hispanic and post-SC indicator with an indicator for an active sanctuary city policy during
the period of SC activation. We find that almost all of our main effects for food stamp take-up
are driven by locations with no sanctuary policy. Specifically, we find a significant and positive
effect of SC activation on Hispanics in sanctuary cities relative to non-sanctuary cities, such that


that you worry a lot, some, not much, or not at all?” From this question, we define individuals who respond that
they worry a lot or some as being “fearful” and limit the sample to Hispanic citizen respondents so as to more nearly
approximate spillover effects. We also limit the sample to states with at least five respondents. In 2010, Pew also
asked a specific question on knowledge of detention/deportation: “Do you personally know someone who has been
deported or detained by the federal government for immigration reasons in the last 12 months?” We use the 2010
data in Figure 6.
   44
      In unreported results, we find qualitatively similar estimates on program take-up if we estimate our results at
the DMA media market level instead of the county level.


                                                         23
SC activation has a net null effect on Hispanics in sanctuary jurisdictions.45 Appendix Figure A8
presents corresponding event study estimates of the differential effect of SC activation on program
take-up in sanctuary versus non-sanctuary jurisdictions.
    Fifth, we explore the idea that if fear is an explanatory factor, counties with a higher share of
Hispanics that face zero to minimal deportation risk should be less responsive to SC activation. In
particular, we measure the share of Hispanics in a county that are Puerto Rican or Cuban, given
that Puerto Ricans have citizenship status and thus cannot be deported, and Cubans are more
likely to have political refugee status and thus face a lower risk of deportation. In columns 4 and
8, we find that Hispanics in counties with a ten percent higher share of Puerto Ricans and Cubans
experience significantly smaller reductions in both food stamp (0.3 percentage points) and SSI (0.4
percentage points) take-up.
    Sixth, and finally, we explore the hypothesis that households and communities with more mixing
or exposure between non-citizen and citizen Hispanics should be more influenced by SC activation,
as suggested by our model and qualitative findings. Exposure to non-citizens is highly relevant
for Hispanic communities because Hispanics live in ethnically homogeneous neighborhoods, with
Hispanic segregation generally increasing over the past decade.46
    In Figure 8, we present a series of results on take-up based on the “intensity” of treatment.
Compared to our main coefficient in our preferred specification, reductions in take-up are relatively
larger in counties with a higher share of Hispanic households that are mixed-status. Specifically,
Hispanic households from counties with a ten percent higher share of mixed-status households
decrease take-up of food stamps and SSI by an additional 0.1 and 0.3 percentage points after SC
activation, respectively. Take-up is further dampened in counties with a higher share of Hispanics
that are non-citizens. Hispanic households from counties with a ten percent higher share of Hispanics
who are non-citizens decrease take-up of food stamps by an additional 0.5 percentage points and
decrease take-up of SSI by an additional 0.5 percentage points post-SC.
    Finally, we use share mixed at the household level interacted with share non-citizen at the
county level as a measure of exposure to relevant information. The higher the share non-citizen in
a county, the easier information could spread regarding the heightened risk of deportation under
SC (see Figure 6). The greater the share of mixed-status households in the area, the more salient
that information is for take-up decisions. This “exposure index” thus captures the probability that
a mixed-status household is randomly exposed to a Hispanic non-citizen in a county. A ten percent
increase in the exposure index decreases food stamps by an additional 1.1 percentage points and
SSI by an additional 0.9 percentage points after the activation of SC.
    Taken together, these six findings suggest that fear of deportation is a likely explanatory mech-
anism.47
  45
      See the Online Appendix for institutional details of sanctuary cities.
  46
      See https://www.brookings.edu/opinions/census-data-blacks-and-hispanics-take-different-segregation-paths/.
Mixed-status families are also much more common among Hispanic households relative to other groups. In the
ACS data, we find that 18 percent of Hispanics households have at least one non-citizen Hispanic, compared to 0.20
percent of white households and 0.04 percent of black households.
   47
      A related explanation is the role of legitimacy, or the theory that individuals cooperate or engage with legal


                                                        24
                                               B. Information

We next consider an alternative mechanism – the role of information. Information sharing might
explain our findings to the extent that individuals rely on other people from their networks about
information on public programs, with prior work suggesting that take-up of food stamps and other
programs increases with greater information on eligibility and outreach (see Daponte et al. 1999 and
Aizer 2003). In particular, information might be salient for immigrant communities to the extent
that there is greater confusion or uncertainty about eligibility.
    In our context, greater immigration enforcement may reduce take-up of public programs among
citizen Hispanic households if they lose access to information as non-citizen co-ethnics in their net-
works reduce take-up. We partially test this hypothesis by comparing our estimated effects for
Hispanic households that had never previously taken up the relevant public program prior to SC
versus Hispanic households that previously took up the program following Aizer and Currie (2004).
If a household has previously taken up the program, the household will likely already have infor-
mation about the program, such as eligibility and how to apply. As a result, if information explains
our findings, we would expect to find smaller effects of SC activation for prior use households.
    Columns 2 and 4 of Table 3 presents these results in the PSID sample where we limit the sample
exclusively to all individuals in households that have taken up food stamps or SSI prior to SC
activation, respectively. In our PSID sample, 52 percent of Hispanic households are prior users of
food stamps before SC activation and on average, prior users take up food stamps 73 percent of the
time before SC activation. In the PSID, 8 percent of Hispanic households are prior users of SSI and
take up SSI 49 percent of the time on average before SC activation. We find that the decline in both
food stamp and SSI take-up post SC is largely driven by Hispanic heads that have previously taken
up these safety net programs. Among prior users, SC activation reduced Hispanic heads of household
take-up of food stamps by 49.6 percentage points and take-up of SSI by 112.9 percentage points
relative to non-Hispanics. These results suggest that our main findings are unlikely due to Hispanic
households being less likely to receive information about public programs as their co-ethnics reduce
sign up. This finding, combined with qualitative evidence suggesting that Hispanic families are not
renewing benefits, also lessens the likelihood that an explanation like stigma is driving our results.

                                       C. Compositional Changes

We also consider the possibility that SC activation may have affected the number or types of
Hispanic citizens and households living within a particular county or within the United States, or
more subtly, the number or types willing to declare their ethnicity or report program take-up in
surveys like the ACS. This line of query is important since the Great Recession affected migration,
in general reducing it (Johnson et al. 2016), although immigrants were more sensitive to local
authorities based on their perception of how fairly these authorities deal with members of the public (Tyler 2006).
Under this theory, SC may have reduced program participation because it corroded the perceived legitimacy of
the federal government in the eyes of Hispanic citizens. However, we find larger effects of SC in areas with more
mixed-status households and smaller effects in areas with greater shares of Cubans and Puerto Ricans as described
previously, findings that are hard to reconcile with a general theory of legitimacy.


                                                        25
economic downturns (Cadena and Kovak 2016). While we note that these responses may also be
driven by fear, compositional changes in Hispanic survey respondents within a particular county or
changes in reporting behavior may lead to a different interpretation of our main findings.
    To test this channel, Table 6 presents our main specification in the ACS, where the depen-
dent variables are average race-specific observable characteristics of citizens/households in each
county-year, race-specific household weights in each county-year from the ACS, and the percent
mixed-status and U.S.-born citizen among Hispanics in each county-year. We find no significant
relationship between SC activation and compositional changes in the types of Hispanics relative to
non-Hispanics in each county-year in terms of number of children, poverty level, or employment
rate (columns 1–3).48 We also find no evidence of differential migration of Hispanics, measured by
the share that report moving between states in the past year (column 4) or evidence that house-
hold weights from the ACS change differentially for Hispanics relative to other groups after SC
activation (column 5). Finally, we find no statistically significant change in the percent of Hispanic
mixed-status families or share citizen within a county post-SC activation (columns 6–7).
    As another test of whether compositional changes could explain our findings, we predict both
food stamp and SSI take-up using our race-specific observable characteristics of citizens/households
in each county-year. We then estimate our main specification using predicted take-up as our de-
pendent variable. Appendix Figure A9 presents these results and shows no evidence of significant
changes or trend breaks in predicted take-up for Hispanics relative to non-Hispanic whites post-SC
activation, in sharp contrast to our main event studies in Figure 4.


                                              VIII. Conclusion

In this study, we test the hypothesis that linkages between citizens and non-citizens reduce safety
net participation in the presence of enhanced immigration enforcement activity. Leveraging the
roll-out of Secure Communities under the Obama administration, we find that citizen Hispanic
Americans are indeed sensitive to such enforcement although they themselves are not at risk of
removal – a spillover effect. In particular, we find significant reductions in food stamp and SSI take-
up among Hispanic households. We find evidence that our results may be driven by deportation fear
rather than lack of benefit information, measurement error, or stigma. Hispanic citizens residing
in areas with a higher degree of connectedness with non-citizens, areas with a higher incidence of
detainers issued for low-level arrests, and areas with greater increases in deportation fear exhibit
larger decreases in take-up in response to SC. In contrast, Hispanic households residing in sanctuary
cities and areas with a higher share of Puerto Ricans and Cubans exhibited more muted responses
to SC activation.
    These findings are particularly relevant given recent immigration policies. For one, the reacti-
vation of SC in 2017 has substantially increased deportations relative to prior years. In contrast

   48
      Using a differences-in-differences approach, East et al. (2018) find that SC reduced the employment rate of all
citizens by 0.5 percent. Our triple-differences approach compares the differential change for Hispanic citizens relative
to other groups.


                                                          26
to the operation of SC under the Obama administration, a larger share of deportations under the
Trump administration result from arrests for misdemeanor and petty offenses, which may enhance
deportation fear. Second, recently proposed changes to the “public charge” determination, a desig-
nation that can prevent a non-citizen from adjusting their immigration status to legal permanent
resident, could further intensify the spillover effects of fear. In 2018, DHS proposed to substantially
expand the definition of a public charge to include any immigrant who “uses or receives one or
more public benefits,” including both SSI and food stamps (previously exempt from public-charge
determination). Moreover, the new proposal contemplates that use of these programs by U.S.-born
citizen spouses and children could also count towards non-citizens’ use of public assistance, with
some estimates suggesting that up to one third of U.S.-born citizens could have their use of public
benefits considered in the public-charge determination of a family member (Perreira et al. 2018).
Our results suggest that these policy changes could lead to further decreases in sign-up of safety net
programs as Hispanic citizens may fear that their participation could jeopardize the chances that a
family member obtains legal permanent residency.
   Ultimately, our results have several implications on health and well-being for Hispanic house-
holds. A back-of-the-envelope calculation based on number of recipients and average benefit size
suggests that as a result of SC, Hispanic households forgo over $212 million and $77 million in food
stamp and SSI benefits per year, respectively. Extrapolating from the work of other scholars, fam-
ilies could experience adverse long-run consequences from forgoing benefits in response to stricter
immigration enforcement. For example, Hoynes, Schanzenbach, and Almond (2016) show that food
stamp take-up reduces the incidence of metabolic syndrome in adulthood, and Tiehen et al. (2012)
find that food stamp participation reduced the child poverty rate by 5.6 percent from 2000 to 2009.
Bronchetti et al. (2018) find that higher food stamp purchasing power increases the utilization of
preventive medical care for children and reduces days of school missed due to illness. Similarly,
Duggan and Kearney (2007) find that child participation in SSI is linked with long-term reductions
in child poverty and Deshpande (2016) finds that removing disabled youth from SSI leads to a
large decrease in observed lifetime income and exposes youth to greater income volatility. Schmidt,
Shore-Sheppard, and Watson (2016) find that SSI program participation leads to a reduction in
family food insecurity. These results suggest that reductions in food stamp and SSI usage among
Hispanics in response to immigration enforcement could have long-run consequences for health and
economic security. Most broadly, our results reveal how the dual role of federal authority as both en-
forcer and benefactor influences the take-up decisions of vulnerable households, yielding potentially
unexpected results for families.




                                                  27
                                          References

 [1] Aizer, Anna. 2003. “Low Take-Up in Medicaid: Does Outreach Matter and for Whom?” Amer-
        ican Economic Review, 93(2): 238–241.
 [2] Aizer, Anna, and Janet Currie. 2004. “Networks or Neighborhoods? Correlations in the Use
        of Publicly-Funded Maternity Care in California.” Journal of Public Economics, 88(12):
        2573–2585.
 [3] Aizer, Anna. 2007. “Public Health Insurance, Program Take-Up, and Child Health.” Review of
        Economics and Statistics, 89(3): 400–415.
 [4] Aizer, Anna, Shari Eli, Joseph Ferrie, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2016. “The Long-Run Impact
        of Cash Transfers to Poor Families.” American Economic Review, 106(4): 935–971.
 [5] Almada, Lorenzo N., and Rusty Tchernis. 2018. “Measuring Effects of SNAP on Obesity at the
        Intensive Margin.” Economics and Human Biology, 31: 150–63.
 [6] Almond, Douglas, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2011. “Inside the
        War on Poverty: The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes.” Review of Economics
        and Statistics, 93(2): 387–403.
 [7] Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina, Esther Arenas-Arroyo, and Almudena Sevilla. 2018. “Immigra-
       tion Enforcement and Economic Resources of Children with Likely Unauthorized Parents.”
       Journal of Public Economics, 158: 63–78.
 [8] Antonovics, Kate, and Brian Knight. 2009. “A New Look at Racial Profiling: Evidence from
        the Boston Police Department.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1): 163–177.
 [9] Anwar, Shamena, and Hanming Fang. 2006. “An Alternative Test of Racial Bias in Motor
       Vehicle Searches: Theory and Evidence.” American Economic Review, 96(1): 127–151.
[10] Asad, Asad L., and Matthew Clair. 2018. “Racialized Legal Status as a Social Determinant of
        Health.” Social Science and Medicine, 199: 19–28.
[11] Ashenfelter, Orley. 1983. “Determining Participation in Income-Tested Social Programs.” Jour-
        nal of the American Statistical Association, 78(383): 517–525.
[12] Bean, Frank, Susan Brown, and James Bachmeier. 2015. Parents Without Papers: The Progress
        and Pitfalls of Mexican American Integration. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
[13] Becker, Gary S., and Yona Rubinstein. 2011. “Fear and the Response to Terrorism: An Eco-
        nomic Analysis.” CEP Discussion Paper, 1079.
[14] Bertrand, Marianne, Erzo F. P. Luttmer, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2000. “Network Effects
        and Welfare Cultures.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3): 1019–1055.
[15] Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate. 1992. “Understanding Welfare Stigma: Taxpayer Resent-
        ment and Statistical Discrimination.” Journal of Public Economics, 48(2): 165–183.
[16] Bhargava, Saurabh, and Dayanand Manoli. 2015. “Psychological Frictions and the Incomplete
       Take-Up of Social Benefits: Evidence from an IRS Field Experiment.” American Economic
       Review, 105(11): 3489–3529.
[17] Bitler, Marianne, and Hilary Hoynes. 2015. “Heterogeneity in the Impact of Economic Cycles
        and the Great Recession: Effects within and across the Income Distribution.” American
        Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 105 (5): 154–160.




                                               28
[18] Bohn, Sarah, Magnus Lofstrom, and Steven Raphael. 2014. “Did the 2007 Legal Arizona Work-
        ers Act Reduce the State’s Unauthorized Immigrant Population?” Review of Economics
        and Statistics, 96(2): 258–269.
[19] Borjas, George J. 1992. “Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility.” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 107(1): 409–439.
[20] Borjas, George J., and Lynette Hilton. 1996. “Immigration and the Welfare State: Immigrant
        Participation in Means-Tested Entitlement Programs.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        111(2): 575–604.
[21] Borjas, George J. 2017. “The Labor Supply of Undocumented Immigrants.” Labour Economics,
        46:1-13.
[22] Bronchetti, Erin T., Garret Christensen, and Hilary W. Hoynes. 2018. “Local Food Prices,
        SNAP Purchasing Power, and Child Health.” NBER Working Paper, 24762.
[23] Brown, Anna. 2015. “The Unique Challenges of Surveying U.S. Latinos.” Washington, D.C.:
        Pew Research Center.
[24] Brown, J. David, Misty L. Heggeness, Suzanne M. Dorinski, and Lawrence Warren. 2018.
        “Understanding the Quality of Alternative Citizenship Data Sources for the 2020 Census.”
        CES Research Paper, 18-38.
[25] Browning, Martin, Pierre-André Chiappori, and Valérie Lechene. 2006. “Collective and Unitary
        Models: A Clarification.” Review of Economics of the Household, 4(1): 5–14.
[26] Burchardi, Konrad B., Thomas Chaney, and Tarek A. Hassan. 2018. “Migrants, Ancestors, and
        Foreign Investments.” Review of Economic Studies, 0: 1–39.
[27] Burgess, Robin, and Rohini Pande. 2005. “Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from the Indian
        Social Banking Experiment.” American Economic Review, 95(3): 780–795.
[28] Cadena, Brian C., and Brian K. Kovak. 2016. “Immigrants Equilibrate Local Labor Markets:
        Evidence from the Great Recession.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
        8(1): 257–290.
[29] Cascio, Elizabeth U., and Ethan G. Lewis. 2019. “Distributing the Green (Cards): Permanent
        Residency and Personal Income Taxes after the Immigration Reform and Control Act of
        1986.” Journal of Public Economics 172: 135–150.
[30] Coleman-Jensen, Alisha, Christian A. Gregory, and Anita Singh. 2014. “Household Food Se-
        curity in the United States in 2013.” United States Department of Agriculture, Economic
        Research Report Number 173.
[31] Congressional Budget Office. 2012. “The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.”
        https://www.cbo.gov/publication/43173. Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office.
[32] Cox, Donald, and Marcel Fafchamps. 2008. “Extended Family and Kinship Networks: Economic
        Insights and Evolutionary Directions.” Handbook of Development Economics, Volume 4.
[33] Cox, Adam B., and Thomas J. Miles. 2013. “Policing Immigration.” University of Chicago Law
        Review, 80(87): 87–136.
[34] Cox, Adam B., and Thomas J. Miles. 2014. “Does Immigration Enforcement Reduce Crime?
        Evidence from ‘Secure Communities’.” Journal of Law and Economics, 57(4): 937–973.
[35] Dahl, Gordon B., Andreas Ravndal Kostøl, and Magne Mogstad. 2014. “Family Welfare Cul-
       tures.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1711–1752.


                                               29
[36] Cruz Nichols, Vanessa, Alana M. W. LeBrón, and Francisco I. Pedraza. 2018. “Spillover Effects:
        Immigrant Policing and Government Skepticism in Matters of Health for Latinos.” Public
        Administration Review, 78(3): 432–443.
[37] Currie, Janet. 2006. “The Take-Up of Social Benefits.” In Alan J. Auerbach, David Card, and
        John M. Quigley, eds., Public Policy and the Income Distribution, New York: Russell Sage
        Foundation: 80–148.
[38] Daponte, Beth O., Seth Sanders, and Lowell Taylor. 1999. “Why Do Low-Income Households
       Not Use Food Stamps? Evidence from an Experiment.” Journal of Human Resources, 34(3):
       612–628.
[39] de Chaisemartin, Clement, and Xavier D’Haultfoeuille. 2018. “Two Way Fixed Effects Estima-
        tors With Heterogeneous Treatment Effects.” Working Paper.
[40] de Chaisemartin, Clement, Xavier D’Haultfoeuille, and Yannick Guyonvarch. forthcoming.
        “Fuzzy Differences-in-Differences in Stata.” Stata Journal.
[41] Daly, Mary, and Richard V. Burkhauser. 2003. “The Supplemental Security Income Program.”
        In The Making of the American Essay, edited by Robert A. Moffitt, 79–139. Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press.
[42] Deshpande, Manasi. 2016. “Does Welfare Inhibit Success? The Long-Term Effects of Removing
        Low-Income Youth from the Disability Rolls.” American Economic Review, 106(11): 3300–
        3330.
[43] Deshpande, Manasi, and Yue Li. forthcoming. “Who Is Screened Out? Application Costs and
        the Targeting of Disability Programs.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
[44] di Falco, Salvatore, and Erwin Bulte. 2011. “A Dark Side of Social Capital? Kinship, Con-
        sumption, and Savings.” Journal of Development Studies, 47(8): 1128–1151.
[45] Duggan, Mark, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2007. “The Impact of Child SSI Enrollment on House-
       hold Outcomes.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 26(4): 861–885.
[46] Duggan, Mark, Melissa S. Kearney, and Stephanie Rennane. 2016. “The Supplemental Security
       Income (SSI) Program.” In Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United
       States, Volume 2, Robert Moffitt, eds. 1–58. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
[47] East, Chloe. 2018. “The Effect of Food Stamps on Children’s Health: Evidence from Immi-
        grants’ Changing Eligibility.” Journal of Human Resources.
[48] East, Chloe, Philip Luck, Hani Mansour, and Andrea Velasquez. 2018. “The Labor Market
        Effects of Immigration Enforcement.” IZA Discussion Paper, 11486.
[49] Flores-Lagunes, Alfonso, Hugo B. Jales, Judith Liu, and Norbert L. Wilson. 2018. “The Differ-
        ential Incidence and Severity of Food Insecurity by Racial, Ethnic, and Immigrant Groups
        over the Great Recession in the United States.” American Economic Association Papers
        and Proceedings, 108: 379–383.
[50] Freyaldenhoven, Simon, Christian Hansen, and Jesse M. Shapiro. forthcoming. “Pre-Event
        Trends in the Panel Event-Study Design.” American Economic Review.
[51] Ganong, Peter, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2018. “The Decline, Rebound, and Further Rise in
       SNAP Enrollment: Disentangling Business Cycle Fluctuations and Policy Changes.” Amer-
       ican Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(4): 153–76.
[52] Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2018a. “Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment Tim-
       ing.” NBER Working Paper, 25018.

                                                30
[53] Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2018b. “Public Insurance and Mortality: Evidence from Medicaid
       Implementation.” Journal of Political Economy, 126(1): 216–262.
[54] Hacker, Karen, Jocelyn Chu, Carolyn Leung, Robert Marra, Alex Pirie, Mohamed Brahimi,
        Margaret English, Joshua Beckmann, Dolores Acevedo-Garcia, and Robert P. Marlin. 2011.
        “The Impact of Immigration and Customs Enforcement on Immigrant Health: Perceptions
        of Immigrants in Everett, Massachusetts, USA.” Social Science and Medicine, 73(4): 586–
        594.
[55] Homeland Security Advisory Council Task Force. 2011. “Task Force on Se-
       cure    Communities     Findings    and     Recommendations.”      September  2011.
       https://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/hsac-task-force-on-secure-communities.pdf
[56] Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond. 2016. “Long-Run Im-
        pacts of Childhood Access to the Safety Net.” American Economic Review, 106(4): 903–934.
[57] Johnson, Kenneth M., Katherine J. Curtis, and David Egan-Robertson. 2016. “How the Great
        Recession Changed U.S. Migration Patterns.” Population Trends in Post-Recession Rural
        American, Brief No. 01-16.
[58] Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2016. “Get-
        ting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving.” Management Science, 62(12):
        3393–3411.
[59] Kochhar, Rakesh, Richard Fry, and Paul Taylor. 2011. “Wealth Gaps Rise to Record
        Highs between Whites, Blacks and Hispanics.” Pew Research Center Report,
        http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2011/07/26/wealth-gaps-rise-to-record-highs-between-
        whites-blacks-hispanics/.
[60] Lauffer, Sarah. 2017. “Characteristics of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program House-
        holds: Fiscal Year 2016.” Washington, DC: United States Department of Agriculture, Food
        and Nutrition Service.
[61] Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F. Shea. 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
       Participation and Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4): 1149–1187.
[62] McCrary, Justin. 2007. “The Effect of Court-Ordered Hiring Quotas on the Composition and
       Quality of Police.” American Economic Review, 97(1): 318–353.
[63] McKernan, Signe-Mary, Caroline Ratcliffe, C. Eugene Steuerle, and Sisi Zhang. 2014. “Impact
       of the Great Recession and Beyond: Disparities in Wealth Building by Generation and
       Race.” Urban Institute Report, https://www.urban.org/research/publication/impact-great-
       recession-and-beyond.
[64] Meyer, Bruce D., Nikolas Mittag, and Robert M. Goerge. 2018. “Errors in Survey Reporting
       and Imputation and their Effects on Estimates of Food Stamp Program Participation.”
       NBER Working Paper, 25143.
[65] Moffitt, Robert. 1983. “An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma.” American Economic Review,
       73(5): 1023–1035.
[66] Morin, Rich, Paul Taylor, and Eileen Patten. 2012. “A Bipartisan Nation of Beneficiaries.”
       Pew Research Center Report. http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2012/12/18/a-bipartisan-
       nation-of-beneficiaries/.
[67] Nord, Mark, Margaret Andrews, and Steven Carlson. 2006. “Household Food Security in the
        United States, 2005.” Economic Research Report Number 29. Washington, DC: United
        States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.

                                              31
[68] O’Hare, William P. 2018. “Citizenship Question Nonresponse: A Demographic Profile of People
        Who Do Not Answer the American Community Survey Citizenship Question.” Georgetown
        Law Center on Poverty and Inequality Report.
[69] Panel Study of Income Dynamics. 2000. “Information on the PSID Immigrant Sample Addition
        of 1997/1999.” Technical Series Paper 00-04.
[70] Panel Study of Income Dynamics, public use dataset and restricted use data, county level
        identifiers. Produced and distributed by the Survey Research Center, Institute for Social
        Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 2017.
[71] Passel, Jeffrey S., and D’vera Cohn. 2018. “U.S. Unauthorized Immigrant Total Dips to Lowest
        Level in a Decade.” http://www.pewhispanic.org/2018/11/27/u-s-unauthorized-immigrant-
        total-dips-to-lowest-level-in-a-decade/. Washington D.C.: Pew Research Center.
[72] Pedraza, Francisco I., and Ling Zhu. 2014. “Immigration Enforcement and the Chilling Effect
        on Latino Medicaid Enrollment.” Working Paper.
[73] Pedraza, Francisco I., and Maricruz Ariana Osorio. 2017. “Courted and Deported: The Salience
        of Immigration Issues and Avoidance of Police, Health Care, and Education Services among
        Latinos.” Aztlán: A Journal of Chicano Studies, 42(2): 247–264.
[74] Perreira, Krista M., Hirokazu Yoshikawa, and Jonathan Oberlander. 2018. “A New Threat to
        Immigrants’ Health – The Public-Charge Rule.” The New England Journal of Medicine,
        379: 901–903.
[75] Rubin, Donald B. 1974. “Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized and Nonran-
       domized Studies.” Educational Psychology, 66(5): 688–701.
[76] Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas and
       Matthew Sobek. 2019. IPUMS USA: Version 9.0 [2006–2016]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS
       2019.
[77] Sampson, Robert J., and Janet L. Lauritsen. 1997. “Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Crime
        and Criminal Justice in the United States.” Crime and Justice, 21: 311–374.
[78] Schmidt, Lucie, Lara Shore-Sheppard, and Tara Watson. 2016. “The Effect of Safety-Net Pro-
        grams on Food Insecurity.” Journal of Human Resources, 51(3): 589–614.
[79] Short, Kathleen. 2014. “The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2013.” Current Popula-
        tion Reports P60-251. US Census Bureau.
[80] Slemrod, Joel. 1990. “Fear of Nuclear War and Intercountry Differences in the Rate of Saving.”
        Economic Inquiry, 28(4): 647–657.
[81] Solon, Gary, Steven J. Haider, and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. 2015. “What Are We Weighting
        For?” Journal of Human Resources, 50(2): 301–316.
[82] Tiehen, Laura, Dean Jolliffe, and Craig Gundersen. 2012. “Alleviating Poverty in the United
        States: The Critical Role of SNAP Benefits.” Economic Research Report 132. Washington,
        DC: United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
[83] TRACFED 2016. “TRACFED: A Unique Source of Authoritative Information about the Fed-
       eral Government’s Enforcement Activity.” Syracuse, N.Y.: Transactional Records Access
       Clearinghouse, Syracuse University.
[84] Tyler, Tom. 2006. Why People Obey the Law. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.



                                                32
[85] United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement. 2011. “Secure Communities: Quarterly
        Report Fiscal Year 2010 Report to Congress, Fourth Quarter.” Washington D.C.: United
        States Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
[86] United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement. 2015. “ICE’s Use of IDENT/IAFIS
        Interoperability. Monthly Statistics through February 28, 2015.” Washington D.C.: United
        States Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
[87] United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement. 2017. “Declined Detainer Outcome
        Report.” https://www.ice.gov/doclib/ddor/ddor2017_02-04to02-10.pdf Washington D.C.:
        United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
[88] United States Social Security Administration. 2013. “SSI Annual Statistical Report, 2012.”
        Washington D.C.: United States Social Security Administration.
[89] Vargas, Edward D., and Maureen A. Pirog. 2016. “Mixed-Status Families and WIC Uptake: The
        Effects of Risk of Deportation on Program Use.” Social Science Quarterly, 97(3): 555–572.
[90] Vargas, Edward D., and Vickie D. Ybarra. 2017. “U.S. Citizen Children of Undocumented
        Parents: The Link between State Immigration Policy and the Health of Latino Children.”
        Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health, 19(4): 913–920.
[91] Watson, Tara. 2014. “Inside the Refrigerator: Immigration Enforcement and Chilling in Immi-
       grant Medicaid Participation.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6: 313–338.
[92] Wolkwitz, Kari. 2007. “Characteristics of Food Stamp Households: Fiscal Year 2006.” Report
       No. FSP-07-CHAR. Washington, DC: United States Department of Agriculture, Food and
       Nutrition Service.
[93] Yoshikawa, Hirokazu. 2011. Immigrants Raising Citizens: Undocumented Parents and Their
        Young Children. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.




                                               33
                                         Table 1: Balance Table
                                     ACS Citizens Sample (2006–2008)
                                                              F-Statistic   p-value
                                                                 (1)          (2)
                                 Outcome
                                 Log Poverty                    2.141        0.073
                                 # Children                     0.932        0.444
                                 Share Employed                 1.104        0.399
                                 Share Citizen                  2.980        0.018
                                 Share Food Stamp               1.715        0.144
                                 Share SSI                      2.415        0.047

                                 ∆   Log Poverty                0.668        0.615
                                 ∆   # Children                 2.477        0.043
                                 ∆   Share Employed             1.599        0.172
                                 ∆   Share Citizen              2.326        0.055
                                 ∆   Share Food Stamp           1.505        0.198
                                 ∆   Share SSI                  1.508        0.197
Note: Data from ACS 2006–2008. The data are limited to heads of households with less than a high school degree
that are U.S. citizens, defined as individuals born in the United States or those who are naturalized and have lived
in the United States for at least a decade. This table presents results from a regression of the mean Hispanic-white
difference for each outcome variable on fixed effects for each activation year group. All regressions control for state
fixed effects, log crime, and the mean black-white difference in the outcome variable. Columns 1 and 2 present F-
statistics and p-values from an F-test of the joint significance of the activation year group fixed effects. Observations
in the ACS are weighted by the population in each county. Robust standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                         34
                Table 2: Triple Differences Estimation – Food Stamp and SSI Take-Up
                                         ACS Citizens Sample
                           Outcome                Share Food Stamp                  Share SSI
                                                   (1)         (2)              (3)           (4)
                  Hispanic × Post                −0.021∗∗∗ −0.022∗∗          −0.016∗∗∗     −0.017∗∗∗
                                                 (0.008)     (0.009)          (0.006)       (0.006)
                  Post                            0.005       0.005            0.006∗∗       0.007∗∗
                                                 (0.004)     (0.004)          (0.003)       (0.003)
                  Black × Post                              −0.003                         −0.005
                                                            (0.009)                        (0.006)

                  Pre-Period Hisp. Mean            0.218       0.218      0.053        0.053
                  Fixed Effects                  State-Yr, State-Race, Race-Yr, County-Morton
                  Baseline Controls                 Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
                  Observations                    80,977      80,977      80,977      80,977
                  Number Clusters                  2,759       2,759      2,759        2,759
Note: Data from ACS 2006–2016. The data are limited to heads of households with less than a high school degree
that are U.S. citizens, defined as individuals born in the United States or those who are naturalized and have lived in
the United States for at least a decade. Baseline controls in the ACS include log poverty, number of children, share
employed, share citizen, and FBI log crime interacted with race. All regressions control for county-by-Morton memo
fixed effects, state-by-year fixed effects, state-by-race fixed effects, race-by-year fixed effects, and race-by-state changes
in employment during the Great Recession. Observations in the ACS are weighted by the race-specific population in
each county. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1
percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                           35
               Table 3: Triple Differences Estimation – Food Stamp and SSI Take-Up
                                        PSID Citizens Sample
                        Outcome                 Share Food Stamp           Share SSI
                        Sample                  All      Prior User    All      Prior User
                                                 (1)         (2)       (3)          (4)
                Hispanic × Post               −0.138      −0.496∗∗∗ −0.019        −1.129∗∗
                                              (0.112)      (0.206)   (0.078)       (0.525)
                Post                           0.060        0.058     0.064         0.029
                                              (0.054)      (0.096)   (0.049)       (0.164)

                Pre-Period Hisp. Mean           0.341         0.728      0.040        0.493
                Fixed Effects                  State-Yr, State-Race, Race-Yr, County-Morton
                Baseline Controls                Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
                Observations                   19,596       10,643      18,051       3,156
                Number Clusters                  628          369         610         178
Note: Data from PSID 2005–2015. The data are limited to individuals from families where the heads of household
have less than a high school degree and grew up in the United States or were born to parents who were born in the
United States. Prior users in the PSID includes households that had previously taken up food stamps and/or SSI prior
to SC activation. Baseline controls in the PSID include number of children, log poverty, disability-by-race-by-over 65
fixed effects, employment status, health status, sex, marital status, share citizen, and FBI log crime interacted with
race. All regressions control for county-by-Morton memo fixed effects, state-by-year fixed effects, state-by-race fixed
effects, race-by-year fixed effects, and race-by-state changes in employment during the Great Recession. Observations
in the PSID are weighted by the PSID family weight. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are
reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10
percent level.




                                                         36
                                          Table 4: Robustness Checks
                                             ACS Citizens Sample
                        No GR        County-Yr FE Predicted Yr Hisp/Nonhisp Freyaldenhoven                         < College
                         (1)              (2)             (3)           (4)       (5)                                 (6)
                                                Panel A: Share Food Stamp
Hispanic × Post        −0.021∗∗∗         −0.020∗∗      −0.016∗         −0.025∗∗∗  −0.019∗∗                          −0.007∗
                       (0.008)            (0.009)        (0.009)        (0.008)    (0.008)                           (0.004)
Post                    0.005                          −0.007∗           0.010∗∗    0.001                           −0.001
                       (0.004)                           (0.004)        (0.004)    (0.002)                           (0.001)

                                                        Panel B: Share SSI
Hispanic × Post        −0.016∗∗∗           −0.017∗∗        −0.015∗∗        −0.018∗∗∗                 −0.017∗∗       −0.003
                       (0.006)              (0.007)         (0.006)         (0.005)                   (0.007)        (0.002)
Post                    0.006∗∗                              0.004           0.008∗∗∗                  0.003          0.0001
                       (0.003)                              (0.003)         (0.003)                   (0.002)        (0.001)

Fixed Effects                                 State-Yr, State-Race, Race-Yr, County-Morton
Baseline Controls         Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes                          Yes
Observations             80,977          79,946          80,977          56,312         71,660                       89,671
Note: Data from ACS 2006–2016. The data are limited to heads of households with less than a high school degree
that are U.S. citizens, defined as individuals born in the United States or those who are naturalized and have lived in
the United States for at least a decade. Baseline controls in the ACS include log poverty, number of children, share
employed, share citizen, and FBI log crime interacted with race. All regressions control for county-by-Morton memo
fixed effects, state-by-year fixed effects, state-by-race fixed effects, and race-by-year fixed effects. Observations in the
ACS are weighted by the race-specific population in each county. Column 1 estimates our main specification excluding
race-by-state changes in employment during the Great Recession. Column 2 replaces county-by-Morton memo fixed
effects with county-by-year fixed effects to our main specification. Column 3 estimates our main specification using
predicted activation date instead of actual activation. Column 4 estimates our main specification comparing Hispanics
to all non-Hispanics. Column 5 estimates our main specification instrumenting for pre-SC activation trends in program
take-up following Freyaldenhoven, Hansen, and Shapiro (forthcoming). Column 6 estimates our main specification
on a sample of household heads with less than a college degree. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level
are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant
at 10 percent level.




                                                          37
                                                  Table 5: Food Stamp and SSI Take-Up Heterogeneity
                                                                 ACS Citizens Sample
                        Outcome                                     Share Food Stamp                                  Share          SSI
                                                       (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)                  (7)       (8)
         Hispanic × Post                              0.007       −0.043∗∗∗ −0.025∗∗∗ −0.029∗∗∗ −0.003          −0.025∗∗∗            −0.015∗∗∗ −0.023∗∗∗
                                                     (0.015)       (0.009)    (0.008)      (0.008)    (0.012)    (0.006)              (0.006)   (0.006)
         Hispanic × Post × Proportion Petty          −0.057∗∗                                        −0.026
                                                     (0.025)                                          (0.016)
         Hispanic × Post × ∆ Pew Fear                             −0.213∗∗∗                                     −0.101∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.050)                                       (0.030)
         Hispanic × Post × Sanctuary City                                      0.036∗∗∗                                              −0.006
                                                                              (0.010)                                                 (0.007)
         Hispanic × Post × % PR/Cuban                                                       0.032∗∗                                                 0.041∗∗∗
                                                                                           (0.013)                                                 (0.008)
         Fixed Effects                                                       State-Yr, State-Race, Race-Yr, County-Morton
         Baseline Controls                             Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes                 Yes           Yes
         Observations                                 65,903        76,800     86,407       77,465     65,903     76,800              86,407        77,465
38




     Note: Data from ACS 2006–2016. The data are limited to heads of households with less than a high school degree that are U.S. citizens, defined as
     individuals born in the United States or those who are naturalized and have lived in the United States for at least a decade. Proportion Petty measures
     the share of Hispanic detainers issued for minor offenses relative to those for both minor and serious offenses. ∆ Pew Fear measures the change in the
     share that are worried a family member or close friend could be deported between 2013 and 2010 from Pew. This measure is defined at the Census
     division level. Sanctuary city is an indicator for an active sanctuary city policy during the period of SC activation. % PR/Cuban measures the share
     of Hispanic households with a Puerto Rican or Cuban head in a county. All specifications contain main terms and the full set of interactions with the
     Hispanic indicator, black indicator and post-SC indicator. Baseline controls in the ACS include log poverty, number of children, share employed, share
     citizen, and FBI log crime interacted with race. All regressions control for county-by-Morton memo fixed effects, state-by-year fixed effects, state-by-race
     fixed effects, race-by-year fixed effects, and race-by-state changes in employment during the Great Recession. Observations in the ACS are weighted by
     the race-specific population in each county. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1
     percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.
                                      Table 6: Compositional Changes
                                           ACS Citizens Sample
Outcome                     # Child      Log Pov       % Emp       % Moved       HH Weight      % Mixed      % Citizen
                               (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)
Hispanic × Post              0.007         0.033      −0.002         0.003        −0.870
                            (0.024)       (0.025)      (0.002)      (0.002)        (2.896)
Post                         0.001       −0.017∗        0.001      −0.001         −2.206          0.008         0.003∗
                            (0.010)       (0.009)      (0.001)      (0.001)        (2.192)       (0.008)       (0.002)

Pre-Period Hisp. Mean        0.713        3.766       0.377      0.054       107.620     0.176                  0.687
Fixed Effects                                  State-Yr, State-Race, Race-Yr, County-Morton
Baseline Controls             Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes                   Yes
Observations                 80,977       80,977     80,977      80,977       80,977     25,342                25,342
Note: Data from ACS 2006–2016. The data are limited to heads of households with less than a high school degree
that are U.S. citizens, defined as individuals born in the United States or those who are naturalized and have lived in
the United States for at least a decade. Baseline controls include FBI log crime interacted with race and, in column
1 log poverty, share employed, and share citizen, in column 2 number of children, share employed, and share citizen,
in column 3 number of children, log poverty, and share citizen, and in columns 4–7 log poverty, number of children,
share employed, and share citizen. All regressions control for county-by-Morton memo fixed effects, state-by-year
fixed effects, state-by-race fixed effects, race-by-year fixed effects, and race-by-state changes in employment during
the Great Recession. Observations in the ACS are weighted by the race-specific population in each county. Robust
standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** =
significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                        39
                                                                                            Figure 1: Detainers by Year


                                                                                              Panel A: Total by Year
                                                    300000


                                                    250000




                      Total Detainers Issued
                                                    200000


                                                    150000


                                                    100000


                                                    50000



                                                                                 2002         2004    2006          2008        2010       2012      2014
                                                                                                                      Year

                                                                                                               All                 Hispanic



                                                                                            Panel B: Cumulative by Year
                                                    2000000
                      Cumulative Detainers Issued




                                                    1500000




                                                    1000000




                                                     500000




                                                                                 0
                                                                                     2002     2004    2006           2008       2010          2012   2014
                                                                                                                       Year

                                                                                                                   All             Hispanic



                                          Panel C: Ratio of Low-Level to Violent Offenses
                                                                 1.2       1.1
                                                     Ratio L3/L1 Detainers
                                                           .9    .8
                                                                 .71




                                                                                 2008          2009      2010            2011            2012        2013
                                                                                                         Year Detainer Issued

                                                                                                             All              Hispanic



Note: Data from TRACFED (2016).




                                                                                                              40
                             Figure 2: Secure Communities Activation



                 2008                          2009                    2010




                 2011                          2012                    2013




Note: Data from US ICE (2015).




                                               41
                        Figure 3: Predicted Secure Communities Activation



                 2008                              2009                             2010




                 2011                              2012                             2013




Note: Predicted values based on information from ICE Quarterly Reports (US ICE 2011). See text for details of
prediction.




                                                   42
                                                                                             Figure 4: Event Study of Food Stamp and SSI Take-Up


                                                                                                                                         Panel A. Share Food Stamp
                                                Non-Hispanic Whites                                                                         Non-Hispanic Blacks                                                                                    Hispanics
                    .15




                                                                                                                  .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .15
                    .1




                                                                                                                  .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .1
                         .05




                                                                                                                       .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hispanic Coefficient
         White Coefficient




                                                                                                       Black Coefficient
                0




                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
      -.05




                                                                                                    -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                -.05
                    -.1




                                                                                                                  -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.1
                    -.15




                                                                                                                  -.15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.15
                                      -5   -4    -3   -2      -1        0        1   2   3     4                                    -5    -4    -3   -2      -1        0        1   2   3   4                                       -5   -4   -3   -2      -1        0        1   2   3   4
                                                           Years to Activation                                                                            Years to Activation                                                                           Years to Activation




                                                                                                                                               Panel B. Share SSI
43




                                                Non-Hispanic Whites                                                                            Non-Hispanic Blacks                                                                                 Hispanics
                    .1




                                                                                                                  .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .1
                    .075




                                                                                                                  .075




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .075
                    .05




                                                                                                                  .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .025 .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hispanic Coefficient
                               .025




                                                                                                                             .025
                  White Coefficient




                                                                                                                Black Coefficient
                         0




                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
      -.075 -.05 -.025




                                                                                                    -.075 -.05 -.025




                                                                                                                                                                                                -.075 -.05 -.025
                    -.1




                                                                                                                  -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.1
                                      -5   -4    -3   -2      -1        0        1   2   3     4                                    -5    -4    -3   -2      -1        0        1   2   3   4                                       -5   -4   -3   -2      -1        0        1   2   3   4
                                                           Years to Activation                                                                            Years to Activation                                                                           Years to Activation



     Note: Data from ACS from 2006–2016. Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals are plotted. The data are limited to heads of households with less than
     a high school degree that are U.S. citizens, defined as individuals born in the United States or those who are naturalized and have lived in the United
     States for at least a decade. Baseline controls in the ACS include log poverty, number of children, share employed, share citizen, and FBI log crime
     interacted with race. All regressions control for county-by-Morton memo fixed effects, state-by-year fixed effects, state-by-race fixed effects, race-by-year
     fixed effects, and race-by-state changes in employment during the Great Recession. Observations in the ACS are weighted by the race-specific population
     in each county. Robust standard errors are clustered at the county level. The vertical lines denote the interval of Secure Communities activation.
                                             Figure 5: Robustness Event Study of Food Stamp and SSI Take-Up
                                                                Non-Hispanic vs. Hispanic


                                                                                  Panel A: Share Food Stamp
                                                  Non-Hispanics                                                                                Hispanics
                .15




                                                                                                                .15
                .1




                                                                                                                .1
  Non-Hispanic Coefficient
                     .05




                                                                                                                        .05
                                                                                                      Hispanic Coefficient
            0




                                                                                                               0
   -.05




                                                                                                     -.05
                -.1




                                                                                                                -.1
                -.15




                                                                                                                -.15
                                   -5   -4   -3    -2      -1        0        1    2    3   4                                   -5   -4   -3   -2      -1        0        1   2   3   4
                                                        Years to Activation                                                                         Years to Activation




                                                                                       Panel B: Share SSI
                                                  Non-Hispanics                                                                                Hispanics
                .1




                                                                                                                .1
                             .05




                                                                                                                          .05
     Non-Hispanic Coefficient




                                                                                                     Hispanic Coefficient
               0




                                                                                                              0
  -.05




                                                                                                                -.05
                -.1




                                                                                                                -.1




                                   -5   -4   -3    -2      -1        0        1    2    3   4                                   -5   -4   -3   -2      -1        0        1   2   3   4
                                                        Years to Activation                                                                         Years to Activation



Note: Data from ACS from 2006–2016. Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals are plotted. The data are limited
to heads of households with less than a high school degree that are U.S. citizens, defined as individuals born in the
United States or those who are naturalized and have lived in the United States for at least a decade. Non-Hispanic
includes household heads who identify as non-Hispanic black or non-Hispanic white. Baseline controls in the ACS
include log poverty, number of children, share employed, share citizen, and FBI log crime interacted with race. All
regressions control for county-by-Morton memo fixed effects, state-by-year fixed effects, state-by-race fixed effects,
race-by-year fixed effects, and race-by-state changes in employment during the Great Recession. Observations in the
ACS are weighted by the race-specific population in each county. Robust standard errors are clustered at the county
level. The vertical lines denote the interval of Secure Communities activation.




                                                                                                44
                Figure 6: Correlation between Fear and Knowing Someone Detained




                                  .6
                  Share Fearful Friend/Fam Deported                      CA      AZ

                                                               FL
                                           .4


                                                                    TX
                         .2       0




                                                      0   .2                          .4    .6
                                                                Share Know Detained

Note: Data from Pew Hispanic Survey 2010. The sample excludes non-citizens and states with five or fewer respon-
dents. Fear refers to fear that a family member or close contact will be deported. The knowledge measure refers
to the share of people responding affirmatively that they know someone who has been detained or deported. The
size of the bubble represents the size of the Hispanic population. The correlation between share fear and share know
detained is 0.50. The 45◦ line is drawn for reference.




                                                                     45
                                                      Figure 7: Google Deportation Searches Event Study




                                 .75            .5
                  Coefficient Log Google Trends
                     -.25       0-.5
                                 -.75   .25




                                                     -5   -4   -3    -2   -1       0       1    2   3   4   5
                                                                          Years to Activation

Note: Data from Google Trends. Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals are plotted. This figure represents event
study estimates of the time to SC activation on the log normalized number of deportation-related searches at the
DMA media markets level. All specifications control for DMA and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
at the DMA level. The vertical lines denote the interval of Secure Communities activation.




                                                                              46
                                      Figure 8: Intensity of Treatment and Take-Up




                          .1
                          .05
                          0    -.05
                   Coefficient
                      -.1 -.15
                          -.2
                          -.25
                          -.3




                                      Primary Spec   Share Mixed    Share Non-Citizens   Exposure Index


                                                             SNAP        SSI


Note: Data from ACS from 2006–2016. Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals are plotted. For “Primary Spec,”
we present the coefficient from Hispanic*Post in our main specification. For “Share Mixed,” we present the coefficient
from Hispanic*Post*% Mixed where % Mixed is the share of Hispanic households that are mixed-status in a county.
Mixed-status family is defined as a Hispanic citizen head of household with any family member that is a Hispanic
non-citizen. For “Share Non-Citizens,” we present the coefficient from Hispanic*Post*% Non-Citizen where % Non-
Citizen measures the share of non-citizens among Hispanics in a county. Finally, for “Exposure Index”, we present the
coefficient from Hispanic*Post*Exposure Index where Exposure Index is the product of % Mixed and % Non-Citizen
and captures the probability that a mixed-status household is randomly exposed to a Hispanic non-citizen in a county.
The data are limited to heads of households with less than a high school degree that are U.S. citizens, defined as
individuals born in the United States or those who are naturalized and have lived in the United States for at least
a decade. Baseline controls in the ACS include log poverty, number of children, share employed, share citizen, and
FBI log crime interacted with race. All regressions control for county-by-Morton memo fixed effects, state-by-year
fixed effects, state-by-race fixed effects, race-by-year fixed effects, and race-by-state changes in employment during
the Great Recession. Observations in the ACS are weighted by the race-specific population in each county. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                              47
