                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        MISPERCEIVED SOCIAL NORMS:
              FEMALE LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION IN SAUDI ARABIA

                                      Leonardo Bursztyn
                                    Alessandra L. González
                                    David Yanagizawa-Drott

                                      Working Paper 24736
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24736


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2018




We would like to thank Roland Bénabou, Marianne Bertrand, Ruben Durante, Claudia Goldin,
Georgy Egorov, Eliana La Ferrara, Rohini Pande, Joachim Voth, and numerous seminar
participants for comments and suggestions, and Hussein Elkheshen, Aakaash Rao, Erik
Torstensson, and especially Raymond Han for outstanding research assistance. Our study was
approved by the University of Chicago Institutional Review Board. This research was sponsored
in part by a grant from the Harvard Kennedy School Evidence for Policy Design program and the
Human Resources Development Fund of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The experiment and
follow-up survey reported in this study can be found in the AEA RCT Registry (#0002447 and
#0002633). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Leonardo Bursztyn, Alessandra L. González, and David Yanagizawa-Drott. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Misperceived Social Norms: Female Labor Force Participation in Saudi Arabia
Leonardo Bursztyn, Alessandra L. González, and David Yanagizawa-Drott
NBER Working Paper No. 24736
June 2018
JEL No. C90,D83,D91,J22,Z10

                                           ABSTRACT

Through the custom of guardianship, husbands typically have the final word on their wives’ labor
supply decisions in Saudi Arabia, a country with very low female labor force participation
(FLFP). We provide incentivized evidence (both from an experimental sample in Riyadh and
from a national sample) that the vast majority of young married men in Saudi Arabia privately
support FLFP outside of home from a normative perspective, while they substantially
underestimate the level of support for FLFP by other similar men – even men from their same
social setting, such as their neighbors. We then show that randomly correcting these beliefs about
others increases married men’s willingness to let their wives join the labor force (as measured by
their costly sign-up for a job-matching service for their wives). Finally, we find that this decision
maps onto real outcomes: four months after the main intervention, the wives of men in our
original sample whose beliefs about acceptability of FLFP were corrected are more likely to have
applied and interviewed for a job outside of home. Together, our evidence indicates a potentially
important source of labor market frictions, where job search is underprovided due to
misperceived social norms.

Leonardo Bursztyn                                 David Yanagizawa-Drott
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of Chicago                             University of Zurich
1126 E. 59th Street                               Schönberggasse 1
Chicago, IL 60637                                 Zurich, 8001
and NBER                                          Switzerland
bursztyn@uchicago.edu                             david.yanagizawa-drott@econ.uzh.ch

Alessandra L. González
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th St
Chicago, IL 60637
alg2@uchicago.edu
1        Introduction
Female labor force participation (henceforth, FLFP) remains low in several parts of the world,
particularly in the Middle East and North Africa, where thirteen of the fifteen nations with the
lowest rates of female participation in the labor market (Global Gender Gap Report 2015) are
located. A salient example of a country with low rates of female labor force participation is Saudi
Arabia, where less than 15% of the Saudi female population aged fifteen and above were employed
in 2017 (a labor force participation rate of around 18%).1 Anecdotal evidence suggests that social
norms are a key constraint on local FLFP; for example, women are expected to work in spaces
segregated from men. Men also play a key role in the labor supply decision of women: in order
to work, the existing norm (but not law) implies that essentially all women are required to receive
approval from their male “guardian,” typically the husband or father. In recent years, changes
in Saudi law might have created a more friendly environment for FLFP; for example, the ban on
women’s right to drive was lifted in 2018. Do male guardians in Saudi have correct perceptions of
the opinions held by other men regarding FLFP?
        In principle, a historically conservative country, in which laws are fast changing is a likely setting
for “pluralistic ignorance” (Katz and Allport 1931), a situation where most people privately reject a
norm, but they incorrectly believe that most other people accept it, and therefore end up following
the norm as well. When individuals believe a behavior or attitude is stigmatized, they might be
reluctant to reveal their private views to others for fear of social sanction. If most individuals act
this way, they might all end up believing their private views are only shared by a small minority
at most.2 However, factors correcting beliefs about what others think might generate fast changes
in the perceived acceptability of certain behaviors, and also in actual behavior (as examined in
Bursztyn, Egorov and Fiorin 2017).3
        In this paper, we combine experiments and surveys to first provide incentivized evidence that
the majority of married men in Saudi Arabia in fact support FLFP outside of home, while they
substantially underestimate the level of support for FLFP by other men—even those from their
same social setting, such as neighbors. We then show that randomly correcting these beliefs about
    1
     Source: General Authority For Statistics, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 2017.
    2
     Historic examples of pluralistic ignorance include the late Soviet regime (Kuran 1991), where many individuals
opposed the regime but believed others supported it. In 1968, most white Americans substantially overestimated
the support for racial segregation among other whites (O’Gorman 1975). Work in psychology has also documented
pluralistic ignorance regarding alcohol use on college campuses (Prentice and Miller 1973). A related concept is
“preference falsification” (Kuran, 1995): people’s stated, public preferences are influenced by social acceptability, and
might be different from their true, private preferences. More closely related to our study, González (2013) documents
that the majority of male Kuwaiti college students in her sample believed women should work outside the home,
while they thought that the majority of their religious community would not approve of it. For a recent overview in
social psychology, see Tankard and Paluck (2016). For the related concept of “third order inference” in sociology, see
Correll et al. (2017).
   3
     Following Bénabou and Tirole, 2011, we think of social norms as the set of ‘social sanctions or rewards’ that
incentivize a certain behavior. We examine injunctive, but not descriptive norms.



                                                           1
others increases married men’s willingness to let their wives join the labor force (as measured by
their costly sign-up for a mobile job-matching service for their wives). Finally, we find that this
decision maps onto real outcomes: three to five months after the main intervention, the wives of
men in our original sample whose beliefs about acceptability of FLFP were corrected are more
likely to have applied and interviewed for a job outside of home.
       We first report on an experiment with a sample of 500 Saudi married men aged 18-35, recruited
from different neighborhoods in Riyadh. These men each attended a 30-participant session com-
posed of individuals from the same geographical area, thus sharing a common a social network.4
In an anonymous online survey, 87% of the experimental participants agreed with the statement:
“In my opinion, women should be allowed to work outside of the home.” When incentivized to
guess how other session participants responded to the same question, about three-quarters of the
experimental subjects underestimate the true number. We interpret this as evidence of mispercep-
tion of social norms, even among people from the same neighborhood who know each other. Those
with larger misperceptions report lower confidence in their guesses when making them. Those with
fewer social connections in the sample are also less confident and have more incorrect beliefs about
the other session participants.
       Next, we evaluate whether correcting these misperceptions matters for household labor supply
decisions. Half of the participants were randomly given feedback on the true number of agreements
with the statement in their session. At the end of the experiment, subjects were asked to make
an incentivized choice between receiving an additional bonus payment (an online gift card) and
signing their wives up for a job matching mobile application specializing in the Saudi female labor
market. In a control group without belief corrections, 23% of participants chose the job matching
service. In the treatment group with feedback on the opinions of other participants, the share
went up significantly, by 9 percentage points (a 36% increase). The increase is driven by those
who underestimated the true share of FLFP participant supporters in their session: sign-up rates
go up by 57% (from a baseline rate of 21%) when this group is provided with information, while
information doesn’t change sign-up rates for those who did not underestimate support by others
(that group also has a higher baseline sign-up rate of 31%).5
       One might be worried that the sign-up outcome is not strongly indicative of “real” labor supply
decisions, or that the immediate decision does not imply a more permanent change in perceived
social norms and behavior. To deal with these concerns, three to five months after the original
intervention, participants were recontacted by phone and a series of additional outcome questions
   4
    The average participant reported knowing 15 of the 29 other session participants.
   5
    This first outcome is a decision made by husbands/guardians, and not by wives themselves. We think husbands’
decisions are crucial, since we are examining men’s potential reluctance to let their wives join the labor force due
to perceived social norms as an obstacle for FLFP. Moreover, due to the custom of male guardianship (until 2011,
guardians’ permission was legally required, and since then their permission is generally asked by hiring firms), hus-
bands typically have the final word on their wives’ labor supply decisions. Also, note that since a participant’s wife’s
eventual employment status is observable, the observability of the sign-up choice itself does not matter independently.



                                                           2
were collected.6 We document a longer-term impact on real labor supply outcomes. Wives of
treated participants were significantly more likely to have applied for a job outside of home (up by
10 percentage points from a baseline level of 6%) and to have interviewed for a job outside of home
(up by 5 percentage points from a baseline level of 1%). We are not powered to detect a significant
change in the likelihood of the wife being employed outside of home, though we directionally observe
an increase. We also document that the change in perceived social norms is persistent: treated
participants believe a significantly higher share of their neighbors in general support women working
outside of home. Finally, we observe that the persistent change in perceived social norms might
spill over to other behaviors: treated participants are significantly more likely to report that they
would sign up their wives for driving lessons. These findings are robust to adjustments for multiple
testing.7
       We also conduct a similar-looking, anonymous online survey with a larger, national sample of
about 1,500 married Saudi men aged 18-35. The goal of this additional survey is two-fold. First,
we assess the external validity of the finding that most Saudi men privately support FLFP while
failing to understand that others do as well. In this broader, more representative sample, 82% of
men agree with the same statement on FLFP used in the main experiment. When incentivized to
guess the responses of other survey respondents, 92% of them underestimate the true share. These
are stronger misperceptions, perhaps because they are no longer asked about their own neighbors’
opinions.
       Second, we examine whether social desirability bias/experimenter demand effects could have
been a driver of the misperception finding in the main experiment. Indeed, although the experiment
was anonymous, it is possible that some participants may have felt like they had to answer the
question about their own views in a certain way. Half of the online survey participants were
   6
      To preserve anonymity in the original experiment, while still being able to contact participants in the future,
phone numbers were first collected at the session level without matching them to specific respondents, before the
experiment started. In the follow up phone survey, participants were asked for the last three digits of their phone
numbers. We were able to match 95% of the phone numbers to the combination of last three digits and session
number.
    7
      Since the vast majority of men in our sample privately support FLFP outside of home, we believe updates in
perceived social acceptability are the main mechanism driving our findings (in Appendix A, we present a simple model
of labor supply and stigma based on this mechanism). However, it is possible that the information provided leads
some participants from having a privately negative opinion about FLFP to a positive one. We did not collect updated
opinions after the information was provided to verify this possibility. Still, we can check the treatment effects for
those originally opposed to FLFP outside of home. We find a large point estimate (10.9 p.p. increase from a baseline
sign-up rate of 10.7% in the control group), but this estimate is not significant, perhaps due to the small sample size
for that group (N=65). This might be interpreted as suggestive evidence of a persuasive effect of the information
treatment in that subsample. However, it is also consistent with these participants not changing their opinions, but
changing their behavior because they care strongly about their social image and their perceptions of norms have been
substantially updated. Indeed, the average wedge among those originally negative about FLFP is substantially and
significantly larger than among those originally positive: -11p.p. vs. -6.7 p.p (p=0.000). Furthermore, the point
estimate of the treatment effect is unchanged when we restrict the analysis to those who originally reported positive
own views about FLFP outside of home. Finally, the treatment effects are stronger for those who experience a larger
update in beliefs about the opinions of others.



                                                          3
assigned an elicitation procedure that provided a “cover” for their opinion on FLFP. In particular,
we implemented a “list experiment” (also called the “unmatched count” and the “item count
technique”, originally formalized by Raghavarao and Federer 1979).8 Using a method that provides
respondents with a higher degree of plausible deniability, we find a very similar level of agreement
with the statement regarding whether women should be allowed to work outside of home: 80%.
Finally, we examine whether individuals may incorrectly expect others to strategically respond
to the FLFP agreement question, which would distort guesses about others since the question
asked about how others answered the question. We find that beliefs about other participants’ true
opinions were extremely similar to the guesses about others’ answers.
    As a last check on the external validity of the fact we document, we show that the share of
Saudi men supportive of FLFP outside of home is also very similar when using the nationally
representative sample from the wave of the Arab Barometer containing that question for Saudi
Arabia (2010-2011). Out of approximately 1,400 male respondents, 75% agree with the statement
“a married woman can work outside the home if she wishes.” Among male respondents aged 18-35
(the age bracket in our study), the share is 79%. The Arab Barometer survey also allows us to
establish that older men are also supportive of FLFP outside of home: among those over 35, the
share agreeing with that statement is 71%.9 Moreover, the numbers from the Arab Barometer in
2019-2011 suggest that the misperception in social norms might have not have been a short-lived
phenomenon, at least in the sense that support for FLFP has been high (even before the recent
progressive law changes) and remained relatively constant until today.
    We contribute to a growing literature on social norms in economics. This literature has focused
mostly on the long-term persistence of cultural traits and norms (Fernandez, 2007, Voigtlaender
and Voth 2012, Giuliano 2007, Alesina et al. 2013). We study how long-standing social norms
can potentially change with the provision of information.10 We also contribute to a large literature
on gender and labor markets (e.g., Goldin, 2014, Bertrand, 2011) by studying how social norms
impact FLFP, and our work is thus related to a growing literature on the effects of gender identity
   8
     The list experiment works as follows: first, respondents are (randomly) assigned either into a control group or
to one or to a treatment group. Subjects in all conditions are asked to indicate the number of policy positions
they support from a list of positions on several issues. Support for any particular policy position is never indicated,
only the total number of positions articulated on the list that a subject supports. In the control condition, the list
includes a set of contentious, but not stigmatized, policy positions. In the treatment condition, the list includes the
contentious policy positions from the control list, but also adds the policy position of interest (support for FLFP),
which is potentially stigmatized. The degree of support for the stigmatized position at the sample level is determined
by comparing the average number of issues supported in the treatment and control conditions. For another recent
application of list experiments, see Enikolopov et al. (2017).
   9
     The question is designed to elicit opinions regarding whether women should be allowed to work outside the home
(as opposed to views on whether have the right (from a legal sense) to work outside the home. Participants were
asked to report their extent of agreement: strongly agree/agree/disagree/strongly disagree. We pool the first two the
create the indicator of agreement.
  10
     Our paper also speaks to a recent theoretical literature on social norms (e.g., Bénabou and Tirole, 2011, Ali and
Bénabou, 2016, and Acemoglu and Jackson, Forthcoming) by documenting how new information may lead to updates
in perceptions of norms and fast changes in behavior.



                                                          4
and norms on economic outcomes (see Alesina et al. (2013), Akerlof and Kranton (2000), Baldiga
(2014), Bernhardt et al. (2018), Bertrand et al. (2015), Bordalo et al. (2016), Bursztyn et al. al
(2017), Coffman (2014), Dohmen et al. (2011), Eckel and Grossman (2008), Fernández and Fogli
(2009), Fernández (2004), Fernández (2007) and Field et al. (2016), and Jayachandran (2015) for
a discussion of the literature studying the role of social norms in explaining gender inequality in
developing countries). Our paper relates to the work by Fernández (2013), which studies the role
of cultural changes in explaining the large increases in married women’s labor force participation
over the last century in the US. Our work adds to a growing literature on social image concerns
in economics. Individuals’ concerns about how they will be viewed by others has been shown to
affect important decisions, from voting (DellaVigna et al. 2017, Perez-Truglia and Cruces 2017)
to charitable donations (DellaVigna et al. 2012) to schooling choices (Bursztyn and Jensen 2015).
We show that Saudi men’s decisions to let their wives work are also affected by perceptions of the
likelihood of judgment by others.
    On the policy side, our results highlight how simple information provision might change percep-
tions of a society’s opinions on important topics, and how this might eventually lead to changes in
behavior. Conducting opinion polls and diffusing information about their findings could potentially
be used to change important behaviors in some societies.
    The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. We discuss the experimental design of our
main experiment and the underlying conceptual framework in Section 2. In Section 3, we present
and interpret the results from that experiment. In Section 4, we present the design and results
from the national online survey and discuss evidence from the Arab Barometer survey. Section 5
concludes.


2     Main Experiment: Design
2.1   Experimental Design
To organize thoughts and help guide our design, in Appendix A we present a simple model of labor
supply and stigma, following the intuition from Bursztyn, Egorov, and Fiorin (2017). If married
Saudi men believe that a large share of other men are opposed to FLFP and if they care to a
great extent about their social image, they may end up not letting their wives work outside of
home, despite the fact that most would prefer to allow their wives to work if the behavior were not
observable. However, our model predicts that correcting perceptions about the opinions of others
leads to drastic changes in the share of men willing to let their wives work.
    Our experiment is comprised of two stages. We first conducted an experiment in the field to
establish the effect of correcting participants’ perceptions of the beliefs of others on a contempora-
neous decision to sign up their wife for a job matching service. We then administered a follow-up
survey three to five months later to collect information on longer-term labor supply outcomes.

                                                  5
2.1.1      Sample and Recruitment

We partnered with a local branch of an international survey company and recruited 500 Saudi
males between the ages of 18 and 35 living across Riyadh, Saudi Arabia as participants in our main
experiment.11 Participants were required to have at least some college education as well as access
to a smartphone.12 We additionally restricted our recruitment to candidates who were married to
ensure that participants would be able to make decisions regarding the labor market participation
of their wives.
       A recruiter database was used for initial contacts and further recruitment was conducted using
a combination of snowball sampling and random street intercept. Participants were recruited from
districts representing a range of socio-economic classes. Anticipating that contacts from districts
with lower average incomes would be more responsive to the offered incentives, these districts were
oversampled.13
       Participants were organized into 17 experimental sessions of 30 participants each.14 Importantly,
participants for each session were recruited from the same geographical area, so that participants
in the same session shared a common social network–the average participant reported knowing 15
of the 29 other session participants. Sessions were held in conference rooms located in a Riyadh
hotel, administered over the course of a week starting Oct. 9, 2017 and ending Oct. 13, 2017.

2.1.2      Main experiment

On their scheduled session date, participants arrived at the hotel. Upon arrival, participants
were asked to provide their name, phone number and email on a sign-in sheet before entering the
designated session room. For each of the sessions, 5 rows of 6 chairs each were set up, with every
other chair rotated to face the back of the room so that respondents’ survey responses would not be
seen by nearby participants. A survey facilitator instructed participants to sit quietly until the start
of the survey, at which point all participants were instructed to begin the survey simultaneously.
Participants were not allowed to ask further questions after the start of the survey.
       The survey itself was administered using the online survey software Qualtrics and was imple-
  11
     An additional 120 participants were recruited for a pilot study consisting of 4 sessions which took place right before
the start of the main experiment. The pilot study provided important logistical experience for survey facilitators and
results were used to inform the final experimental design. Data from the pilot sessions are not included in the results
presented.
  12
     Access to a smartphone was required not only so that participants could take the survey on their own devices,
but also so we can ask participants whether they would like to sign up for a job matching service which includes a
mobile app.
  13
     Participants were offered gift certificates with values ranging from 100-150 SAR (26-40 USD).
  14
     This means 510 total participants were expected, but only 500 completed the survey. Each session included
two sequential survey links for each participant: the first part of the survey (corresponding to the first link) simply
contained questions; the second part contained the informational conditions and the outcomes. The 10-subject
attrition in the experiment is driven by participants who failed to activate the second link.




                                                            6
mented in two parts.15 In the first part of the survey, we collected demographic information and
elicited participants’ own opinions about a range of topics as well as their incentivized perceptions
of others’ beliefs. In the second part of the survey, we randomized participants to our information
provision treatment and measure outcomes. At the start of the survey period, a survey link to
the first part of the survey was provided on a board at the front of the room. Participants were
instructed to navigate to the link and take the survey on their personal smartphones.16
       Since FLFP may be a sensitive issue for respondents, maintaining anonymity of responses
is an important focus of our experimental design. While the names and phone numbers of all
participants were collected on the sign-in sheets, this identifying information was not collected in
the survey itself. As a result, participants’ names and full phone numbers are not associated with
their individual survey responses at any point in the data collection or analysis process.17 Instead,
participants were asked only to provide the last three digits of their phone number. We then used
these trailing digits to randomize participants to treatment conditions, allowing us to recover a
given participant’s assigned treatment status using only their last three phone number digits.18 In
addition, this also allows us to link participants’ follow-up responses to their responses in the main
experiment using only the combination of session number and these trailing digits.19 In sum, only
the local surveyors collected a list with names and full phone names for each session. However,
these surveyors were not able to link names to answers since they never had access to the data we
collected through the online platform. Meanwhile, the researchers have access to the data, but do
not have access to the participants’ contact list—just the last three digits of their phone numbers.
This anonymous design was chosen to facilitate the elicitation of honest opinions regarding FLFP.
       In addition to using an anonymous online survey, we attempted to additionally reduce the scope
for social desirability bias (SBS), by avoiding priming effects. The study was framed as a general
labor market survey, with filler questions asking opinions on the employment insurance system,
privileging Saudi nationals over foreigners into job vacancies, and the minimum wage level. In
addition, no Western non-Arab was present during the intervention.20 In section 4 we present
  15
      All the scripts from the different interventions are included in the Appendix.
  16
      While the majority of participants were able to take the survey successfully on their own devices, tablets were
provided to those who encountered technical difficulties.
   17
      Participants were asked to provide an email address in order to receive a gift card reward for correctly guessing
others’ beliefs as well as the contact information of their wife if they choose to sign her up for a job matching service.
All requests for identifying information occurred after the elicitation of private opinions and perceptions about the
beliefs of others. Providing this contact information was also not required to complete the survey.
   18
      In particular, we electronically randomized treatment values to all possible combinations of three digits (000-999)
before the start of the experiment. Participants were then assigned to the treatment condition corresponding to the
treatment value pre-assigned to the last three digits of their phone number.
   19
      Provided that trailing digits identify participants one-to-one. Phone numbers are recorded on session specific
sign-in sheets so that we only need to worry about matching digits within sessions; in practice we find that 12
within-session pairs have matching trailing digits. Since we have no way to match the follow-up responses of these
respondents to their survey responses, we drop these respondents in the analysis of the follow-up calls, and these
participants were not recontacted.
   20
      SBS would be an important issue if it leads to an upward bias in reported pro-FLFP opinions. We note that it



                                                            7
results from an alternative approach to eliciting opinions regarding FLFP using a method that
provides a higher degree of plausible deniability: the “list experiment.” The very similar findings
there indicate that SBS is not likely to be an issue in our setting.
    After collecting basic demographic information, participants were presented with a series of
statements. For each statement, we asked the respondent whether they agreed or disagreed with
the statement. We began with three statements regarding the labor market in general. These
statements were:

    • In my opinion, Saudi nationals should receive privileged access to job vacancies
      before expatriate workers.

    • In my opinion, the current unemployment insurance system (Haafez) is good for
      the economy.

    • In my opinion, the minimum wage for Saudis (SAR 3000) should be kept at its current
      level.

We then presented two statements regarding the participation of women in the labor force:

    • In my opinion, women should be allowed to work outside of the home.

    • In my opinion, a woman should have the right to work in semi-segregated environments.

    For each of the statements regarding FLFP as well as the statement about the minimum wage,
participants were asked to estimate how many of the other 29 participants they expected to agree
with the statement. To incentivize participants to estimate the beliefs of others accurately, partic-
ipants were told that the respondent with the closest guess would receive a $20 Amazon gift card
code (distributed by email after the end of the session).
    This concluded the first part of the survey. Upon completing this part of the survey, participants
were instructed to wait for the facilitator’s permission before continuing. The session facilitator
was instructed to closely monitor the progress of the survey responses through the online platform.
After it had been determined that all participants had completed the first part of the survey,
participants were instructed to continue on to the second part of the survey by following a link
provided on the end page of the first survey.
    In the second part of the survey, half the participants were randomly assigned to a treatment
condition. This randomization was conducted at the individual level, based on the last three digits of
the respondents’ phone number (provided in the first part of the survey). In the treatment condition,
participants were given feedback about the responses of the other session participants to the two
statements about female labor participation. In particular, we provided treatment participants
is unclear in what direction the bias would go: if participants are afraid of stigma associated with being pro-FLFP
in the case that their neighbors discover their true opinion, we would be underestimating the true level of support.


                                                         8
with charts embedded in the survey interface showing the proportion of respondents who reported
agreeing and disagreeing with each statement in the first part of the survey. Participants assigned
to the control group received no information.

2.1.3    Outcomes

All participants were then asked to read a short passage about a Saudi startup which provides an
online platform aiming to connect job-seeking Saudi women with employers. The startup’s platform
lists thousands of job opportunities for Saudi women, matching workers to jobs based on skills and
interests. The informational passage contained basic information about the online platform as well
as the company’s outreach and mentorship initiatives.
    We then asked respondents to make an incentivized choice between receiving a $5 Amazon gift
card and the opportunity to sign up their wives for access to the company’s platform and services.
An important service in the case of sign-up is a weekly email to be received listing a number of
links to descriptions and application forms for postings of jobs outside of home for women in the
participants’ areas. Participants who chose to sign up for the service were subsequently asked to
provide the contact information of their wife.21 Note that since a participant’s wife’s eventual
employment status is observable to peers, the observability of the sign-up choice itself does not
matter independently, so we chose not to randomize the observability of the sign-up decision.
    If participants who privately support FLFP underestimate the level of support for FLFP among
others, they may incorrectly expect that signing up their wives for the job matching service is
stigmatized. If this is indeed the case, participants who receive information correcting their beliefs
about others’ support for FLFP (treatment) should exhibit a higher sign-up rate than participants
who receive no information (control).
    At the end of our survey, we ask participants to estimate the percent of private sector firms in
Saudi Arabia that have semi-segregated work environments as a way to proxy for perceived market
demand for female labor.22 Observing that our information provision has a positive effect on the
expected percentage of firms with semi-segregated environments would provide evidence consistent
with perceived female labor demand being a function of perceived social norms regarding female
labor force participation. We use this information to assess the extent to which the decision to
sign up is driven by changes in perceptions about labor demand—a different mechanism that is
potentially relevant.
    Figure 1 summarizes the design of the main experiment.
  21
     In the results we present, as pre-registered, those who do not provide their wife’s name and number (even if
initially choosing the sign-up option) are treated as having chosen not to sign up. Results are almost identical if we
include those as effectively signing up.
  22
     Semi-segregated workplaces have a separate section for women.




                                                          9
2.1.4      Follow-up Calls: Longer-Term Outcomes

We conducted follow-up calls three to five months after the conclusion of the main experiment in
order to collect longer-term labor market outcomes.23 We again partnered with the same survey
company to re-contact participants and conduct the follow-up survey.
      Participants were contacted using the phone numbers collected on the session sign-in sheets
during the main experiment. Participants who were not reached initially were called several times.
At the beginning of each call, the surveyor reminded the respondent of his participation in the main
experiment and provided further information about the follow-up call. Participants who consented
to participate in the follow-up were offered a payment of up to 35 SAR in phone credit for successful
completion of the survey.
      As noted above, we link the data collected in the follow-up call to individual survey data in
the main experiment using the last three digits of the respondent’s phone number. Twelve pairs
of respondents in the same experimental session provided identical trailing digits. We drop these
participants from the subsequent follow-up analysis since we cannot uniquely match them to their
survey responses. Surveyors were able to recontact 82% of the original experimental subjects
with unique trailing digits, and 98% of recontacted participants completed the survey. We find no
evidence of selective attrition overall, or within initial conditions (see Appendix Tables A1 and A2),
both based on observables and on the sign-up decision in the original experiment. We note that it
is possible that some respondents changed their cell phone numbers in the four months between the
experiment and the follow-up survey, which could have contributed to the attrition rate (a number
of numbers called were disconnected, which could have resulted from changes in telephone service
or, alternatively, to participants providing incorrect numbers in during the experiment). In Section
3.1.3, we provide Lee (2009) attrition bounds for our treatment effects.
      In each follow-up call, we collected a variety of outcomes related to the wife’s labor supply
outcomes. We asked whether the wife was currently employed and if so, whether this job was
outside of home. Jobs outside of home are our outcome of interest since the information intervention
focuses on norms about working outside of home, and the job-matching service focuses on access
to jobs of this kind. We also asked whether the wife was employed 3-4 months ago (depending on
the follow-up survey data), i.e., at the time of the main experiment. We did this for two reasons.
First, since we had already asked whether the wife was employed during the main experiment itself,
asking the question again in the follow-up allowed us to compare responses to the two questions as a
sanity check for internal consistency. Reassuringly, 94% of respondents respond consistently, giving
the same answer to the question in both instances. Second, we were initially surprised that almost
two-thirds (65%) of respondents in the main experiment reported that their wife was employed.
This high proportion led us to question whether some of the respondents’ wives were in fact working
 23
      Follow-up calls began on Jan. 10, 2018 and ended Mar. 6, 2018.




                                                        10
from home. We used the follow-up survey as an opportunity to ask whether respondents’ wives
were employed outside of home. We find that while 61% of the respondents in the follow-up survey
reported that their wives were working three months before (i.e., around the time of the original
experiment), only 8% of them reported that their wives were then working outside of home.24
Participants were also given the option to answer an open-ended question asking for their wives’
exact occupation. However, only a small share of participants provided an answer to this question,
so we interpret the numbers with caution. The most common occupation categories for wives
working from home were customer service – via phone calls (51% of them) and data entry (20% of
them).
       We then asked whether their wife participated in any job search activities in the last 3-4 months.
In particular, we collected information on whether their wife applied for a job during this period,
interviewed for a job during this period and whether she had any interviews currently scheduled.
For all questions, affirmative answers were followed by a question asking whether the job of interest
was outside of home. Next, we considered whether the information intervention in the original
experiment may have had spillover effects on related behavioral outcomes. Taking advantage of the
recent announcements lifting the ban on women’s right to drive, we posed a hypothetical question
asking participants if they would be willing to sign up their wife for driving lessons if given the
chance. Finally, we checked for persistence in the correction of perceptions of others’ beliefs induced
by the information provision treatment. In particular, we asked participants to guess how many
people out of 30 randomly selected residents of their neighborhood would agree with each of the
statements presented in the main experiment. Finding systematic differences in perceptions about
norms between the treatment group and the control group would suggest that the information
provision treatment had a persistent effect on participants’ beliefs about others. Since participants
were recruited from the same neighborhoods within sessions, information spillovers from treatment
to control participants could have washed out differential persistence in perceived norms.
       Due to the number of outcomes we collect, we address the issue of multiple hypothesis testing
by constructing an index pooling all of our collected outcomes following Kling et al. (2007). We
discuss the construction of this index in Section 3.1.3. We also adjust p-values for multiple testing
following the procedure developed by List, Shaikh and Xu (2016).
  24
   In the larger, online national survey we conducted later, 43% of participants reported that their wife was currently
working, while only 10% reported that their wife was working outside of home.




                                                          11
3      Main Experiment: Results
3.1     Main Results
3.1.1    Misperceived Social Norms

We start by describing the measured misperception about social norms relating to FLFP. Figure 2
displays the CDF of incentivized guesses about the responses of other session participants across all
experimental sessions, the CDF of true shares by session, and the true share of respondents across
all sessions who agreed with the main statement regarding FLFP (“work outside of home”). The
average (median) guess is that 63% (67%) of other session participants agree with the pro-FLFP
statement. The average level of agreement across all sessions is 87%, a number larger than the
guesses of close to 70% of participants. Of course, the proper comparison is between a participant’s
guess and the share agreeing in his session. In Figure 3, we calculate the wedge between the
participant’s belief about the opinions of other session subjects and the actual opinions of all
session participants, and then plot the distribution of these wedges across all sessions. We find
that 72% of participants strictly underestimate the support for FLFP among session participants
(noting that these are individuals recruited from the same neighborhoods).25
    To further examine what is underlying these guesses, we also asked people to assess on a 1-5
scale how confident they were with their guesses. We also asked how many other people they
knew in the room. In Appendix Figure A3, we show that more accurate guesses are significantly
correlated with higher levels of confidence in the guess and that knowing more people in the room
is significantly correlated with both higher levels of confidence in the guess and with more accurate
guesses. These are just suggestive correlations, but they are consistent with our hypothesis that
these Saudi men attempt to learn the acceptability of female labor supply behavior from the people
around them. We make further use of the information on the confidence level of guesses in section
3.2.
    The information collected in the follow-up survey on whether wives were working outside of
home at the time of the original experiment allows us to conduct another validity check: 100%
of participants whose wife was working outside of home reported supporting FLFP outside of
home. We also note that participants supportive of FLFP outside of home (the vast majority
of participants in the sample) have a significantly higher perception of support by other session
subjects than participants opposed to FLFP outside of home (average guesses of 18.7 vs 13.4,
respectively, with p=0.000).
  25
     Appendix Figures A1 and A2 display very similar findings for the second question relating to FLFP (“semi-
segregated environments”).




                                                     12
3.1.2    Main Results (1): Job-Matching Service Sign-up Rates

We now turn to our experimental intervention correcting beliefs about the opinions of other par-
ticipants. Appendix Table A3 provides evidence that individual characteristics are balanced across
the two experimental conditions, confirming that the randomization was successful.
    Figure 4 displays our main findings. In the control condition, 23% of participants prefer to
sign up their wives for the job service as opposed to taking the gift card payment. In the group
receiving feedback on the responses of other participants to the questions on support for FLFP,
the sign-up rate goes up to 32%, a 39% increase (the p-value of a t test of equality is 0.017). Table
1 displays the findings in regression format: column (1) replicates the findings from Figure 4. In
column (2), we add session fixed effects, column (3) controls for baseline beliefs and column (4)
includes additional individual covariates. Results are unchanged across specifications. In this table
and all tables which follow, in addition to p-values from robust standard errors, we also present
p-values from wild cluster bootstrap standard errors (where we cluster at the session level) and
permutation tests for relevant coefficients.26

3.1.3    Main Results (2): Longer-Term Outcomes

We now evaluate the longer-term effects of the information intervention (three to five months later).
Figure 5 displays the results. We first present the impact of the original treatment on three labor-
supply outcomes: whether or not the participant’s wife applied for a job outside of home since the
original intervention, whether or not she interviewed for a job outside of home during this period
and whether or not she is currently employed outside of home. Across all outcomes, we see increases
stemming from the original treatment, though this difference is significant only for the first two
outcomes. The percentage of wives who applied for a job outside of home during the time frame of
interest goes up from 5.8% to 16.2%, a 179% increase (the p-value of a t test of equality is 0.001).
Regarding interviews for this type of job, the share increases from 1.1% to 5.8% (p-value=0.06).
Rates of employment outside of home go up from 7.4% to 9.4% (p-value=0.235). If we restrict the
analysis to wives who were not employed outside of home at the time of the intervention (92% of
them), the effect is an increase from 1.1% to 2.8% (p-value=0.25).
    We also examine whether the information provided might lead to changes in other behaviors
related to women’s rights in Saudi Arabia. Figure 5 shows that the share of husbands who report in
a hypothetical question that they would sign their wives up for driving lessons goes up from 65.2%
to 76.4% (p-value=0.008). This suggests that the effects of the information intervention extend
beyond behaviors narrowly associated with FLFP outside of home, and may act more generally
with respect to norms about women’s rights in Saudi Arabia.
 26
    We use wild cluster bootstrap standard errors because of the small number of clusters (Cameron, Gelbach and
Miller 2008). We use permutation tests due to potentially small sample sizes.




                                                      13
       We next assess whether the original treatment produced a persistent change in perceived norms
(and whether spillovers via subsequent communication with the control group undid the original
intervention). To that end, we asked participants to provide a non-incentivized guess on the number
of 30 randomly selected people from their neighborhood they think would agree with the same
pro-FLFP statements from the original experiment. We find evidence of a persistent change in
perceptions by treated relative to control participants: the average guessed share for “working
outside of home” increases from 43.9% to 56.6% (p-value=0.000). These findings also suggest that
the intervention updated beliefs about neighbor’s opinions in general—not just regarding responses
by other session participants.
    To deal with the potential issue of multiple testing, we follow Kling et al. (2007), and construct
                                                                       6
an index pooling all six of our used outcomes.27 The index is (1/6)
                                                                      P
                                                                         (k − qk )/σk , where k indexes
                                                                              k=1
an outcome, and qk and σk are the mean and standard deviation of that outcome for participants
originally in the control group. In addition, we display p-values adjusting for multiple testing
following the procedure developed by List, Shaikh and Xu (2016). Finally, we provide Lee (2009)
attrition bounds for our treatment effects.
       Table 2 presents the results in regression format, with and without controls.
       We can further examine the longer-term effects of the information provided on perceptions of
social norms. Appendix Figure A4 provides visual evidence that for control group participants,
higher beliefs about the share of pro-FLFP session participants are associated with higher beliefs
about the share of pro-FLFP neighbors in the follow-up survey (the effect is significant at the 1%
level). The figure also shows that the levels of beliefs in the follow-up survey are higher for treated
participants, and that the relationship between prior and posterior beliefs is (significantly) flatter
for treated participants. These results suggest that the treatment indeed updated priors about
neighbors’ opinions and that treated participants used the signal from the treatment to override
their priors.

3.2      Heterogeneity by Direction of Priors’ Update
We move beyond the average effects of the information provision and now analyze heterogeneous
effects by the direction (and size) of priors’ updating. Figure 6 provides the raw averages and
Table 3 displays regression results. For those who originally underestimated the true share of
session participants agreeing with the statement regarding women’s right to work outside of home,
we observe a large increase in sign-up rates for the app when information is provided: the share
signing up increases from 21.4% in the control group to 33.5% in the treatment group (a 57%
  27
    The index here includes six outcomes (interviews scheduled is included in the index but not in the tables since
only 1 person had an interview scheduled). Results are unchanged if we include as a seventh outcome guesses about
opinions regarding the statement on semi-segregated environments, since the answers were very correlated for both
types of guesses.



                                                        14
increase, p-value=0.004). For those who originally overestimated the true share of session subjects
agreeing with the statement, the baseline sign-up rate is higher in the control group (30.9%),
which is by itself consistent with the hypothesis of a role of perceived social norms affecting labor
supply decisions for their wives. The effect of the intervention is no longer significant for that
group, and is in fact directionally negative (albeit small). We note that the interaction term in the
regression including the whole sample (that is, the treatment interacted with a dummy on the sign
of the wedge) is not significant at conventional levels (the p-value of the interaction in the regression
without additional covariates is 0.115, while it is 0.204 for the full specification).28 Interestingly, the
sign-up rate among control participants with positive wedges is very similar (and not statistically
different) from the sign-up rate in the treatment group, which provides correlational evidence from
the control group consistent with our hypothesis that perceptions of social norms matter for the
sign-up decision. The evidence on heterogeneous updating for the longer-term outcomes is less
conclusive, and is shown in Tables A4 (without controls) and A5 (full specification).29
    If one assumes that treated participants use the numbers given by the information provision
as their posterior beliefs about the other session subjects, we can compute a continuous measure
of belief update during the experiment. For control participants, this update is equal to zero.
For treatment participants, it is equal to the negative of their “wedge.” We can then evaluate the
impact of the size of the prior updating on the sign-up decision, as displayed in Table 4. Note that
unlike in the other tables, we control for participants’ own views on FLFP outside of home, their
beliefs about other session subjects, and their confidence in their own guesses, since conceptually
all these variables should matter for a given prior updating level. We find that higher levels of
prior updating lead to significantly higher sign-up rates. For example, using the specification in
column (1), a positive update in prior corresponding to one standard deviation of the wedge in
the treatment group causally leads to a 6.9 percentage point increase in the app sign-up rate. In
Appendix Table A6, we provide suggestive evidence that higher levels of updating also lead to
larger changes in the longer-term outcomes.
  28
     Also note that, as discussed before, participants with larger negative wedges are more likely to be personally
opposed to FLFP outside of home, which in principle would reduce the scope for an effect of the information provision
to them. When we restrict the regression to those who reported supporting FLFP, the interaction term yields p-values
of 0.099 (no additional controls) and 0.209 (full specification).
  29
     We find similar treatment effects on sign-up rates for participants with fewer or more social connections in the
original experimental session. We note though that a priori, it is unclear whether the effects should be stronger
or weaker according to the number of social connections: the treatment might be less informative because socially
connected participants might already have better guesses about the opinions of others, but those participants might
potentially care more about the opinions of the other subjects, thus strengthening the treatment.




                                                         15
3.3       Interpreting the Results
3.3.1      Understanding the Longer-Term Effects

It is difficult to separate the extent to which the longer-term effects are driven by the higher rate of
access to the job service vs. a persistent change in perceptions of the stigma associated with FLFP
outside of home. The fact that we observe a persistent treatment effect on beliefs about neighbors
measured in the follow-up survey and on the (reported) willingness to sign up one’s wife for driving
lessons (that is, a different, related outcome) suggests that the longer-term effects on job search
behavior might not be entirely mechanically driven by the job matching service alone.
       One might wonder if there could have been informational spillovers between treatment and
control participants: these participants often reported knowing each other and could have discussed
the information given to them after the main experiment. This is particularly related to our
hypothesis: if perceived social sanctions associated with FLFP outside of home have been reduced,
some participants would be more open to discussing the topic with their neighbors or friends. While
we observe persistent differences in beliefs about others in the follow-up survey, we have no way
of knowing if the differences between control and treatment groups would have been even larger in
the absence of potential spillovers.30
       Interestingly, we find significant effects for outcomes (applying and interviewing for jobs outside
of home) that are not easily observable (when compared to working outside of home itself). It is pos-
sible that the difference in beliefs about others between the two conditions would have been smaller
if control participants started observing more women working outside of home. Unfortunately, we
do not have the data to test this hypothesis.

3.3.2      Signaling Labor Demand

The channel we have in mind to explain our results is an update in the perceived social sanctions
associated with having a wife working outside of home. However, updating one’s beliefs about
what others think regarding FLFP might also turn on a potential additional channel, since this
update may also lead to learning about the labor demand side. Subjects may think: “If so many
people in fact support FLFP, then there are probably many firms willing to hire women.” This is
an interesting alternative mechanism and could explain our findings if: i) inducing positive updates
in perceptions about other participants’ opinions leads to positive updates in perceptions about
  30
    We find similar treatment effects on longer-term outcomes for participants with fewer or more social connections
in the original experimental session, suggesting that informational spillovers alone might not have been enough to
induce more job search among control participants’ wives. Possible reasons for this pattern include: a) the other,
known participants were not very close friends but their opinions are still relevant signals about the relevant peer
group in the neighborhood; b) perhaps one has no economic incentives to tell one’s friends until one’s wife gets a job
because communicating to others would increase competition for the same jobs; c) if treated participants now think
that FLFP outside of home is socially desirable and a symbol of status, they may want to be the first to have an
employed wife (to distinguish themselves), or derive utility from being the “leader” and having others follow them.



                                                         16
the availability of jobs for women and ii) this second update matters for the sign-up decision (i.e.,
participants originally believed labor demand was a constraint). In Appendix Table A7, we find
that the treatment leads to a small (and generally not-significant) increase in participants’ beliefs
about the percentage of private-sector firms in Saudi Arabia with semi-segregated environments. In
Appendix Table A8, we show that once we include covariates, there is no correlation in the control
group between participants’ perception of firms’ willingness to hire women and participants’ decision
to sign up for the job-matching app. We therefore believe that this alternative mechanism is not
driving our findings.


4     National Survey
We now examine results from an anonymous, online survey with a larger, national sample of about
1,500 married Saudi men that used the same platform and had the same layout as the original
experiment. The goal of this additional survey is two-fold. First, we assess the external validity of
the finding that most Saudi men privately support FLFP while failing to understand that others
do. Second, we examine whether social desirability bias/experimenter demand effects could have
been a driver of the misperception finding in the main experiment.

4.1   Survey Design
The sample of survey takers was recruited through the same survey company as before and the
(visually identical) survey was administered online through Qualtrics. As in the main experiment,
we restricted the survey to married Saudi males between the ages of 18 and 35. The final sample
of participants was designed to be a nationally representative sample of the targeted demographic
category, enabling us to provide evidence of the external validity of our main finding.
    After signing an online consent form, participants were asked the same set of demographic
questions as in the main experiment. Then, we departed from the design of the main experiment
by implementing a list experiment to introduce plausible deniability to our elicitation of individual
beliefs. In a list experiment, participants are randomly assigned to either a control group or to
a treatment group. In the control group, participants are presented with a list of statements or
policy positions that are contentious but not stigmatized. In the treatment group, participants are
presented with an identical list of items but also an additional, potentially stigmatized item for
which the experimenter would like to elicit beliefs. Participants in both conditions are then asked
to indicate how many of the statements they agree with. The true degree of support for the item of
interest at the sample level can then be inferred by comparing the average number of agreements
in the treatment group with the average number of agreements in the control group.
    This design allows the experimenter to ask participants only how many of the statements or
policy positions in a given list they agree with rather than needing to know which items they


                                                 17
support in particular. In our case, as long as participants do not disagree with all the non-FLFP
statements, the list experiment provides plausible deniability to those who do not support FLFP
and might otherwise be affected by social desirability bias.
       We operationalized the list experiment in our online survey as follows. Participants in the
control group were presented with a list of three general statements about the labor market (the
same statements used in the main experiment).31 These statements were chosen to be contentious
but not stigmatized.

       • In my opinion, Saudi nationals should receive privileged access to job vacancies
         before expatriate workers.

       • In my opinion, the current unemployment insurance system (Haafez) is good for
         the economy.

       • In my opinion, the minimum wage for Saudis (SAR 3000) should be kept at its current
         level.

Participants were asked to read all three statements carefully and to indicate the number (from 0
to 3) that they agreed with. Note that we did not ask participants which of the statements they
agreed with, only how many.
       In the treatment group, participants were presented with the same list of statements with the
single addition of the statement of interest regarding FLFP that is potentially stigmatized:

       • In my opinion, women should be allowed to work outside of the home.

Treatment participants were likewise asked to indicate the number of statements (from 0 to 4)
that they agreed with. We recover the true share of participants supporting FLFP by subtracting
the average number of stated agreements to the three non-FLFP statements (given by the control
group mean) from the average number of stated agreements to the list including the FLFP statement
(given by the treatment group mean).
       Next, we directly elicited private opinions about FLFP by asking participants in the control
group whether they agreed with the statement about the right of women to work outside the home.
This enables us to compare, at the sample-level, the stated degree of support for FLFP with the
degree of support for FLFP inferred using the list experiment. Since the latter should be much
less susceptible to social desirability bias, this comparison reveals the magnitude of any potential
social desirability bias effects.
       Finally, we ask participants to gauge the responses of other participants to the statement about
FLFP. In the control condition, participants are asked to estimate the percentage of other partic-
ipants who reported agreeing with the same statement. Participants are informed that the study
  31
       The ordering of the statements in the list was randomized for both the treatment and the control groups.


                                                          18
consists of a nationally representative sample of 1,500 married Saudi males aged 18-35. As in
the main experiment, this elicitation was conducted in an incentivized manner–participants were
informed that the respondent with the most accurate guess would receive a $50 Amazon gift card.
      Since we do not directly elicit private beliefs about the FLFP statement in the treatment con-
dition we cannot elicit participants’ beliefs about others in the same way (without revealing the
existence of our treatment and control conditions). Instead, we ask participants to estimate the per-
centage of other participants who would privately agree with the FLFP statement.32 Participants
are again informed about the characteristics of the sample. Comparing the distribution of these
estimates of the true opinions of others to the distribution of estimates of the answers of others
allows us to examine whether guesses about the answers of others are distorted by expectations
that others might answer strategically.
      A pilot sample of 100 participants was launched on Feb. 15, 2018 and concluded on Feb. 16,
2018. No changes were made to the experimental design after reviewing the pilot results. The
survey was then administered to the rest of the sample (1,496 survey participants, 1,460 of which
completed the whole survey) starting on Feb. 17, 2018 and concluding on Mar. 2, 2018. We drop
the data from the pilot in our analysis. Appendix Table A10 displays summary statistics for the
national survey sample and shows that covariates are balanced across conditions.

4.2      Results
We first assess the external validity of the finding that most Saudi men privately support FLFP while
failing to understand that others do. As displayed in Figure 7, in this broader, more representative
sample, 82% of men agree with the same statement on FLFP used in the main experiment regarding
working outside of home. When incentivized to guess the responses of other survey respondents,
92% of them underestimate the true share. These are stronger misperceptions, perhaps because
they are no longer being asked about their own neighbors’ opinions.
      We next use the survey to examine whether social desirability bias/experimenter demand effects
could have been a driver of the misperception finding in the main experiment. These results are
also shown in Figure 7. By subtracting the average number of agreements in the control list from
the treatment list, we get the share of respondents who agree with the statement of interest, but
under response conditions with a higher degree of plausible deniability. We find a very similar
share of 80%, indicating that social desirability bias/experimenter demand effects are not a driver
of the finding. Finally, we examine whether individuals might be incorrectly expecting others to
strategically respond to the FLFP agreement question, which would distort guesses about others,
since the question asked about how others answered the question. We find that beliefs about other
participants’ true opinions were extremely similar to the guesses about others’ answers.
 32
      This was done without incentives since there is no obvious measure of accuracy available.




                                                          19
    Finally, we again find that more accurate guesses (for both types of questions regarding others)
are correlated with more confidence in the guess, as depicted in Appendix Figure A5.

4.3   Evidence from the Arab Barometer
As a last check on the external validity of the fact we document, we find that the share of Saudi
men supportive of FLFP outside of home is also extremely similar when using the nationally
representative sample from the wave of Arab Barometer containing that question for Saudi Arabia
(2010-2011). Out of approximately 700 male respondents, 75% agree with the statement “a married
woman can work outside the home if she wishes.” Among male respondents aged 18-35 (the age
bracket in our study), the share is 79%. The Arab Barometer survey also allows us to establish that
older men are also supportive of FLFP outside of home: among those over 35, the share agreeing
with that statement is 71%. Figure 8 displays the share of men supportive of FLFP outside of
home in the different samples discussed in this paper.


5     Conclusion
In this paper, we provide evidence that: i) the vast majority of married men in Saudi Arabia
privately support female labor force participation; ii) they substantially underestimate the level of
support by other men, including their own neighbors; iii) correcting these beliefs about others affects
their wives’ labor supply decisions. These results might help us understand the role that social
norms play in constraining female labor force participation in Saudi Arabia, but also how these
constraints might be lifted by the simple provision of information. Active information provision
might be particularly important in less democratic societies, where the availability of other natural
aggregators of information (such as elections, referenda and even opinion polls) is more limited.
    We end with potential avenues for future research. We view our findings as “proof of concept” of
the potential for information provision to change behavior regarding female labor force participation
in Saudi Arabia (and potentially in other countries). We believe that expanding the scale and
observing how information spreads in networks, and how it affects a large set of outcomes is an
important topic for future work. Also, the goal of the study was to understand the opinions and
perceptions of male guardians in Saudi Arabia. As a result, we did not examine opinions and
perceptions of women. Evidence from the Arab Barometer suggests that the vast majority of
women in the country are supportive of FLFP outside of home (89%). Future work can enrich the
analysis on the women’s side of the labor supply decision process. Finally, understanding what is
at the root of the stigma associated with female labor force participation might help design policies
to address it: what are husbands trying to signal to others by acting in opposition to female labor
force participation?



                                                  20
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Matthew O. Jackson, “Social Norms and the Enforcement of Laws,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.

Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton, “Economics and Identity,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 2000, 115, 715-753.

Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn, “On the Origins of Gender Roles:
Women and the Plough,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128(2), 469-530.

Ali, S. Nageeb and Roland Bénabou, “Image Versus Information: Changing Societal Norms
and Optimal Privacy,” 2016, NBER Working Paper No. 22203.

Baldiga, Katherine, “Gender Differences in Willingness to Guess,” Management Science, 2014,
60(2), 434-448.

Bénabou, Roland and Jean Tirole, “Laws and Norms”, 2011, NBER Working Paper No.
17579.

Bernhardt, Arielle, Erica Field, Rohini Pande, Natalia Rigol, Simone Schaner, and
Charity Troyer-Moore, “Male Social Status and Women’s Work,” AEA Papers and Proceedings,
2018, 108: 363–67.

Bertrand, Marianne, “New Perspectives on Gender,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card
eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, 2010, 4B, 1545–1592.

–, Emir Kamenica, and Jessica Pan, “Gender Identity and Relative Income Within House-
holds,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130(2), 571-614.

Bordalo, Pedro, Katherine B. Coffman, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, “Beliefs
about Gender,” 2016, NBER Working Paper No. 22972.

Bursztyn, Leonardo, Georgy Egorov and Stefano Fiorin, “From Extreme to Mainstream:
How Social Norms Unravel,” 2017, NBER Working Paper No. 23415.

–, Leonardo, Thomas Fujiwara, and Amanda Pallais, “‘Acting Wife’: Marriage Market
Incentives and Labor Market Investments,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107(11), 3288–
3319.

–, and Robert T. Jensen, “How Does Peer Pressure Affect Educational Investments?,” Quar-
terly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (3), 1329–1367.



                                             21
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach and Douglas L. Miller, “Bootstrap-Based Im-
provements for Inference with Clustered Errors,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90(3),
414–427.

Coffman, Katherine B., “Evidence on Self-Stereotyping and the Contribution of Ideas,” Quar-
terly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129(4), 1625–1660.

Correll, Shelley J., Cecilia L. Ridgeway, Ezra W. Zuckerman, Sharon Jank, Sara
Jordan-Bloch, Sandra Nakagawa, “Its the Conventional Thought That Counts: How Third-
Order Inference Produces Status Advantage,” American Sociological Review, 2017, 82(2), 297–327.

DellaVigna, Stefano, John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao, “Voting to
Tell Others,” Review of Economic Studies, 2017, 84(1), 143–181.

–, John A. List, and Ulrike Malmendier, “Testing for Altruism and Social Pressure in
Charitable Giving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127, 1–56.

Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, Uwe Sunde, Jürgen Schupp, and
Gert G. Wagner, “Individual Risk Attitudes: Measurement, Determinants, and Behavioral
Consequences,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2011, 9(3), 522–550.

Eckel, Catherine C., and Philip J. Grossman, “Men, Women and Risk Aversion: Exper-
imental Evidence,” Handbook of Experimental Economic Results, ed. by C. R. Plott, and V. L.
Smith, Vol. 1, 2008.

Enikolopov, Ruben, Alexey Makarin, Maria Petrova, and Leonid Polishchuk “Social
image, Networks, and Protest Participation,” Working paper, 2017.

Fernández, Raquel, “Cultural Change as Learning: The Evolution of Female Labor Force
Participation over a Century,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103(1), 472-500.

–, “Women, Work, and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2007, 5(2-3),
305–332. ‘

–, –, and Alessandra Fogli, “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and Fertil-
ity,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2009, 1(1), 146–177.

–, Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti, “Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation and
Female Labor Force Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119(4), 1249–1299.

Field, Erica, Rohini Pande, Natalia Rigol, Simone Schaner, and Charity Troyer
Moore, “On Her Account: Can Strengthening Women?s Financial Control Boost Female La-
bor Supply?,” Working Paper, 2016,

                                              22
Goldin, Claudia, “A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter,” American Economic Re-
view, 2014, 104(4)

González, Alessandra L., Islamic Feminism in Kuwait: The Politics and Paradoxes, 2013,
New York, NY: Palgrave-Macmillan.

Giuliano, Paola, “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, 2007, 5(5), 927–952.

International Labour Organization, ILOSTAT database, retrieved March 2017.

Jayachandran, Seema, “The Roots of Gender Inequality in Developing Countries,” Annual
Review of Economics, 2015, 7, 63–88.

Katz, Daniel and Floyd Allport, “Students’ Attitudes,” 1931, Syracuse, Craftsman.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz, “Experimental Analysis of
Neighborhood Effects,” Econometrica, 2007, 75(1), 83–119.

Kuran, Timur, Private Truths, Public Lies, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995.

–, “The East European Revolution of 1989: Is It Surprising That We Were Surprised?,” American
Economic Review, 1991, 81 (2), 121–25.

List, John A., Azeem M. Shaikh and Yang Xu, “Multiple Hypothesis Testing in Experi-
mental Economics,” 2016, NBER Working Paper No. 21875.

O’Gorman, Hubert J., “Pluralistic Ignorance and White Estimates of White Support for Racial
Segregation,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 1975, 39(3), 313–330.

Perez-Truglia, Ricardo and Guillermo Cruces, “Partisan Interactions: Evidence from a
Field Experiment in the United States,” Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125(4), 1208–1243.

Prentice, Deborah A. and Dale T. Miller, “Pluralistic ignorance and alcohol use on cam-
pus: Some consequences of misperceiving the social norm,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 1993, 64(2), 243–256.

Raghavarao, Damaraju and Walter T. Federer, “Block Total Response as an Alternative
to the Randomized Response Method in Surveys,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series
B (Statistical Methodology), 1979, 41 (1), 40–45.

Tankard, Margaret E. and Elizabeth Levy Paluck, “Norm Perception as a Vehicle for Social
Change,” Social Issues and Policy Review, 2016, 10(1), 181–211.



                                               23
Voigtländer, Nico and Hans-Joachim Voth, “Nazi indoctrination and anti-Semitic beliefs in
Germany,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2015, 112 (26), 7931–7936.

World Economic Forum, Global Gender Gap Report 2015, 2015.




                                             24
Figures and Tables

                                        Figure 1: Experimental Design
                                             (Main Experiment)




Notes: Experimental design of the main experiment. Dashed lines indicate points in the survey flow where participants
were instructed by the session facilitator and/or the survey instructions to wait for all session participants to be ready
to start the next section before proceeding.




                                                           25
Figure 2: Misperceptions about Others’ Beliefs (Working Outside the Home)
                           (Main Experiment)

             1         .8
Cumulative Probability
    .4        .6
             .2
             0




                                                                                         Overall Share

                            0        .2             .4              .6            .8                 1
                                                 Share of others agreeing

                                Perceived (by individual)             Objective (by session)




                                                            26
         Figure 3: Wedges in Perceptions of Others’ Beliefs (Working Outside the Home)
                                      (Main Experiment)

                     .015
                     .01
           Density
                     .005
                     0




                            -100   -80   -60   -40   -20    0      20      40       60      80      100
                                               Wedge (guess % - objective %)




Notes: The distribution of wedges in perceptions about the beliefs of others regarding whether women should be able
to work outside the home. Wedges calculated as (the respondent’s guess about the % of session participants agreeing
with the statement) - (the true % of session participants agreeing with the statement).




                                                         27
                                       Figure 4: Job-Matching Service Sign-up
                                                 (Main Experiment)




                               40
                                                        p-value = 0.017




                               30
                           % Sign-up
                              20
                               10




                                               23.48%                      32.02%
                               0




                                              Control                     Treatment




Notes: 95% binomial proportion confidence intervals. p-value calculated from testing for equality of proportions.




                                                          28
                                       Figure 5: Long-term Labor Supply Outcomes
                                                       (Follow-up)


                    (a) Applied for Job                                          (b) Interviewed for Job
               25




                                                                            10
                                p-value = 0.001                                                p-value = 0.006
               20




                                                                            8
               15




                                                                            6
           %




                                                                        %
               10




                                                                            4
               5




                                                                            2
                               5.79%                      16.23%                              1.05%                      5.76%
               0




                                                                            0

                     Control                      Treatment                         Control                      Treatment




                       (c) Employed                                               (d) Driving Lessons
                                                                            90
               14




                                p-value = 0.235
                                                                                               p-value = 0.008
                                                                            80
               12




                                                                            70
               10




                                                                            60
                                                                            50
               8
           %




                                                                        %
                                                                            40
               6




                                                                            30
               4




                                                                            20
               2




                                                                            10




                               7.37%                      9.42%                               65.26%                     76.44%
               0




                                                                            0




                     Control                      Treatment                         Control                      Treatment




Notes: Labor supply outcomes of participants’ wives in the follow-up survey. 95% binomial proportion confidence
intervals. p-value calculated from testing for equality of proportions. Panels (a) - (c) refer exclusively to job oppor-
tunities outside of the home.




                                                                   29
                      Figure 6: Job-Matching Service Sign-up–Heterogeneity by Wedge
                                           (Main Experiment)



                                    Wedge ≤ 0                             Wedge > 0
                    50


                                    p-value = 0.004                       p-value = 0.369
                        40
              % Sign-up
                 30 20
                    10




                                21.35%        33.52%                   30.91%       28.17%
                    0




                                 Control     Treatment                 Control     Treatment




Notes: Job-Matching service sign-up rates for respondents with non-positive and positive wedges in perceptions
about the beliefs of others regarding whether women should be able to work outside the home. Wedges calculated
as (the respondent’s guess about the % of session participants agreeing with the statement) - (the true % of session
participants agreeing with the statement). 95% binomial proportion confidence intervals. p-value calculated from
testing for equality of proportions.




                                                         30
                                               Figure 7: Misperceptions about Others’ Beliefs
                                                            (National Survey)


                            1         .8
               Cumulative Probability
                   .4       .6
                            .2




                                                                              True proportion (treatment)        True proportion (control)
                            0




                                           0         .2           .4            .6                          .8                     1
                                                              Share of others agreeing

                                                     Control (perceptions about others' answers)
                                                     Treatment (perceptions about others' beliefs)



Notes: CDF of respondents’ guesses about the share of other participants in the national survey agreeing with the
statement that women should be able to work outside the home. Vertical lines show the true proportion of respondents
agreeing with the statement. In the treatment group, private beliefs are elicited using a list experiment. The true
proportion of respondents agreeing to the statement in the treatment group is then inferred by subtracting the average
number of agreements in the control list from the treatment list (a list of statements identical to the control list with
the single addition of the sensitive FLFP statement).




                                                                      31
                                                     Figure 8: Comparison with Arab Barometer


                                   100




                                          87.00            82.42              80.46                75.25        79.10         71.39
                                   90
                                   80
                                   70
            Support for FLFP (%)
                                   60
                                   50
                                   40
                                   30
                                   20
                                   10
                                   0




                                         Main Exp.   Ntnl. Svy. (Direct) Ntnl. Svy. (List)        All Males   Males 18-35   Males 36+


                                                                         Experimental Data              Arab Barometer




Notes: Comparison of support for female labor force participation in experimental data and the nationally repre-
sentative Arab Barometer. In each of the experimental conditions, participants were presented with the following
statement: “In my opinion, women should be allowed to work outside the home.” The corresponding statement
presented in the Arab Barometer is: “a married woman can work outside the home if she wishes.” The plot shows
the percentage of respondents agreeing to the presented statement in each case. In the Arab Barometer data, we
define the agreement indicator by pooling respondents who reported “agreeing” or “strongly agreeing.” “Ntnl. Svy.
(Direct)” refers to the direct elicitation of beliefs conducted in our own nationally representative online survey. “Ntnl.
Svy. (List)” refers to the level of support inferred from the list experiment in the same survey by subtracting the
average number of agreements in the control group from the average number in the treatment group. 95% binomial
proportion confidence intervals. Confidence interval for the level of support inferred from the list experiment calcu-
lated by taking the variance of the treatment–control estimator to be the sum of the variance of the sample mean in
the control group and the variance of the sample mean in the treatment group.




                                                                                             32
                     Table 1: Job-Matching Service Sign-Up
                              (Main Experiment)

                                           (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)
Treatment (β)                           0.0853∗∗     0.0876∗∗      0.0899∗∗     0.0898∗∗
                                        (0.0399)     (0.0399)      (0.0395)     (0.0404)
Constant                                0.235∗∗∗      0.132∗        -0.156        -0.131
                                        (0.0270)     (0.0739)      (0.0970)      (0.186)
Inference Robustness (β)
     p-value: Robust S.E.                0.033         0.028        0.023         0.027
     p-value: Wild Bootstrap             0.013         0.020        0.004         0.011
     p-value: Permutation Test           0.036         0.038        0.024         0.025
Session F.E.                                             X            X             X
Baseline beliefs                                                      X             X
Controls                                                                            X
N                                         500          500           500           491
R2                                      0.00907       0.0696        0.108         0.116
 Notes: Column (1) reports estimates from an OLS regression of an indicator for
 whether the respondent signed their wife up for the job-matching service on a treat-
 ment dummy. Column (2) includes session fixed effects. Column (3) controls for 1st
 and 2nd order baseline beliefs. Column (4) adds socioeconomic controls for age, edu-
 cation, employment status (of both respondent and wife), number of children and the
 share of people in the session room the respondent reported knowing and having mu-
 tual friends with. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. Reported p-values
 for wild bootstrap and permutation tests derived from running 1000 replications in
 each case. Wild bootstrap clustered at the session level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
 p < 0.01.




                                            33
                                  Table 2: Effect of Treatment on Labor Supply Outcomes
                                                        (Follow-up)

                                         K-L-K Index        Employed         Applied      Interviewed        Driving      Beliefs about
                                                                                                             Lessons       Neighbors
Panel A: No controls
Treatment (β)                               0.249∗∗∗          0.0206        0.104∗∗∗        0.0471∗∗         0.112∗∗         0.128∗∗∗
                                            (0.0495)         (0.0285)       (0.0317)        (0.0185)        (0.0463)         (0.0267)
Constant                                   -0.119∗∗∗         0.0737∗∗∗      0.0579∗∗∗         0.0105        0.653∗∗∗         0.439∗∗∗
                                           (0.0272)          (0.0190)       (0.0170)        (0.00742)       (0.0346)         (0.0195)
Inference Robustness (β)
     p-value: Robust S.E.                    0.000             0.471          0.001           0.011           0.016           0.000
     p-value: Wild Bootstrap                 0.000             0.523          0.027           0.008           0.019           0.000
     p-value: Permutation Test               0.000             0.593          0.002           0.017           0.009           0.000
     p-value: L-S-X MHT Corr.                  –               0.484          0.003           0.050           0.039           0.000
Lee Attrition Bounds
    Lower Bound:                           0.238***           0.014         0.101***         0.046**          0.092         0.119***
                                           (0.0576)          (0.0288)       (0.0314)         (0.0181)       (0.0564)        (0.0350)
     Upper Bound:                          0.276***           0.033         0.120**         0.056***        0.111**         0.138***
                                           (0.0592)          (0.0532)       (0.0555)        (0.0166)        (0.0500)        (0.0392)
N                                              381              381           381              381            381               381
R2                                           0.0626           0.00137        0.0278           0.0168         0.0151           0.0571

Panel B: Session fixed effects, baseline beliefs and socioeconomic controls
Treatment (β)                               0.276∗∗∗          0.0223        0.115∗∗∗        0.0469∗∗        0.125∗∗∗         0.144∗∗∗
                                            (0.0528)         (0.0282)       (0.0332)        (0.0182)        (0.0475)         (0.0268)
Constant                                     -0.141           0.0545         -0.0262          0.0222        0.882∗∗∗         0.310∗∗∗
                                            (0.210)           (0.137)        (0.146)         (0.0795)       (0.225)          (0.114)
Inference Robustness (β)
     p-value: Robust S.E.                    0.000             0.429          0.001           0.010           0.009           0.000
     p-value: Wild Bootstrap                 0.000             0.452          0.016           0.002           0.023           0.001
     p-value: Permutation Test               0.000             0.423          0.000           0.006           0.007           0.000
N                                             375               375            375             375             375             375
R2                                           0.164            0.0947          0.166           0.117           0.128           0.229
 Notes: Each column reports estimates from OLS regression of the outcome indicated by the column on a treatment dummy.
 The Kling-Liebman-Katz index, defined in the text, is constructed from all 6 tested outcomes including those not reported in
 the table. Panel A includes no controls while Panel B adds session fixed effects, baseline beliefs and socioeconomic controls for
 age, education, employment status (of both respondent and wife), number of children and the share of people in the session
 room the respondent reported knowing and having mutual friends with. In Panel A, L-S-X MHT Correction refers to the
 multiple hypothesis testing procedure presented in List, Shaikh and Xu (2016). Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis.
 Reported p-values for wild bootstrap and permutation tests derived from running 1000 replications in each case. Wild bootstrap
 clustered at the (main-experiment) session level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                    34
                                     Table 3: Job-Matching Service Sign-Up: Heterogeneity by Wedge
                                                          (Main Experiment)

                                                               Wedge ≤ 0                                            Wedge > 0
                                                (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)
     Treatment (β)                           0.122∗∗∗     0.122∗∗∗      0.127∗∗∗     0.125∗∗∗       -0.0274      -0.0383       -0.0391     -0.0252
                                             (0.0459)     (0.0457)      (0.0450)     (0.0463)      (0.0827)     (0.0883)      (0.0919)     (0.114)
     Constant                                0.214∗∗∗      0.0511       -0.202∗        -0.251      0.309∗∗∗      0.315∗         0.711       0.946
                                             (0.0297)     (0.0710)      (0.117)       (0.204)      (0.0628)      (0.162)       (0.659)     (0.882)
     Inference Robustness (β)
          p-value: Robust S.E.                0.008         0.008        0.005         0.007        0.741         0.665         0.671       0.825
          p-value: Wild Bootstrap             0.004         0.003        0.000         0.001        0.776         0.663         0.691       0.840
          p-value: Permutation Test           0.014         0.009        0.007         0.010        0.850         0.644         0.651       0.826
     Session F.E.                                             X            X             X                          X             X           X
     Baseline beliefs                                                      X             X                                        X           X
35




     Controls                                                                            X                                                    X
     N                                         374           374          374           365          126           126           126         126
     R2                                       0.0186       0.0943        0.135         0.150      0.000890        0.136         0.221       0.271
      Notes: Wedge for the given statement (whether women should be able to work outside the home) calculated as (the respondent’s guess
      about the number of session participants agreeing with the statement) - (the true number of session participants agreeing with the statement).
      Column (1) reports OLS estimates from regressing an indicator for whether the respondent signed their wife up for the job-matching service
      on a treatment dummy restricted to respondents with non-positive wedge (those underestimating the progressivism of the other participants).
      Column (5) reports estimates from the same specification restricted instead to respondents with positive wedge. Columns (2) and (6) include
      session fixed effects. Columns (3) and (7) additionally control for 1st and 2nd order baseline beliefs. Columns (4) and (8) add socioeconomic
      controls for age, education, employment status (of both respondent and wife), number of children and the share of people in the session room
      the respondent reported knowing and having mutual friends with. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. Reported p-values for
      wild bootstrap and permutation tests derived from running 1000 replications in each case. Wild bootstrap clustered at the session level. * p
      < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
 Table 4: Effect of Belief Update on Job-Matching Service Sign-Up
                         (Main Experiment)

                                              (1)           (2)            (3)
Update (−Wedge∗1T reatment ;β)           0.00758∗∗      0.00648∗       0.00682∗
                                         (0.00334)      (0.00342)      (0.00352)
Constant                                   -0.0255        -0.116         -0.111
                                          (0.0716)       (0.0979)       (0.182)
Inference Robustness (β)
     p-value: Robust S.E.                    0.023         0.058         0.053
     p-value: Wild Bootstrap                 0.014         0.017         0.019
     p-value: Permutation Test               0.028         0.069         0.069
Baseline beliefs and confidence                X             X              X
Session F.E.                                                 X              X
Controls                                                                    X
N                                             500          500             491
R2                                           0.0270       0.0798         0.0926
 Notes: Column (1) reports estimates from an OLS regression on the update
 in belief about the support of others induced by the information treatment
 (for women working outside the home), controlling for own belief, belief about
 others and confidence in belief about others (for the question asking whether
 women should be able to work outside the home). The update measure is given
 by minus the wedge for those in the treatment condition and equals 0 for those
 in the control condition. Column (2) includes session fixed effects. Column (3)
 additionally includes socioeconomic controls for age, education, employment
 status (of both respondent and wife), number of children and the share of
 people in the session room the respondent reported knowing and having mutual
 friends with. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. Reported p-
 values for wild bootstrap and permutation tests derived from running 1000
 replications in each case. Wild bootstrap clustered at the session level. * p <
 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                        36
Online Appendix — Not for Publication
A        A Simple Model of Labor Supply and Stigma
Assume a continuum of agents (husbands or guardians) making an observable labor-supply decision for their wives.
Agents can hold one of two mutually exclusive convictions, A (pro-FLFP) or B (anti-FLFP); which we refer to as
their type and write ti ∈ {A, B} for agent i. The share of citizens holding conviction A is p, so Pr (ti = A) = p.
We do not assume that p is known, and instead allow agents to hold an incorrect belief about the share of citizens
with conviction A, which we denote by q. To avoid dealing with higher-order beliefs, we assume that q is common
knowledge.
       Agents are paired with one another; within each pair, there is a sender i and receiver j. Sender i makes a
binary labor supply decision si ∈ {A, B}, observed by a receiver j, where si = A means allowing the sender’s wife to
work outside of home, and si = B means not allowing it. Making a decision si 6= ti generates a cost of suboptimal
decision-making ci ∼ U [0, 1] and independently of ti . The sender enjoys a benefit proportional (with intensity factor
denoted by a) to his belief that the receiver approves his type. Finally, if a sender of either type chooses si = A,
he receives an additional benefit y > 0 corresponding to the wife’s income. Consequently, the expected utility of a
citizen i with two-dimensional type (ti , ci ) from choosing action si and being observed by receiver j is given by

                 Ui (si ) = −ci I{si 6=ti } + yI{si =A} + aq Prj (ti = A | si ) + a (1 − q) (1 − Prj (ti = A | si )) ,       (1)

where Prj (ti = A | si ) is the receiver’s posterior that the sender is type A conditional on the decision he made, si .
       In this game, we are interested in Perfect Bayesian Equilibria, which furthermore satisfy the D1 criterion (Cho
and Kreps, 1987).
       We start by characterizing equilibrium conditions:
Proposition 1. Denote
                              (        (    p                                                                     ))
                                                (1 − q + qy)2 − 4q(y − qy − a + 3aq − 2aq 2 ) + (1 − q) + qy
               zA (q) = min 1, max 0,                                                                                    ,
                                                                           2q
                                   (       p (                                                ))
                                            (y − qy − q)2 − 4aq(1 − 2q)(1 − q) + y(1 − q) − q
                    zB (q) = min 1, max 0,                                                       .
                                                               2(1 − q)
  (i) If q > a−y
              2a
                 , then all type A agents choose si = A. Type B agents with cost ci < zB (q) choose si = A; type B
      agents with cost ci > zB (q) choose si = B. Moreover, if q satisfies y > aq(1 − 2q) + 1, then all type B agents
      choose si = A.
                a−y
  (ii) If q =    2a
                    ,   then all agents choose si = ti .
                a−y
 (iii) If q <    2a
                    ,
                   then all type B agents choose si = B. Type A agents with cost ci < zA (q) choose si = B; type A
       agents with cost ci > zA (q) choose si = A. Moreover, if q satisfies y < a(1 − q)(1 − 2q) − 1, then all type A
       agents choose si = B.
Proof. Let zA ∈ [0, 1] denote the threshold such that type-A agents with ci < zA choose si = A and type-B agents
with ci > zA choose si = B.33 Similarly, let zB ∈ [0, 1] denote the threshold such that type-B agents with ci < zB
choose si = B and type-B agents with ci > zB choose si = A. In other words, agents choose si = ti when the cost
of suboptimal decision making is high relative to the payoff and choose si 6= ti when the cost is low relative to the
payoff.
    We begin our analysis with case (ii), the “truthful” equilibrium. In this case, zA = zB = 0, and thus a receiver
places probability 1 on the event that the sender’s action matches his type, i.e. Prj (ti = A | si ) = 1 for si = A,
Prj (ti = B | si ) = 1 for si = B. Then for a type A agent, we have:

                             Ui (si = A|ti = A) = y + aq and Ui (si = B|ti = A) = −ci + a(1 − q),
  33
       Agents with ci = zA are indifferent; we will ignore this population of measure 0.


                                                                 37
and for a type B agent we have:

                          Ui (si = A|ti = B) = y − ci + aq and Ui (si = B|ti = B) = a(1 − q).

    Note that for zA = 0, we must have Ui (si = A|ti = A) − Ui (si = B|ti = A) ≥ 0 for all type A agents, i.e.
y ≥ a(1 − 2q) − ci . Since min{ci } = 0, this inequality must hold at ci = 0, i.e. y ≥ a(1 − 2q). Similarly, for zB = 0, we
must have Ui (si = A|ti = A) − Ui (si = B|ti = A) ≤ 0 for all type B agents, i.e. y ≤ a(1 − 2q) + ci =⇒ y ≤ a(1 − 2q).
Thus at y = a(1 − 2q) =⇒ q = a−y    2a
                                       , all agents will choose si = ti . This proves case (ii).
    Next, we will prove case (i). All type A agents choose si = A for any q > a−y     2a
                                                                                         , so for a type B agent, choosing
si = A results in expected utility
                                                    q                     (1 − q) zB
                          Ui (si = A) = aq                  + a (1 − q)                − ci + y,
                                             q + (1 − q) zB             q + (1 − q) zB
whereas choosing si = B results in expected utility

                                                   Ui (mi = B) = a (1 − q) ,

because only receivers of type B will approve of him. The sender with cost ci = zB is indifferent if and only if
Ui (si = A) = Ui (si = B), i.e.

                                      q                     (1 − q) zB
                          aq                  + a (1 − q)                − ci + y − a (1 − q) = 0                      (2)
                               q + (1 − q) zB             q + (1 − q) zB

    The left hand side must be positive at zB = 1, i.e. y > aq(1 − 2q) + 1. As discussed before, the left hand side
must be negative at zB = 0, i.e. y < a(1 − 2q). Thus for zB ∈ (0, 1), we need aq(1 − 2q) + 1 < y < a(1 − 2q). Suppose
that y satisfies this inequality; then solving (2) for zB yields
                                      p
                                        (y − qy − q)2 − 4aq(1 − 2q)(1 − q) + y(1 − q) − q
                                zB =                                                                              (3)
                                                             2(1 − q)
     Note that in the special case q = 21 , this becomes zB = y. The intuition is as follows. At q = 12 , social image
concerns become irrelevant, since the expected social utility of undertaking either action is the same. It is easy to
see that type A agents will report truthfully when q = 21 , since choosing si = B would result not only in the cost ci
but also in the loss of income y. Type B agents, on the other hand, must balance the cost ci against the income y.
Agents for whom ci < y will report si = A; agents for whom ci > y will report si = B.
     Finally, we will prove case (iii); the analysis is similar to that of case (i). All type B agents choose si = B for
any q < a−y
          2a
              , so for a type A agent, choosing si = A results in expected utility

                                                     Ui (si = A) = y + aq,

while choosing si = B results in expected utility
                                                            qzA                     (1 − q)
                               Ui (si = B) = −ci + aq                 + a(1 − q)               .
                                                        qzA + (1 − q)            qzA + (1 − q)

    The sender with cost ci = zA is indifferent if and only if Ui (si = A) = Ui (si = B), i.e.

                                                       qzA                     (1 − q)
                                y + aq + zA − aq                 − a(1 − q)               =0                           (4)
                                                   qzA + (1 − q)            qzA + (1 − q)

     The left hand side must be negative at zA = 1, i.e. y < a(1 − q)(1 − 2q) − 1. As discussed before, the left hand
side must be positive at zA = 0, i.e. y > a(1 − 2q). Thus for zA ∈ (0, 1), we need a(1 − 2q) < y < a(1 − q)(1 − 2q) − 1.
Suppose that y satisfies this inequality; then solving (4) for zA yields
                                   p
                                     (1 − q + qy)2 − 4q(1 − q)(2aq − a + y) + (1 − q) + qy
                            zA =                                                                                     (5)
                                                               2q
      
                                                                                                                       a−y
    We can now provide a result describing the effect of an experimental intervention that shifts beliefs from q <      2a
to some q 0 > q. Note that in our experimental sample, the average measured prior (q) is greater than 1/2 (which


                                                              38
would imply that all agents in favor of FLFP should choose to have their wives work). Still, we are in a situation
where these agents are not choosing to have their wives work, which is consistent with case (iii) in Proposition 1.
One way to reconcile these elements is to assume that the measured prior is a proxy for the relevant q, which is lower.
      Clearly, if the shift in beliefs from q to q 0 is sufficiently large, i.e. q 0 ≥        a−y
                                                                                               2a
                                                                                                  ,   then the new q 0 will satisfy case (ii)
or case (iii) in Proposition 1, and thus the number of A choices will increase. We characterize the effect of a smaller
change in q below.
                               a−y dzA (q)
Proposition 2. For q <          2a
                                   , dq        ≤ 0. If zA 6= 1, i.e. y ≥ a(1 − q)(1 − 2q) − 1, the inequality is strict.

Proof. Suppose that q < a−y   2a
                                  (case (iii) of Proposition 1). Then all type B agents choose si = B; type A agents
with a cost ci < zA (q) choose si = B, while type B agents with a cost ci > zA (q) choose si = A.
     First, suppose that y < a(1 − q)(1 − 2q) − 1. Then all type A agents choose si = B. For any q 0 ∈ (q, q + ), we
will also have y < a(1 − q 0 )(1 − 2q 0 ) − 1, so all type A agents once again choose si = B. Thus dzA
                                                                                                     dq
                                                                                                       (q)
                                                                                                           = 0.
     Now suppose that y > a(1 − q)(1 − 2q) − 1, so that zA ∈ (0, 1). For a type A agent with cost ci = zA , we have:

                                                              qzA                     (1 − q)
                    Ui (si = B) − Ui (si = A) = aq                      + a(1 − q)               − zA − aq − y
                                                          qzA + (1 − q)            qzA + (1 − q)
                                                        a − y − z + 2aq 2 − qz 2 − 3aq + qy + qz − qyz
                                                  =
                                                                          −q + qz + 1
                                                 2
                                                   + (q − qy − 1) zA + a − y + 2aq 2 − 3aq + qy . The agent with cost
                                                                                                
    Denote the numerator by f (zA , q) = (−q) zA
ci = zA must be indifferent between choosing A and B, so the equilibrium z ∗ solves f (z ∗ , q) = 0. The coefficient of
     2
the zA term is negative, and a − y + 2aq 2 − 3aq + qy = (1 − q) (a − y − 2aq) > 0 for q < a−y
                                                                                           2a
                                                                                              . So there is exactly one
               ∗                                              ∂f
positive root zA , and the parabola points downward. Thus ∂z    A
                                                                  | zA =z ∗ < 0.



      To show that    dzA
                          |
                       dq zA =z
                                ∗   < 0, it suffices to prove       ∂f
                                                                  < 0. We have that ∂f
                                                                       | ∗
                                                                    ∂q z=z            ∂q
                                                                                               = − (z ∗ )2 + (1 − y) z ∗ +
                                                                                         z=z ∗
                                                    ∗              ∗2   −1                 ∗
                                                                             (q − qy − 1) z + a − y + 2aq 2 − 3aq + qy .
                                                                                                                          
(y − 3a + 4aq). We solve our expression f (z , q) = 0 to compute z = q
                                  ∗       ∂
    Plugging this expression for z into ∂q  (·) |z=z∗ , we derive

                                                   ∂                    z ∗ − a + y + 2aq 2
                                                      (·)           =
                                                   ∂q       z=z ∗                q


     Denoting the numerator by g(z), it suffices to prove that g(z ∗ ) < 0. Since dg(z) dz
                                                                                              > 0 and g admits an inverse
g , it suffices to prove that g −1 (0) > z ∗ . g −1 (0) = a − y − 2aq 2 ; we claim that g −1 (0) is positive, since g −1 (0) =
 −1

a − y − 2aq 2 > a − y − 2aq > a − y − 2a a−y  2a
                                                   = 0. Since f (z, q) > 0 for z ∈ (0, z ∗ ) and f (z, q) < 0 for z > z ∗ , it
suffices to prove that f g −1 (0), q < 0.

                              f g −1 (0), q = −aq a − 4q − y − 4aq 2 + 4aq 4 + 2q 2 y + 2q 2 + 2
                                                                                                


    Denoting the second factor by h(y), i.e. h(y) = a − 4q − y − 4aq 2 + 4aq 4 + 2q 2 y + 2q 2 + 2 , it suffices to show
                                                                                                  

that h(y) > 0. Simplifying, we get

                                     h(y) = 2q 2 − 1 y + a − 4q − 4aq 2 + 4aq 4 + 2q 2 + 2
                                                                                          

    Notice that this is linear in y, so to show that this is positive for all possible values of y, it suffices to check
the minimal value (y1 = 0) and the maximal possible value found from the condition q < a−y    2a
                                                                                                 , i.e. y2 = a (1 − 2q).
Recalling that q < a−y
                    2a
                        guarantees  that q < 1
                                             2
                                               , we have:
                                     2
                h (y1 ) = 1 − 2q 2        a + 2 (1 − q)2 > 0, and h(y2 ) = 2 (1 − q) q 1 − 2q 2 a + (1 − q) > 0
                                                                                                          

    Thus we conclude that h(y) > 0 for all y, and therefore that dz    A
                                                                         |
                                                                      dq zA =z
                                                                               ∗ < 0. In other words, assuming we start

at an interior solution for zA , a positive update in q results in more A actions being undertaken in equilibrium.
        


                                                                        39
Appendix Figure and Tables

    Figure A1: Misperceptions about Others’ Beliefs (Semi-segregated Environments)
                                (Main Experiment)
                   1         .8
      Cumulative Probability
          .4        .6
                   .2
                   0




                                                                                               Overall Share

                                  0        .2             .4              .6            .8                 1
                                                       Share of others agreeing

                                      Perceived (by individual)             Objective (by session)




                                                                  40
      Figure A2: Wedges in Perceptions of Others’ Beliefs (Semi-segregated Environments)
                                    (Main Experiment)

                     .015
                     .01
           Density
                     .005
                     0




                            -100   -80   -60   -40   -20    0      20      40      60      80     100
                                               Wedge (guess % - objective %)



Notes: The distribution of wedges in perceptions about the beliefs of others regarding whether women should be
able to work in semi-segregated environments. Wedges calculated as (the respondent’s guess about the % of session
participants agreeing with the statement) - (the true % of session participants agreeing with the statement).




                                                         41
                                                   Figure A3: Confidence and Social Connections
                                                               (Main Experiment)


                             (a) Confidence and Accuracy                                                           (b) Connections and Confidence
  Very Confident




                                                                                                      3.8
                                                                                                      3.73.6
                                                                                                 Confidence
  Neutral




                                                                                                3.5   3.4
  Not at all Confident




                                                                                                      3.3




                         0      5                 10                   15             20                       0     .2         .4              .6       .8   1
                                    Absolute Wedge (|guess-objective|)                                                     Share of participants known



                                                                          (c) Connections and Accuracy
                                                            11
                                                            10
                                                     Absolute Wedge
                                                       8    7
                                                            6   9




                                                                      0     .2        .4              .6              .8         1
                                                                                 Share of participants known




Notes: Panel (a) shows the average absolute wedge in perceptions about the beliefs of others for each confidence
level. Panel (b) and (c) show binned scatterplots of confidence and absolute wedge, respectively, against the share of
other participants the respondent claimed to know. Absolute wedge calculated as |the respondent’s guess about the
number of session participants agreeing with the statement) - (the true number of session participants agreeing with
the statement)|. Confidence measured on a scale of 1-5.




                                                                                           42
                                        Figure A4: Persistence in Beliefs Update
                                                     (Follow-up)




                               25
                               20
                   Follow-up
                               15
                               10
                               5




                                    5           10        15         20        25          30
                                                       Main Experiment
                                                      Control    Treatment




Notes: Guesses of the number of randomly selected neighbors (out of 30) who would support FLFP plotted against
participants’ guesses of the number of participants (out of 30) supporting FLFP in their main experiment session.
The red dotted line shows the overall share of private support for FLFP in the main experiment.




                                                           43
                                                         Figure A5: Confidence and Accuracy
                                                                 (National Survey)


                                  (a) Control Group                                                                (b) Treatment Group
  Very Confident




                                                                                   Very Confident
  Neutral




                                                                                   Neutral
  Not at all Confident




                                                                                   Not at all Confident
                         0   20           40            60             80   100                           0   20           40            60             80   100
                                  Absolute Wedge (|guess-objective|)                                               Absolute Wedge (|guess-objective|)




Notes: Respondents in the control group were asked to guess the share of other participants reporting agreeing with
the statement that women should have the right to work outside the home. Respondents in the treatment group
were asked to guess the share of other participants privately agreeing with the statement. Absolute wedge calculated
as |the respondent’s guess about the share of survey participants responding affirmatively (agreeing privately) to the
statement) - (the true (or inferred) share of survey participants agreeing with the statement)|. Confidence measured
on a scale of 1-5.




                                                                              44
                                           Table A1: Attrition
                                               (Follow-up)

                                                           All      Successful follow-up        No follow-up
N                                                          500                381                    119
Treatment (%)                                            50.60               50.13                  52.10
Age                                                      24.78               24.81                  24.68
                                                         (4.21)              (4.29)                 (3.94)
Number of Children                                        1.71                1.69                   1.77
                                                         (1.72)              (1.70)                 (1.82)
College Degree (%)                                       56.20               55.91                  57.14
Employed (%)                                             86.60               85.83                  89.08
Wife Employed (%)                                        65.20               63.52                  70.59
Job-Matching Service Sign-up (%)                         27.80               29.40                  22.69
Other Participants Known (%)                             51.19               49.72                  55.88
                                                        (38.24)             (38.71)                (36.46)
Other Participants with Mutual Friends (%)               38.64               38.03                  40.59
                                                        (34.94)             (35.03)                (34.71)
 Notes: Summary statistics of respondent characteristics for the subsample that was successfully reached
 for a follow-up and for the subsample that was not successfully reached. Asterisks in the no follow-up
 column refer to p-values from two-tailed t-tests of equality with the successful follow-up group; asterisks
 in the full sample column test the successful follow-up group against the full sample mean. * p < 0.1, **
 p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                      45
                                                   Table A2: Attrition by Treatment
                                                             (Follow-up)

                                                                          Control                                Treatment
                                                              All       Follow-up      Dropped         All       Follow-up      Dropped
     N                                                        247           190            57          253           191               62
     Age                                                     24.64        24.68          24.54        24.91         24.94         24.82
                                                             (3.99)       (4.16)         (3.41)       (4.41)        (4.43)        (4.41)
     Number of Children                                       1.64         1.65           1.60         1.77          1.72          1.94
                                                             (1.70)       (1.83)         (1.22)       (1.74)        (1.56)        (2.22)
     College Degree (%)                                      55.06        54.21          57.89        57.31         57.59         56.45
     Employed (%)                                            87.45        86.84          89.47        85.77         84.82         88.71
     Wife Employed (%)                                       65.59        61.58         78.95*        64.82         65.45         62.90
     Job-Matching Service Sign-up (%)                        23.48       24.74**         19.30        32.02         34.03         25.81
     Other Participants Known (%)                            49.68        49.05          51.75        52.66         50.38         59.68
                                                            (38.60)      (39.16)        (36.93)      (37.92)       (38.36)       (35.90)
46




     Other Participants with Mutual Friends (%)              37.62        37.32          38.65        39.63         38.74         42.37
                                                            (34.62)      (34.94)        (33.79)      (35.29)       (35.20)       (35.73)
      Notes: Summary statistics of respondent characteristics for the subsample that was successfully reached for a follow-up and
      for the subsample that was not successfully reached, split by treatment condition in the original experiment. Asterisks in the
      dropped respondent columns refer to p-values from two-tailed t-tests of equality with the corresponding treatment condition
      among respondents with successful follow-ups; asterisks in the successful follow-up columns test the sample indicated by the
      column against the full sample mean. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                       Table A3: Sample Summary Statistics
                               (Main Experiment)

                                                          All       Control      Treatment
N                                                         500         247            253
Age                                                     24.78        24.64         24.91
                                                        (4.21)       (3.99)        (4.41)
Number of Children                                       1.71         1.64          1.77
                                                        (1.72)       (1.70)        (1.74)
College Degree (%)                                      56.20        55.06         57.31
Employed (%)                                            86.60        87.45         85.77
Wife Employed (%)                                       65.20        65.59         64.82
Other Participants Known (%)                             51.19       49.68          52.66
                                                        (38.24)     (38.60)        (37.92)
Other Participants with Mutual Friends (%)               38.64       37.62          39.63
                                                        (34.94)     (34.62)        (35.29)
 Notes: Summary statistics of respondent characteristics in the field experiment. As-
 terisks in the treatment column refer to p-values from two-tailed t-tests of equality
 with the control group. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                             47
        Table A4: Effect of Treatment on Labor Supply Outcomes: Heterogeneity by Wedge (No Controls)
                                                 (Follow-up)

                                                K-L-K Index        Employed        Applied      Interviewed       Driving     Beliefs about
                                                                                                                  Lessons      Neighbors
Panel A: Wedge ≤ 0
 Treatment (β)                                     0.261∗∗∗         0.00357        0.125∗∗∗       0.0438∗∗        0.108∗∗        0.142∗∗∗
                                                   (0.0609)         (0.0331)       (0.0388)       (0.0221)       (0.0524)        (0.0314)
 Constant                                          -0.124∗∗∗       0.0828∗∗∗      0.0621∗∗∗        0.0138        0.676∗∗∗        0.401∗∗∗
                                                   (0.0334)        (0.0230)       (0.0201)        (0.00972)      (0.0390)        (0.0223)
 Inference Robustness (β)
      p-value: Robust S.E.                           0.000            0.914         0.001           0.048          0.040           0.000
      p-value: Wild Bootstrap                        0.000            0.929         0.037           0.036          0.063           0.005
      p-value: Permutation Test                      0.000            1.000         0.002           0.039          0.044           0.000
      p-value: L-S-X MHT Correction                    –              0.904         0.006           0.111          0.117           0.000
 Lee Attrition Bounds
     Lower Bound:                                  0.252***          -0.005       0.122***        0.043**          0.089         0.136***
                                                   (0.0704)         (0.0339)      (0.0386)        (0.0218)       (0.0656)        (0.0395)
      Upper Bound:                                 0.290***           0.024        0.151**        0.057***       0.118**         0.152***
                                                   (0.0715)         (0.0623)       (0.0664)       (0.0196)       (0.0567)        (0.0476)
 N                                                    284             284             284            284           284              284
 R2                                                 0.0623         0.0000412        0.0361         0.0141         0.0148          0.0680

Panel B: Wedge > 0
 Treatment (β)                                     0.214∗∗∗          0.0709         0.0517        0.0577∗          0.134          0.0673
                                                   (0.0791)         (0.0545)       (0.0517)       (0.0327)       (0.0978)        (0.0458)
 Constant                                          -0.104∗∗          0.0444         0.0444        3.12e-17       0.578∗∗∗        0.562∗∗∗
                                                   (0.0405)         (0.0310)       (0.0310)      (1.57e-09)      (0.0744)        (0.0352)
 Inference Robustness (β)
      p-value: Robust S.E.                           0.008            0.196         0.320           0.081          0.175           0.145
      p-value: Wild Bootstrap                        0.017            0.253         0.455           0.196          0.197           0.202
      p-value: Permutation Test                      0.008            0.288         0.460           0.258          0.232           0.136
      p-value: L-S-X MHT Correction                    –              0.346         0.323           0.486          0.436           0.498
 Lee Attrition Bounds
     Lower Bound:                                  0.199**            0.061          0.043         0.050          0.106            0.043
                                                   (0.0889)         (0.0980)       (0.0980)       (0.0930)       (0.1022)        (0.0575)
      Upper Bound:                                 0.235**            0.067          0.049         0.056*          0.111           0.081
                                                   (0.0930)         (0.0541)       (0.0511)       (0.0318)       (0.1167)        (0.0635)
 N                                                    97               97             97             97             97              97
 R2                                                 0.0665           0.0165        0.00993         0.0276         0.0195          0.0225
 Notes: Each column reports estimates from OLS regression of the outcome indicated by the column on a treatment dummy. For
 estimates of the full specification with fixed effects, socioeconomic controls and baseline beliefs included as covariates (but without
 L-S-X multiple hypothesis testing correction and Lee attrition bounds), see Table A4. Wedge for the given statement (whether women
 should be able to work outside the home) calculated as (the respondent’s guess about the number of session participants agreeing with the
 statement) - (the true number of session participants agreeing with the statement). Panel A restricts to the subsample of respondents
 with a non-positive wedge in perceptions about others (those underestimating support for FLFP among the other participants) while
 Panel B restricts to the subsample of respondents with a positive wedge in perceptions about others. The Kling-Liebman-Katz index,
 defined in the text, is constructed from all 6 tested outcomes including those not reported in the table. L-S-X MHT Correction refers
 to the multiple hypothesis testing procedure presented in List, Shaikh and Xu (2016). Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis.
 Reported p-values for wild bootstrap and permutation tests derived from running 1000 replications in each case. Wild bootstrap
 clustered at the (main-experiment) session level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                                                                    48
   Table A5: Effect of Treatment on Labor Supply Outcomes: Heterogeneity by Wedge (Full Specification)
                                              (Follow-up)

                                         K-L-K Index        Employed       Applied      Interviewed      Driving      Beliefs about
                                                                                                         Lessons       Neighbors
Panel A: Wedge ≤ 0 (Session fixed effects, baseline beliefs and socioeconomic controls)
 Treatment (β)                              0.317∗∗∗          0.0138       0.151∗∗∗       0.0476∗∗       0.145∗∗∗        0.162∗∗∗
                                            (0.0641)         (0.0318)      (0.0407)       (0.0217)       (0.0531)        (0.0317)
 Constant                                    -0.460∗           -0.172       -0.0528        -0.0392        0.648∗∗         0.241∗
                                             (0.243)          (0.152)       (0.178)       (0.0987)        (0.265)         (0.145)
 Inference Robustness (β)
      p-value: Robust S.E.                    0.000            0.664         0.000          0.030          0.007           0.000
      p-value: Wild Bootstrap                 0.000            0.649         0.010          0.030          0.030           0.005
      p-value: Permutation Test               0.000            0.639         0.000          0.025          0.009           0.000
 N                                             278              278           278            278            278             278
 R2                                           0.202            0.131         0.202          0.123          0.156           0.264

Panel B: Wedge > 0 (Session fixed effects, baseline beliefs and socioeconomic controls)
 Treatment (β)                               0.150∗           0.0716        0.0108        0.00478         0.0703          0.115∗
                                            (0.0756)         (0.0671)      (0.0570)       (0.0270)        (0.112)        (0.0638)
 Constant                                   2.675∗∗∗          1.592∗∗        0.251          0.397        3.858∗∗∗          0.865
                                            (0.741)           (0.714)       (0.549)        (0.370)       (0.929)          (0.610)
 Inference Robustness (β)
      p-value: Robust S.E.                    0.051            0.290         0.850          0.860          0.531           0.076
      p-value: Wild Bootstrap                 0.033            0.218         0.836          0.678          0.649           0.068
      p-value: Permutation Test               0.039            0.271         0.861          0.862          0.517           0.078
 N                                             97                97            97            97             97              97
 R2                                           0.582            0.501         0.530          0.596          0.491           0.333
 Notes: Each column reports estimates from OLS regression of the outcome indicated by the column on a treatment dummy,
 session fixed effects, baseline beliefs, socioeconomic controls for age, education, employment status (of both respondent and
 wife), number of children and the share of people in the session room the respondent reported knowing and having mutual
 friends with. For estimates of the basic specification without fixed effects or additional covariates but including L-S-X multiple
 hypothesis testing correction and Lee attrition bounds, see Table A5. Wedge for the given statement (whether women should
 be able to work outside the home) calculated as (the respondent’s guess about the number of session participants agreeing with
 the statement) - (the true number of session participants agreeing with the statement). Panel A restricts to the subsample of
 respondents with a non-positive wedge in perceptions about others (those underestimating support for FLFP among the other
 participants) while Panel B restricts to the subsample of respondents with a positive wedge in perceptions about others. The
 Kling-Liebman-Katz index, defined in the text, is constructed from all 6 tested outcomes including those not reported in the
 table. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. Reported p-values for wild bootstrap and permutation tests derived
 from running 1000 replications in each case. Wild bootstrap clustered at the (main-experiment) session level. * p < 0.1, ** p
 < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                  49
                               Table A6: Effect of Belief Update on Labor Supply Outcomes
                                                        (Follow-up)

                                         K-L-K Index        Employed         Applied       Interviewed        Driving       Beliefs about
                                                                                                              Lessons        Neighbors
Panel A: Baseline beliefs and confidence
Update (−Wedge∗1T reatment ;β)             0.0191∗∗∗         -0.00227      0.00917∗∗∗        0.00235         0.00812∗∗        0.0103∗∗∗
                                           (0.00590)        (0.00241)      (0.00288)        (0.00152)        (0.00387)        (0.00209)
Constant                                   -0.204∗∗           0.103∗         0.0905           0.0475          0.590∗∗∗         0.222∗∗∗
                                           (0.0967)          (0.0565)       (0.0692)         (0.0358)         (0.106)          (0.0561)
Inference Robustness (β)
     p-value: Robust S.E.                    0.001            0.347           0.002            0.123           0.036            0.000
     p-value: Wild Bootstrap                 0.000            0.484           0.053            0.113           0.001            0.000
     p-value: Permutation Test               0.003            0.377           0.002            0.139           0.047            0.000
N                                             381              381            381              381             381               381
R2                                          0.0531           0.00428         0.0398           0.0286          0.0140            0.127

Panel B: Baseline beliefs, confidence, session fixed effects and demographic controls
Update (−Wedge∗1T reatment ;β)             0.0207∗∗∗         -0.00242      0.00943∗∗∗       0.00248∗         0.00842∗∗        0.0118∗∗∗
                                           (0.00598)        (0.00262)      (0.00304)        (0.00146)        (0.00401)        (0.00221)
Constant                                     -0.272           0.153          -0.0982          0.0444          0.617∗∗∗         0.213∗
                                            (0.193)          (0.129)         (0.143)         (0.0726)         (0.219)          (0.118)
Inference Robustness (β)
     p-value: Robust S.E.                    0.001            0.357           0.002            0.089           0.036            0.000
     p-value: Wild Bootstrap                 0.002            0.492           0.052            0.092           0.014            0.000
     p-value: Permutation Test               0.000            0.364           0.006            0.125           0.040            0.000
N                                             375               375            375             375              375              375
R2                                           0.143            0.0905          0.157           0.0902           0.112            0.213
 Notes: Each column reports estimates from OLS regression of the outcome indicated by the column on the update in belief about
 the support of others for women working outside the home induced by the information treatment. The update measure is given by
 minus the wedge for those in the treatment condition and takes value 0 for those in the control condition. The Kling-Liebman-Katz
 index, defined in the text, is constructed from all 6 tested outcomes including those not reported in the table. Panel A controls for
 the respondent’s own belief about whether women should be able to work outside the home, how many others they thought supported
 women working outside the home as well as their confidence in this guess. Panel B adds session fixed effects and socioeconomic
 controls for age, education, employment status (of both respondent and wife), number of children and the share of people in the session
 room the respondent reported knowing and having mutual friends with. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. Reported
 p-values for wild bootstrap and permutation tests derived from running 1000 replications in each case. Wild bootstrap clustered at
 the (main-experiment) session level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                   50
                   Table A7: Perceptions of Labor Demand
                            (Main Experiment)

                                            (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)
Treatment (β)                             2.264         2.361        2.151        2.963
                                         (2.527)       (2.501)      (2.219)      (2.229)
Constant                                 54.22∗∗∗     56.85∗∗∗      17.87∗∗∗     22.97∗∗
                                         (1.759)      (4.515)       (5.911)      (10.59)
Inference Robustness (β)
     p-value: Robust S.E.                 0.371         0.346        0.333        0.185
     p-value: Wild Bootstrap              0.217         0.191        0.279        0.145
     p-value: Permutation Test            0.389         0.366        0.313        0.190
Session F.E.                                              X            X            X
Baseline beliefs                                                       X            X
Controls                                                                            X
N                                          486           486          486          477
R2                                       0.00165       0.0795        0.317        0.345
 Notes: Column (1) reports estimates from an OLS regression of estimated labor de-
 mand on a treatment dummy. Column (2) includes session fixed effects. Column (3)
 controls for 1st and 2nd order baseline beliefs. Column (4) adds socioeconomic con-
 trols for age, education, employment status (of both respondent and wife), number of
 children and the share of people in the session room the respondent reported knowing
 and having mutual friends with. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. Re-
 ported p-values for wild bootstrap and permutation tests derived from running 1000
 replications in each case. Wild bootstrap clustered at the session level. * p < 0.1, **
 p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                            51
Table A8: Perceptions of Labor Demand and Job-Matching Service Sign-up
                          (Main Experiment)

                                           (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)
Expected Labor Demand (β)               0.0506∗       0.0443       0.0192        0.0248
                                        (0.0286)     (0.0301)     (0.0316)      (0.0331)
Constant                                0.248∗∗∗      0.241∗∗      -0.0847      -0.0375
                                        (0.0282)      (0.111)      (0.151)      (0.294)
Inference Robustness (β)
     p-value: Robust S.E.                0.079         0.142        0.544         0.455
     p-value: Wild Bootstrap             0.077         0.130        0.402         0.243
     p-value: Permutation Test           0.077         0.160        0.545         0.435
Session F.E.                                             X            X             X
Baseline beliefs                                                      X             X
Controls                                                                            X
N                                          236         236           236           233
R2                                       0.0129       0.0773        0.108         0.147
 Notes: Control group only. Column (1) reports estimates from an OLS regression
 of an indicator for whether the respondent signed their wife up for the job-matching
 service on estimated labor demand (standardized to mean 0 and s.d. 1) and a treat-
 ment dummy. Column (2) includes session fixed effects. Column (3) controls for 1st
 and 2nd order baseline beliefs. Column (4) adds socioeconomic controls for age, edu-
 cation, employment status (of both respondent and wife), number of children and the
 share of people in the session room the respondent reported knowing and having mu-
 tual friends with. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. Reported p-values
 for wild bootstrap and permutation tests derived from running 1000 replications in
 each case. Wild bootstrap clustered at the session level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
 p < 0.01.




                                            52
                            Table A9: Persistence of Beliefs Update
                                        (Follow-up)

                                                          (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
Treatment (β)                                           4.376∗∗∗    4.300∗∗∗     8.011∗∗∗     8.859∗∗∗
                                                        (0.791)     (0.784)      (1.706)      (1.727)
Treatment*Baseline Belief about Others (γ)                                       -0.209∗∗     -0.257∗∗∗
                                                                                 (0.0874)     (0.0894)
Constant                                                15.12∗∗∗    7.340∗∗∗     5.126∗∗       6.618∗
                                                        (1.786)     (2.269)      (2.452)       (3.562)
Inference Robustness (β)
     p-value: Robust S.E.                                0.000       0.000        0.000         0.000
     p-value: Wild Bootstrap                             0.001       0.004        0.000         0.000
     p-value: Permutation Test                           0.000       0.000        0.000         0.000
Inference Robustness (γ)
     p-value: Robust S.E.                                                         0.017         0.004
     p-value: Wild Bootstrap                                                      0.051         0.015
     p-value: Permutation Test                                                    0.020         0.004
Session F.E                                                X           X            X             X
Baseline beliefs                                                       X            X             X
Controls                                                                                          X
N                                                         381         381          381           375
R2                                                       0.123       0.200        0.212         0.247
 Notes: Column (1) reports estimates from an OLS regression of respondents estimate of the number
 of people out of 30 randomly selected people in their neighborhood who would support FLFP
 (measured during the follow-up) on a treatment dummy (as determined in the main experiment)
 and session fixed effects. Column (2) controls for 1st and 2nd order baseline beliefs. Column (3)
 additionally includes the interaction between a dummy for treatment status and the respondents
 original belief about the number of people in their main experiment session supporting FLFP.
 Column (4) adds socioeconomic controls for age, education, employment status (of both respondent
 and wife), number of children and the share of people in the session room the respondent reported
 knowing and having mutual friends with. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. Reported
 p-values for wild bootstrap and permutation tests derived from running 1000 replications in each
 case. Wild bootstrap clustered at the (main-experiment) session level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
 p < 0.01.




                                                   53
                 Table A10: Sample Summary Statistics
                          (National Survey)

                                                 All      Control      Treatment
N                                               1460         728           732
Age                                            28.42       28.47          28.36
                                               (4.31)      (4.31)         (4.31)
Number of Children                              2.94        2.95           2.93
                                               (1.20)      (1.18)         (1.22)
College Degree (%)                             59.52       58.65          60.38
Employed (%)                                   79.66       78.98          80.33
Wife Employed (%)                              42.60       43.41          41.80
Wife Employed Outside of Home (%)              10.13        9.18          11.11
 Notes: Summary statistics of respondent characteristics in the online survey.
 Asterisks in the treatment column refer to p-values from two-tailed t-tests of
 equality with the control group. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                         54
Survey Scripts




                 55
                                                   Main Experiment

                                                 ***​SURVEY 1 BEGIN​***

                                                   [Consent Form (all)]

If you have any additional questions please let the facilitator know now. After beginning the survey, please keep
additional questions until the end of the session to minimize disruptions. I have read this form and the research study
has been explained to me. I have been given the opportunity to ask questions and my questions have been answered.
If I have additional questions, I have been told whom to contact. I agree to participate in the research study described
above and have received a copy of this consent form.
        I consent
        I do not consent <-{cannot continue}

Q1​ Please enter the last three digits of your phone number: (This information will not be linked to any personally
identifiable information)

Q2​ Please fill in the following fields.
    What is your age?

Q3​ What is your marital status?
      Single (1)
      Married (2)
      Widowed (3)
      Divorced (4)

Q4 ​What is the highest education level you have achieved?
      None (1)
      Primary (2)
      Secondary (3)
      Middle (4)
      Diploma (5)
      Bachelor (6)
      Masters (7)
      Ph. D (8)
      Other Post-Graduate (9)

Q5​ Have you ever been employed?
       Yes (1)
       No (2)

Q6​ Are you currently employed?
       Yes (1)
       No (2)

Q7​ Is your wife currently employed?
        Yes (1)
        No (2)

Q8​ What is your zipcode of residence?




                                                            56
        _____
        don’t know

Q9​ How many children do you have?
       (dropdown, 0-8+)

Q10​ How many of the other participants in the room did you know before today's survey?
       0
       1-5
       6-10
       11-15
       16-20
       21-25
       26-29

Q11​ Based on your initial impressions, with how many of the other participants in the room would you guess you have a
mutual friend?
       0
       1-5
       6-10
       11-15
       16-20
       21-25
       26-29

Q12​ We would like to ask you some questions related to employment and the Saudization of the labor market. If you
are not sure about your answer, please answer to the best of your ability. All your answers are completely anonymous.

Q13​ Do you agree with the following statement?
In​ ​my​ ​opinion,​ ​the​ ​current​ ​unemployment​ ​insurance​ ​system​ ​(Haafez)​ ​is​ ​good​ ​for​ ​the economy.
           Yes (1)
           No (2)

Q14​ Do you agree with the following statement?
In my opinion, Saudi nationals should receive privileged access to job vacancies before expatriate workers.
       Yes (1)
       No (2)

Q15​ On each of the following pages, you will be presented with a statement. First, you will be asked whether you
personally agree with the statement. You will then be asked to guess how many of the other participants in the room
agree with the statement. The participant who guesses most accurately across all the statements will receive a $20
Amazon gift card.

Q16​ Do you agree with the following statement?              {Looped statement}
       Yes (1)
       No (2)

Q17​ If you had to guess, how many people among the 29 other study participants in this room do you think agree with
the same statement? {Looped statement}
         0 (1)




                                                                       57
       1-2 (2)
       3-4 (3)
       5-6 (4)
       7-8 (5)
       9-10 (6)
       11-12 (7)
       13-14 (8)
       15-16 (9)
       17-18 (10)
       19-20 (11)
       21-22 (12)
       23-24 (13)
       25-26 (14)
       27-28 (15)
       29 (16)

Q18​ How confident are you about your guess regarding the opinions of the other participants?
       1 (1) <-Not at all confident
       2 (2)
       3 (3)
       4 (4)
       ​5 (5) <-Very confident

{Looped statements:

1)     In my opinion, the minimum wage for Saudis (SAR 3000) should be kept at its current level.
2)     In my opinion, women should be allowed to work outside of the home.
3)     In my opinion, a woman should have the right to work in semi-segregated environments.​}

Q19​ We will determine the overall prize winner after tabulating the responses. If you would like to receive a $20
Amazon gift card reward in case you are selected as the winner, please enter your email below so that we may email
you the reward code after the survey concludes (the winner will be sent a reward code within 5 business days):

                                                   ***​SURVEY 1 END​***



                                                  ***​SURVEY 2 BEGIN​***

Q20​ If the facilitator has announced the start of the second survey, please continue. If not, please WAIT for further
instructions before continuing.

Q21​ This second survey continues our questionnaire on employment and the Saudization of the labor market.

                    -----------------------------------------------​TREATMENT​-----------------------------------------------
Q22​ ​The charts on the following pages show the responses of the other participants in the room to the questions you
just answered. Please carefully review all the information displayed before answering the question that follows. You
may wish to position your device in landscape orientation for optimal display. ​Depending on your device, you may need
to scroll to reach the bottom of the page where you will see the option to continue the survey.

//Embedded Feedback Links//]




                                                             58
Q23​ Please read the following information about a software platform called ​--------​.

        (Description of the job-matching service.)

--------​ provides an online platform and mobile app that connects Saudi women to job opportunities. ​--------​ provides
access to a large pool of job postings and to career fairs. You now have the opportunity to choose between two options:

             A) Sign your wife up for free access to the premium version of the ​--------​ platform and app.
        OR
             B) Receive a $5 Amazon gift card



{if A}:
Q24 ​You have chosen to give your wife free access to the premium version of the ​--------​ platform and app. Please enter
her contact information in the fields below. Your wife will be contacted directly by ​--------​ to sign up for the service.
     Wife's Name (1)
     Wife's Email (2)
     Wife's Phone Number (3)

{if B}:
Q25​ You have chosen to receive a $5 Amazon gift card. Please enter your email below so that we may email you the
reward code after the survey concludes (within 5 business days):
        Email (1)

Q26​ What percent of private sector firms do you think have semi-segregated environments?
      (0-100) %

Q27​ Thank you for your participation. You will be invited to participate in a follow-up survey in the coming months.

                                                     ***​SURVEY 2 END​***



-END-




                                                              59
                                                   Follow-up Script

Hello,

Am I speaking with ​{​participant name​}​?
       {if NO:} -> ​What would be the best way to reach them?
               {record CONTACT/SCHEDULE info}
               Thank you for your time! {-END CALL-}
       {if YES, continue}

My name is ____ and I am calling to follow up about a study you participated in at the ​         ​ about the Saudi labor
market 3 months ago. This research is being conducted to understand the effect that new companies such as ​--------​,
which provide job opportunities for Saudi women, are having on the labor market. I would like to ask you a few more
questions about the employment of you and your wife to conclude our study.

Please keep in mind that your participation is voluntary. The information you provide will remain completely anonymous
and you will not be identified by any of the answers you provide during this call or the answers provided during the
previous study session. This conversation is NOT being recorded but notes will be taken to record your answers. All
information disclosed during this survey will be kept confidential and stored in a secure location. I can supply you with
contact information regarding this study upon request.

Do you have any questions before we get started?
{Record CONSENT: YES or NO}
      {If NO:} ​Thank you for your time. {-END CALL-}
      {if YES, continue}

Ok, let’s begin.

1. ​Are you currently employed?​ {YES/NO}
2. ​Was your wife employed 3 months ago?​ {YES/NO}
          {if YES:}      -> ​Was she working at home or outside the home?
                  {if OUTSIDE:} -> ​Was this job outside the home more or less than 30
hours/week?
                         -> ​What was her occupation?
3. ​Is your wife currently employed?​ {YES/NO}
          {if YES:}      -> ​Is she working at home or outside the home?
                  {if OUTSIDE:} -> ​Is this job outside the home more or less than 30 hours/week?
                         -> ​What is her occupation?
4. ​Has your wife applied for a job in the la​st 3 months? ​{YES/NO/UNCERTAIN}
          {if YES:}      -> ​Is this for a job at home or outside the home?
                  {if OUTSIDE:} -> ​Is this job outside the home more or less than 30 hours/week?
5. ​Has your wife been interviewed for a job in the last 3 months? ​{YES/NO/UNCERTAIN}
          {if YES:}      -> ​Is this for a job at home or outside the home?
                  {if OUTSIDE:} -> ​Is this job outside the home more or less than 30 hours/week?
6. ​Does your wife have any job interviews currently scheduled? ​{YES/NO/UNCERTAIN}
          {if YES:}      -> ​Is this for a job at home or outside the home?
                  {if OUTSIDE:} -> ​Is this job outside the home more or less than 30 hours/week?
7. ​What district in Riyadh do you live in?
8.​ If given the opportunity, would you sign up your wife for driving lessons?




                                                            60
For each statement, please tell me how many people you think would agree with the statement if we asked 30 randomly
selected people from your neighborhood.

If we asked 30 randomly selected residents of your neighborhood if they agreed with the following statement, how many
do you think would agree?

9.      In my opinion, the minimum wage for Saudis (SAR 3000) should be kept at its current level.

What about the following statement?

{Looped statements:}
10.   In my opinion, women should be allowed to work outside of the home.
11.   In my opinion, a woman should have the right to work in semi-segregated environments.

Thank you–this concludes the questions in this follow-up survey. Thank you very much for your participation. Do you
have any further questions?

        {if participant has further questions:} -> ​I would be glad to provide you with further information describing the
        purpose of this study and the way the information you have provided will be used. Would you like me to send
        you a detailed information sheet by email?
                 {if YES:}       ->​ What is your email address? ​{Record EMAIL}

{prompt for additional notes}

-END-




                                                             61
                                                     Online Survey

                                                   [Consent Form (all)]
I consent (1)
I do not consent (2) <-{cannot continue}

Q1​ Please fill in the following fields.
    What is your age? (1)

Q2​ What is your marital status?
      Single (1)
      Married (2)
      Widowed (3)
      Divorced (4)

Q3​ What is the highest education level you have achieved?
      None (1)
      Primary (2)
      Secondary (3)
      Middle (4)
      Diploma (5)
      Bachelor (6)
      Masters (7)
      Ph. D (8)
      Other Post-graduate (9)

Q4​ Have you ever been employed?
       Yes (1)
       No (2)

Q5​ Are you currently employed?
       Yes (1)
       No (2)

        Q5.1 ​(if Q5 == “Yes”) ​Is this job at home or outside the home?
                 At home (1)
                 Outside the home (2)

                Q5.2 ​(if Q5A == “Outside”) ​Is this job outside the home more or less than 30 hours/week?
                         More than 30 hours/week (1)
                         Less than 30 hours/week (2)

Q6​ Is your wife currently employed?
        Yes (1)
        No (2)

        Q6.1 ​(if Q5 == “Yes”) ​Is this job at home or outside the home?
                 At home (1)
                 Outside the home (2)




                                                            62
                Q6.2 ​(if Q5A == “Outside”) ​Is this job outside the home more or less than 30 hours/week?
                         More than 30 hours/week (1)
                         Less than 30 hours/week (2)

Q7​ What city do you live in?
    1. Riyadh
    2. Jeddah
    3. Mecca
    4. Medina
    5. Al Ahsa
    6. Ta’if
    7. Dammam
    8. Buraidah
    9. Khobar
    10. Tabuk
    11. Qatif
    12. Khamis Mushait
    13. Ha’il
    14. Hafar Al-Batin
    15. Jubail
    16. Al-Kharj
    17. Abha
    18. Najran
    19. Yanbu
    20. Al Qunfudhah
    21. Other

Q8​ What district do you live in within {city}?
      _______ (1)

Q8.1​ What is your monthly household income (SR)?
       0-3,000 (1)
       3,000-6,000 (2)
       6,000-9,000 (3)
       9,000-12,000 (4)
       12,000-15,000 (5)
       15,000-20,000 (6)
       20,000-25,000 (7)
       25,000-30,000 (8)
       30,000-40,000 (9)
       40,000-50,000 (10)
       50,000-75,000 (11)
       75,000-100,000 (12)
       100,000-150,000 (13)
       150,000+ (14)

Q9​ How many children do you have?
       (dropdown, 0-8+)




                                                            63
                   -----------------------------------------------​CONTROL​-----------------------------------------------
We would like to ask you some questions related to employment and the Saudization of the labor market. If you are not
sure about your answer, please answer to the best of your ability.

All your answers are completely anonymous.

Q10C​ In this question, you will be presented with ​three​ statements. Please read all three statements carefully and
consider whether or not you agree with each statement. Then, please indicate the number of statements (from 0 to 3)
that you agree with. Note that we are not interested in which statements you agree with, only ​how many​.

{in randomized order}
1.      In my opinion, the minimum wage for Saudis (SAR 3000) should be kept at its current level.
2.      In my opinion, the current unemployment insurance system (Haafez) is good for the economy.
3.      In my opinion, Saudi nationals should receive privileged access to job vacancies before expatriate workers.

How many​ of the statements above do you agree with?

       0 (1)
       1 (2)
       2 (3)
       3 (4)

On the following page, you will be presented with a single statement. First, you will be asked whether you personally
agree with the statement. You will then be asked to guess how many of the other participants in the study agreed with
the statement. The participant who guesses most accurately will receive a ​$50​ Amazon gift card.

Q11C​ Do you agree with the following statement?
In my opinion, women should be allowed to work outside of the home.
       Yes (1)
       No (2)

Q12C​ There are 1500 total participants in this study who are all married Saudi males. These participants have been
recruited from different cities across Saudi Arabia to be a representative sample of all married males in Saudi Arabia
aged 18-35. If you had to guess, what percentage of the other participants do you think reported agreeing with the same
statement?
In my opinion, women should be allowed to work outside of the home.
        0-100 % (1)

Q13C​ How confident are you about your guess regarding the answers of the other participants?
       1 (1) <-Not at all confident
       2 (2)
       3 (3)
       4 (4)
       5 (5) <-Very confident

Q14C​ We will determine the overall prize winner after tabulating the responses. If you would like to receive a $50
Amazon gift card reward in case you are selected as the winner, please enter your email below so that we may email
you the reward code after the survey concludes:
       __________(1)




                                                            64
                      -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                 -----------------------------------------------​TREATMENT​-----------------------------------------------
We would like to ask you some questions related to employment and the Saudization of the labor market. If you are not
sure about your answer, please answer to the best of your ability.

All your answers are completely anonymous.

Q10T​ In this question, you will be presented with ​four​ statements. Please read all four statements carefully and
consider whether or not you agree with each statement. Then, please indicate the number of statements (from 0 to 4)
that you agree with. Note that we are not interested in which statements you agree with, only ​how many​.

{in randomized order}
1.      In my opinion, the minimum wage for Saudis (SAR 3000) should be kept at its current level.
2.      In my opinion, the current unemployment insurance system (Haafez) is good for the economy.
3.      In my opinion, Saudi nationals should receive privileged access to job vacancies before expatriate workers.
4.      In my opinion, women should be allowed to work outside of the home.

How many​ of the statements above do you agree with?

         0 (1)
         1 (2)
         2 (3)
         3 (4)
         4 (5)

Q12T​ There are 1500 total participants in this study who are all married Saudi males. These participants have been
recruited from different cities across Saudi Arabia to be a representative sample of all married males in Saudi Arabia
aged 18-35. If you had to guess, what percentage of the other participants do you think would privately agree with the
same statement?
In my opinion, women should be allowed to work outside of the home.
        0-100 % (1)

Q13T​ How confident are you about your guess regarding the private opinions of the other participants?
       1 (1) <-Not at all confident
       2 (2)
       3 (3)
       4 (4)
       5 (5) <-Very confident
                -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-END-




                                                                            65
