                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CHOKED BY RED TAPE? THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF WASTEFUL TRADE
                               BARRIERS

                                        Giovanni Maggi
                                        Monika Mrázová
                                          Peter Neary

                                       Working Paper 24739
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24739


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2018




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Peter Neary thanks the European Research Council for
funding under the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013), ERC
grant agreement no. 295669. Monika Mrazova thanks the Fondation de Famille Sandoz for
funding under the "Sandoz Family Foundation - Monique de Meuron" Programme for Academic
Promotion.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Giovanni Maggi, Monika Mrázová, and Peter Neary. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Choked By Red Tape? The Political Economy of Wasteful Trade Barriers
Giovanni Maggi, Monika Mrázová, and Peter Neary
NBER Working Paper No. 24739
June 2018
JEL No. D72,F13

                                          ABSTRACT

Red-tape barriers (RTBs) are an important source of trade costs, but have received little scholarly
attention to date. Here we examine the economic-political determinants of RTBs and their effects
on trade. Because of their wasteful nature, RTBs have very different implications from those of
more traditional trade barriers. In particular, RTBs have important impacts on the extensive
margin of trade, and respond in non-standard ways to changes in tariffs and natural trade costs.
We argue that taking into account the endogenous response of RTBs is crucial for understanding
the effects of tariff liberalization and globalization on trade and welfare.


Giovanni Maggi                                        Peter Neary
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Yale University                                       University of Oxford
37 Hillhouse Avenue Rm 27                             Manor Road Building
New Haven, CT 06511                                   Oxford OX1 3UQ
and FGV/EPGE-Rio                                      United Kingdom
and also NBER                                         and CEPR
giovanni.maggi@yale.edu                               peter.neary@economics.ox.ac.uk

Monika Mrázová
Geneva School of Economics and Management
University of Geneva
Uni Mail, Office M5262
40, Boulevard du Pont-d'Arve
CH 1211 Geneva
Switzerland
monika.mrazova@gmail.com
1         Introduction

There is increasing evidence that “Red-Tape Barriers” (RTBs) – defined as policy-induced
trade barriers that do not generate revenue or rents – are an important source of trade costs.
Typically, RTBs take the form of procedural obstacles in the clearing of customs or in the ap-
plication of non-tariff measures. According to the International Trade Center’s 2016 survey of
EU exporters (ITC (2016)), the most common procedural obstacles are “time constraints,”
which include delays in the clearing of customs or in the process of obtaining an import
license or product certification, or short deadlines for submitting documentation. Other im-
portant procedural obstacles that often affect exporters are: administrative burdens related
to regulations (such as a large number of required documents); information/transparency is-
sues (e.g., information on the licensing/certification process is not adequately published and
disseminated, or is inaccurate); and arbitrary behaviour of customs officials when handling
the exporter’s application (ITC (2016), Table B6).1
        Also, governments may resort to less obvious ways to increase exporters’ trade costs: one
example is given by India’s decision in 2015 to allow apple imports only via the Nhava Sheva
port of Mumbai, while other ports such as Chennai were more efficient options for serving
large parts of the country (spsims.wto.org/en/SpecificTradeConcerns/View/397).2 Similar
measures have been used also by developed countries. A well-known example is given by
France’s decision in 1982 to allow imports of Japanese video tape recorders only through
the bottleneck of Poitiers, a small inland town, which resulted in the number of customs
    1
     Interestingly, when EU exporters are asked about the regulations they face in the importing country, they
complain more about the procedural obstacles associated with the regulations than about the regulations
themselves (ITC (2016), Table B5). One representative case is illustrated by a British exporter of lamb
to Ghana, whose “company has to provide a Health Certificate issued by a vet. The certificate has to be
immaculate, as even a small typo could result in the goods being rejected despite there being no threat to
human life. There is no possibility to amend the error, and we are given two options: either destroy the
goods or return them, both of which cost roughly the same.” (ITC (2016), page 9)
   2
     There are strong indications that this was a deliberate protectionistic measure. According to the Indian
Commerce and Industry Minister, Nirmala Sitharaman, “The government has received requests from several
quarters, including public representatives, for increasing import duty on apples. The present import duty
rates for apples is 50% which is also the bound rate of duty agreed to in GATT/WTO. As such, there is no
scope for further increase in tariff rates without further negotiation under the WTO regime” (The Economic
Times, August 3, 2016).
clearances falling from 100,000 per month to 8,000 per month.3
       In spite of their growing importance, RTBs have largely been ignored by the academic
literature. In this paper we take a first step toward understanding the economic-political
determinants of RTBs and their effects on trade. We will show that the implications of RTBs
are subtle and quite different from those of more traditional trade barriers.
       Before we outline the model and our main results, it is useful to discuss briefly the
available empirical evidence on RTBs and their impact on trade.
       There is an abundance of studies showing that RTBs are quantitatively important. For
example, the 2012 WTO World Trade Report highlights that 76.5% of non-tariff measures
entailed procedural obstacles, and the ITC (2016) survey points out that more than 90%
of the reported product certifications were deemed problematic because of the procedural
obstacles linked to the certification process. As another example, Djankov et al. (2010)
estimate that 75% percent of the delays in shipping containers from origin to destination
country are due to administrative hurdles, such as customs procedures, tax procedures,
clearance and inspections.4
       Perhaps surprisingly, RTBs are common in developed countries, although they are even
more common in developing countries. This is clearly illustrated by the ITC survey (see
ITC (2016), pp. 19 and 40).5 Another interesting fact is that there is little difference in
the impact of RTBs on small versus large firms (see ITC (2016), p.17, and Carballo et al.
(2016)). Furthermore, RTBs often affect variable trade costs rather than fixed trade costs.6
   3
     See nytimes.com/1982/11/22/opinion/essay-the-battle-of-poitiers.html.
   4
     In this paper we focus on RTBs that are deliberately imposed by governments, but RTBs may also be
caused by technological limitations or resource constraints. We are not aware of systematic empirical studies
that try to assess the importance of these different causes of RTBs, although there are many anecdotes
suggesting that RTBs are often deliberately-imposed trade barriers (see for example footnote 2).
   5
     An interesting case mentioned in the ITC survey is that of a Germany-based wood products exporter,
who reports: “Swiss Customs behave rather arbitrarily when dealing with the acceptance of the EUR.1
certificate. The processing time is always different and it is not possible to predict when the goods will reach
the customer. It may take up to several weeks and as a result, the customer is displeased and suffers losses”
(ITC (2016)).
   6
     RTBs are likely to increase variable costs whenever they cause delays in customs clearing (since delaying
the entry of a big shipment imposes a bigger cost than delaying a small shipment) or when they cause a
shipment to be rejected at the customs with a certain probability. As an example of RTBs that affect variable
costs by causing delays, “a small German company exporting musical instruments to India was not aware


                                                       2
Finally, RTBs are often prohibitive, and have important impacts on the extensive margin
of trade. Dennis and Shepherd (2011), Nordas et al. (2006), Persson (2013), Hendy and
Zaki (2013), Shepherd (2013), Beverelli et al. (2015) and Fontagné et al. (2016) examine the
trade impact of various indexes of RTBs, finding that they have a significant impact on the
number of imported varieties. For example, Fontagné et al. (2016) find that reducing by 10%
the time and amount of documents needed to export into a market implies a 1% increase in
the number of exported products for the average firm, and a 2.7% increase for large firms.
This confirms both that RTBs have important extensive-margin effects and that large firms
are affected at least as much as small firms.7
    Existing trade agreements, including the WTO, have gone a long way toward restraining
the use of trade barriers across the world. However it is difficult for a trade agreement to
rein in the use of RTBs, because it is hard to specify them ex ante, and it is hard to monitor
and verify them ex post.8 This leads to a number of questions concerning the determinants
of RTBs and their impacts on trade: How do equilibrium RTBs depend on the tariffs set by
trade agreements? How do they respond to lobbying pressures? How are they affected by
“natural” trade costs? How do equilibrium RTBs affect the intensive and extensive margins
of trade? And how are the optimal cooperative tariffs affected by the anticipation that
governments may resort to RTBs ex post?
    To make our points more transparently, we assume a standard economic structure in
that a compulsory inspection takes place at the Indian Customs due to lack of information. According to the
company, ‘the inspection officials work slowly, causing the goods to be delayed for up to 105 days without
any information about the status or outcome of the inspection.’ The company estimates the total cost of
this measure to be 50% of the value of the product” (ITC (2016)).
    7
      Some of these authors suggest that the extensive-margin impacts of RTBs reflect firm-selection effects
due to fixed costs, but the underlying mechanism is not obvious. In fact, the finding in Fontagné et al.
(2016) that RTBs affect large firms more than small firms is not consistent with a Melitz-type selection
mechanism. A similar finding is also reported in Shepherd (2013). In the present paper we will suggest a
different mechanism that could explain the extensive-margin impact of RTBs.
    8
      Recently the WTO has made an important effort to reduce non-tariff trade costs through the “Trade
Facilitation Agreement” (TFA). There are two main components to the TFA: encouraging investment in
trade-related infrastructure (e.g. improving port efficiency), and reducing RTBs. Arguably, the latter
objective is more challenging, especially if RTBs are used by governments as a disguised form of protectionism,
and there is little evidence that the TFA has made a big difference in this respect thus far. On the other
hand, deep-integration agreements like the EU can go a long way toward eliminating RTBs, especially if
they remove customs borders between member countries (as the EU has done).


                                                      3
the spirit of Grossman and Helpman (1994), and capture domestic lobbying pressures in a
reduced-form way by assuming that governments attach extra weight to domestic producers
in import-competing industries. We consider two types of trade policy: import tariffs and
RTBs. Given that RTBs do not generate revenue, they are more inefficient than tariffs, so a
government (even if politically motivated) would never use them if tariffs were unconstrained.
But if a trade agreement constrains tariffs, RTBs may emerge.
       We distinguish between an ex-ante stage, when the trade agreement is written, and an
ex-post stage, when governments choose RTBs given the tariffs specified in the agreement.
At the ex-ante stage, the political weights are uncertain. Importantly, the trade agreement
is incomplete in two dimensions. First, the agreement can specify tariffs but not RTBs, so
RTBs are left to a government’s discretion. Second, the tariffs specified in the agreement
cannot be contingent on the level of political pressures in the various industries, so the
agreement displays some rigidity.9
       Our basic model focuses on a small country setting where the trade agreement is moti-
vated by domestic-commitment issues, but later we consider a setting with two large countries
where the agreement is motivated by terms-of-trade externalities, and show that our main
insights extend to this setting.
       We next preview our main results. We start by examining a government’s choice of RTBs
taking tariffs as exogenous.10
       In general there can be two sets of products. The first set consists of products for which
import demand is convex or not very concave. For these products, given any tariff level the
optimal RTB is either zero (if political pressures are weak) or prohibitive (if political pressures
are strong); thus RTBs are likely to “choke” trade for a range of products, implying that the
   9
      This view of trade agreements as incomplete contracts that can display both discretion and rigidity is
similar in spirit to Horn et al. (2010).
   10
      The case of exogenous tariffs is interesting for several reasons. First, we can interpret the impact
of parameter changes on RTBs as short-run effects, reflecting the fact that tariffs cannot be renegotiated
frequently. Second, exogenous tariff changes can be interpreted as tariff changes caused by shocks outside our
model. Third, this case can capture situations where a country has little choice on the tariff commitments,
for example because it must choose whether or not to join a pre-existing trade agreement.



                                                      4
extensive margin is key for understanding the impact of RTBs.11 The second set consists of
products for which import demand is sufficiently concave, in which case the optimal RTB is
non-prohibitive for a range of tariff levels and political pressures.
       We consider two kinds of exogenous changes in trade costs: changes in tariffs and changes
in “natural” (i.e. exogenous) trade costs. We will pay particular attention to the effects of
an across-the-board reduction in tariffs, which we refer to as “tariff liberalization,” and an
across-the-board reduction in natural trade costs, which we refer to as “globalization.”
       We find that tariff liberalization can have surprising effects on trade, to the extent that
it induces an increase in RTBs. Tariff liberalization leads to a contraction of trade at the
extensive margin, because prohibitive RTBs are triggered for a range of products. More-
over, trade volume decreases for products covered by non-prohibitive RTBs, because for
these products the government over-compensates for the tariff reduction with an increase in
RTBs.12 Tariff liberalization has the intuitive trade-increasing effect only for products that
are unencumbered by RTBs, which is the case if political pressures are sufficiently low.
       We then examine how RTBs depend on natural trade costs, holding tariffs fixed. We find
that reducing natural trade costs for a given product reduces the probability that imports
of that product are choked by RTBs; and at the aggregate level, globalization leads to an
expansion of trade at the extensive margin. This seems surprising, because natural trade
costs and RTBs in our model have identical economic effects, so one might expect them to be
substitutes. Importantly, this counterintuitive effect of natural trade costs arises if and only
if RTBs affect trade through the extensive margin; if RTBs are non-prohibitive, a reduction
  11
     This feature of our model is consistent with the above-mentioned empirical finding that RTBs have
important impacts on the extensive margin of trade. In the existing literature, the most popular explanation
for extensive-margin effects relies on fixed trade costs and imperfect competition. Our model, on the other
hand, can explain extensive-margin effects of RTBs without invoking fixed costs or imperfect competition,
but rather as arising from a fundamental non-convexity in the government optimization problem, which is
due to the fact that consumer surplus and producer surplus are convex in prices.
  12
     The result that RTBs (when non-prohibitive) over-respond to tariff changes, so that tariff reductions have
a perverse trade-reducing effect, contrasts with the policy-substitution effects highlighted in other papers,
where typically the direct effect of the tariff reduction outweighs the indirect effect due to policy substitution
toward non-tariff measures, so that trade increases as a result. See for example Copeland (1990) and Horn
et al. (2010).



                                                        5
in natural trade costs has the intuitive effect of increasing RTBs. Thus the impact of natural
trade costs on RTBs depends critically on whether RTBs operate at the extensive or the
intensive margin.
   The above results have important implications for studies aimed at evaluating the welfare
gains from reducing tariffs or natural trade costs. Ignoring the possibility of RTBs will lead
to over stating the welfare gains from tariff liberalization, but may well lead to under stating
the welfare gains from reductions in natural trade costs (globalization). Tariff reductions
trigger policy substitution toward RTBs, so if the endogenous RTB response is ignored, the
welfare gains from tariff liberalization will be overstated. In contrast, to the extent that RTBs
operate at the extensive margin, reductions in natural trade costs mitigate a government’s
incentive to use RTBs, and hence if RTBs are ignored the welfare gains from globalization
will be understated.
   We then examine the optimal tariff commitments. We start with the benchmark case of
no political uncertainty. In this case, the optimal tariff cuts just prevent RTBs from arising
in equilibrium. But even if RTBs remain off-equilibrium, the potential for their use affects
the extent of tariff liberalization: tariffs are set above the level that would be optimal if
RTBs were unavailable, in order to avoid a “protectionist backlash” in the form of RTBs.
   In the presence of political uncertainty, even if tariffs are optimized, RTBs arise in equi-
librium for a range of products. Furthermore, the model suggests that increasing political
uncertainty tends to increase the occurrence of RTBs in equilibrium.
   We then examine how optimal tariffs are affected by a decrease in natural trade costs.
Recall that, for the set of products where RTBs operate only through the extensive margin
of trade, globalization reduces the government’s incentive to use RTBs. Intuitively, then,
globalization should reduce the need to keep tariffs high as a way to mitigate such incentive.
We find that this intuition is correct if political uncertainty is sufficiently small, but if political
uncertainty is large the result may be reversed. Furthermore, for the set of products such
that RTBs can operate also through the intensive margin, globalization always increases the


                                                  6
optimal tariffs (a reflection of the fact that for these products globalization increases the
government’s incentive to use RTBs).
       In the final part of the paper we extend the model in two directions: First we consider
the case of partially wasteful trade barriers, meaning that only part of the revenue/rents
associated with the policy is wasted. In this case, we find that our main results continue to
hold, though with some interesting qualifications. Second, we consider the case of two large
countries that sign a trade agreement to address terms-of-trade externalities. We show that
the key qualitative results of the small-country case carry over to this environment.
       In the related literature, there are a few papers that focus on the substitutability between
tariffs and non-tariff measures such as production subsidies and domestic regulations, but
the implications of these policies are very different from those of RTBs. See for example
Copeland (1990), Bagwell and Staiger (2001a) and Horn et al. (2010).13 The paper by
Beshkar and Lashkaripour (2016) is more closely related to ours. They consider a model
where governments maximize welfare and show that, if tariffs are not available, RTBs can be
optimal for sectors (if any) that are characterized by a trade elasticity higher than twice the
world average trade elasticity. The reason RTBs can be optimal in a given sector is that they
improve the terms of trade for other sectors by depressing foreign wages. In contrast, our
paper presents a political-economy theory of RTBs, where RTBs can be optimal for sectors
characterized by strong domestic political pressures, even if RTBs do not affect the terms of
trade. As a consequence, our model can explain the use of RTBs also for small countries.
Furthermore, while they focus on the interdependencies in trade policies across sectors, we
focus more on the within-sector impact of changes in tariffs and natural trade costs on RTBs,
as well as how the extensive and intensive margins of trade are impacted in turn, and how
the availability of RTBs affects the tariffs specified in a trade agreement.14
  13
      On the empirical side, papers that have found evidence of policy-substitution effects are Ray (1981),
Ray and Marvel (1984), Bown and Tovar (2011), Limão and Tovar (2011) and Eibl and Malik (2016).
   14
      Ossa (2011) is another model where wasteful trade barriers can increase welfare, specifically because of
firm-delocation effects under monopolistic competition. However, Ossa’s basic model considers wasteful trade
barriers only for tractability, whereas his main focus is on tariff agreements, which he analyzes numerically.



                                                      7
    Also related is the paper by Limão and Tovar (2011), who consider partially wasteful
trade barriers. The focus of their paper however is very different from ours: they argue that
a government may want to commit to lower tariffs to improve its bargaining position vis-
à-vis domestic lobbies in the choice of non-tariff measures. Furthermore, they assume that
the optimal level of the non-tariff barrier is always interior; but as we show in this paper,
this assumption is unlikely to hold for RTBs, or more generally for policies with a large
share of wasted revenue. Finally, Staiger (2012) focuses on trade facilitation agreements
that encourage trade-cost-reducing investments. His approach is complementary to ours, in
that we allow a government to freely increase trade costs above their “natural” levels, while
Staiger allows a government to decrease trade costs below their “natural” levels by making
costly investments.
    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 lays out the basic model. Section 3 focuses
on the case where RTBs affect only the extensive margin of trade. Section 4 considers the
richer scenario where RTBs can also affect the intensive margin. Section 5 considers partially
wasteful trade barriers. Section 6 considers terms-of-trade motivated trade agreements.
Section 7 concludes. Proofs not given in the text are in the Appendix.



2     The Basic Model

In this section we lay out the basic model. We start by describing the political-economic
environment, and then introduce trade agreements.


2.1    The Political-Economic Environment

The setting is a small open economy that we call Home, trading with a large rest of the
world, whose variables are denoted by an asterisk (*). Markets are perfectly competitive.
The economy produces and consumes a continuum of products plus an outside good (which
we take to be the numéraire).


                                              8
       In order to make our key points in the most transparent way, we assume quasi-linear and
separable preferences.15 Each individual at Home has the following utility function:

                                                    Z
                                         U = x0 +           ui (xi )di                                (1)
                                                        i



Given this utility function, the demand function for each of the nonnuméraire goods depends
only on the good’s own price: xi (pi ) = −s′i (pi ), where si (pi ) ≡ ui (xi (pi )) − pi xi (pi ) is the
surplus the consumer derives from good i. Integrating this over all goods i and adding
                                                     R
individual income Y gives their indirect utility: Y + i si (pi )di.
       On the supply side, each nonnuméraire good is produced using a specific factor and
mobile labor with constant returns to scale. Aggregate supplies of all factors are fixed, equal
to Ki for specific factor i and L for labor. The numéraire good uses only labor with constant
returns to scale, and we assume that the labor supply is large enough that this good is
always produced in equilibrium. Hence the wage is pinned down in the numéraire good
sector. It is convenient to choose units of measurement such that both the wage and the
aggregate supply of labor are equal to one (though it is sometimes more insightful to write
L explicitly). The return to specific factor i is πi = ri Ki . Given the technology assumed, πi
depends only on pi , so we denote it πi (pi ). By Hotelling’s Lemma, the supply of each good
is given by the derivative of the profit function: yi (pi ) = πi′ (pi ). Hence total factor income
            R
equals L + i πi (pi )di.
       Since we want to focus on import barriers, it is convenient to assume that (supply and
demand parameters are such that) all nonnuméraire goods are imported while the numéraire
good is exported. We will focus on specific tariffs τi , so the revenue from a tariff is τi mi (pi ),
where mi (pi ) = xi (pi ) − yi (pi ). Tariff revenue is rebated to citizens in a non-distortionary
way, but the government cannot make targeted lump-sum transfers to specific groups.
                                                                     R              R
   Welfare is defined as aggregate indirect utility. Letting Ȳ = L + i πi (pi )di + i τi m(pi )di
  15
    Allowing for substitutability across goods complicates the analysis without adding much insight. In an
alternative version of our model where individuals have Melitz-Ottaviano preferences, it can be shown that
our qualitative results remain unchanged.

                                                    9
                                                                                 R
denote aggregate income, we can write welfare as W̄ = Ȳ +                           i
                                                                                         si (pi )di, or equivalently:

                                   Z
                  W̄ = L +                 Wi di   where:      Wi ≡ si (pi ) + πi (pi ) + τi mi (pi )                   (2)
                                       i



       In addition to the tariffs, there are two types of trade costs: red-tape barriers (RTBs),
which are denoted θi , and “natural” (exogenous) trade costs δi . Focusing on RTBs first, for
the present we assume that they generate no revenue or rents; in Section 5 we will allow
them to generate some rents. The natural trade costs δi are unaffected by trade policy but
can be interpreted as determined by factors such as technology and geography. RTBs and
natural trade costs contribute to the wedge between domestic price and world price, so we
can write the domestic price of good i as:


                                                   pi = p∗i + δi + τi + θi                                              (3)


We now introduce the government’s objective function. To capture the idea that the gov-
ernment chooses trade policy subject to domestic political pressures, we assume that the
government maximizes the following politically-adjusted welfare function:

                          Z
               V̄ = L +           Vi di        where:     Vi ≡ si (pi ) + (1 + γi )πi (pi ) + τi mi (pi )               (4)
                              i



The weight γi > 0 reflects the political influence of domestic producers of good i. This type
of reduced-form government objective is similar to Hillman (1982) and Baldwin (1987), and
can be “micro-founded” along the lines of Grossman and Helpman (1994).16
  16
     We assume that tariffs and RTBs are chosen by a unitary government, but an alternative interpretation
of the same setting is that RTBs are under the control of low-level bureaucrats, e.g. customs officials, who
have a different objective than the central government. Suppose that customs officials can “sell” RTBs
to local producers (in the spirit of Grossman and Helpman’s “protection for sale”), and their objective is
to maximize the bribes they receive. If we think of the relationship between the central government and
customs officials as a principal-agent relationship, and we abstract from informational frictions, then RTBs
will maximize the joint surplus of principal and agent, which in this setting boils down to a weighted average
of consumer surplus, producer surplus and revenue. We also note that, since our basic model assumes that
RTBs generate no revenue, it does not capture situations where customs officials can extract bribes from
exporters, because such bribes are a form of revenue. However, if the government attaches less weight to


                                                             10
    Note that the structure we have laid out is separable across products. Nevertheless it
is instructive to considering a setting with many imported products, rather than a single
one, because this allows us to examine how the extensive and intensive margins of trade are
affected by changes such as general reductions in tariffs and natural trade costs.
    Before we consider trade agreements, it is useful to examine the benchmark case of
noncooperative policy choice, that is the case in which the home government can choose
tariffs and RTBs to maximize its politically-motivated objective without any constraints.
    Given separability across products, we can focus on a single imported product i. Both
the tariff and the RTB protect home firms, but only the tariff raises revenue. Hence, in
the absence of any constraints on its use of the tariff, the government will never use the
RTB. Assuming that Vi is concave in τi , the optimal noncooperative tariff is defined by the
following first-order condition:
                                         dVi
                                             = γi yi + τi m′i = 0                                       (5)
                                         dτi

This yields the optimal noncooperative tariff τiN = − γmi y′i . We note that τiN is prohibitive if
                                                                 i

γi is above some threshold level, which we label         γiH .


2.2     Trade Agreements

We are now ready to introduce trade agreements in our model. We distinguish between an
ex-ante stage in which the Home government can sign a trade agreement, and an ex-post
stage in which the government chooses trade policies subject to the constraints imposed by
the trade agreement.
    We assume that the political weights γi are observed ex post but uncertain ex ante.
Ex ante, each γi is distributed according to some cumulative distribution function Gi (γi ),
with associated density function gi (γi ). We assume that gi (γi ) is continuous with support
[γimin , γimax ]. The political weights are assumed to be independent across products. All other
such bribes than to the other components of welfare, this scenario fits in our extension of Section 5, where
we consider non-tariff barriers with partial waste of revenue.



                                                    11
parameters of the model are assumed to be deterministic.17
    As mentioned in the introduction, we view trade agreements as contracts that are in-
complete in two dimensions. First, a trade agreement can specify tariffs but not RTBs,
reflecting the difficulties of verifying RTBs ex-post and of describing them in detail ex ante.
This means that the agreement leaves discretion over RTBs. Note that, since RTBs are not
covered by the agreement, they can respond flexibly to political pressures ex post.
    Second, the agreement cannot specify contingent tariffs. In our setting, the relevant
contingencies are the political shocks γi , so we are assuming that tariffs cannot be made
contingent on political shocks (while they can be tailored to all other product characteristics).
This means that the agreement also displays some rigidity.18 As will become clear, in our
model the co-existence of rigidity and discretion in the trade agreement is responsible for
the emergence of RTBs in equilibrium.
    We will examine the implications of a trade agreement in two steps. First we will take
tariff commitments as exogenous, and highlight the implications of tariff reductions for the
use of RTBs, as well as the impact of some key parameter changes (in particular, a decline
in natural trade costs) when tariffs are held fixed. This will serve three purposes: first,
when we examine the comparative-statics effects of parameter changes on RTBs, this can
   17
      The role that political uncertainty plays in the model is to generate a setting where tariffs cannot be
fully contingent. An alternative approach would be to assume that each good i is differentiated along some
dimension (e.g. quality) and the tariff on each good i must be uniform.
   18
      Horn et al. (2010) develop a model that explains rigidity and discretion in trade agreements as arising
endogenously from contracting costs. As discussed in that paper, there may exist ways to mitigate the
issues of rigidity and discretion in trade agreements. For example, one way to mitigate the rigidity of tariff
commitments is to use tariff caps instead of exact tariff commitments (see also Amador and Bagwell (2013)).
Tariff caps allow downward flexibility in the choice of tariffs. Such flexibility can improve efficiency in some
states of the world, but it cannot completely eliminate the inefficiency from rigidity. As we discuss later in
the paper, our main results are qualitatively unchanged when we consider tariff caps instead of exact tariff
commitments. There may also be ways to mitigate the problem of discretion over non-tariff policies: for
example, the agreement could be structured as an “outcome-based” contract whereby the importing country
guarantees a minimum volume of imports. Arguably, the GATT’s so-called “non-violation” clause (Article
XXIII:1(b)) falls in this broad category of rules. An important limitation of an outcome-based contract
however is that, if there are demand or supply shocks that affect trade volume, the contract needs to be fully
contingent on these demand and supply shocks, and this may be very difficult or not even feasible. Just as
in Horn et al. (2010), in this paper we focus on “instrument-based” contracts rather than outcome-based
contracts. A formal examination of the tradeoffs between these two types of contracts in a more general
stochastic setting would be a worthwhile endeavor, but one that is beyond the scope of this paper.



                                                      12
be interpreted as a short-run scenario, since in reality tariffs are renegotiated infrequently;
second, when we examine the effect of exogenous tariff changes on RTBs, these can be
interpreted as tariff changes caused by shocks that are outside our model; and third, the
case of exogenous tariffs can capture situations where a country does not have much choice
on the tariff commitments, for example because it must choose whether or not to join a
pre-existing trade agreement.
       The second step will be to consider explicitly the formation of a trade agreement and
examine the optimal tariff commitments.               In the basic model we consider a domestic-
commitment motivated trade agreement, focusing on a small country, but in Section 6 we
will consider also the case of a terms-of-trade motivated trade agreement between two large
countries. We capture domestic-commitment motives in a very stylized way, by assuming
that the government’s ex-ante objective is different from its ex-post objective. In particular,
ex ante the government maximizes social welfare (given by (2)), but when choosing trade
policies ex post it maximizes the politically-adjusted social welfare function (given by (4)).19
One interpretation of this reduced-form setting is that, when the agreement is signed, the
government is in “constitution-writing” mode, and would like to prevent future policy-makers
from engaging in protectionism. Alternatively, this setting could capture a government that
faces time-consistency issues and would like to prevent its future self from caving in to do-
mestic political pressures. This reduced-form approach can be given micro-foundations, for
example, along the lines of Maggi and Rodrı́guez-Clare (1998) or Mitra (2002).



3        RTBs and the Extensive Margin of Trade

We are now ready to launch into the analysis of our basic model. In this section we focus
on the case where RTBs affect only the extensive margin of trade, whereas in Section 4 we
will consider the more general setting where RTBs can also affect the intensive margin.
  19
     Our qualitative results would not change if we allowed for political pressures also at the ex-ante stage,
as long as they are less strong than at the ex-post stage.



                                                     13
3.1    Exogenous Tariff Commitments

In this subsection we examine the government’s ex-post choice of RTBs given an exogenous
set of tariff commitments.
   As a preliminary step, it is instructive to focus on the benchmark case where RTBs are
the only instruments available, for example because a trade agreement sets the tariffs at
zero. In this case, we ask, when will the government impose RTBs?
   Recall that, given the separability of our structure, we can focus on a single product.
The key observation here is that if τi = 0 then Vi is convex in θi , because both consumer
and producer surplus are convex in pi :

                             dVi                         d2 Vi
                       (i)       = γ i yi − mi    (ii)         = γi yi′ − m′i > 0             (6)
                             dθi                         dθi2

This implies a corner solution: the optimal θi is either zero or prohibitive. Let ViF T denote the
value of Vi when evaluated at free trade and ViN T (for “non traded”) its value when evaluated
at prohibitive trade costs. The optimal RTB is prohibitive if and only if ViN T > ViF T . This
is the case if the political weight γi exceeds a threshold level:

                                                              sFi T − sN
                                                                       i
                                                                         T
                        ViN T > ViF T     ⇔      γi > γiL ≡                 −1                (7)
                                                              πiN T − πiF T

The condition in (7) means that γi is high enough that the gain in producer surplus when
moving from free trade to no trade is valued more highly than the loss in consumer surplus.
It is easy to show that γiL < γiH . To rule out uninteresting cases, we assume that there is a
non-empty intersection between the support of γi and the interval (γiL , γiH ).
   The benchmark case in which tariffs are not available illustrates a simple but fundamental
feature of the government’s unilateral choice of wasteful trade barriers: it may be optimal to
use such barriers if more efficient trade policies are not available, but then the government
optimization problem is non-convex, due to the absence of revenue. This non-convexity will



                                                  14
play a key role in what follows, and indeed will be the driver of the extensive-margin effects
of RTBs in our model.
       We are now ready to examine the government’s ex-post choice of RTBs given arbitrary
tariff commitments. Suppose that the tariff for product i is constrained at some level τi < τiN ,
and consider the ex-post choice of θi given this tariff. A key determinant of such ex-post
choice is whether Vi is concave or convex in θi . Relative to the previous case of zero tariffs,
an increase in the RTB now has an additional effect: increasing θi lowers tariff revenue.
Because of this effect, Vi may be concave for a range of τi if import demand mi is sufficiently
concave. To see this, differentiate (4) with respect to θi , allowing for a positive tariff:


                            dVi                                 d2 Vi
                      (i)       = γi yi − mi + τi m′i    (ii)         = γi yi′ − m′i + τi m′′i    (8)
                            dθi                                 dθi2

As the expressions above indicate, if import demand mi is convex or slightly concave then
Vi is convex in θi for all τi , but if mi is sufficiently concave then Vi is concave in θi for τi > 0.
       To make some key points in the simplest way, in this section we assume that, for all
products, Vi is convex in θi for all τi , deferring until Section 4 the more general case in which
Vi may be convex for some products and concave for others.
       If Vi is convex, the ex-post choice of θi exhibits a bang-bang pattern: it is either zero
or prohibitive, depending on the realized political weight and the tariff. We let θiR (γi , τi )
denote the ex-post choice of θi as a function of γi and τi . We call this the “RTB response
function.” Here and throughout the analysis, in order to avoid cluttering the notation, we
omit the argument δi from the RTB response function and all other functions, even though
this will be a key parameter of interest.
       It is immediate to show that there exists a threshold γiJ (τi ) such that the RTB response
is prohibitive for γi > γiJ (τi ) and zero for γi ≤ γiJ (τi ).20 Figure 1 illustrates this result, and
Remark 1 states it formally.

  20
       We assume that in case of indifference the government chooses θi = 0.




                                                        15
                 Figure 1: RTB Response as a Function of γi : Bang-Bang Case


Remark 1. Given τi < τiN , there exists a threshold γiJ (τi ) such that θiR (γi , τi ) is prohibitive
if γi > γiJ (τi ) and zero if γi ≤ γiJ (τi ).

Remark 1 is intuitive, given that the optimal θi must be at a corner: holding the tariff fixed,
imports of product i will be choked by RTBs if the realized political weight for this product
is high, while RTBs will not be used at all if the realized political weight is low.
    Next we turn to the impact of tariffs on RTBs. It is intuitive and easy to show that the
threshold γiJ (τi ) is increasing in τi . As a consequence, it is clear that lowering τi increases
the probability that imports of product i will be choked by red tape.
    Consider next the impact of a general decrease in tariffs across all products. Let F choke
denote the fraction of products whose imports are choked by red tape. An immediate
implication of the observation above is that, if τi falls for all products, P r(F choke < x)
decreases weakly for any x, therefore F choke increases in the first-order stochastic sense. The
following proposition summarizes the impact of tariff reductions on RTBs at the product
level and at the aggregate level:

Proposition 1. (i) The probability that imports of product i are choked by RTBs increases
as τi falls; (ii) If τi falls for all products, F choke increases in the first-order stochastic sense.

Proposition 1 reflects a kind of “policy substitution” effect: when tariffs are lower, the
government has more incentive to use red-tape barriers. The novel aspect of this substitution

                                                 16
effect is that it occurs at the extensive margin.21
    We next examine the effect of tariff liberalization on trade when we take into account both
the direct effect of the tariff changes and the induced RTB response. As a direct consequence
of the tariff reductions, trade increases at the intensive margin, because conditional on a
product being imported the tariff reduction does not trigger the use of RTBs; but trade
shrinks at the extensive margin, because the fraction of products whose imports are choked
by RTBs increases.

Corollary 1. The joint effect of tariff liberalization and the induced RTB response is an
increase of trade at the intensive margin and a contraction of trade at the extensive margin.

    Corollary 1 highlights an interesting decoupling of the intensive-margin and extensive-
margin effects of tariff liberalization: while the intensive-margin effect goes in the intuitive
direction, the extensive-margin effect goes in the opposite direction because of the induced
RTB response.
    Next we focus on the impact of natural trade costs on RTBs. In light of the substitutabil-
ity between tariffs and RTBs, one might think that a reduction in natural trade costs should
increase the government’s temptation to impose RTBs. Indeed, natural trade costs and
red-tape barriers enter the government’s objective function only through their sum δi + θi ,
suggesting that δi and θi should be even more closely substitutable than τi and θi . However,
this intuition turns out not to be correct.
    The key point is that, for each product, the threshold political weight γiJ increases as δi
decreases. To see why, consider a configuration of parameters such that the government is
indifferent between θi = 0 and a prohibitive value of θi . Since Vi is convex in θi and takes
the same value at the two extremes of θi , it follows that Vi is U-shaped in θi , and thus a
small increase in θi from zero reduces Vi . But an increase in δi has the same effect as an
increase in θi , and has no impact on the no-trade payoff level, ViN T . Hence a rise in δi favors
  21
     Policy-substitution effects have been highlighted in the literature for other non-tariff measures, but not
at the extensive margin. See, e.g., Copeland (1990), Horn et al. (2010) and Limão and Tovar (2011).


                                                      17
the prohibitive level of the RTB over the zero level. Figure 2 visualizes this point.
                           !"#




                         !"$%#




                                  0+δ"#                      (θ"+δ")!"# θ"+δ"

                           Figure 2: RTBs and Natural Trade Costs


   An alternative perspective to understand this result is to consider the cross derivative of
Vi with respect to θi and δi . Clearly, this cross derivative is equal to the second derivative
of Vi with respect to θi , which in this setting is positive. Thus, when the objective function
is convex in θi , so that the optimum is at a corner, θi is complementary to δi .
   Consider next the impact of a general fall in natural trade costs (globalization). Applying
a similar aggregation logic as the one we used above for tariffs, it is easy to argue that, if δi
falls for all products, F choke must decrease in the first-order stochastic sense, and therefore
trade expands at the extensive margin. We can thus state:

Proposition 2. Holding tariffs constant: (i) The probability that imports of product i are
choked by red tape is increasing in the natural trade cost δi . (ii) Globalization implies a
reduction of F choke in the first-order stochastic sense.

Proposition 2(i) suggests a cross-sectional prediction of the model: products characterized
by lower natural trade costs are less likely to be hit by RTBs. Proposition 2(ii) suggests a
“time-series” prediction of the model: holding tariffs fixed, globalization should lead to fewer



                                               18
RTBs, and through this channel, to an expansion of trade at the extensive margin.22
       Before proceeding, we note an important implication of the results presented above. If
one evaluates the welfare gains from a reduction in tariffs or a reduction in natural trade costs
(globalization) ignoring the possibility of RTBs, one will over state the welfare gains from
tariff liberalization, but under state the welfare gains from globalization. Tariff reductions
trigger policy substitution toward RTBs, so it is obvious that if the endogenous RTB response
is ignored, the welfare gains from tariff liberalization will be overstated. But the sign of this
“bias” is reversed when evaluating the welfare effects of globalization, because reductions in
natural trade costs reduce a government’s incentive to use RTBs.


3.2        Optimal Tariff Commitments

In this subsection we examine the optimal choice of tariff commitments. The agreement is
chosen ex ante to maximize the Home country’s welfare, taking into account that ex post
the government will be subject to political pressures. Recall that the agreement can only
specify tariffs, and that the tariffs cannot be contingent on the political shocks (γi ).
       It is instructive to start with the benchmark case in which there is no political uncertainty,
in the sense that the distribution of each γi is degenerate at some value γi0 . In this case each
tariff can be tailored to the political weight of a product (as well as to the other product
characteristics), so there is no rigidity in the tariffs. For this reason we call the optimal
tariffs in this scenario the “bespoke” tariffs, and denote them by τiB (γi0 ).
       Given the separability of our structure, we can optimize the tariff product by product.
Focusing on product i, the optimization problem can be written as follows:


 τiB (γi0 ) ≡ arg max Wi τi , θiR (γi0 , τi ) ,              θiR (γi0 , τi ) ≡ arg max Vi (τi , θi , γi0 ) (9)
                        !                    
                                                  where
                    τi                                                            θi

  22
    Note that the impact of a general reduction in natural trade costs on trade (when taking into account
the induced RTB response) is that trade increases both at the extensive and the intensive margin: trade
volume increases for products that are RTB-free before and after the change, and the fraction of products
whose imports are choked by RTBs decreases.



                                                   19
Recall from Proposition 1 that θiR (γi0 , τi ) is prohibitive if and only if γi0 > γiJ (τi ), where γiJ (τi )
is increasing in τi . It follows immediately that θiR is prohibitive if and only if τi < τiJ (γi0 ),
where τiJ (·) is the inverse of γiJ (·). Intuitively, then, the bespoke tariff τiB (γi0 ) is the lowest
tariff that does not trigger RTBs, hence it coincides with τiJ (γi0 ).23 Figure 3 illustrates the
bespoke tariff for product i. For all tariffs below τiJ (γi0 ) a prohibitive RTB is triggered, thus
yielding the no-trade level of welfare WiN T ; if the tariff is raised slightly above τiJ (γi0 ) the
RTB response jumps down to zero, so the welfare level jumps up, and then falls as the tariff
increases further. It follows that the bespoke tariff is τiJ (γi0 ).
                            $!%&!#
                                                          &!(τ!) #
                                                          $!(τ!) #



                             $!'(#




                             &!'(#


                                      τ!!(γ!")=τ!"(γ!")              τ!##   τ!#$# τ!#

                                     Figure 3: The Bespoke Tariff


       Next we ask how the bespoke tariff varies with the natural trade cost δi . Recall from
the discussion after Proposition 2 that decreasing δi reduces the incentive to impose RTBs.
There we showed that, given the tariff, the threshold political weight γiJ is decreasing in
δi . With the same logic it is easy to show that the threshold tariff τiJ (γi0 ) – and hence the
bespoke tariff τiB (γi0 ) – goes down as δi decreases. Summarizing our results for the bespoke
tariff:

Remark 2. If the distribution of γi is degenerate at γi0 (so there is no rigidity in the tariff
commitment), then: (i) the optimal tariff for product i is the lowest tariff that does not
  23
    Recall the assumption that, in case of indifference, the government chooses θi = 0. If instead it chooses
θi = 0 with probability less than one, then the optimal tariff will be “just” above τiJ (γi0 ).

                                                             20
trigger choking by red tape; (ii) the optimal tariff is increasing in the natural trade cost δi .

       The intuition for Remark 2(i) is simple: a complete trade agreement would specify zero
trade barriers in this small open economy, but given that the agreement cannot specify
RTBs, the optimal (incomplete) agreement sets a tariff which is just high enough to avoid a
“protectionist backlash” that would choke imports. Note that, in this benchmark case where
tariffs are fully contingent, no RTBs emerge in equilibrium. However, the potential for use
of RTBs limits the extent of tariff liberalization: if RTBs were not available the optimal
agreement would lower tariffs all the way to zero, but given that RTBs are available, the
optimal agreement sets strictly positive tariffs to prevent RTBs from emerging.24
       Remark 2(ii) states that, in this scenario, optimal tariffs are lower when natural trade
costs are lower. Intuitively, if natural trade costs are lower the government is less tempted
to use RTBs for given tariffs, so there is less need to keep tariffs high.
       Now we introduce political uncertainty, by considering a non-degenerate distribution of
γi for each i. The optimal tariff, denoted τ̄i , maximizes expected welfare for product i:

                                                              Z    γimax
                                   τ̄i ≡ arg max                           Wi (τi , θiR (γi , τi ))dGi (γi )               (10)
                                                     τi           γimin



Given the bang-bang nature of the RTB response function, we can write expected welfare
from (10) as:

 Z    γiJ (τi )                            Z     γimax
                  Wi (τi , 0)dGi (γi ) +                   WiN T dGi (γi ) = Gi (γiJ (τi ))Wi (τi ) + [1 − Gi (γiJ (τi ))]WiN T
     γimin                                     γiJ (τi )
                                                                                                                           (11)
                                                    Rb
where we adopt the convention                         a
                                                           f (x)dx = 0 if a > b. When γi < γiJ (τi ) the product is
imported at the tariff τi , but when γi > γiJ (τi ) imports of product i are choked by red tape,
  24
     This effect is reminiscent of the “indirect incentive-management” effect in Horn et al. (2010), where
tariffs need to be kept relatively high to mitigate the incentive of governments to use production subsidies,
if these are not specified in the agreement.




                                                                           21
yielding the no-trade welfare level. The first-order condition (FOC) for the optimal tariff is:

                                       dγiJ (τi )                            ∂Wi (τi , 0)
                      gi (γiJ (τi ))              ∆Wi (τi ) + Gi (γiJ (τi ))              =0        (12)
                                         dτi                                   ∂τi

where ∆Wi (τi ) ≡ Wi (τi , 0) − WiN T is the welfare loss caused by a prohibitive RTB relative
to a zero RTB (for a given tariff).
   The FOC above highlights the tradeoffs involved in the optimal choice of tariff. An
increase in the tariff has two distinct effects on welfare. The first term is positive and is due
to the fact that raising the tariff reduces the range of γi for which imports are choked by red
tape, by increasing the threshold γiJ and hence generating a discrete welfare gain ∆Wi for
values of γi close to γiJ . The second term in (12), on the other hand, is negative and reflects
the adverse “infra-marginal” welfare effects of increasing the tariff for the range of γi such
that red-tape barriers are not imposed.
   We next argue that, when tariffs are optimized, RTBs are more likely to arise when
political uncertainty is larger.
   Let γimed denote the median value of γi . Consider the left-hand side of (12) evaluated
at τiJ (γimed ). Recall that the first term is positive and the second term is negative. Note
that γiJ (τiJ (γimed )) = γimed and Gi (γimed ) = 1/2. Thus, if we reduce the density of γi at the
median, gi (γimed ), the second term evaluated at τiJ (γimed ) does not change. Next focus on the
first term. If gi (γimed ) is close to zero, the left-hand side of (12) is negative, and hence the
optimal tariff is below τiJ (γimed ). On the other hand, if gi (γimed ) is high enough, the first term
outweighs the second term and hence the left-hand side of (12) is positive, thus the optimal
tariff is above τiJ (γimed ). Next note that τi > τiJ (γimed ) is equivalent to γiJ (τi ) > γimed , which
implies that product i is choked by red tape with probability lower than 1/2. We can thus
state:

Remark 3. If gi (γimed ) is sufficiently high, the probability that imports of product i are choked
by red tape is lower than 1/2. If gi (γimed ) is sufficiently low, the probability that imports of


                                                          22
product i are choked by red tape is higher than 1/2.

   To interpret this result, suppose that the density gi (γi ) takes a common parametric form,
such as Pareto, normal, lognormal, or uniform. Then the case in which gi (γimed ) is very high
can be interpreted as the case of small uncertainty, and the case in which gi (γimed ) is very
low can be interpreted as the case of large uncertainty. Recall also from Remark 2(i) that,
if there is no uncertainty at all, no RTBs arise under the optimal tariff. The above results
thus suggest that RTBs should be more likely to arise for products characterized by larger
political uncertainty. The intuition behind this result is simple: the “ideal” level of the tariff
commitment is the one that just prevents RTBs from arising, but since tariffs cannot be
contingent on political shocks, increasing political uncertainty causes “errors” and induces
RTBs in equilibrium.
   Next we focus on the impact of natural trade costs on the optimal tariff commitments.
First note that, if political uncertainty is sufficiently small, in the sense that the distribution
of γi is sufficiently concentrated, the optimal tariff is increasing in δi . This follows from
Remark 2(ii), where we showed that, if the distribution of γi is degenerate, the optimal tariff
is increasing in δi . By continuity, this is true also if the distribution of γi is very concentrated.
The intuition for this result is that a reduction in natural trade costs reduces a government’s
incentive to use RTBs, and hence there is less need to keep tariffs high to keep this incentive
in check. However, this result may be reversed if political uncertainty is large enough. A fall
in δi affects the first-order condition (12) through multiple channels, so it easy to see why in
general the overall effect can go in either direction. In particular, one of these effects is that
reducing δi increases ∆Wi , the welfare loss from choking trade; this effect pushes in favor of
a higher tariff. For example, if demand is linear, supply is fixed and the distribution of γi is
either Pareto or uniform, we find that the optimal tariff is increasing in δi when dispersion
is sufficiently large. In the Appendix we prove:

Proposition 3. If political uncertainty is sufficiently small, a fall in δi reduces the optimal
tariff. However, this effect may be reversed if political uncertainty is sufficiently large.

                                                 23
       Before concluding this section, we note that our main results would not be affected if the
agreement specified tariff caps instead of exact tariff commitments (see also footnote 18). One
can show that the optimal tariff cap is higher than the optimal exact tariff commitment,
because the downward flexibility associated with tariff caps reduces the marginal cost of
raising the tariff level, but our results are not altered in a qualitative way.25



4        RTBs and the Two Margins of Trade

In the previous section we focused on the case in which equilibrium RTBs affect only the
extensive margin of trade. Here we focus on the more general setting where RTBs can also
operate at the intensive margin.
       Recall from equation (8) that for product i, given a positive tariff, if import demand is
sufficiently concave the government objective Vi is concave. In this case, the RTB response
θiR (γi , τi ) may be non-prohibitive for a range of γi and τi . An example where θiR (γi , τi ) is
non-prohibitive for a range of γi and τi is the case in which supply is fixed and the demand
function takes the Pollak (1971) form, that is xi (pi ) = αi − βi pσi i , with σi > 2.
       In this section we allow for general demand and supply functions, so that RTBs may be
non-prohibitive for a subset of goods. As in the previous section, we start by focusing on
the case of exogenous tariff commitments.


4.1       Exogenous Tariff Commitments

Let us start by focusing on a given product i. Fix the tariff τi and consider how the optimal
RTB depends on the realization of the political weight γi . Clearly θiR can be non-prohibitive
only for an intermediate interval of γi , because θiR must be zero if γi is close to zero and
  25
    The main change would be that the government can choose both θi and τi subject to the tariff cap. In
general there will be a low interval of γi such that the tariff cap is not binding, in which case the government
chooses the optimal noncooperative tariff and θi = 0. Clearly this does not affect the bang-bang nature of
the RTB response function, with a threshold level of γi such that θi is zero below it and prohibitive above it.
When it comes to the optimal tariff cap, there would be one additional term in the first-order condition (12),
corresponding to the range of γi where the tariff cap is not binding, but our results would still go through.


                                                      24
prohibitive if γi is sufficiently high. It is also intuitive that, within the non-prohibitive
interval, θiR is increasing in γi . In what follows we let γ̂i (τi ) denote the threshold value of γi
below which θiR is zero, and γ̃i (τi ) the threshold value of γi above which θiR is prohibitive,
with γ̂i (τi ) ≤ γ̃i (τi ). To simplify exposition we assume that, if the non-prohibitive interval
is non-empty (i.e. γ̃i (τi ) < γ̂i (τi )), the function θiR (γi , τi ) is continuous.26 In the Appendix
we prove:

Remark 4. Given τi < τiN , there exist γ̂i (τi ) and γ̃i (τi ) (with γ̂i (τi ) ≤ γ̃i (τi )) such that
θiR (γi , τi ) is zero for γi < γ̂i (τi ), increasing in γi for γi ∈ (γ̂i (τi ), γ̃i (τi )) and prohibitive for
γi > γ̃i (τi ).

    The bang-bang case examined in the previous section corresponds to the case γ̂i (τi ) =
γ̃i (τi ). It is important to keep in mind that we allow for many heterogeneous products, so in
general there may be products for which γ̂i (τi ) < γ̃i (τi ) and products for which γ̂i (τi ) = γ̃i (τi ).
Figure 4 illustrates the RTB response as a function of γi , focusing on the former case.




                   Figure 4: RTB Response as a Function of γi : γ̂i (τi ) < γ̃i (τi )


    How do tariff reductions affect RTBs? It is easy to show that reducing τi decreases both
thresholds γ̂i (τi ) and γ̃i (τi ), and it increases the level of θiR in the non-prohibitive interval
if that interval is non-empty. As a consequence, decreasing τi increases the probability that
  26
     In general θiR (γi , τi ) may have jumps at γ̃i (τi ) and/or γ̂i (τi ). In the case of fixed supply and Pollak
demand, for example, it can be shown that θiR (γi , τi ) may have a jump only at the upper threshold γ̃i (τi );
however, all of our results go through in this case.


                                                        25
product i is affected by RTBs as well as the probability that imports of product i are choked
by RTBs.
       At the aggregate level, the above observations imply that tariff liberalization increases the
fraction of products choked by RTBs (F choke ) as well as the fraction of products “covered” by
RTBs (i.e. such that θi > 0), which we denote by F cov . With a slight abuse of terminology
we will refer to F cov as the “RTB coverage ratio.”27 Formally, if τi decreases for all products,
F choke and F cov increase (weakly) in the first-order stochastic sense.
       Another important point is the following. If the RTB level is non-prohibitive before the
                                                                                          dθiR
tariff change, it will increase by more than the tariff reduction:                        dτi
                                                                                                 < −1. To see this,
                             d2 Vi                           d2 Vi
note from (8) that          dθi dτi
                                      = γi yi′ + τi m′′i <   dθi2
                                                                     = γi yi′ + τi m′′i − m′i < 0. Thus, if RTBs are
non-prohibitive, the government over-compensates for the tariff reduction with an increase
in RTBs, thus total trade cost increases. To gain intuition, recall that the FOC for θi is
dVi
dθi
       = γi yi − mi + τi m′i = 0. Start from a point on the RTB response function, where the
FOC is satisfied, and decrease τi by one unit: to restore the FOC, θi must be increased
                                                                                            dVi
by more than one unit, because θi has a smaller impact than τi on                           dθi
                                                                                                ,   due to the lack of
revenue. In the Appendix we show:

Proposition 4. If τi decreases for all products, the fraction of products choked by RTBs
(F choke ) and the RTB coverage ratio (F cov ) increase in the first-order stochastic sense. More-
over, for all products such that θi is initially non-prohibitive, θi increases by more than the
                     dθ R
tariff reduction ( dτii < −1), so total trade cost increases.

       The above result has an immediate and striking implication for the overall effect of tariff
liberalization on the extensive and intensive margins of trade:

Corollary 2. If τi decreases for all products, trade shrinks at the extensive margin, and it
shrinks also at the intensive margin for all products such that θi is non-prohibitive before and
  27
    Note that, while F choke captures the extensive margin of trade (since it is the fraction of products that
are not traded because of RTBs), F cov captures the extensive margin of RTB use, and the two margins in
general are different.



                                                               26
after the tariff reduction. Trade can increase at the intensive margin only for products such
that θi = 0 before the tariff reduction.

       The result that tariff liberalization (combined with the induced RTB response) leads to a
contraction of trade at the extensive margin mirrors the finding in the bang-bang scenario of
the previous section. But in this richer scenario, tariff reductions can have a perverse negative
effect on trade also at the intensive margin: trade volume decreases for products covered by
non-prohibitive RTBs, because for these products the government over-compensates for the
tariff reduction with an increase in RTBs, so that total trade cost increases.28
       Next we focus on the impact of natural trade costs on RTBs. We will show that, for prod-
ucts such that RTBs can be non-prohibitive (i.e. γ̂i (τi ) < γ̃i (τi )), this impact is dramatically
different than for products such that the RTB response is bang-bang (i.e. γ̂i (τi ) = γ̃i (τi )).
       Let us start by considering a decrease in δi at the product level. The key observation
is that, if γ̂i (τi ) < γ̃i (τi ), a decrease in δi leads to a one-for-one increase in θiR in the non-
prohibitive interval (γ̂i (τi ), γ̃i (τi )) and a decrease in the lower threshold γ̂i (τi ), while the
upper threshold γ̃i (τi ) is not affected. That a decrease in δi leads to a one-for-one increase in
θiR when the latter is non-prohibitive follows from the fact that δi and θi enter the objective
Vi through their sum: here, RTBs are used to neutralize the reduction in natural trade costs.
Intuitively, this in turn implies that the lower threshold γ̂i (τi ) decreases. And the reason
why the upper threshold γ̃i (τi ) is not affected is that, for this level of γi , there is an interior
maximum for θi , and the value of the objective at an interior maximum is not affected by a
change in δi , since this is fully offset by the change in θi .
       The above observations have two immediate implications for the impact of natural trade
costs at the product level. First, if the non-prohibitive interval of γi is non-empty (γ̂i (τi ) <
γ̃i (τi )), a decrease in δi weakly increases θi for all γi , but the probability of choking is not
affected. Second, as δi decreases, a range of non-prohibitive θi can emerge, but cannot
disappear; in other words, the thresholds γ̂i (τi ) and γ̃i (τi ) may separate, but cannot merge.
  28
    If the tariff reduction triggers RTBs for a product that initially had none (that is, if γi is below γ̂i before
the change but above γ̂i after the change), the RTB increase may be higher or lower than the tariff decrease.

                                                        27
                          γ!
                                                   θ!'(%&)!*!+,$'




                                θ!!!"#$%!&%'


                                                        θ!'-'.'




                                                                       δ!

                Figure 5: RTBs and Natural Trade Costs in the General Case

The following proposition (proved in the Appendix) summarizes the impact of natural trade
costs at the product level:

Proposition 5. For a given tariff level τi , there exist two intervals of δi (each of which may
be empty): (i) for high values of δi the RTB response is bang-bang, and reducing δi decreases
the probability that imports are choked; (ii) for low values of δi the RTB response is non-
prohibitive for a range of γi , and decreasing δi increases this range, while the probability of
choking stays unchanged.

   Figure 5 illustrates the above result, assuming parameters are such that both intervals of
δi are non-empty. For a level of δi in the higher range, the RTB is either zero or prohibitive
depending on γi , and the range of γi where the RTB is prohibitive shrinks as δi goes down.
For a level of δi in the lower range, an interval of γi appears where the RTB is interior, and
this interval expands as δi falls, while the range of γi where the RTB is prohibitive remains
unchanged.
   Notice the non-monotonic effect of δi on the probability that product i is hit by RTBs:
as δi falls, this probability initially decreases and then it increases.
   We are now ready to examine the effects of a general fall in natural trade costs (global-
ization) at the aggregate level. We let E (for “extensive margin”) denote the set of products
such that γ̂i (τi ) = γ̃i (τi ), so that Proposition 5(i) applies, and I (for “intensive margin”) the

                                                 28
set of products such that γ̂i (τi ) < γ̃i (τi ), so that Proposition 5(ii) applies. Of course, each of
these sets may be empty, depending on parameters. Also, when we talk about a change in
the fraction of products choked by RTBs, we mean it in the first-order stochastic sense.

Corollary 3. Holding tariffs constant, globalization has the following effects: (i) Within
product set E, the fraction of products choked by RTBs decreases, thus trade expands at the
extensive margin. (ii) Within product set I, the extensive margin of trade is not affected, but
the RTB coverage ratio increases, and for these products the level of RTBs increases. (iii)
Set E shrinks (weakly) in favor of set I.

   As Corollary 3 indicates, our model predicts that globalization should reduce RTBs when
these operate at the extensive margin of trade, but increase RTBs when these operate at the
intensive margin.
   The results above also suggest a number of interesting empirical predictions. Conditional
on observing non-prohibitive RTBs, these should be higher when natural trade costs are
lower, both in a cross-sectional sense (RTBs should be higher for products characterized by
lower natural trade costs) and in a time-series sense (RTBs should get higher as natural
trade costs fall). However, the fraction of products choked by RTBs should decrease over
time as natural trade costs fall. And by a similar token, products characterized by lower
natural trade costs should be less likely to be choked by RTBs.
   Before proceeding, we come back to the point made previously that, if RTBs operate at
the extensive margin, ignoring the endogenous choice of RTBs will lead to understating the
welfare gains from reductions in natural trade costs. In the richer scenario considered here
this statement holds, broadly speaking, if product set E is large relative to product set I, so
that the extensive-margin effects of RTBs are stronger than their intensive-margin effects.


4.2     Optimal Tariff Commitments

As in section 3, we start by focusing on the benchmark case of no political uncertainty (the
“bespoke” tariffs).

                                                 29
    Let us first characterize how the RTB response θiR (γi , τi ) varies with the tariff τi for a
given γi . Recalling Remark 4, it is easy to show that, for a given γi , the RTB response θiR
is prohibitive for τi < τ̃i (γi ), non-prohibitive and decreasing in τi for τi ∈ (τ̃i (γi ), τ̂i (γi )), and
zero for τi > τ̂i (γi ), where τ̃i (γi ) is the inverse of γ̃i (τi ), and τ̂i (γi ) is the inverse of γ̂i (τi ).
    Now suppose the distribution of γi is degenerate at γi0 . We can show that the bespoke
tariff is the lowest tariff that does not trigger any red tape: τiB (γi0 ) = τ̂i (γi0 ). Intuitively, the
reason is that in the non-prohibitive range (τ̃i (γi ), τ̂i (γi )) the RTB over-responds to changes
                dθ R
in the tariff ( dτii < −1), as we noted above, so the benefit of lowering the tariff is outweighed
by the cost of the induced increase in θiR .
    Next consider how the bespoke tariff for product i varies with the natural trade cost
δi . Recall from Remark 2(ii) that, conditional on the product being in set E, the bespoke
tariff is increasing in δi . Now consider a product in set I. We just argued that in this case
the bespoke tariff is τ̂i (γi0 ). Recall also from the discussion leading to Proposition 5 that
γ̂i (τi ) increases with δi for any given τi . This implies that τ̂i (γi ) decreases with δi for any
given γi . Thus in this case the bespoke tariff is decreasing in δi . The intuition is that, when
RTBs operate at the intensive margin, reducing δi increases the government’s incentive to
use RTBs, and an increase in the tariff serves to mitigate this incentive. We can thus state:

Remark 5. If the distribution of γi is degenerate at γi0 : (i) The optimal tariff for product
i is the lowest τi that does not trigger any RTBs. (ii) Conditional on the product being in
set I, the bespoke tariff is decreasing in δi . Conditional on the product being in set E, the
bespoke tariff is increasing in δi .

As Remark 5 indicates, the result that the bespoke tariff prevents any RTBs from arising
applies regardless of whether RTBs operate at the extensive margin or at the intensive margin
of trade. On the other hand, natural trade costs have opposite impacts on the bespoke tariff
depending on whether RTBs operate at the extensive margin or at the intensive margin.
    Recalling from Proposition 5 that a fall in δi can induce a switch of product i from set E
to set I (but not vice-versa), Remark 5 also implies an interesting non-monotonicity. In the

                                                        30
absence of political uncertainty, as δi falls, in general there are two phases (each of which
may be empty): in the first phase the optimal tariff decreases, and in the second phase the
optimal tariff increases. This in turn suggests that globalization may initially lead to tariff
liberalization, but this effect may be reversed at a later stage.
    We next consider the impact of natural trade costs on the optimal tariffs in the presence
of political uncertainty. Recall from Proposition 3 that, conditional on a product being in
set E, the optimal tariff is increasing in δi if political uncertainty is sufficiently small, but
the effect may get reversed if political uncertainty is large. Next consider a product in set
I. Remark 5(ii) suggests that, if political uncertainty is small, the optimal tariff should be
decreasing in δi . In the Appendix we show that this is true not only with small uncertainty,
but for any distribution of γi . The following proposition summarizes our results about the
impact of natural trade costs on the optimal tariffs in this richer scenario:

Proposition 6. For products in set I, the optimal tariff is decreasing in δi , regardless of
the degree of political uncertainty. For products in set E, the optimal tariff is increasing
in δi if political uncertainty is sufficiently small, but this effect may be reversed if political
uncertainty is sufficiently large.

    This result confirms that the effects of natural trade costs on the optimal tariffs are
qualitatively different depending on whether RTBs operate at the intensive margin or at the
extensive margin of trade.



5     Partially Wasteful Trade Barriers

Thus far we have focused on import barriers that do not generate rents. How do our results
extend to the case of import barriers that generate some rents? To address this question,
we revisit the previous analysis by assuming that a fraction φi > 0 of the rents associated
with the trade barrier θi is wasted, as in Anderson and Neary (1992) and Limão and Tovar
(2011). The model analyzed in the previous sections corresponds to the special case where φi

                                               31
equals one. We refer to this more general import barrier as a “Non Tariff Barrier” (NTB).29
       The government’s objective function for good i now becomes Vi = si (pi ) + (1 + γi )πi (pi ) +
(τi + (1 − φi )θi ) mi , where (1 − φi )θi mi is the revenue generated by the NTB. For any φi > 0,
the NTB is a less efficient instrument than a tariff, therefore in the absence of restrictions on
tariffs the government will not use NTBs. But if tariffs are constrained by a trade agreement,
then the government may have an incentive to use NTBs.
       For simplicity, in this section we focus on the case of linear demand and fixed supply.
The first step is to consider whether the government objective is convex or concave. It is
                              d2 Vi
immediate to derive:          dθi2
                                      = (1 − 2φi )m′i . Clearly, Vi is concave in θi if and only if φi < 1/2.
If φi > 1/2, all our results from Section 3 continue to hold. We next examine the case
φi < 1/2.
       If φi < 1/2, so that Vi is concave in θi , the characterization of the NTB response function
is the same as in Section 4. In particular, θiR is zero for low values of γi , prohibitive for
high values of γi , and non-prohibitive for an intermediate interval of γi , as in Remark 4.
Moreover, the impact of tariff reductions is the same as described in Proposition 4.
       Interestingly, however, the impact of natural trade costs on the optimal NTBs is very
different from Section 4. If δi decreases then θiR goes down weakly for all γi and τi , and both
thresholds γ̂i (τi ) and γ̃i (τi ) increase. As a consequence, globalization leads to an increase in
trade both at the extensive margin (the fraction of products whose imports are choked by
NTBs goes down) and at the intensive margin, and the fraction of products covered by NTBs
decreases. What underlies these results is the fact that, if φi < 1/2, NTBs and natural trade
costs are complementary. To see this, notice that with linear demand and fixed supply we
          d2 Vi                                      d2 Vi                         dθiR
have     dδi dθi
                   = −φi m′i > 0, and given that     d2 θi
                                                             < 0 it follows that   dδi
                                                                                          > 0. Notice the contrast
between this case and the case of non-prohibitive RTBs for φi = 1 (examined in Section 4),
where RTBs and natural trade costs are substitutes.
  29
    One of the possible interpretations for the waste of rents is that some rents are dissipated through rent-
seeking activities, or in Jagdish Bhagwati’s terminology, “directly unproductive profit-seeking” activities (see
Bhagwati (1982)). Note that under this interpretation φi could in principle be higher than one (implying
that rents are negative); our results can be easily extended to consider this case.


                                                             32
       A further prediction of this extension of our model is that, as NTBs become more wasteful,
they can switch from an interior solution to a corner solution, but not vice-versa. This
suggests that we should tend to observe fewer non-prohibitive NTBs when these are more
wasteful, and by a similar token, more wasteful NTBs should have a relatively bigger impact
on the extensive margin than on the intensive margin of trade.



6        Terms-of-Trade Motivated Trade Agreements

So far we have focused on domestic commitment as the motivation for a trade agreement.
As we show in this section, the main qualitative insights hold when trade agreements are
motivated by the presence of terms-of-trade (TOT) externalities. The economic structure is
analogous to that of our basic model, except that now there are two large countries, Home
and Foreign. We continue to assume that markets are perfectly competitive and that the
economy produces a continuum of products plus an outside good (which again we take to
be the numéraire). Home is the natural importer of all non-numéraire goods.
       The Home government can use both tariffs and RTBs to maximise its politically-adjusted
welfare function V̄ . For simplicity we return to the case of totally wasteful RTBs. Focusing
on a single product, the Home government’s payoff is as before Vi = si + (1 + γi )πi + τi mi . To
keep the exposition as simple as possible, we assume that the Foreign government is passive
and its payoff is Vi∗ = s∗i + (1 + γi∗ )πi∗ .30
       As in the small-country setting, in the absence of trade agreements, the Home government
would never use the RTB (given that it does not raise any revenue). Assuming that Vi
is concave in τi , the optimal noncooperative tariff is defined by the following first-order
condition:
                               dVi                          dpi
                                   = (γi yi + τi m′i − mi )     + mi = 0                              (13)
                               dτi                          dτi
  30
    For a similar partial-equilibrium setting where trade agreements are motivated by terms-of-trade exter-
nalities, see for example Bagwell and Staiger (2001b) and Horn et al. (2010).




                                                    33
                                                               γi yi       1−pi τi mi
This yields the optimal noncooperative tariff: τiN =           −m′i
                                                                       +    pi τi −m′i
                                                                                       .   In this large country
case, tariffs are used not only to protect domestic producers, but also to improve Home’s
terms of trade at the expense of Foreign. This terms-of-trade externality leads to trade
policy choices which are inefficient from the perspective of the governments’ joint payoff.
The objective of a trade agreement in this setting is to correct this inefficiency. Thus here
we abstract from domestic commitment motives. At the ex-ante stage, the governments sign
a trade agreement on tariffs that maximizes the governments’ joint payoff V̄ + V̄ ∗ .31 At the
ex-post stage, Home chooses its RTBs to maximize its payoff V̄ subject to the constraints
on tariffs imposed by the trade agreement.
    As in the small country case, we assume that the political weights for each product, γi
and γi∗ , are observed ex post but uncertain ex ante, and that the tariffs specified in the
agreement cannot be contingent on these political shocks.
    We will revisit the results of Section 4, which focuses on the richer scenario where RTBs
can operate at both the extensive and intensive margins of trade. In the interest of space,
we focus on the optimal choice of RTBs when tariff commitments are exogenously given.
As before, we can focus on a single product i. Similarly to the case of a small country
with commitment motives, given the tariff τi , there will be two thresholds γ̂i (τi ) and γ̃i (τi ),
with γ̂i (τi ) ≤ γ̃i (τi ), such that for γi ≤ γ̂i (τi ) the optimal RTB is zero, for γi ≥ γ̃i (τi ) the
optimal RTB is prohibitive, and for γi ∈ (γ̂i (τi ), γ̃i (τi )) the optimal RTB is positive but
non-prohibitive. If Vi is convex in θi then γ̂i (τi ) = γ̃i (τi ) = γiJ (τi ), and the optimal RTB
response function is bang-bang, as in Section 3.
    It can easily be shown that the thresholds γ̂i and γ̃i vary with the tariff τi and the natural
trade cost δi in the same qualitative way as in Section 4. As a consequence, the results of
Propositions 6 and 7 regarding the effects of tariff reductions and globalization on RTBs, as
well as the results of Corollaries 2 and 3 on the overall impacts that these changes have on
  31
     The interpretation of this assumption is that governments bargain efficiently over the Home tariffs and
a transfer (from Foreign to Home), with the transfer entering payoffs linearly. So, if T is the transfer made
by Foreign, Home’s (resp. Foreign’s) payoff inclusive of the transfer is V̄ + T (resp. V̄ ∗ − T ). This payoff
structure, together with efficient bargaining, implies that tariffs will maximize V̄ + V̄ ∗ .


                                                     34
the extensive and intensive margins of trade, are qualitatively analogous to those in the case
of a small country with commitment motives.



7     Conclusion

Red-tape barriers to trade are pervasive but have received little attention from scholars to
date. In this paper we have taken a first step in exploring the implications of RTBs, and
have shown that they are very different from those of more traditional trade barriers.
    In our model, politically-motivated governments may have incentives to impose RTBs
even though they yield no revenue, if a trade agreement can constrain tariffs but not RTBs.
At the agreement stage, the extent of tariff liberalization is limited by the need to prevent
such wasteful behavior: tariffs need to be set above the level that would be optimal with a
complete agreement to avoid a “protectionist backlash” in the form of RTBs. However, RTBs
may nonetheless emerge in equilibrium, if the tariff commitments are not fully contingent.
The model further suggests that RTBs tend to be more frequent in equilibrium when the
degree of political uncertainty is higher.
    When RTBs are used, they are likely to “choke” trade for a range of products, implying
that the extensive margin is key for understanding the impact of RTBs. At the same time,
non-prohibitive RTBs can arise for products characterized by a sufficiently concave import
demand. Whether RTBs operate at the extensive margin or at the intensive margin also
matters for the effects of globalization: reductions in natural trade costs reduce a govern-
ment’s incentive to resort to RTBs when these operate at the extensive margin of trade, but
increases the level of RTBs when these operate at the intensive margin.
    In the presence of RTBs, tariff liberalization can have perverse effects on trade, to the
extent that it induces an increase in RTBs. Tariff liberalization always leads to a contraction
of trade at the extensive margin, and it also reduces trade at the intensive margin for products
covered by non-prohibitive RTBs, because the government over-compensates for the tariff



                                              35
reduction with an increase in RTBs. Tariff reductions increase trade only for products that
are unencumbered by RTBs, which is the case if political pressures are sufficiently low.
   Finally our model suggests an important lesson for studies that seek to evaluate the wel-
fare gains from reducing tariffs or natural trade costs. Ignoring RTBs will lead to over stating
the welfare gains from tariff liberalization, but may well lead to under stating the welfare
gains from globalization. This is because tariff reductions trigger policy substitution toward
RTBs, while reductions in natural trade costs mitigate a government’s incentive to use RTBs,
to the extent that RTBs operate at the extensive margin of trade.




                                              36
Appendix

Throughout the Appendix we omit the product index i, as this should not create confusion.

Proof of Proposition 3

    We start by giving a heuristic proof for the first part of Proposition 3, that the optimal
tariff is increasing in δ if the distribution of γ is sufficiently concentrated. Fix two levels of δ,
say δ ′ < δ ′′ , and consider a distribution G that is close (for example in the weak-convergence
sense) to the degenerate distribution at γ 0 , which we denote G0 . We now argue that if G
is sufficiently close to G0 then the optimal tariff for δ = δ ′ must be lower than the optimal
tariff for δ = δ ′′ . To see this, recall from Figure 3 how expected welfare depends on the
tariff for a degenerate distribution such as G0 : it is constant up to the bespoke tariff, where
it jumps up, and then decreases monotonically as the tariff rises above the bespoke tariff.
We denote τ B (γ 0 , δ) the bespoke tariff as a function of γ 0 and δ. Clearly, for a given level
of δ, if G is close to G0 then the shape of the expected-welfare function is close to that of
the welfare function drawn in Figure 3, so the optimal tariff is close to the bespoke tariff
τ B (γ 0 , δ). Now recall that the bespoke tariff is increasing in δ, so τ B (γ 0 , δ ′ ) < τ B (γ 0 , δ ′′ ). It
follows immediately that, if G is sufficiently close to G0 , the optimal tariff for δ = δ ′ must
be lower than the optimal tariff for δ = δ ′′ .
    To prove the second part of the proposition, that globalization can raise the optimal
commitment tariff if political uncertainty is large enough, it is sufficient to consider the
special case of linear demand, fixed supply and Pareto distribution. Recall the first-order
condition given by equation (12):


                                       W̄τ = G′ γτJ ∆W + GWτ = 0                                           (14)


Relative to the text, this is written more compactly by omitting the arguments of all func-


                                                       37
tions. Now, differentiate this with respect to δ:


                 W̄τ δ = G′′ γδJ γτJ ∆W + G′ γτJδ ∆W + G′ γτJ Wδ + G′ γδJ Wτ + GWτ δ              (15)


With linear demand and fixed supply, we have γτJδ = Wτ δ = 0 and γδJ + γτJ = 0, thus:


                W̄τ δ = G′′ γδJ γτJ ∆W + G′ γτJ (Wδ − Wτ ) = G′′ γδJ ∆W − G′ m γτJ
                                                            !                 
                                                                                                  (16)


where we used the fact that Wδ −Wτ = −m. Next we substitute from the first-order condition
                                                     G
(14), which implies that γδJ ∆W = −γτJ ∆W =          G′
                                                        Wτ ,   and use Wτ = τ m′ , to obtain:

                                                           
                                              GG′′ τ pm′
                                W̄τ δ =                  − 1 mG′ γτJ                              (17)
                                              (G′ )2 p m

                                                         k
   Using the Pareto distribution, G = 1 − (γ 0 ) γ −k , where the shape parameter k is an
                                                  0
                                                                                 k
inverse measure of dispersion: Gk = − (1 − G) log γγ > 0. Note that G′ = k (γ 0 ) γ −k−1 =
                                          k
k
γ
    (1 − G) and G′′ = −k (k + 1) (γ 0 ) γ −k−2 = − k(k+1)
                                                     γ2
                                                          (1 − G). Substituting into (17) gives:

                                                            
                                            k + 1 G τ pm′
                            W̄τ δ = −                     + 1 mG′ γτJ                             (18)
                                              k 1−Gp m

Clearly this is negative for k sufficiently low, in line with the second part of the proposition.

Proof of Remark 4

     The key step is to note that Vθγ = y > 0. This immediately implies that θR (τ, γ) is
weakly increasing in γ. Thus, for any given τ < τ N , in general there are three intervals of
γ, each of which may be empty: a low interval (γmin , γ̂(τ )) where θR = 0, an intermediate
interval (γ̂(τ ), γ̃(τ )) where θR is positive but non-prohibitive, and a high interval (γ̃(τ ), γmax )
where θR is prohibitive. And since Vθγ is strictly positive, θR is strictly increasing in the
intermediate range (γ̂(τ ), γ̃(τ )).



                                                    38
Proof of Proposition 4

     In order to prove the aggregate results of Proposition 4, we start by showing how a tariff
change affects the RTB response function at the product level. In this proof we focus on the
case γ̂(τ ) < γ̃(τ ), since we already dealt with the bang-bang case (γ̂(τ ) = γ̃(τ )) earlier.
                                                                         dθ R
     We already established in the text that                              dτ
                                                                                < −1 in the non-prohibitive range, so we
can focus on how the tariff affects the two thresholds γ̂(τ ) and γ̃(τ ). Let us start with γ̂(τ ).
Recalling Remark 4 and the assumption that θR is continuous, the first-order condition for
optimality of θ must be satisfied at this threshold, so γ̂(τ ) is implicitly defined by Vθ (τ, 0, γ̂) =
                                                                                       dγ̂
0. Differentiating this equation in γ̂ and τ , we obtain                               dτ
                                                                                             = − VVθγ
                                                                                                   θτ
                                                                                                      . Note that the second-order
condition Vθθ < 0 must hold, so Vθτ < Vθθ < 0, and furthermore Vθγ = y > 0, thus we can
                  dγ̂
conclude that     dτ
                        > 0.
     Next focus on the threshold γ̃(τ ). This is implicitly defined by Vθ (τ, θN T (τ ), γ̃) = 0.
                                                                                 dγ̃         Vθθ −Vθτ
Differentiating this equation in γ̃ and τ , we obtain                            dτ
                                                                                       =       Vθγ
                                                                                                      ,   where we used the fact that
dθ N T
 dτ
         = −1 (which in turn follows from the fact that θN T (τ ) is defined by the condition that
θ + τ equals the minimum prohibitive trade cost level). Again noting that Vθτ < Vθθ < 0
                                     dγ̃
and Vθγ > 0, it follows that         dτ
                                            > 0.
     Consider next the probability that θ > 0. Recalling that RTBs are imposed if γ > γ̂ (τ ),
we obtain:
                                                       Z    γ max
                                Pr [θ > 0] =                            g(γ)dγ = 1 − G (γ̂ (τ ))                                (19)
                                                           γ̂(τ )

Differentiating shows that this is decreasing in τ :

                                       d Pr [θ > 0]                dγ̂
                                                    = −g (γ̂ (τ ))     <0                                                       (20)
                                            dτ                     dτ

                                      dγ̂
where we used the fact that           dτ
                                            > 0. A similar argument allows us to sign the effect of τ on
the probability that θ chokes imports:

                                                           Z    γ max
                                             NT
                                                  
                               Pr θ ≥ θ                =                  g(γ)dγ = 1 − G (γ̃ (τ ))                              (21)
                                                               γ̃(τ )


                                                                        39
                                    dγ̃
Differentiating and using           dτ
                                          > 0 we conclude that this too is decreasing in τ .
      Having established that a tariff reduction decreases the probability that a product is
covered by an RTB and the probability that it is choked by an RTB, it follows immediately
that both F choke and F cov increase in the first-order stochastic sense.

Proof of Proposition 5

      Part (i) has been proved already, so we can focus on Part (ii). In this proof we suppress
the argument τ and highlight instead the argument δ, so we write the government objective
as V (δ, θ, γ) and the prohibitive level of θ as θN T (δ). All we need to prove is that a decrease
in δ leads to a reduction of the threshold γ̂ and does not affect the threshold γ̃.
      Consider first the effect of a change in δ on the threshold γ̂. Recalling Remark 4 and the
assumption that θR is continuous, θ = 0 satisfies the first-order condition at this threshold,
hence Vθ (δ, 0, γ̂) = 0. Differentiating this equation with respect to δ and γ̂, we obtain
dγ̂
dδ
      = − VVθγ
            θδ
               = − VVθγ
                     θθ
                        . Since the second-order condition Vθθ < 0 must hold and Vθγ > 0, it
               dγ̂
follows that   dδ
                     > 0.
      Consider next how δ affects the threshold γ̃. Again recalling Remark 4 and the assumption
that θR is continuous, θ = θN T (δ) satisfies the first-order condition at this threshold, hence
                                                                                                                         dγ̃
Vθ (δ, θN T (δ), γ̃) = 0. Differentiating this equation with respect to γ̃ and δ, we obtain                              dδ
                                                                                                                               =
                                                             dθ N T
− VθθV−V
      θγ
         θδ
            , where we used the fact that                     dδ
                                                                      = −1 (which in turn follows from the fact that
θN T (δ) is defined by the condition that the total trade cost equals the minimum prohibitive
                                                                               dγ̂
trade cost level). But Vθθ = Vθδ , thus it follows that                        dδ
                                                                                     = 0.

Proof of Proposition 6
      We wish to show that, conditional on product i being in set I, the optimal commitment
tariff is decreasing in δ, regardless of the distribution of γ.
      We can write expected welfare as:

              Z    γ̂(τ )                       Z        γ̃(τ )                              Z    γ max
                                                                           R
      EW =                  W (τ, 0)g(γ)dγ +                      W (τ, θ (γ, τ ))g(γ)dγ +                W N T g(γ)dγ   (22)
                  γ min                             γ̂                                           γ̃(τ )


                                                                      40
We want to evaluate the cross derivative of (22) with respect to δ and τ . Consider first the
first derivative with respect to δ. Recall that, when θR is non-prohibitive, a change in δ is
exactly offset by a change in θR , thus leaving welfare unchanged. Hence δ does not affect the
second integrand. Also the no-trade level of welfare is unaffected by δ, so the third integrand
is unaffected by δ. Next, note that we can ignore the effect of δ on the boundaries γ̂(τ )
and γ̃(τ ), because welfare is continuous at the lower boundary, and the upper boundary is
                                                                                    ∂
unaffected by δ. Thus the derivative of (22) with respect to δ is simply: G(γ̂(τ )) ∂δ W (τ, 0).
The cross-derivative of expected welfare with respect to δ and τ is therefore:

                  ∂ 2 EW             ∂ 2 W (τ, 0)                      ∂W (τ, 0)
                         = G(γ̂(τ ))              + g(γ̂(τ ))γ̂ ′ (τ )           <0              (23)
                   ∂δ∂τ                  ∂δ∂τ                            ∂δ

                                     ∂ 2 W (τ,0)
where we have used the fact that        ∂δ∂τ
                                                   has the same sign as m′′ , which recall is negative
for products in set I, and that γ̂ ′ (τ ) > 0 (from Proposition 4). It follows that, conditional
on the product being in set I, a small decrease in δ leads to an increase in the optimal tariff.




                                                     41
References

Amador, M. and K. Bagwell (2013): “The Theory of Optimal Delegation With an
  Application to Tariff Caps,” Econometrica, 81, 1541–1599.

Anderson, J. E. and J. P. Neary (1992): “Trade Reform with Quotas, Partial Rent
  Retention, and Tariffs,” Econometrica, 63, 57–76.

Bagwell, K. and R. W. Staiger (2001a): “Domestic Policies, National Sovereignty,
  and International Economic Institutions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 519–562.

——— (2001b): “Reciprocity, Non-Discrimination and Preferential Agreements in the Mul-
  tilateral Trading System,” European Journal of Political Economy, 17, 281–325.

Baldwin, R. (1987): “Politically Realistic Objective Functions and Trade Policy: PROFs
  and Tariffs,” Economics Letters, 24, 287–290.

Beshkar, M. and A. Lashkaripour (2016): “Interdependence of Trade Policies in Gen-
  eral Equilibrium,” Working Paper 2017-003, CAEPR.

Beverelli, C., S. Neumueller, and R. Teh (2015): “Export Diversification Effects of
  the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement,” World Development, 76, 293–310.

Bhagwati, J. N. (1982): “Directly Unproductive, Profit-Seeking (DUP) Activities,” Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, 90, 988–1002.

Bown, C. P. and P. Tovar (2011): “Trade Liberalization, Antidumping, and Safeguards:
  Evidence from India’s Tariff Reform,” Journal of Development Economics, 96, 115–125.

Carballo, J., A. Graziano, G. Schaur, and C. V. Martincus (2016): “Endogenous
  Border Times: Ports, Customs, Storage?” Inter-American Development Bank Working
  Paper Series.




                                            42
Copeland, B. R. (1990): “Strategic Interaction among Nations: Negotiable and Non-
  Negotiable Trade Barriers,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 23, 84–108.

Dennis, A. and B. Shepherd (2011): “Trade Facilitation and Export Diversification,”
  The World Economy, 34, 101–122.

Djankov, S., C. Freund, and C. S. Pham (2010): “Trading on Time,” Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 92, 166–173.

Eibl, F. and A. Malik (2016): “The Politics of Partial Liberalization: Cronyism and
  Non-Tariff Protection in Mubaraks Egypt,” CSAE Working Paper No. 2016-27.

Fontagné, L., G. Orefice, and R. Piermartini (2016): “Making (Small) Firms Happy.
  The Heterogeneous Effect of Trade Facilitation Measures,” CESifo Working Paper Series
  No. 5899.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (1994): “Protection for Sale,” American Economic
  Review, 84, 833–850.

Hendy, R. and C. Zaki (2013): “Understanding the Effects of Red Tape Costs on the
  Performance of Firms Exports: The Case of Egypt,” mimeo., Cairo University.

Hillman, A. L. (1982): “Declining Industries and Political-Support Protectionist Motives,”
  American Economic Review, 72, 1180–1187.

Horn, H., G. Maggi, and R. W. Staiger (2010): “Trade Agreements as Endogenously
  Incomplete Contracts,” American Economic Review, 100, 394–419.

ITC (2016): Navigating Non-Tariff Measures: Insights From A Business Survey in the
  European Union, Geneva: International Trade Centre.

Limão, N. and P. Tovar (2011): “Policy Choice: Theory and Evidence from Commitment
  via International Trade Agreements,” Journal of International Economics, 85, 186–205.


                                           43
Maggi, G. and A. Rodrı́guez-Clare (1998): “The Value of Trade Agreements in the
  Presence of Political Pressures,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 574–601.

Mitra, D. (2002): “Endogenous Political Organization and the Value of Trade Agree-
  ments,” Journal of International Economics, 57, 473–485.

Nordas, H., E. Pinali, and M. Geloso Grosso (2006): “Logistics and Time as a
  Trade Barrier,” OECD Trade Policy Working Paper No. 35.

Ossa, R. (2011): “A “New Trade” Theory of GATT/WTO Negotiations,” Journal of Po-
  litical Economy, 119, 122–152.

Persson, M. (2013): “Trade Facilitation and the Extensive Margin,” Journal of Interna-
  tional Trade & Economic Development, 22, 658–693.

Pollak, R. A. (1971): “Additive Utility Functions and Linear Engel Curves,” Review of
  Economic Studies, 38, 401–414.

Ray, E. J. (1981): “The Determinants of Tariff and Nontariff Trade Restrictions in the
  United States,” Journal of Political Economy, 89, 105–121.

Ray, E. J. and H. P. Marvel (1984): “The Pattern of Protection in the Industralized
  World,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 66, 452–458.

Shepherd, B. (2013): “Trade times, importing and exporting: firm-level evidence,” Applied
  Economics Letters, 20, 879–883.

Staiger, R. W. (2012): “Non-Tariff Measures and the WTO,” mimeo., Stanford University.




                                            44
