                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  MONETARY MOMENTUM

                                        Andreas Neuhierl
                                         Michael Weber

                                       Working Paper 24748
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24748


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2018




We thank Hengjie Ai, Oliver Boguth, Jean-Sebastien Fontaine, Thomas Gilbert, Nina Karnaukh,
Emanuel Mönch, Ali Ozdagli, Andrea Vedolin, Mihail Velikov, Paul Whelan, Amir Yaron, and
participants at several seminars and conferences. Weber gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the University of Chicago Booth School of Business and the Fama-Miller Center.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Andreas Neuhierl and Michael Weber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Momentum
Andreas Neuhierl and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 24748
June 2018
JEL No. E31,E43,E44,E52,E58,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

We document a large return drift around monetary policy announcements by the Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC). Stock returns start drifting up 25 days before expansionary
monetary policy surprises, whereas they decrease before contractionary surprises. The cumulative
return difference across expansionary and contractionary policy decisions amounts to 2.5% until
the day of the policy decision and continues to increase to more than 4.5% 15 days after the
meeting. Standard returns factors and time-series momentum do not span the return drift around
FOMC policy decisions. The return drift is a market-wide phenomenon and holds for all
industries and many international equity markets. A simple trading strategy exploiting the drift
around FOMC meetings increases Sharpe ratios relative to a buy-and-hold investment by a factor
of 4.


Andreas Neuhierl
University of Notre Dame
College of Business
221 Mendoza
Notre Dame, IN 46556
aneuhier@nd.edu

Michael Weber
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu
                                      I     Introduction
Figure 1 documents a novel fact for stock returns around monetary policy decisions by
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC): starting around 25 days before the FOMC
meeting, returns of the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) value-weighted
index drift upwards before expansionary monetary policy decisions (lower-than-expected
federal funds target rates) and drift downwards before contractionary policy decisions.
The difference in returns between expansionary and contractionary policy surprises
amounts to 2.5% until the day before the announcement.                         On the day before the
announcement, returns drift upwards independent of the direction of the monetary policy
surprise, which is the pre-FOMC announcement drift of Lucca and Moench (2015).
Around the announcement, contractionary monetary policy surprises result in negative
returns, and expansionary surprises result in an increase in returns, consistent with a large
literature, such as Bernanke and Kuttner (2005). Returns, however, continue to drift in
the same direction for another 15 days, which – together with the long pre-drift – is the
novel fact we document in this paper. The continuation in returns is surprising, because
the trading signal it builds on is publicly observable. On average, the difference in the
drift from before until after the announcement across contractionary and expansionary
surprises amounts to around 4.5%, which is large relative to an annual equity premium of
6%. We label the return drift around monetary policy decisions monetary momentum.1
       Our findings have important implications for policy and research. First, a recent
literature studies the effect of monetary policy on asset prices, using narrow event windows
of 30 or 60 minutes around FOMC policy decisions to obtain identification. The large drift
before and after FOMC decisions suggests researchers might underestimate the effect of
monetary policy on asset prices by restricting attention to narrow event windows. Second,
the magnitude of the drift around FOMC decisions suggests asset-pricing theories that
aim to understand the unconditionally large excess returns of stocks relative to bonds
should focus on channels through which monetary policy and asset markets interact.
Third, the pre-drift around FOMC decisions implies “surprise changes” in target rates
   1
    We do not report standard-error bands in the figures but evaluate statistical significance in regressions
later in the paper.


                                                     2
might partially be predictable, which has important implications for the large literature
in macroeconomics and monetary economics that tries to understand the real effects of
exogenous monetary policy shocks on real consumption, investment, and GDP.

         Figure 1: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions
        5
                          Expansionary Surprise
                          Contractionary Surprise
        4


        3


        2


        1


        0


       -1


       -2
                5
                     0
                          5
                               0
                                    5
                                         0
                                              5
                                                   0
                                                       -5



                                                                10
                                                                     15
                                                                          20
                                                                               25
                                                                                    30
                                                                                         35
                                                                                              40
                                                                                                   45
                                                            0
                                                                 5
              -4
                    -4
                         -3
                              -3
                                   -2
                                        -2
                                             -1
                                                  -1




            This figure plots cumulative returns in percent around FOMC policy decisions sep-
            arately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and negative (expansionary;
            blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample period is from 1994 to 2009.



    The differential drift around contractionary and expansionary FOMC announcements
is a robust feature of the data and holds for samples with or without intermeeting policy
decisions (policy decisions on unscheduled FOMC meetings), with or without turning
points in monetary policy (changes in the federal funds target rate in the direction opposite
to the previous move), or how we treat zero-changes in the federal funds target rate
(FOMC meetings on which the target rate does not change).
    Our baseline sample runs from 1994, when the FOMC started issuing press releases

                                                        3
after meetings and policy decisions, until 2009, the start of the binding zero-lower-bound
(ZLB) period. Our results continue to hold when we stop our sample in 2004, as in
Bernanke and Kuttner (2005).
    We define expansionary and contractionary monetary policy shocks using federal
funds futures (Kuttner (2001) surprises). Lower-than-expected federal funds target rates
(expansionary monetary policy surprises) do not necessarily coincide with cuts in the
target rate. The market might assign a probability of less than 100% to a cut in target
rates, and we would measure expansionary surprises whenever the FOMC indeed lowers
target rates. But we would also measure an expansionary monetary policy surprise if
the market assigns a positive probability to a tightening in target rates that does not
materialize. We do not find similar return drifts when we sort on raw changes in the
target rate. Instead, the FOMC seems to increase rates following positive stock returns
and cut rates after negative stock returns.
    Market participants cannot observe whether target-rate changes are expansionary or
contractionary according to our definition until after the actual change in target rates. We
show that the differential drift following expansionary versus contractionary policy shocks
is still economically large and statistically significant when we start the event window on
the day after the FOMC policy decision.
    The pre- and post-drifts are largely a market-wide phenomenon. We do not find
similar returns drifts around FOMC announcements for cross-sectional return premia,
such as size, value, profitability, or investment, because all portfolios tend to drift in
the same direction. Momentum is an exception: momentum returns are flat around
FOMC announcements for expansionary monetary policy surprises. For contractionary
surprises, however, we find an upward drift in momentum returns starting 15 days before
the FOMC meeting and continuing for another 15 days subsequent to the target-rate
decision. Within this 30 day trading period, momentum earns an excess return of 4%.
When we decompose momentum into winners and losers, we see a flat momentum return
around expansionary monetary policy shocks, because both winners and losers appreciate
in lock-step. Instead, for contractionary monetary policy shocks, past losers drop by 5%
within days, whereas past winners appreciate slightly. This differential behavior around


                                              4
contractionary surprises holds for the full sample, but also for a sample ending in 2004,
and hence, a momentum crash cannot explain this pattern (see Daniel and Moskowitz
(2016)).
    We find drift behavior similar to the drift for the overall market at the industry level
when we study returns following the Fama & French 17-industry classification with a
return-drift difference of around 4% around expansionary versus contractionary monetary
policy surprises. Machinery is an exception, with a return drift of almost 8%, and
Mining, with no differential return drift at all because mining stocks appreciate following
contractionary monetary policy.
    The return drift is not contained to the United States, but also occurs in international
equity markets. We find a differential return drift for benchmark equity indexes around
U.S. monetary policy decisions for Germany, Canada, French, Spain, Switzerland, and the
U.K. with magnitudes that are comparable to the pattern in the United States. Japan
is an exception, because returns are flat for both U.S. contractionary and expansionary
monetary policy surprises similar to the non-existent pre-FOMC announcement drift for
Japan in Lucca and Moench (2015).
    We compare the Sharpe ratios of monetary momentum strategies with the Sharpe
ratios of a buy-and-hold investor to gauge the economic significance of the return drift
around FOMC meetings. We find increases in Sharpe ratios by a factor of four for a
simple monetary momentum strategy that investors can implement in real time. We
also find standard return factors cannot span our monetary momentum strategy with
a large unexplained return of 9.6% per year. Recently, Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen
(2012) popularized time-series momentum strategies. We show time-series momentum
and monetary momentum are economically two separate phenomena.
    Predictability and persistence in the monetary policy shocks themselves might drive
the return drift we uncover. We find expansionary surprises follow contractionary and
expansionary surprises with equal probabilities, and the sign of past surprises cannot
predict the sign of current surprises. These patterns in policy surprises mean persistent
shocks and predictability in monetary policy decisions are unlikely to explain our results.
    Another possible explanation might be state dependence of monetary policy shocks.


                                             5
The FOMC might surprisingly cut rates in times of high risk or risk aversion, which could
possibly explain the upward drift around events we associate with expansionary shocks.
However, we also find equal probabilities of observing expansionary or contractionary
surprises in times of high and low economic uncertainty as measured by the VIX.
     Ultimately, and similarly to many important findings in empirical asset pricing, such
as time-series momentum or the pre-FOMC announcement drift only to name few, what
explains the patterns we document in the data remains an open question that we leave
to future research.


A.     Related Literature

A large literature at the intersection of macroeconomics and finance investigates the effect
of monetary policy shocks on asset prices in an event-study framework. In a seminal study,
Cook and Hahn (1989) use daily event windows to examine the effects of changes in the
federal funds rate on bond rates using a daily event window. They show that changes
in the federal funds target rate are associated with changes in interest rates in the same
direction, with larger effects at the short end of the yield curve. Bernanke and Kuttner
(2005)—also using a daily event window—focus on unexpected changes in the federal
funds target rate. They find that an unexpected interest-rate cut of 25 basis points leads
to an increase in the CRSP value-weighted market index of about 1 percentage point.
Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) focus on intraday event windows and find effects of
similar magnitudes for the S&P500. They argue that two factors, a target and path factor,
are necessary to describe the reaction of notes with up to ten-year maturity to monetary
policy shocks. Boyarchenko, Haddad, and Plosser (2017) extend the heteroskedasticity-
based identification of Rigobon and Sack (2003) and also argue that two shocks best
describe the reaction of financial instruments across a wide range of asset markets: a
conventional monetary policy shock and a confidence shock. Leombroni, Vedolin, Venter,
and Whelan (2016) decompose monetary policy shocks into a target and communication
shock, and find the latter is the main driver of yields around policy decisions. Neuhierl and
Weber (2017) show the whole future path of monetary policy matters for the association
between stock returns and federal funds rate changes. Boguth, Grégoire, and Martineau

                                             6
(2017) show that the market expects monetary policy actions in recent years only on
FOMC meetings with subsequent press conferences. Ozdagli and Weber (2016) use spatial
autoregressions to decompose the overall response of stock returns to monetary policy
surprises into direct demand effects and higher-order network effects, and find that more
than 50% of the overall market response comes from indirect effects. Fontaine (2016)
estimates a dynamic term-structure model and finds that uncertainty about future rate
changes is cyclical. Law, Song, and Yaron (2018) document cyclical variation in the
sensitivity of stock returns to monetary policy shocks. Ozdagli and Velikov (2017) use
observable firm characteristics to construct a monetary policy exposure index to measure
a monetary policy risk premium from the cross section of stock returns. Drechsler, Savov,
and Schnabl (2015) provide a framework to rationalize the effect of monetary policy on
risk premia.
    Besides the effect on the level of the stock market, researchers have recently also
studied cross-sectional differences in the response of stocks to monetary policy and the
response of other asset classes. Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2004) and Ippolito, Ozdagli, and
Perez-Orive (2018), among others, show that firms with high bank debt, firms with low
cash flows, small firms, firms with low credit ratings, firms with low financial constraints,
firms with high price-earnings multiples, and firms with Tobin’s q show a higher sensitivity
to monetary policy shocks, which is in line with bank-lending, balance-sheet, and interest-
rate channels of monetary policy. Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) show that firms with
stickier output prices have more volatile cash flows and high conditional volatility in
narrow event windows around FOMC announcements. Weber (2015) studies how firm-
level and portfolio returns vary with measured price stickiness, and shows that sticky-
price firms have higher systematic risk and are more sensitive to monetary policy shocks.
Brooks, Katz, and Lustig (2018) study the drift in Treasury markets after changes in
fed fund target rates, Mueller, Tahbaz-Salehi, and Vedolin (2017) find a trading strategy
short the US dollar and long other currencies earns substantially higher excess returns on
FOMC announcement days, Wiriadinata (2018) shows unexpected cuts in fed funds target
rates lead to larger currency appreciation of countries with larger US dollar denominated
net external debt, and Karnaukh (2018) documents the U.S. dollar appreciates in the


                                             7
two-day window before contractionary monetary policy decisions and depreciates before
expansionary policy decisions.
    We also contribute to a recent literature studying stock return patterns around
FOMC announcements. The most closely related paper is Lucca and Moench (2015),
who show that 60% to 80% of the realized equity premium since 1994 is earned in the
24 hours before the actual FOMC meeting. Their pre-FOMC announcement drift is
independent of the sign of monetary policy shocks and is contained in the 24 hours before
the policy decision. Savor and Wilson (2013) show stock returns are substantially higher
on macroeconomic announcement days such as FOMC days and Savor and Wilson (2014)
find the CAPM tends to hold on these days. Ai and Bansal (2018) develop a theory to
rationalize macroeconomic announcement premia and pre-drifts such as the pre-FOMC
announcement drift. This line of research focuses on patterns in stock returns independent
of the sign of the monetary policy shock. We build on this body of work and document an
extended pre- and post-FOMC drift that has signs opposite to the surprises in line with
the event-study literature we cite above: negative, that is, expansionary monetary policy
shocks result in an upward drift in stock returns after as well as before the rate changes.
    Moreover, the paper relates to the literature on the the post-earnings-announcement
drift (PEAD). Ball and Brown (1968) first document PEAD, which describes the tendency
of stock returns to drift in the direction of recent earnings’ surprises. Fama (1998)
points out that PEAD has undergone heavy scrutiny and holds up out of sample and
is therefore “above suspicion.” Livnat and Mendenhall (2006) show the robustness of
PEAD to different ways of measuring surprises and also provide a nice overview of the
literature. PEAD is, however, concentrated in smaller firms, which raises concerns of
its exploitability (see, e.g., Chordia et al. (2009)). We document a drift in returns
around FOMC decisions in the direction opposite of the monetary-policy surprises. The
drift occurs for market-wide indices and industry portfolios and is therefore not subject
to high transaction costs. In addition, FOMC decisions during our sample period are
pre-scheduled and closely watched, which makes inattention unlikely to drive our findings.
    Finally, our findings are reminiscent of, but distinct from, the time-series momentum
strategy of Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen (2012), who document that aggregate indices


                                            8
that did well over the previous 12 months positively predict future excess returns for
up to 12 months. Hence, our results provide out-of-sample findings to test behavioral
theories of momentum, such as Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), Daniel, Hirshleifer,
and Subrahmanyam (1998), and Hong and Stein (1999) against rational theories, such as
Berk, Green, and Naik (1999), Ahn, Conrad, and Dittmar (2003), and Sagi and Seasholes
(2007).2



                                            II      Data

A.     Stock Returns

We sample daily returns for the CRSP value-weighted index directly from CRSP. The
index is an average of all common stocks trading on NYSE, Amex, or Nasdaq. We
also sample returns for international stock indices from Datastream. Industry and factor
returns are from the Ken French data library.


B.     Federal Funds Futures Data

Federal funds futures started trading on the Chicago Board of Trade in October 1988.
These contracts have a face value of $5,000,000. Prices are quoted as 100 minus the
average daily federal funds rate as reported by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Federal funds futures face limited counterparty risk due to daily marking to market and
collateral requirements by the exchange. We use tick-by-tick data of the federal funds
futures trading on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) Globex electronic trading
platform (as opposed to the open outcry market) directly from the CME. Using Globex
data has the advantage that trading in these contracts starts on the previous trading day
at 6.30 pm ET (compared to 8.20am ET in the open outcry market). We are therefore able
   2
    Of course a large literature also exists on cross-sectional momentum, that is, comparing the past
performance of securities relative to the past performance of other securities. See, for example, Jegadeesh
and Titman (1993) for U.S. equities, Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999) for industries, Asness, Liew, and
Stevens (1997) for equity indices, Shleifer and Summers (1990) for currencies, Gorton et al. (2013) for
commodities, and Asness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2013) for evidence across asset classes and around
the world.



                                                    9
to calculate the monetary policy surprises for all event days including the intermeeting
policy decisions occuring outside of open outcry trading hours.
       Our sample period starts in 1994 and ends in 2009. With the first meeting in 1994,
the FOMC started to communicate its decision by issuing press releases after meetings
and policy decisions. The liquidity trap and ZLB on nominal interest rates determine the
end of our sample because little variation exists in federal funds futures-implied rates and
no target rate change occurs for the following seven years. The FOMC has eight scheduled
meetings per year and, starting with the first meeting in 1994, most press releases are
issued around 2:15 pm ET.
       We now define the measure of monetary policy shocks following Kuttner (2001),
Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), and Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005). Let f ft,0
denote the rate implied by the current-month federal funds futures on date t and assume
that one FOMC meeting takes place during that month. t is the day of the FOMC meeting
and D is the number of days in the month. We can then write f ft,0 as a weighted average
of the prevailing federal funds target rate, r0 , and the expectation of the target rate after
the meeting, r1 :

                                          t      D−t
                               f ft,0 =     r0 +     Et (r1 ) + µt,0 ,                           (1)
                                          D       D

where µt,0 is a risk premium.3 Gürkaynak et al. (2007) estimate risk premia of 1 to 3
basis points, and Piazzesi and Swanson (2008) show that they only vary at business-cycle
frequencies. We focus on intraday changes to calculate monetary policy surprises and
neglect risk premia in the following, as is common in the literature.
       We can calculate the surprise component of the announced change in the federal
funds rate, vt , as:

                                       D
                               vt =       (f ft+∆t+ ,0 − f ft−∆t− ,0 ),                          (2)
                                      D−t

where t is the time when the FOMC issues an announcement, f ft+∆t+ ,0 is the fed funds
   3
    We implicitly assume date t is after the previous FOMC meeting. Meetings are typically around six
to eight weeks apart.



                                                  10
futures rate shortly after t, f ft−∆t− ,0 is the fed funds futures rate just before t, and D
is the number of days in the month.4 The D/(D − t) term adjusts for the fact that the
federal funds futures settle on the average effective overnight federal funds rate.
       We follow Gürkaynak et al. (2005) and use the unscaled change in the next-month
futures contract if the event day occurs within the last seven days of the month. This
approach ensures small targeting errors in the federal funds rate by the trading desk at
the New York Fed, revisions in expectations of future targeting errors, changes in bid-ask
spreads, or other noise, which have only a small effect on the current-month average, are
not amplified through multiplication by a large scaling factor.
       Following the convention in the literature, which we discuss in the introduction,
we call monetary policy surprises expansionary when the new target rate is lower than
predicted by fed funds futures before the FOMC meeting, that is, when vt is negative
and we call positive vt contractionary. Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for surprises
in monetary policy for all 137 event dates between 1994 and 2009, as well as separately
for turning points in monetary policy and intermeeting policy decisions. Turning points
(target-rate changes in the direction opposite to previous changes) signal changes in the
current and future stance of monetary policy and thus convey larger news (Piazzesi 2005,
Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2012). The average monetary policy shock is approximately
0. The most negative shock is more than -45 basis points—about three times larger in
absolute value than the most positive shock. Policy surprises on intermeeting event dates
and turning points are more volatile than surprises on scheduled meetings.
       Table 2 reports the transition matrix for contractionary and expansionary shocks.
We see contractionary shocks are about as likely to be followed by contractionary shocks
as they are to be followed by expansionary shocks, and the same holds for expansionary
shocks. In untabulated results, we also find little predictability in the sign of the shocks
using the sign or level of past shocks, and aggregate uncertainty such as the VIX also has
no predictive power for the sign of vt .
   4
    We implicitly assume in these calculations that the average effective rate within the month is equal
to the federal funds target rate and that only one rate change occurs within the month. Due to changes
in the policy target on unscheduled meetings, we have six observations with more than one change in a
given month. Because these policy moves were not anticipated, they most likely have no major impact on
our results. We nevertheless analyze intermeeting policy decisions separately in our empirical analyses.


                                                  11
                          III      Empirical Results

A.    Methodology

We follow a large event-study literature focusing on the conditional reaction of stock
returns around contractionary and expansionary monetary policy shocks by the FOMC.
Contrary to the recent literature studying intraday event windows of 30 to 60 minutes,
we focus on drifts in returns several days up to a few weeks before and after the
announcement. Specifically, the FOMC policy day constitutes event day 0, and we then
study the reaction of returns in event time before and after the announcement, separating
expansionary from contractionary monetary policy shocks.


B.    Baseline

Figure 1 plots the return movements around FOMC announcements separately for
expansionary and contractionary monetary policy surprises, which we calculate following
equation (2). Expansionary monetary policy shocks are all surprises that are smaller
than or equal to zero, whereas positive surprises are contractionary monetary policy
shocks. In line with the recent literature, we focus on regular FOMC meetings and exclude
FOMC policy decisions occurring on unscheduled meetings, so-called intermeeting policy
decisions. Faust et al. (2004) argue that intermeeting policy decisions are likely to reflect
new information about the state of the economy, and hence, the stock market might
react to news about the economy rather than changes in monetary policy. In addition,
intermeetings are not scheduled and we would not expect to find any pre-drift. We show
robustness checks regarding the sample below.
     We see in Figure 1 stock returns start drifting upwards around 25 days before
expansionary monetary policy decisions (blue-solid line), whereas stock returns are flat or
drift down slightly before contractionary monetary policy decisions (red-dashed line). For
both types of events, we see a positive return on the day before the FOMC meeting, the
pre-FOMC announcement drift of Lucca and Moench (2015). For expansionary monetary
policy events, stock returns continue to increase. Following contractionary shocks, instead,
we see flat or slightly decreasing returns for the next 20 days. The difference in cumulative

                                             12
return drifts around contractionary and expansionary monetary policy surprises amounts
to 4.5%.
    The sensitivity of stock returns to monetary policy shocks varies across types of
events. Ozdagli and Weber (2016) find larger sensitivities of stock returns to monetary
policy shocks on turning points in monetary policy compared to regular meetings. Figure
2 shows very similar drift patterns when we also exclude turning points in monetary policy
in addition to intermeeting policy moves, both in sign and magnitude, and Figure 3 shows
the same drift pattern in returns when we exclude neither of the two types of events.
    So far, we assign meeting dates with zero monetary policy shock to the expansionary
monetary policy shocks sample. Figure 4 shows this definition does not drive our findings.
When we exclude all events with zero policy surprises, we confirm our baseline findings.
Our baseline sample lasts until the start of the binding ZLB, whereas a large event-study
literature stops in the early 2000s. Figure 5 shows results for a sample ending in 2004
that confirm our baseline finding.
    Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen (2017) document a Fed Put; that is, the FOMC tends
to lower federal funds target rates following weak stock returns. Figure 6 plots cumulative
returns for the CRSP value-weighted index when we split events by actual changes in
federal funds target rates. We find stock returns tend to be lower before the FOMC lowers
its target rate and higher before increases in target rates. Returns tend to remain flat when
we condition on either positive or negative changes in the actual target rates. These results
for actual changes in target rates are consistent with Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen (2017),
but a Fed Put is unlikely to explain our findings, because we show that stock returns drift
upwards before lower-than-expected federal funds target rates, whereas returns tend to
drift downwards before cuts in actual target rates.
    So far, our analysis relies on graphs, eyeball econometrics, and cumulative returns
from 50 days before until 50 days after the FOMC meeting. The choice of the window
implies that in rare cases, part of the window might overlap with previous and subsequent
FOMC meetings. Table 3 reports regression estimates for different event windows around
FOMC policy decisions ranging from –15 until +15 days around the meetings ensuring
no overlap across policy events occurs. Specifically, we regress cumulative returns of the


                                             13
CRSP value-weighted index from t− = −15 until t− + s, with s running from 1 until +30
and s = 15 being the event day, rt− ,t− +s , on a constant and a dummy variable that equals
1 around expansionary monetary policy surprises, D exp :


                            rt− ,t− +s = β0 + β1 × D exp + εt− ,t− +s .                      (3)


β0 reports the average cumulative return around contractionary monetary policy surprises,
whereas β1 reports the average differential cumulative return around expansionary
monetary policy surprises relative to cumulative returns on contractionary policy
meetings. We report robust t-statistics in parentheses.
     Panel A reports results for our baseline sample excluding intermeeting policy releases.
We see returns drift upwards before expansionary surprises relative to contractionary
surprises, but the differential drift is not statistically significant before the policy release.
Including the day of the release, the differential drift is 1.5% and statistically significant
at the 10% level. Returns continue to drift upwards differentially, resulting in a difference
in cumulative returns of 2% five days after the meeting and doubling to 3% 15 days after
the meeting. All post-meeting estimates of β1 are significant at the 5% level.
     In Panels B to D, we see economically and statistically similar results for samples
with intermeetings, when we exclude both intermeetings and turning points, or when we
exclude all events with zero monetary policy surprises: returns start drifting upwards
before expansionary monetary policy surprises, and the cumulative return differential
reaches around 1.5% on the day of the meeting, and increases to about 3% over the
course of the next 15 days.
     Table 4 adds control variables to the previous specifications. Specifically, we add
dummies that equal 1 if a FOMC meeting corresponds to an intermeeting or turning
point in monetary policy and the actual change in federal funds target rates.                We
see that cumulative returns tend to be negative around intermeeting policy decisions,
consistent with findings in the literature with no differential drift around turning points
in monetary policy and no effect of actual changes in the target rate on cumulative returns.
Importantly, our baseline results continue to hold in a sample with these additional



                                                14
controls.
       Table 5 also adds the level of the federal funds rate in addition to the previous
controls, because stock markets might be differentially sensitive at different stages of the
business cycle. Contrary to this hypothesis, we never find a statistically significant effect
of the level of the federal funds rate on cumulative stock returns around FOMC meetings
and no effect on the differential return drift around positive versus negative surprises.


C.      Cross-Sectional Factors

So far, we have focused on the drift of a broad market index around expansionary and
contractionary monetary policy surprises, but the reaction of the CRSP value-weighted
index might camouflage large cross-sectional variation. We first study the reaction of the
five Fama and French (2015) factors.
       Figure 8 plots the drift around FOMC announcements for the size factor. Cumulative
excess returns are close to zero around both expansionary and contractionary monetary
policy surprises.     The non-response of the size factor might reflect the insignificant
unconditional size premium during our sample period.5
       Figure 9 plots the drift for the value factor, Figure 10 plots the drift for the
profitability factor, and Figure 11 plots the drift for the investment factor. Overall, little
drift occurs either before or after the announcement for all three factors for expansionary
monetary policy surprises.         Before contractionary monetary policy surprises, we see
an upward drift of value firms relative to growth firms, high-profitability relative to
low-profitability firms, and low- relative to high-investment firms, but the drift levels
off at the announcement and is smaller than the drift for the overall market.
       Lastly, Figure 12 plots the drift for the momentum factor. We see little return
drift for expansionary monetary policy surprises. Around contractionary monetary policy
surprises, however, we see a large upward drift for the momentum factor: starting 20 days
before the announcement, excess returns drift upwards, reaching 2% on the day of the
   5
    Asness, Frazzini, Israel, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2015) show that firm size is highly correlated
with other firm characteristics, and once they condition on these, the size effect reappears. This result
is consistent with evidence in Freyberger, Neuhierl, and Weber (2017), who find that the size effect
conditional on other firm characteristics is strongest in the modern sample period.



                                                   15
announcement, but continue to drift for another 20 days, and a cumulative drift of 4% for
the 40-day window centered around contractionary monetary policy surprises. The 4%
cumulative return is large relative to an average annual excess return of the momentum
factor of 6.12% between 1994 and 2009 and 10% when we end the sample in 2008 and
exclude the momentum crash (see Daniel and Moskowitz (2016)).
     An upward drift of past winners or a downward drift of past losers might drive
the large upward drift of the momentum factor around contractionary monetary policy
surprises.   Figure 13 plots the cumulative excess returns around contractionary and
expansionary monetary policy surprises separately for past winners and losers. We define
past winners to be portfolio 10 in the 10 momentum-sorted portfolios of Fama & French
and past losers to be portfolio 1. For expansionary monetary policy announcements, we
see no large drift for the momentum factor, because both past winners and losers tend to
drift upwards in parallel. Around contractionary surprises, however, we see a pronounced
downward drift in returns: starting 10 days before the announcement, past losers start
drifting downwards, reaching a cumulative return of -2% on the FOMC meeting day and
continue drifting down for another 10 days, and a cumulative return of -5% within these
25 days. In Figure 14, we see a similar pattern in a sample until 2004, indicating a
momentum crash is unlikely to explain these patterns.


D.     Industry Returns

Industries might react differentially to monetary policy shocks, because of demand effects
or different sensitivities to monetary policy. Durable-goods demand is particularly volatile
over the business cycle, and consumers can easily shift the timing of their purchases, thus
making monetary policy sensitivity especially high (see, e.g., D’Acunto, Hoang, and Weber
(2017)). Figure 15 to Figure 18 plot the cumulative industry returns following the Fama
& French 17-industry classification for expansionary monetary policy shocks in blue and
for contractionary monetary policy shocks in red.
     For all but one industry, we see a differential drift around expansionary versus
contractionary monetary policy surprises that averages aroud 4%, consistent with the
overall results for the CRSP value-weighted index. The mining industry is an exception,

                                            16
because returns also drift upwards around contractionary monetary policy shocks (see
Figure 17). We observe the largest differential drift for the machinery industry, with a
cumulative return difference of more than 7% (see Figure 16).


E.    International Equity Returns

We now study international equity returns around FOMC meetings to see whether similar
return patterns are present around the world. Lucca and Moench (2015) already document
that their pre-FOMC announcement drift is a global phenomenom in that international
stock indices appreciate in the 24 hours before the announcement of U.S. monetary policy
decisions.
     Figure A.1 in the Online Appendix plots the cumulative returns of the German DAX
30 index around expansionary and contractionary monetary policy decisions. Similar
to the evidence for the United States, we see stock returns drifting differentially before
expansionary versus contractionary surprises starting around 20 days before the U.S.
monetary policy decision. The return gap between the two types of events increases to
around 3.5% on the day of the FOMC meeting. Returns of the DAX index, however,
continue to drift in the same direction, so that the return gap widens to 6% 15 days after
the FOMC meeting.
     We find similar evidence for the Canadian TSX Composite index in Figure A.2, for
the French CAC40 in Figure A.3, the Spanish IBEX 35 index in Figure A.4, the Swiss
SMI index in Figure A.5, and the British FTSE100 in Figure A.6, but to a lesser extent.
The Japanese Nikkei 225 in Figure A.7 is an exception with almost zero return drift. The
non-result for the Nikkei is consistent with Lucca and Moench (2015), who also do not
find any pre-FOMC return drift for Japan.


F.    Trading Strategy

We report daily mean returns, standard deviations, and Sharpe ratios in Table 7, to
benchmark the economic significance of the differential drift of the CRSP value-weighted
index around FOMC monetary policy decisions across expansionary and contractionary


                                            17
policy surprises. Specifically, we compare the Sharpe ratios of monetary momentum
strategies to the ones for a passive buy-and-hold strategy for event windows around the
FOMC meeting t of different lengths in trading days. The event window in columns (1)
and (2) starts 15 days before the FOMC meeting and ends 15 days after the FOMC
meeting. The monetary momentum strategy invests in the market when the monetary
policy shock is expansionary, and shorts the market when the monetary policy shock is
contractionary. We calculate the annualized Sharpe ratio as the ratio of the daily mean
excess return and the daily standard deviation multiplied by the square root of 252.
       We see in column (1) that holding the market in the 30 days around the FOMC
meeting results in an annualized Sharpe ratio of 0.20. The baseline monetary momentum
strategy, instead, has a Sharpe ratio of 0.61, which is more than three times larger than
the Sharpe ratio of the passive long-only strategy.
       Lucca and Moench (2015) document large returns in the 24 hours before the FOMC
meeting. These large returns cannot explain the increase in Sharpe ratios by a factor
of three, because the buy-and-hold strategy automatically harvests these returns. In
columns (3) and (4), we nevertheless study event windows that exclude the day of and
the day before the FOMC meeting.6 We see that a passive buy-and-hold strategy earns
a negative Sharpe ratio when we exclude the large returns before the FOMC meeting.
The monetary momentum strategy instead still earns an economically meaningful Sharpe
ratio of 0.43.
       So far, we might not be able to implement the monetary momentum strategies we
study, because we do not know the sign of the monetary policy surprise 15 days before
the FOMC meeting.7 We now study event windows that start only the day after the
FOMC meeting in columns (5) and (6). The passive buy-and-hold strategy has a Sharpe
ratio of 0.13 only. A strategy that starts investing in the market for 15 days whenever the
monetary policy surprise was negative on the previous day instead earns an annualized
Sharpe ratio of 0.52, which is larger by a factor of 4.
       Columns (7) and (8) compare the Sharpe ratio of a strategy that holds the market
   6
    We work with daily returns, and both days cover part of that pre-FOMC drift window.
   7
    A recent literature argues that monetary policy shocks are predictable; see, for example, Miranda-
Agrippino (2016). See also discussion below.


                                                 18
throughout the year with a buy-and-hold strategy plus that shorts the market for 15 days
following any contractionary monetary policy surprise. We see that this simple timing
strategy that is implementable in real time increases annualized Sharpe ratios by 65%.
     For comparison, Panel B lists annualized Sharpe ratios for the five Fama & French
factors and the time-series momentum strategy of Moskowitz et al. (2012). We see
that the simple monetary momentum market-timing rules generate Sharpe ratios that
are comparable to the Sharpe ratios of leading risk factors and do not require frequent
rebalancing or the trading of a large number of stocks.


G.     Predictability of Monetary Policy Shocks

We find returns start drifting upwards several days before expansionary monetary policy
decisions. We now want to study whether the cumulative returns before FOMC meetings
can actually predict monetary policy shocks.
     When we run a regression of federal funds futures based monetary policy shocks on
the stock returns in the 15 days before the FOMC press release, we find a point estimate
of -0.0024, which is marginally statistically significant with a t-stat of -1.92. Figure
7 graphically shows the negative association between past 15-day returns and surprise
changes in federal funds rates. In particular, in the top figure, we show a binned scatter
plot of cumulative returns on the x-axis and monetary policy surprises on the y-axis using
25 bins. We see that positive returns in the period 15 days before the FOMC meeting
tend to be associated with expansionary monetary policy surprises. The bottom figure
instead shows a flat association between returns on the day before the FOMC meeting
and policy surprises, consistent with findings of Lucca and Moench (2015) that returns
drift upwards in the 24 hours before the rate decision independent of the sign of the shock.
     This predictability does not seem to occur due to any autocorrelation in shocks.
When we regress current shocks on a constant and shocks from the last meeting, we find
a point estimate on the lagged shock of -0.09 with a p-value of 29%, making it unlikely
that the predictability of monetary policy shocks by past market returns originates due
to any persistence in the shocks themselves.
     Transition matrices are another way to study possible persistence in monetary policy

                                            19
shocks. Table 2 shows contractionary shocks are followed 39 times by other contractionary
shocks but also 34 times by expansionary shocks. On the other hand, contractionary
shocks follow expansionary shocks 33 times, but other expansionary shocks follow 30
times. Hence, little persistence exists in the type of shocks, which makes it unlikely that
the sign of the shocks is predictable by past shocks.
     The predictability of fed funds futures based monetary policy shocks by past
cumulative stock returns implies these shocks are not exogenous and researchers in
macroecomics should possibly regress these shocks on past returns to orthognolize the
shocks. The predictability might also expain some puzzling findings in the literature such
as the “price puzzle”, that is, the fact that consumer prices increase in the short run
following contractionary monetary policy shocks.


H.    Monetary Momentum versus Time-Series Momentum

In an influential paper, Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen (2012) show large time-series
momentum across asset classes such as equity indices, currency, commodities, and bond
futures. They show the past 12-month returns of each instrument positively predicts
future returns. Time-series momentum returns might partially explain the return drifts
we document around FOMC meetings.
     To study the associations between time-series momentum and monetary momentum,
we adapt the Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen (2012) time-series strategy to our context
and start investing in the market index 15 days before the FOMC meeting whenever
the return of the market excess return was positive over the previous 12 months, and
short the market whenever the excess return was negative. Table 8 reports results from
different spanning tests to see whether monetary momentum is economically different
from time-series momentum and other well-known trading strategies.
     We see in column (1) that monetary momentum and time-series momentum
strategies are negatively correlated. But even after controlling for exposure to time-series
momentum, we still find a positive, statistically significant alpha of 0.055% per day, which
is almost 14% annualized. Column (2), instead, shows that monetary momentum does
not subsume time-series momentum. Columns (3) and (4) regress monetary momentum

                                            20
strategies on time-series momentum and the Fama & French 3 and 5 factors. Column (4)
implies monetary momentum expands the mean-variance frontier relative to the Fama &
French 5 factors and time-series momentum and results in annualized excess returns of
9.6%.



                       IV      Concluding Remarks
Momentum is a pervasive feature across asset classes, countries, and sample periods. We
document novel time-series momentum strategies around monetary policy decisions in the
United States. Starting 25 days before expansionary monetary policy announcements,
stock returns start drifting upwards. Before contractionary monetary policy surprises
returns drift downwards. The differential drift continues after the policy decision for
another 15 days and amounts to 4% per year within 30 days of the monetary policy
decision.
    The differential drift we document is largely a market-wide phenomenon and holds
for all industries, but we find little differential drift for cross-sectional asset-pricing
factors. Momentum is an exception: around contractionary policy shocks, we find large
momentum returns, because loser stocks tend to plummet. The drift we document is
a global phenomenon, and major stock indices around the world exhibit the differential
drift around U.S. contractionary and expansionary monetary policy decisions.
    A simple market-timing strategy that exploits the monetary momentum strategy we
document improves on the Sharpe ratio of a buy-and-hold investor by a factor of 4, and
investors can implement the strategy in real time.
    Our findings have important implications for policy and research. First, a recent
literature studies the effect of monetary policy on asset prices using narrow event windows
of 30 or 60 minutes around FOMC policy decisions to obtain identification. The large drift
before and after FOMC decisions suggests researchers might underestimate the effect of
monetary policy on asset prices by restricting attention to narrow event windows. Second,
the magnitude of the drift around FOMC decisions suggests asset-pricing theories that
aim to understand the unconditionally large excess returns of stocks relative to bonds


                                            21
should focus on channels through which monetary policy and asset markets interact.
Third, the pre-drift around FOMC decisions implies “surprise changes” in target rates
might partially be predictable, which has important implications for the large literature
in macroeconomics and monetary economics that tries to understand the real effects of
monetary policy shocks on real consumption, investment, and GDP and warrants future
research.




                                           22
References
Ahn, D.-H., J. Conrad, and R. F. Dittmar (2003). Risk adjustment and trading strategies.
  The Review of Financial Studies 16 (2), 459–485.
Ai, H. and R. Bansal (2018). Risk preferences and the macro announcement premium.
  Econometrica.
Asness, C. S., A. Frazzini, R. Israel, T. J. Moskowitz, and L. H. Pedersen (2015). Size
  matters, if you control your junk. Unpublished Manuscript, AQR.
Asness, C. S., J. M. Liew, and R. L. Stevens (1997).             Parallels between the
  cross-sectional predictability of stock and country returns. The Journal of Portfolio
  Management 23 (3), 79–87.
Asness, C. S., T. J. Moskowitz, and L. H. Pedersen (2013). Value and momentum
  everywhere. The Journal of Finance 68 (3), 929–985.
Ball, R. and P. Brown (1968). An empirical evaluation of accounting income numbers.
  Journal of Accounting Research 6, 159–178.
Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1998). A model of investor sentiment. Journal
  of Financial Economics 49 (3), 307–343.
Berk, J. B., R. C. Green, and V. Naik (1999). Optimal investment, growth options, and
  security returns. The Journal of Finance 54 (5), 1553–1607.
Bernanke, B. S. and K. N. Kuttner (2005). What explains the stock market’s reaction to
  Federal Reserve policy? The Journal of Finance 60 (3), 1221–1257.
Boguth, O., V. Grégoire, and C. Martineau (2017). What are they meeting for? a tale of
  two FOMC announcements. Unpublished Manuscript, Arizona State University.
Boyarchenko, N., V. Haddad, and M. C. Plosser (2017). The Federal Reserve and market
  confidence. Unpublished Manuscript, UCLA.
Brooks, J., M. Katz, and H. Lustig (2018). Post-fomc announcement drift in us bond
  markets. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University.
Chordia, T., A. Goyal, G. Sadka, R. Sadka, and L. Shivakumar (2009). Liquidity and the
  post-earnings-announcement drift. Financial Analysts Journal 65, 18–32.
Cieslak, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2017). The economics of the fed put. Unpublished
  Manuscript, University of California at Berkeley.
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012). Why are target interest rate changes so
  persistent? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (4), 126–162.
Cook, T. and T. Hahn (1989). The effect of changes in the federal funds rate target on
  market interest rates in the 1970s. Journal of Monetary Economics 24 (3), 331–351.
D’Acunto, F., D. Hoang, and M. Weber (2017). The effect of unconventional fiscal policy
  on consumption expenditure. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.
Daniel, K., D. Hirshleifer, and A. Subrahmanyam (1998). Investor psychology and security
  market under-and overreactions. The Journal of Finance 53 (6), 1839–1885.
Daniel, K. and T. J. Moskowitz (2016). Momentum crashes. Journal of Financial
  Economics 122 (2), 221–247.
Drechsler, I., A. Savov, and P. Schnabl (2015). A model of monetary policy and risk
  premia. Journal of Finance (forthcoming).


                                          23
Ehrmann, M. and M. Fratzscher (2004). Taking stock: Monetary policy transmission to
  equity markets. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36 (4), 719–737.
Fama, E. F. (1998). Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance. Journal
  of Financial Economics 49, 283–306.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2015). A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of
  Financial Economics 116 (1), 1–22.
Faust, J., E. T. Swanson, and J. H. Wright (2004). Do Federal Reserve policy
  surprises reveal superior information about the economy?              Contributions to
  Macroeconomics 4 (1), 1–29.
Fontaine, J.-S. (2016). What fed funds futures tell us about monetary policy uncertainty.
  Unpublished Manuscript, Bank of Canada.
Freyberger, J., A. Neuhierl, and M. Weber (2017).              Dissecting characteristics
  nonparametrically. Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago Booth School of
  Business.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and M. Weber (2016). Are sticky prices costly? Evidence from the
  stock market. American Economic Review 106 (1), 165–199.
Gorton, G. B., F. Hayashi, and K. G. Rouwenhorst (2013). The fundamentals of
  commodity futures returns. Review of Finance 17 (1), 35–105.
Gürkaynak, R. S., B. P. Sack, and E. T. Swanson (2005). Do actions speak louder
  than words? The response of asset prices to monetary policy actions and statements.
  International Journal of Central Banking 1 (1), 55–93.
Gürkaynak, R. S., B. P. Sack, and E. T. Swanson (2007). Market-based measures of
  monetary policy expectations. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 25 (2), 201–
  212.
Hong, H. and J. C. Stein (1999). A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading,
  and overreaction in asset markets. The Journal of Finance 54 (6), 2143–2184.
Ippolito, F., A. K. Ozdagli, and A. Perez-Orive (2018). The transmission of monetary
  policy through bank lending: The floating rate channel. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 95, 49 – 71.
Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman (1993). Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
  Implications for stock market efficiency. The Journal of Finance 48 (1), 65–91.
Karnaukh, N. (2018). The dollar ahead of fomc target rate changes. Unpublished
  Manuscript, Ohio State University.
Kuttner, K. (2001). Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the Fed
  funds futures market. Journal of Monetary Economics 47 (3), 523–544.
Law, T. H., D. Song, and A. Yaron (2018). Fearing the fed: How wall street reads main
  street. Unpublished manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
Leombroni, M., A. Vedolin, G. Venter, and P. Whelan (2016).                 Central bank
  communication and the yield curve. Unpublished Manuscript, Boston University.
Livnat, J. and R. Mendenhall (2006). Comparing the post–earnings announcement drift
  for surprises calculated from analyst and time series forecasts. Journal of Accounting
  Research 44, 177–205.
Lucca, D. O. and E. Moench (2015). The pre-FOMC announcement drift. The Journal


                                           24
  of Finance 70 (1), 329–371.
Miranda-Agrippino, S. (2016). Unsurprising shocks: Information, premia, and the
  monetary transmission. Unpublished Manuscript, Bank of England .
Moskowitz, T. J. and M. Grinblatt (1999). Do industries explain momentum? The
  Journal of Finance 54 (4), 1249–1290.
Moskowitz, T. J., Y. H. Ooi, and L. H. Pedersen (2012). Time series momentum. Journal
  of Financial Economics 104 (2), 228–250.
Mueller, P., A. Tahbaz-Salehi, and A. Vedolin (2017). Exchange rates and monetary
  policy uncertainty. The Journal of Finance 72 (3), 1213–1252.
Neuhierl, A. and M. Weber (2017). Monetary policy slope and the stock market.
  Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Ozdagli, A. and M. Velikov (2017). Show me the money: the monetary policy risk
  premium. Boston Fed Working Paper .
Ozdagli, A. and M. Weber (2016). Monetary policy through production networks:
  Evidence from the stock market. Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Piazzesi, M. (2005). Bond yields and the Federal Reserve. Journal of Political
  Economy 113 (2), 311–344.
Piazzesi, M. and E. Swanson (2008). Futures prices as risk-adjusted forecasts of monetary
  policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (4), 677–691.
Rigobon, R. and B. Sack (2003). Measuring the reaction of monetary policy to the stock
  market. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2), 639–669.
Sagi, J. S. and M. S. Seasholes (2007). Firm-specific attributes and the cross-section of
  momentum. Journal of Financial Economics 84 (2), 389–434.
Savor, P. and M. Wilson (2013). How much do investors care about macroeconomic
  risk? Evidence from scheduled economic announcements. Journal of Financial and
  Quantitative Analysis 48 (2), 343–375.
Savor, P. and M. Wilson (2014). Asset pricing: A tale of two days. Journal of Financial
  Economics 113 (2), 171–201.
Shleifer, A. and L. H. Summers (1990). The noise trader approach to finance. The Journal
  of Economic Perspectives 4 (2), 19–33.
Weber, M. (2015). Nominal rigidities and asset pricing. Unpublished manuscript,
  University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Wiriadinata, U. (2018). External debt, currency risk, and international monetary policy
  transmission. Unpublished Manuscript, Chicago Booth.




                                           25
Figure 2: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: No Turning
Points
      5
                        Expansionary Surprise
                        Contractionary Surprise
      4


      3


      2


      1


      0


     -1


     -2
              5
                   0
                        5
                             0
                                  5
                                       0
                                            5
                                                 0
                                                     -5



                                                              10
                                                                   15
                                                                        20
                                                                             25
                                                                                  30
                                                                                       35
                                                                                            40
                                                                                                 45
                                                          0
                                                               5
            -4
                  -4
                       -3
                            -3
                                 -2
                                      -2
                                           -1
                                                -1




          This figure plots cumulative returns in percent around FOMC policy decisions sep-
          arately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and negative (expansionary;
          blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. We exclude turning points in federal
          funds target rates. The sample period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                     26
Figure 3: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: Including
Intermeeting Decisions
      5
                        Expansionary Surprise
                        Contractionary Surprise
      4


      3


      2


      1


      0


     -1


     -2
              5
                   0
                        5
                             0
                                  5
                                       0
                                            5
                                                 0
                                                     -5



                                                              10
                                                                   15
                                                                        20
                                                                             25
                                                                                  30
                                                                                       35
                                                                                            40
                                                                                                 45
                                                          0
                                                               5
            -4
                  -4
                       -3
                            -3
                                 -2
                                      -2
                                           -1
                                                -1




          This figure plots cumulative returns in percent around FOMC policy decisions sep-
          arately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and negative (expansionary;
          blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. We add intermeeting policy decisions
          to the sample. The sample period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                     27
Figure 4: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions:                                       No Zero
Surprises
      5
                        Expansionary Surprise
                        Contractionary Surprise
      4


      3


      2


      1


      0


     -1


     -2
              5
                   0
                        5
                             0
                                  5
                                       0
                                            5
                                                 0
                                                     -5



                                                              10
                                                                   15
                                                                        20
                                                                             25
                                                                                  30
                                                                                       35
                                                                                            40
                                                                                                 45
                                                          0
                                                               5
            -4
                  -4
                       -3
                            -3
                                 -2
                                      -2
                                           -1
                                                -1




          This figure plots cumulative returns in percent around FOMC policy decisions
          separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and negative (expansion-
          ary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. We exclude zero monetary policy
          surprises. The sample period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                     28
Figure 5: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: 1994–2004
    5
                       Expansionary Surprise
                       Contractionary Surprise
    4


    3


    2


    1


    0


    -1


    -2
             5
                  0
                       5
                            0
                                 5
                                      0
                                           5
                                                0
                                                    -5



                                                             10
                                                                  15
                                                                       20
                                                                            25
                                                                                 30
                                                                                      35
                                                                                           40
                                                                                                45
                                                         0
                                                              5
           -4
                 -4
                      -3
                           -3
                                -2
                                     -2
                                          -1
                                               -1




         This figure plots cumulative returns in percent around FOMC policy decisions sep-
         arately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and negative (expansionary;
         blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample period is from 1994 to 2004.




                                                    29
Figure 6: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: Actual Change
      4
                         Negative Change
      3                  Positive Change


      2


      1


      0


      -1


      -2


      -3


      -4
               5
                    0
                         5
                              0
                                   5
                                        0
                                             5
                                                  0
                                                      -5



                                                               10
                                                                    15
                                                                         20
                                                                              25
                                                                                   30
                                                                                        35
                                                                                             40
                                                                                                  45
                                                           0
                                                                5
             -4
                   -4
                        -3
                             -3
                                  -2
                                       -2
                                            -1
                                                 -1




           This figure plots cumulative returns in percent around FOMC policy decisions sep-
           arately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and negative (expansionary;
           blue-solid line) changes in actual federal funds target rates. The sample period is
           from 1994 to 2009.




                                                      30
Figure 7: Bin Scatter Plot of Previous Returns and Monetary Policy Surprises
                             .04         .02
                Monetary Policy Surprise
                    -.02        0
                             -.04
                             -.06




                                               -10   -5                0                   5   10
                                                          Cumulative Return last 15 days
                             .05
                Monetary Policy Surprise
                 -.05        -.1   0




                                               -2    -1                 0                  1   2
                                                                 Last day return

        This figure plots cumulative excess returns in percent in the 15 days before the
        FOMC meeting and the federal-funds-futures-based monetary policy shocks in the
        top panel and the previous-day returns in the bottom panel. The sample period is
        from 1994 to 2009.




                                                                    31
        Figure 8: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: SMB

                        5
                                      SMB Expansionary Surprise
                                      SMB Contractionary Surprise

                        4



                        3                                                            Announcement
Cumulative Return [%]




                        2



                        1



                        0



                        -1



                        -2
                                                                                           10

                                                                                                15

                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                          25

                                                                                                               30

                                                                                                                    35

                                                                                                                         40

                                                                                                                              45
                                5

                                      0

                                            5

                                                  0

                                                        5

                                                              0

                                                                    5

                                                                          0



                                                                                   0

                                                                                       5
                                                                              -5
                              -4

                                    -4

                                          -3

                                                -3

                                                      -2

                                                            -2

                                                                  -1

                                                                        -1




                                                                              Event Time

                             This figure plots cumulative returns in percent for the SMB factor around FOMC
                             policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and
                             negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
                             period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                                                32
Figure 9: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: HML

                        5
                                     HML Expansionary Surprise
                                     HML Contractionary Surprise

                        4



                        3                                                         Announcement
Cumulative Return [%]




                        2



                        1



                        0



                        -1



                        -2
                                                                                          10

                                                                                               15

                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                         25

                                                                                                              30

                                                                                                                   35

                                                                                                                        40

                                                                                                                             45
                               5

                                     0

                                           5

                                                 0

                                                       5

                                                             0

                                                                   5

                                                                         0



                                                                                  0

                                                                                      5
                                                                             -5
                             -4

                                   -4

                                         -3

                                               -3

                                                     -2

                                                           -2

                                                                 -1

                                                                       -1




                                                                             Event Time

                         This figure plots cumulative returns in percent for the HML factor around FOMC
                         policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and
                         negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
                         period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                                             33
Figure 10: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: RMW

                        5
                                         RMW Expansionary Surprise
                                         RMW Contractionary Surprise

                        4



                        3                                                        Announcement
Cumulative Return [%]




                        2



                        1



                        0



                        -1



                        -2
                                                                                         10

                                                                                              15

                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                        25

                                                                                                             30

                                                                                                                  35

                                                                                                                       40

                                                                                                                            45
                                5

                                     0

                                            5

                                                 0

                                                      5

                                                           0

                                                                5

                                                                       0



                                                                                 0

                                                                                     5
                                                                           -5
                              -4

                                    -4

                                          -3

                                                -3

                                                     -2

                                                          -2

                                                               -1

                                                                    -1




                                                                           Event Time

                             This figure plots cumulative returns in percent for the RMW factor around
                             FOMC policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line)
                             and negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
                             period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                                            34
Figure 11: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: CMA

                        5
                                      CMA Expansionary Surprise
                                      CMA Contractionary Surprise

                        4



                        3                                                            Announcement
Cumulative Return [%]




                        2



                        1



                        0



                        -1



                        -2
                                                                                           10

                                                                                                15

                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                          25

                                                                                                               30

                                                                                                                    35

                                                                                                                         40

                                                                                                                              45
                                5

                                      0

                                            5

                                                  0

                                                        5

                                                              0

                                                                    5

                                                                          0



                                                                                   0

                                                                                       5
                                                                              -5
                              -4

                                    -4

                                          -3

                                                -3

                                                      -2

                                                            -2

                                                                  -1

                                                                        -1




                                                                              Event Time

                             This figure plots cumulative returns in percent for the CMA factor around
                             FOMC policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line)
                             and negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
                             period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                                                35
Figure 12: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: Momentum

                          5
                                        MOM Expansionary Surprise
                                        MOM Contractionary Surprise

                          4



                          3                                                            Announcement
  Cumulative Return [%]




                          2



                          1



                          0



                          -1



                          -2
                                                                                             10

                                                                                                  15

                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                            25

                                                                                                                 30

                                                                                                                      35

                                                                                                                           40

                                                                                                                                45
                                  5

                                        0

                                              5

                                                    0

                                                          5

                                                                0

                                                                      5

                                                                            0



                                                                                     0

                                                                                         5
                                                                                -5
                                -4

                                      -4

                                            -3

                                                  -3

                                                        -2

                                                              -2

                                                                    -1

                                                                          -1




                                                                                Event Time

                               This figure plots cumulative returns in percent for the Momentum factor around
                               FOMC policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line)
                               and negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
                               period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                                                  36
Figure 13: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: Winners vs
Losers


                           6                                                            Announcement




                           4
   Cumulative Return [%]




                           2




                           0




                           -2




                           -4            Loser Expansionary Surprise
                                         Winner Expansionary Surprise
                                         Loser Contractionary Surprise
                                         Winner Contractionary Surprise

                           -6
                                                                                              10

                                                                                                   15

                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                             25

                                                                                                                  30

                                                                                                                       35

                                                                                                                            40

                                                                                                                                 45
                                   5

                                         0

                                               5

                                                     0

                                                           5

                                                                 0

                                                                       5

                                                                             0



                                                                                      0

                                                                                          5
                                                                                 -5
                                 -4

                                       -4

                                             -3

                                                   -3

                                                         -2

                                                               -2

                                                                     -1

                                                                           -1




                                                                                 Event Time

                                This figure plots cumulative returns in percent for past winners and losers around
                                FOMC policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line)
                                and negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
                                period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                                                   37
Figure 14: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: Winners vs
Losers (1994–2004)


                            8



                            6                                                         Announcement
    Cumulative Return [%]




                            4



                            2



                            0



                            -2


                                         Loser Expansionary Surprise
                            -4           Winner Expansionary Surprise
                                         Loser Contractionary Surprise
                                         Winner Contractionary Surprise

                            -6
                                                                                              10

                                                                                                   15

                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                             25

                                                                                                                  30

                                                                                                                       35

                                                                                                                            40

                                                                                                                                 45
                                   5

                                         0

                                               5

                                                     0

                                                           5

                                                                 0

                                                                       5

                                                                             0



                                                                                      0

                                                                                          5
                                                                                 -5
                                 -4

                                       -4

                                             -3

                                                   -3

                                                         -2

                                                               -2

                                                                     -1

                                                                           -1




                                                                                 Event Time

                             This figure plots cumulative returns in percent for past winners and losers around
                             FOMC policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line)
                             and negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
                             period is from 1994 to 2004.




                                                                                 38
Figure 15: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: Industry
Returns I
      6
                        Auto
      5                 Finance
                        Chemicals
                        Construction
      4                 Durables


      3


      2


      1


      0


     -1


     -2
              5
                   0
                        5
                             0
                                  5
                                       0
                                            5
                                                 0
                                                     -5



                                                              10
                                                                   15
                                                                        20
                                                                             25
                                                                                  30
                                                                                       35
                                                                                            40
                                                                                                 45
                                                          0
                                                               5
            -4
                  -4
                       -3
                            -3
                                 -2
                                      -2
                                           -1
                                                -1




          This figure plots cumulative returns in percent at the industry level around
          FOMC policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line)
          and negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
          period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                     39
Figure 16: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: Industry
Returns II

      8
                        Drugs
      7                 Fabricated
                        Food
      6                 Machinery

      5

      4

      3

      2

      1

      0

     -1

     -2
              5
                   0
                        5
                             0
                                  5
                                       0
                                            5
                                                 0
                                                     -5



                                                              10
                                                                   15
                                                                        20
                                                                             25
                                                                                  30
                                                                                       35
                                                                                            40
                                                                                                 45
                                                          0
                                                               5
            -4
                  -4
                       -3
                            -3
                                 -2
                                      -2
                                           -1
                                                -1




          This figure plots cumulative returns in percent at the industry level around
          FOMC policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line)
          and negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
          period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                     40
Figure 17: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: Industry
Returns III

      10
                     Mining
                     Oil
       8             Other
                     Retail


       6



       4



       2



       0



       -2
               5
               0
               5
               0
               5
               0
               5
               0
             -5



                                                       10
                                                              15
                                                                   20
                                                                        25
                                                                             30
                                                                                  35
                                                                                       40
                                                                                            45
                                                   0
                                                        5
            -4
            -4
            -3
            -3
            -2
            -2
            -1
            -1




       This figure plots cumulative returns in percent at the industry level around
       FOMC policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line)
       and negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
       period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                              41
Figure 18: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: Industry
Returns IV

      6
                      Steel
      5               Textile
                      Transportation
                      Utilities
      4


      3


      2


      1


      0


     -1


     -2
               5
               0
               5
               0
               5
               0
               5
               0
             -5



                                                        10
                                                        15
                                                                   20
                                                                        25
                                                                             30
                                                                                  35
                                                                                       40
                                                                                            45
                                                   0
                                                         5
            -4
            -4
            -3
            -3
            -2
            -2
            -1
            -1




          This figure plots cumulative returns in percent at the industry level around
          FOMC policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line)
          and negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
          period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                 42
                              Table 1: Monetary Policy Shocks

This table reports descriptive statistics for monetary policy shocks separately for all 137 event days between 1994
and 2009, turning points in monetary policy, and intermeeting policy decisions. The policy shock is calculated
according to equation (1) as the scaled change in the current-month federal funds futures in a 30-minute window
bracketing the FOMC press releases.


                              All Event Days            Turning Points       Intermeeting Releases
  Mean                           −1.60                    −6.09                   −12.23
  Median                          0.00                    −1.75                    −5.73
  Standard deviation              8.94                    17.28                    23.84
  Min                           −46.67                   −39.30                   −46.67
  Max                            16.30                    16.30                    15.00
  Observations                      137                       8                        8




                                                   43
                             Table 2: Shock Transition Matrix

The table reports the transition matrix of shocks from contractionary to expansionary. The sample period is from
1994 until 2009.


                                            Contractionary      Expansionary
                     Contractionary                 39                 34
                     Expansionary                   33                 30




                                                 44
                                 Table 3: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Decisions
     Panel A reports the cumulative return of the CRSP value-weighted index around FOMC policy decisions, excluding policy
     decisions on intermeetings. D exp is a dummy that equals 1 if the monetary policy surprise is negative (expansionary). 0 is
     the day of the FOMC meeting. Panel B adds intermeeting policy dates, Panel C excludes intermeetings and turning points in
     monetary policy, and Panel D excludes events with zero monetary policy surprises. The sample period is from 1994 until 2009.

                         -15       -10       -5        -1          0         1             2           3          4          5         10         15
                                                                    Panel A. No Intermeetings
      D exp           −0.05       0.06      0.83      1.11       1.46∗     1.75∗∗         1.85∗∗     1.83∗∗     2.10∗∗     2.02∗∗     2.68∗∗     2.92∗∗
                     (−0.17)     (0.10)    (1.22)    (1.35)     (1.78)    (2.01)         (2.13)     (2.05)     (2.29)     (2.19)     (2.52)     (2.32)
      Constant          0.02      0.43     −0.23     −0.26      −0.07     −0.15      −0.21          −0.11      −0.36      −0.46      −0.87      −0.76
                       (0.07)    (0.96)   (−0.40)   (−0.35)    (−0.09)   (−0.19)    (−0.27)        (−0.15)    (−0.45)    (−0.60)    (−0.96)    (−0.69)


      Nobs                                                                         129
      Adjusted R2       -0.01     -0.01     0.00      0.01       0.02      0.03           0.03       0.03       0.04       0.03       0.04       0.04

                                                                   Panel B. With Intermeetings
      D exp           −0.02       0.14      0.88      1.14       1.45∗     1.73∗          1.84∗∗     1.91∗∗     2.19∗∗     1.89∗∗     2.45∗∗     2.79∗∗
                     (−0.07)     (0.26)    (1.30)    (1.37)     (1.74)    (1.93)         (2.05)     (2.12)     (2.39)     (2.03)     (2.33)     (2.28)
      Constant        −0.05       0.12     −0.52     −0.70      −0.42     −0.52      −0.60          −0.53      −0.78      −0.70      −0.99      −0.91
                     (−0.24)     (0.26)   (−0.95)   (−1.00)    (−0.62)   (−0.70)    (−0.81)        (−0.70)    (−1.02)    (−0.96)    (−1.19)    (−0.90)




45
      Nobs                                                                         137
      Adjusted R2       -0.01     -0.01     0.01      0.01       0.01      0.0     2   0.02          0.03       0.04       0.02       0.03       0.03

                                                            Panel C. No Intermeetings & Turningpoints
      D exp             0.06      0.28      1.03      1.36       1.59∗     1.84∗∗         1.85∗∗     1.82∗      2.04∗∗     1.91∗∗     2.58∗∗     3.03∗∗
                       (0.22)    (0.51)    (1.47)    (1.63)     (1.89)    (2.04)         (2.04)     (1.98)     (2.15)     (2.00)     (2.33)     (2.33)
      Constant        −0.10       0.26     −0.36     −0.43      −0.22     −0.25      −0.18          −0.06      −0.27      −0.35      −0.81      −0.88
                     (−0.44)     (0.57)   (−0.62)   (−0.58)    (−0.30)   (−0.31)    (−0.23)        (−0.08)    (−0.33)    (−0.43)    (−0.86)    (−0.78)


      Nobs                                                                         122
      Adjusted R2       -0.01     -0.01     0.01      0.02       0.02      0.03           0.03       0.03       0.03       0.03       0.04       0.04

                                                                   Panel D. No Zero Surprises
      D exp             0.01     −0.05      0.75      1.25       1.69∗     1.94∗∗         2.04∗∗     2.15∗∗     2.46∗∗     2.28∗∗     2.91∗∗     3.12∗∗
                       (0.03)   (−0.08)    (0.99)    (1.43)     (1.92)    (2.09)         (2.21)     (2.27)     (2.54)     (2.33)     (2.59)     (2.32)
      Constant          0.02      0.43     −0.23     −0.26      −0.07     −0.15      −0.21          −0.11      −0.36      −0.46      −0.87      −0.76
                       (0.07)    (0.96)   (−0.40)   (−0.35)    (−0.09)   (−0.19)    (−0.27)        (−0.15)    (−0.45)    (−0.60)    (−0.96)    (−0.69)


      Nobs                                                                         103
      Adjusted R2       -0.01     -0.01     0.00      0.01       0.03      0.04           0.04       0.04       0.05       0.04       0.06       0.04
                    Table 4: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Decisions: Including Controls
     The table reports the cumulative return of the CRSP value-weighted index around FOMC policy decisions, excluding policy
     decisions on intermeetings. D exp is a dummy that equals 1 if the monetary policy surprise is negative (expansionary).
     Dummy inter indicates an intermeeting policy move, Dummy turn indicates a turning point in monetary policy, and ∆F F T R is
     the actual change in federal funds target rates. 0 is the day of the FOMC meeting. The sample period is from 1994 until 2009.

                         -15       -10       -5        -1         0         1              2         3          4          5        10         15
      D exp            −0.09      0.08      0.83      1.09      1.34      1.63∗          1.78∗     1.80∗∗     2.05∗∗     1.79∗     2.45∗∗     2.82∗∗
                      (−0.34)    (0.15)    (1.23)    (1.30)    (1.60)    (1.76)         (1.94)    (1.99)     (2.22)     (1.88)    (2.23)     (2.25)
      D inter          −0.91     −3.99∗∗∗ −4.19∗∗∗ −6.69∗∗∗ −5.82∗∗ −6.16∗          −6.28∗        −5.92∗∗ −6.03∗∗ −5.37           −4.21      −3.68
                      (−1.30)   (−3.24) (−2.72) (−3.14) (−2.17) (−1.88)            (−1.89)       (−2.36) (−2.45) (−1.62)         (−1.14)    (−1.00)




46
      D turn            0.80      0.58      0.13      0.30      1.41      0.88      −0.27         −0.72      −0.74      −0.71      0.35       1.21
                       (1.19)    (0.53)    (0.10)    (0.18)    (1.03)    (0.67)    (−0.18)       (−0.42)    (−0.45)    (−0.43)    (0.22)     (0.56)
      ∆F F T R         −0.23      1.17      1.28      2.39      1.58      1.78           2.04      1.29       1.01       1.18      1.85       2.15
                      (−0.27)    (0.87)    (0.65)    (1.21)    (0.66)    (0.74)         (0.95)    (0.63)     (0.54)     (0.61)    (0.70)     (0.74)
      Constant          0.00      0.39     −0.23     −0.25     −0.05     −0.11      −0.14         −0.05      −0.28      −0.27     −0.72      −0.74
                      (−0.00)    (0.85)   (−0.38)   (−0.33)   (−0.07)   (−0.13)    (−0.17)       (−0.06)    (−0.34)    (−0.33)   (−0.75)    (−0.66)


      Nobs                                                                        137
      Adjusted R2       0.01      0.10      0.07      0.15      0.11      0.11          0.11       0.10       0.10       0.06      0.05       0.04
           Table 5: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Decisions: Including Federal Funds Rate
     The table reports the cumulative return of the CRSP value-weighted index around FOMC policy decisions, excluding policy
     decisions on intermeetings. D exp is a dummy that equals 1 if the monetary policy surprise is negative (expansionary). D inter
     indicates an intermeeting policy move, D inter indicates a turning point in monetary policy, ∆F F T R is the actual change in
     federal funds target rates, and F F R is the actual federal funds rates. 0 is the day of the FOMC meeting. The sample period is
     from 1994 until 2009.

                         -15       -10       -5        -1         0         1              2         3         4          5        10         15
      D expan         −0.09       0.08      0.82      1.07      1.32      1.61∗          1.76∗     1.79∗     2.03∗∗     1.78∗     2.43∗∗     2.80∗∗
                     (−0.35)     (0.15)    (1.22)    (1.30)    (1.59)    (1.75)         (1.92)    (1.98)    (2.21)     (1.87)    (2.21)     (2.25)
      D inter         −0.92      −4.03∗∗∗ −4.31∗∗∗ −6.87∗∗∗ −5.97∗∗ −6.32∗          −6.45∗        −6.04∗∗ −6.16∗∗ −5.48∗         −4.37      −3.86
                     (−1.33)    (−3.23) (−2.78) (−3.29) (−2.26) (−1.94)            (−1.96)       (−2.43) (−2.54) (−1.66)        (−1.19)    (−1.06)




47
      D turn            0.77      0.49     −0.16     −0.14      1.05      0.50      −0.69         −1.01     −1.06      −0.99     −0.05       0.77
                       (1.15)    (0.45)   (−0.13)   (−0.08)    (0.79)    (0.39)    (−0.47)       (−0.60)   (−0.66)    (−0.60)   (−0.04)     (0.37)
      ∆F F T R        −0.26       1.09      1.03      2.02      1.27      1.45           1.68      1.05      0.73       0.94      1.51       1.77
                     (−0.31)     (0.83)    (0.53)    (1.01)    (0.53)    (0.61)         (0.77)    (0.51)    (0.39)     (0.49)    (0.58)     (0.62)
      FFR               2.81      7.15     21.90     32.80     26.90     28.70      31.10         21.10     24.00      21.00     30.20      33.30
                       (0.42)    (0.51)    (1.19)    (1.64)    (1.28)    (1.29)     (1.41)        (0.91)    (1.05)     (0.85)    (1.05)     (1.02)
      Constant        −0.10       0.12     −1.04     −1.47     −1.05     −1.17      −1.29         −0.83     −1.17      −1.05     −1.84      −1.98
                     (−0.28)     (0.16)   (−1.04)   (−1.28)   (−0.92)   (−0.95)    (−1.07)       (−0.64)   (−0.90)    (−0.79)   (−1.22)    (−1.07)


      Nobs                                                                        137
      Adjusted R2       0.01      0.09      0.08      0.16      0.11      0.11           0.12      0.10      0.10       0.06      0.05       0.04
Table 6: Cumulative Returns after FOMC Decisions: Post Announcement
 The table reports the cumulative return of the CRSP value-weighted index following FOMC
 policy decisions, excluding policy decisions on intermeetings. D exp is a dummy that equals 1 if
 the monetary policy surprise is negative (expansionary). 0 is the day of the FOMC meeting.
 The sample period is from 1994 until 2009.


                       1           2          3           4           5          10          15
D   exp
                    0.31        0.40        0.37        0.64       0.53        1.21∗∗      1.47∗∗
                   (1.26)      (1.25)      (0.99)      (1.50)     (1.13)      (2.18)      (1.98)
Constant          −0.09   −0.14   −0.05   −0.29   −0.38   −0.82∗ −0.74
                 (−0.46) (−0.56) (−0.15) (−0.84) (−0.99) (−1.81) (−1.22)

Nobs                                                    129
Adjusted R2          0.00        0.00        0.00       0.01        0.00        0.03        0.02




                                               48
                                                   Table 7: Trading Strategies and Sharpe Ratios

     The table reports daily mean excess returns, standard deviations, and annualized Sharpe ratios of buy-and-hold strategies and monetary momentum strategies for
     different event windows in trading days around FOMC policy decisions, excluding policy decisions on intermeetings, in Panel A, and for the five Fama & French
     factors plus times-series momentum and cross-sectional momentum in Panel B. t indicates the FOMC meeting. The monetary momentum strategy is invested
     in the market when the monetary policy shock is expansionary and shorts the market for contractionary monetary policy surprises. The sample period is from
     1994 until 2009.

                                                                       Panel A. Market Returns and Monetary Momentum
                                    t-15 – t+15                   t-15 – t+15, excl t-1 & t=0                     t+1 – t+15                        Annual
                       Buy and hold    Monetary Momentum     Buy and hold    Monetary Momentum     Buy and hold     Monetary Momentum    Buy and hold  Buy and hold +
                           (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)                (5)                 (6)               (7)            (8)




49
      Mean                 0.02             0.05                 0.00              0.04                0.01                0.04              0.02           0.04
      Std                 (1.31)            (1.31)              (1.30)            (1.30)              (1.30)              (1.30)            (1.24)         (1.24)
      SRannualized         0.20             0.61                -0.02              0.43                0.13                0.52              0.31           0.46

                                                                                   Panel B. Factor Returns
                         TS Mom             SMB                 HML                Prof               Invest              Mom
                           (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)                (5)                 (6)
      Mean                 0.04             0.01                 0.01              0.02                0.01                0.02
      Std                 (1.31)            (0.64)              (0.72)            (0.57)              (0.51)              (1.04)
      SRannualized         0.50             0.24                 0.31              0.58                0.40                0.34
                                 Table 8: Spanning Tests

The table reports spanning tests of monetary momentum and times-series momentum strategies on the Fama &
French three- and five-factor models. The sample period is from 1994 until 2009.


                                 Monetary Times-Series          Monetary        Monetary
                                 Momentum Momentum              Momentum        Momentum
                                    (1)       (2)                  (3)             (4)
   Time-series Momentum            −0.11∗∗∗                      −0.016          −0.022
                                  (−7.14)                       (−1.03)         (−1.44)
   Monetary Momentum                                −0.11∗∗∗
                                                   (−7.14)
   Market                                                             0.33∗∗∗     0.37∗∗∗
                                                                    (21.91)     (21.48)
   SMB                                                                0.12∗∗∗     0.17∗∗∗
                                                                     (3.83)      (5.24)
   HML                                                                0.12∗∗∗     0.077∗∗
                                                                     (4.53)      (2.47)
   Invest                                                                         0.069
                                                                                 (1.45)
   Prof                                                                           0.19∗∗∗
                                                                                 (4.65)
   alpha                             0.055∗∗∗        0.047∗∗          0.043∗∗     0.038∗∗
                                    (2.76)          (2.32)           (2.27)      (2.02)

   Nobs                                                     4,247
   Adjusted R2                       0.01            0.01             0.11         0.12




                                              50
 Online Appendix:
Monetary Momentum
   Not for Publication




            1
Figure A.1: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: DAX 30
    6
                      DAX Expansionary Surprise
    5                 DAX Contractionary Surprise

    4

    3

    2

    1

    0

    -1

    -2

    -3
            5
                 0
                      5
                           0
                                5
                                     0
                                          5
                                               0
                                                   -5



                                                            10
                                                                 15
                                                                      20
                                                                           25
                                                                                30
                                                                                     35
                                                                                          40
                                                                                               45
                                                        0
                                                             5
           -4
                -4
                     -3
                          -3
                               -2
                                    -2
                                         -1
                                              -1




         This figure plots cumulative returns in percent for the DAX 30 around FOMC
         policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and
         negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
         period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                    2
Figure A.2: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: TSX 300
     6
                      TSX Expansionary Surprise
     5                TSX Contractionary Surprise

     4

     3

     2

     1

     0

    -1

    -2

    -3
            5
                 0
                      5
                           0
                                5
                                     0
                                          5
                                               0
                                                   -5



                                                            10
                                                                 15
                                                                      20
                                                                           25
                                                                                30
                                                                                     35
                                                                                          40
                                                                                               45
                                                        0
                                                             5
           -4
                -4
                     -3
                          -3
                               -2
                                    -2
                                         -1
                                              -1




         This figure plots cumulative returns in percent for the TSX 300 around FOMC
         policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and
         negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
         period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                    3
Figure A.3: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: CAC 40
    6
                       CAC40 Expansionary Surprise
    5                  CAC40 Contractionary Surprise

    4

    3

    2

    1

    0

    -1

    -2

    -3
             5
                  0
                       5
                            0
                                 5
                                      0
                                           5
                                                0
                                                    -5



                                                             10
                                                                  15
                                                                       20
                                                                            25
                                                                                 30
                                                                                      35
                                                                                           40
                                                                                                45
                                                         0
                                                              5
           -4
                 -4
                      -3
                           -3
                                -2
                                     -2
                                          -1
                                               -1




         This figure plots cumulative returns in percent for the CAC 40 around FOMC policy
         decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and negative
         (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample period is
         from 1994 to 2009.




                                                     4
Figure A.4: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: IBEX 35

    6
                      IBEX Expansionary Surprise
    5                 IBEX Contractionary Surprise

    4

    3

    2

    1

    0

    -1

    -2

    -3
            5
                 0
                      5
                           0
                                5
                                     0
                                          5
                                               0
                                                   -5



                                                            10
                                                                 15
                                                                      20
                                                                           25
                                                                                30
                                                                                     35
                                                                                          40
                                                                                               45
                                                        0
                                                             5
           -4
                -4
                     -3
                          -3
                               -2
                                    -2
                                         -1
                                              -1




         This figure plots cumulative returns in percent for the IBEX 35 around FOMC
         policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and
         negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
         period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                    5
Figure A.5: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: SMI

  6
                     SMI Expansionary Surprise
  5                  SMI Contractionary Surprise

  4

  3

  2

  1

  0

  -1

  -2

  -3
           5
                0
                     5
                          0
                               5
                                    0
                                         5
                                              0
                                                  -5



                                                           10
                                                                15
                                                                     20
                                                                          25
                                                                               30
                                                                                    35
                                                                                         40
                                                                                              45
                                                       0
                                                            5
         -4
               -4
                    -3
                         -3
                              -2
                                   -2
                                        -1
                                             -1




       This figure plots cumulative returns in percent for the SMI around FOMC policy
       decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and negative
       (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample period is
       from 1994 to 2009.




                                                   6
Figure A.6: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: FTSE 100
     6
                       FTSE Expansionary Surprise
     5                 FTSE Contractionary Surprise

     4

     3

     2

     1

     0

     -1

     -2

     -3
             5
                  0
                       5
                            0
                                 5
                                      0
                                           5
                                                0
                                                    -5



                                                             10
                                                                  15
                                                                       20
                                                                            25
                                                                                 30
                                                                                      35
                                                                                           40
                                                                                                45
                                                         0
                                                              5
            -4
                 -4
                      -3
                           -3
                                -2
                                     -2
                                          -1
                                               -1




          This figure plots cumulative returns in percent for the FTSE 100 around FOMC
          policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and
          negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
          period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                                     7
Figure A.7: Cumulative Returns around FOMC Policy Decisions: Nikkei 225

       6
                    Nikkei Expansionary Surprise
       5            Nikkei Contractionary Surprise

       4

       3

       2

       1

       0

      -1

      -2

      -3
              5
              0
              5
              0
              5
              0
              5
              0
            -5



                                                     10
                                                            15
                                                                 20
                                                                      25
                                                                           30
                                                                                35
                                                                                     40
                                                                                          45
                                                 0
                                                      5
           -4
           -4
           -3
           -3
           -2
           -2
           -1
           -1




       This figure plots cumulative returns in percent for the Nikkei 225 around FOMC
       policy decisions separately for positive (contractionary; red-dashed line) and
       negative (expansionary; blue-solid line) monetary policy surprises. The sample
       period is from 1994 to 2009.




                                             8
