                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
                             IN MACROECONOMICS:
                       A VERY QUICK REFRESHER COURSE




                             N. Gregory Mankiw




                           Working Paper No. 2474




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                December 1987




This paper was prepared for a conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, October 30-31, 1987. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                  NBER Working Paper #2474
                                  December 1987




              Recent Developments in Macroeconomics:

                  A Very Quick Refresher Course




                             ABSTRACT



     This paper outlines the major developments in macroeconomics
over the past two decades. It examines the reasons for the
breakdown in the consensus view of the l960s and how this
breakdown has guided research in macroeconomics. The
introduction and importance of "rational expectations" are
discussed, as are recent advances within the new classical and

new Keynesian paradigms.




                                  N. Gregory Mankiw
                                  NBER
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
      Fifteen or twenty years ago, it was much easier being a
student of macroeconomics. Macroeconomists felt more sure of the

answers they gave to questions such as, "What causes output and
employment to fluctuate?" and "What is the correct policy
response to these fluctuations?"
      At the textbook level, the accepted model of the economy was
the Is-LM model.     It was little changed from John Hicks's (1937)

interpretation of John Maynard Keynes's (1936) once revolutionary
vision of the macroeconomy.       The IS-LM model takes prices as

given.     To explain the adjustment of prices, a Phillips curve of
some sort was appended. Perhaps the Phillips curve even had the
natural rate property, allowing the economy to be self-correcting
                                                                    -

in the long run.
      At the more applied level, this consensus was embodied in
the large-scale macroeconometric models, such as the MPS model or
the DRI model. The job of refining these models generated many
PhD      dissertations.     Private    and   public   decision-makers

confidently used these models to forecast important economic time
series and to evaluate the impact of alternative macroeconomic

policies.
      Today, macroeconomists are much less sure of their answers.
At some schools, the IS-LM model is not even taught at the
graduate level; it is thought to be the relic of a bygone age.
At most schools, the large-scale macroeconometric models are

                                   1
mentioned only briefly. A graduate student today is unlikely to
devote his dissertation to improving some small sector of the MPS

model.

     In contrast to this major change in the way academic
macroeconomists view their field of study, macroeconomists in
business and government have not substantially changed the way

they analyze the economy.   They continue to use the large-scale
macroeconometric models for forecasting and policy analysis. The
theoretical developments of the past fifteen years have had
relatively little impact on applied macroeconomics.
     Why is there such a great disparity between academic
macroeconomics and applied macroeconomics?      The view of many
academics is that applied macroeconomists have simply fallen
behind the state of the art, that they continue to use obsolete
models simply because they have not kept up with the quickly
advancing field.   This self-righteous view cannot be correct,
however, for it clearly violates a fundamental property of
economic equilibrium: it assumes a profit opportunity remains
unexploited. If recent developments in macroeconomics are useful
for applied work, they should have been adopted. The observation
that recent developments have had little impact on applied
macroeconomics is irima facie evidence that these developments
are of little use to applied macroeconomists.

    One might be tempted to reach just the opposite conclusion:
the fact that the macroeconomic research of the past fifteen
years has had little impact on applied economists implies the

                                2
research has no value. Yet this conclusion is also unwarranted.
The past fifteen years have been a very fertile time for
macroeconomics. Unfortunately, however, recent developments have
not been of the sort that can be quickly adopted by applied
macroeconomists.
     An analogy from the history of science may be helpful for
understanding the current state of macroeconomics.1       It was
approximately five centuries ago when Copernicus suggested that
the sun, rather than the earth, is the center of the planetary

system.   At the time, he mistakenly suggested that the planets
followed circular orbits around the sun; we now know that these
orbits are actually elliptical. Compared to the then prevailing
geocentric system of Ptolemy, the original Copernican system was
more elegant and, ultimately, it proved more useful. But at the
time it was proposed and for many years thereafter, the
Copernican system did not work as well as the Ptolemaic system.
For predicting the positions of the planets, the Ptolemaic system

was clearly superior.
     Now imagine yourself,     alternatively,   as   an academic
astronomer and as an applied astronomer at the time right after

Copernicus.   If you had been an academic astronomer, you would
have devoted your research to improving the Copernican system.
The Copernican system held out the greatest promise for
understanding the movements of the planets in the simplest and

intellectually most satisfying way.     Yet if you had been an
applied astronomer, you would have continued to use the Ptolemaic

                                3
system.   It would have been foolhardy to navigate your ship by
the more promising yet less accurate Copernican system.      Given

the state of knowledge immediately after Copernicus, a complete
separation between academic        and applied astronomers    was

reasonable and, indeed, optimal.
     This paper surveys some of the recent developments in
macroeconomics.    My intended audience includes those applied
economists in business and government who often view recent
research with a combination of amusement, puzzlement, and
disdain. My goal is not to proselytize. Rather, my goal is to
show how several recent developments in macroeconomics point the
way toward a better understanding of the economy, just as
Copernicus's suggestion of the heliocentric system pointed the
way toward a better understanding of the planets.    Yet just as
Copernicus did not see his vision fully realized in his lifetime,
we should not expect these recent developments, no matter how
promising, to yield high returns in the very near future. In the
long run, however, many of these developments will profoundly
change the way all economists think about the economy and
economic policy.


The Breakdown of the Consensus
     The consensus in macroeconomics that prevailed until the
early l970s faltered for two reasons, one empirical and one
theoretical. The empirical reason is that the consensus view did
not adequately cope with the rising rates of inflation and
unemployment experienced during the 1970s.        The theoretical
reason is that the chasm between microeconomic principles and
macroeconomic practice was too great to be intellectually
satisfying.
     These two reasons came together most obviously and most
profoundly in the famous prediction of Milton Friedman (1968) and

Edmund Phelps (1968). According to the unadorned Phillips curve,
one could maintain a permanently low level of unemployment merely

by tolerating a permanently high level of inflation.       In the
late 1960s, when the consensus view was still in its heyday,
Friedman and Phelps argued from microeconomic principles that
this empirical relationship between inflation and unemployment
would break down if policy-makers attempted to exploit it. After
all, the equilibrium level of unemployment should depend on labor.

supply,   labor   demand,   optimal   search   times,   and other
microeconomic considerations, not on the average rate of money
growth. Subsequent events proved Friedman and Phelps correct, as
inflation rose without any permanent reduction in unemployment.
     The breakdown of the Phillips curve and the prescience of
Friedman and Phelps made macroeconomists ready for Robert Lucas's
(1976) more comprehensive attack on the consensus view.     Lucas

pointed out that many of the empirical relationships that make up
the large scale macroeconometric models were no better founded on
microeconomic principles than was the Phillips curve.             In

particular, the decisions that determine most macroeconomic
variables, such as consumption and investment, depend crucially

                                5
on   expectations         of        the     future       state     of   the   economy.
Macroeconometric models treated expectations in a very cavalier

way, most often making up plausible but arbitrary proxies. Lucas
pointed     out    that        an        important      feature     of most policy
interventions is that they change the way individuals form
expectations about the future. Yet the proxies for expectations
used in the macroeconometric models failed to take account of
this feature.       Lucas concluded, therefore                     that these models
should not be used to evaluate the impact of alternative
policies.
     The "Lucas critique" became the rallying cry for those young
turks intent on destroying the consensus.                          Defenders of the
consensus argued that users of macroeconometric models were
already aware of the problem Lucas pointed out so forcefully,
that the models were nonetheless informative if used with care
and judgement, and that the Lucas critique was right in principle
but not important in practice. These defenses were not heeded.
     As     I have mentioned, there were two reasons for the
breakdown of the consensus.                     Both were crucial.       Neither the
empirical reason nor the theoretical reason was, by itself,
sufficient to cause this breakdown.                              As an exercise in
intellectual history,               it     is       instructive    to   consider two
counterfactuals.

     Suppose the macroeconometric models had failed to explain
the events of the 1970s, but macroeconomists had felt confident
in the theoretical underpinning of these models. Undoubtedly the

                                                6
events could have been explained away.                      As defenders of the
consensus view often emphasize, much of the stagflationary l970s
can be attributed to the OPEC supply shocks. The remainder could

always     have been attributed             to        a   few large residuals.
Heteroskedasticity has never been a reason to throw out an
otherwise good model.

      Alternatively,      suppose the macroeconometric models had
performed wonderfully in the 1970s, but that Friedman, Phelps,
and      Lucas   had     correctly        pointed          out   the    inadequate
microfoundations of these models.                In this case, the absence of
microfoundations would have disturbed only the theoretically
obsessive. The prediction of Friedman and Phelps would have been
forgotten, even if it had never been put to a test. The correct
response to the Lucas critique would have been, "If it ain't
broke, don't fix it."
      As it turned out, however, the macroeconometric models and
the   consensus view        did      fail        us       both   empirically   and

theoretically.         This failure caused a period of confusion,
division, and excitement in macroeconomics which is still
continuing today.


Directions of Research
      Much of the research in macroeconomics over the past fifteen
years attempts to deal with the problems that caused the
breakdown of the consensus.          Renewed and more intensive effort
has been directed at the attempt to build macroeconomics on a

                                      7
firm microeconomic foundation. Very often, the relevance of the
research to current macroeconomic problems is sacrificed.      To

macroeconomic practitioners, much of the research must seem
esoteric and useless. Indeed, for practical purposes, it is.
     Let me divide recent developments in macroeconomics into
three catagories. Like most taxonomies of complex phenomena, the

one I propose is highly imperfect.   Some developments fall into
more than one of the three catagories, while others fall
naturally into none of them. Yet the taxonomy is useful, for it
helps in understanding the motivation and goals of the research
programs undertaken by many academic macroeconomists in recent

years.
     One large category of research tries to model exiectations
in a more satisfactory way than was common ten or fifteen years
ago. More careful attention to the treatment of expectations can
often bring out new and surprising implications out of many
standard models.    The widespread acceptance of the axiom of
rational expectations is perhaps the largest single change in
macroeconomics in the past two decades.
     A second category      of research    attempts   to explain
macroeconomic phenomena within the context of equilibrium models.
By the term "equilibrium," I refer to models in which wages and

prices adjust instantly to equate supply and demand.         Many
macroeconomists once presumed that a non-market-clearing theory
was necessary to explain economic fluctuations; indeed, such a
presumption accompanied the prevailing consensus of the l960s.

                                8
In contrast, recent research has shown that intertemporal
equilibrium models have much richer implications and are not so
easily dismissed.
     A third category        of   research   attempts   to   rebuild
macroeconomics within the context of disequilibrium models. This
last category is the most Keynesian and the most compatible with
the textbook IS-LM model.         This research can be viewed as
attempting to put the textbook Keynesian analysis on firmer
microeconomic foundations.


Expectations I: Policy Irrelevance
     The notion of rational expectations has its roots in John
Muth's (1961) brilliant but long neglected paper.        Economists

routinely assume that firms rationally maximize profits and that

consumers rationally maximize utility.       It would be an act of
schizophrenia not to assume that economic agents act rationally
when they form their expectations of the future.
     Much of the research in macroeconomics since the breakdown
of the consensus has been aimed at exploring the assumption of
rational expectations.   By itself, the assumption of rational
expectations has no empirical implication, just as the assumption
of utility maximization has no direct empirical implication. Yet

together with other auxiliary hypotheses, many of which predate
the introduction of rational expectations and at the time seemed
unobjectionable, the assumption of rational expectations can have

profound and startling implications.

                                  9
     The result of Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace (1975), that
systematic monetary policy is irrelevant to the path of output
and employment, is one of the earliest and most controversial
applications of rational expectations.         Sargent and Wallace
merely applied rational expectations to the natural rate Phillips
curve of Friedman and Phelps.        This Phillips curve posits that
expected inflation does not affect unemployment, but that
unexpected inflation temporarily lowers unemployment below the
natural rate.    Since the assumption of rational expectations
rules out surprising people systematically, Sargent and Wallace
concluded that systematic monetary policy can affect only
expected inflation, not unexpected inflation and unemployment.
If correct as a description of the world, this result would
render ineffective policy advice such as, "Increase money growth
when the economy looks like it is going into a recession."
     Much confusion once prevailed over the meaning of the
Sargent-Wallace result. Policy irrelevance was sometimes said to
be the implication of rational expectations er se.      We now know
that rational expectations is not the issue at all.      As Stanley
Fischer (1977) showed, it is entirely possible to construct
models with rational expectations in which systematic moIetary
policy can stabilize the economy.         Fischer's model, in which
sticky wages play a crucial role, produces Keynesian policy
prescriptions despite the presence of rational expectations.
     The paper of Sargent and Wallace was important not primarily
because of its substantive result of policy irrelevance, but

                                10
because it helped familiarize macroeconomists with the use of
rational expectations.   It showed that models could be solved
without invoking arbitrary proxies for expectations, and that the
solution with rational expectations could look very different
from the solution without rational expectations.     The paper by
Sargent and Wallace was one of the earliest applying rational
expectations to macroeconomic theory, and it illustrated vividly
the potential importance of that application.
     Once the attention of macroeconomists turned to the central
role of expectations, many questions took on a new appearance.
Adapting macroeconomic theory to take into account private
decision-makers who form expectations appropriately given their
environment became a major job of academic niacroeconomists.    It

replaced work on the large-scale macroeconometric models as the
primary source of topics for PhD dissertations.


Expectations II: Rules versus Discretion
      Of the many questions that have been reexamined, perhaps
the most important is the question of whether monetary policy
should be conducted by rule or by discretion.        A variety of
authors, most notably Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott (1977),
have provided a new and persuasive reason to be skeptical about
discretion in the conduct of monetary policy.     In particular, a
monetary authority with discretion is likely to choose too high a
rate of inflation.

     Let us suppose that the world is governed by the

                               11
expectations-augmented Phillips curve of Friedman and Phelps. In
particular, letting Y denote the level of output, Y* the natural

rate,    ir   the rate of inflation, and Eir the       expected rate of

inflation, output is determined by
(1)             'f* +   a(ir - Er).
Output is high when inflation exceeds expected inflation, and
output is low when inflation falls below expected inflation.
        For simplicity, let us also suppose that the monetary
authority chooses the rate of inflation.               Of course, more
realistically, the monetary authority controls inflation only
imperfectly through use of its monetary instruments. But for the
purposes of illustration, it is useful to assume that the
monetary authority can control inflation perfectly.
        The monetary, authority likes output to be high and
inflation to be low.              Suppose that the preferences of the
authority can be represented as

(2)

where the parameter           represents how much the monetary authority
dislikes inflation.
        Now let us compare monetary policy made by a fixed rule and
monetary policy made under discretion.
      First consider policy under a fixed rule.        A rule binds the
monetary authority to a particular level of inflation. As long
as private agents understand that the authority is bound by this
rule, the expected level of inflation will be the level the
monetary authority is bound to produce. Since expected inflation

                                      12
equals actual inflation (Eir—ir), the level of output will be at
its natural rate (YY*)
       What is the optimal rule?      Since output is at its natural
rate regardless of the level of inflation legislated by the rule,
there is no benefit to having any inflation at all.      The optimal
fixed rule requires that the monetary authority produce zero
inflation.

       Now consider discretionary monetary policy.              Under
discretion, the economy works as follows:

(a) private agents form their expectations of inflation, Eir;
(b) the authority chooses the actual level of inflation, it;
(c)   based on expected and actual inflation, a level of output
      is determined.

Under this set-up, the monetary authority maximizes its objective
in equation (2) subject to the constraint it faces by the
Phillips curve in equation (1).       When making its decision about
the rate of inflation, the authority takes expected inflation as
already determined.
      What outcome would we expect under discretionary policy?
The monetary authority chooses the level of inflation that
equates the marginal benefit from the increased output to
marginal cost of increased inflation. The marginal benefit is a
while the marginal cost is 2flir, regardless of the level of
expected inflation.    The monetary authority thus determines that
the "optimal" level of inflation is
      it   a/(2$).

                                 13
Of course, rational private agents understand the objective and
constraint of the monetary authority. They therefore expect that
the monetary authority will choose this level of inflation.
Expected inflation equals actual inflation (E7r—lr) and output
equals its natural rate (Y=Y*).        In this highly simplified
model, optimal discretion produces more inflation than under the
optimal fixed rule, while the level of output is the same.
Optimal discretion is worse than the fixed rule, even though the
authority was attempting to maximize its objective function (2).
     It at first seems bizarre that a monetary authority can
achieve a better outcome by being bound by a fixed rule.      Why
can't an authority with discretion mimic an authority bound by a
zero inflation rule? The answer is that the authority is playing
a   game against private decision-makers who have rational
expectations.   Without being bound by a fixed rule of zero
inflation, the authority is not able to get private agents to
expect zero inflation.

     Suppose, for example, that the monetary authority simply
announces that it will follow a zero inflation policy.   Such an
announcement by itself cannot be credible. Once expectations of
inflation are formed, the authority has the incentive to renege
on its announcement in order to increase output. Private agents
understand the incentive to renege and therefore do not believe
the announcement in the first place.

     This simple model of monetary policy has an important
corollary. As I have discussed, the optimal fixed rule achieves

                               14
zero inflation.    There is one circumstance in which a monetary
authority with discretion achieves this outcome.            If the
authority dislikes inflation much more than it likes output (that
is, if the parameter    is very large), inflation under discretion
is near zero.     This finding can provide some guidance to those
who have the job of appointing central bankers. An alternative
to imposing a fixed rule is to appoint an individual with an
excessive distaste for inflation.
     Finally, note that the issue raised here in the context of
monetary policy, more generally called the time inconsistency of
optimal policy, arises in many other contexts.      For example, it
may be optimal for a government to announce that it will not tax
capital in order to encourage accumulation; but once the capital
is in place, the government may wish to renege on its promise.
As another example, the government may wish to announce that it
will prosecute vigorously all tax evaders; but after the taxes
have been evaded, the government may wish to call a "tax amnesty"
to collect some extra revenue.        In each case, rational agents
understand the incentive for the government to renege, and this
expectation affects their behavior.        And in each case, the
solution is to take away the government's discretionary power by
binding it to a fixed policy rule.


Equilibrium

     Since Lucas's initial attack on standard macroeconomic
practice emphasized the inadequate way expectations were treated,

                                 15
much effort at reconstruction has been devoted to learning how to
deal with the foresight of private economic agents. At the early
stages, during the late l970s,            it was believed that the
macroeconometric models could be fixed relatively easily.           It

seemed that the imperfect proxies for expectations merely needed
to be replaced by rational expectations.         This view, it turned
out, was much too optimistic.          There was much more work to be
done.

        The goal of the new classical revolution has been to rebuild
macroeconomics while maintaining the axioms that individuals
always optimize and, more controversially, that markets always
clear.      There has been two major strands to this research
program.
        The early work in this area emphasized the role of imperfect

information regarding prices.          (Lucas 1972,1973)   Individuals
were assumed to observe the prices of the goods they produce but
not the prices of the goods they purchase.             They therefore
confuse movements in the overall price level with movements in
relative prices. An unanticipated inflation leads individuals to
infer that the relative prices of the goods they produce is
temporarily high, which induces them to increase the quantity
supplied.     This story thus generates the natural rate Phillips
curve of Friedman and Phelps, in which output depends on the
deviation of inflation from expected inflation.
        More recent work in the equilibrium tradition has emphasized
the intertemporal substitution of consumption and leisure caused

                                  16
by exogenous technological disturbances.        (Barro and King 1984,
Long and Plosser 1983, Prescott 1986)           These "real business
cycle" models have the virtue of being rigorously founded on
microeconomic      principles:   they     are   actually   simplified,
intertemporal Walrasian models.        Many of the characteristics of
economic time series can be surprisingly well mimicked with such
models.

     Real business cycle theory contrasts most sharply with the
consensus view of the 1960s. Associated with this theory are the

following four propositions.
     (1) The economy experiences large and sudden changes in the

            available production technology.
     (2) Leisure is highly substitutable over time.
     (3) Fluctuations in employment are fully voluntary and

            socially optimal.
     (4) Monetary policy has no ability to affect real variables,
            such as output and employment.

Twenty years ago, all of these claims would have been considered
ridiculous.      That macroeconomists now seriously entertain a
theory with these features shows how radically the field has
changed.2


Disequilibrium
     At the same time that many macroeconomists have been
attempting to explain economic fluctuations within the Walrasian
paradigm, many other macroeconomists have been attempting to

                          -       17
provide justification for the non-Wairasian assumptions of
textbook Keynesian economics. The failure of wages and prices to
adjust instantly to equate supply and demand in all markets was
the key assumption of the consensus view of the l960s.     If this

assumption can be supported by hard-headed microeconomic
reasoning, the consensus view can be resurrected, perhaps with
some modifications.

     Most attempts at explaining disequilibrium have centered on
the labor market.      The models of Fischer (1977) and Taylor
(1980), for example, rely on the existence of labor contracts
that specify in advance the nominal wage at which firms can
purchase labor.   The primary appeal of these models is that they
mirror observed institutions.. Many workers appear to be covered
by contracts predetermining a nominal wage. Incorporated into a
macroeconomic model, this observation has important implications
for the conduct of monetary policy.        In particular, monetary
policy becomes a potent tool for stabilization policy, despite
the assumption of rational expectations.

     These models of nominal wage stickiness have been criticized
on three grounds.     First, the existence of such nominal wage
contracts is never explained from microeconomic principles.    If

these nominal wage contracts are responsible for large and
inefficient fluctuations in output and employment, why do workers
and firms write these contracts? There has been much theoretical

work studying optimal risk-sharing arrangements between firms and
workers. It is clear that optimal contracting cannot produce the

                               18
nominal wage stickiness on which Fischer and Taylor, as well
textbook Keynesian models, rely.
      Second, despite the apparent existence of labor contracts
determining nominal wages in advance, it is not obvious that
these wages play an important role in the determination of
employment. Many workers hold lifetime jobs.    In the context of
a long-term relationship, there is no reason why a wage paid in a

given period should equal the marginal product of labor, as would
be true in a spot market.     Instead, the wage may be like an
installment payment.      For example, some universities pay
professors' annual salary equally over nine months, while other
universities pay the annual salary equally over twelve months;
yet surely this difference has no relation to the work effort or
marginal product of the professors over the course of the year.
Similarly, the fact that the wage paid to a given -worker is
sticky need not imply that the allocation of labor is determined

inefficiently.
      Third, the cyclical behavior of the real wage does not
appear consistent with the model incorporating a predetermined
nominal wage and movements along a standard, downward-sloping
labor demand schedule.     According to the textbook story, a
negative shock to aggregate demand lowers the price level, raises
the real wage since the nominal wage is fixed, and thus reduces
the quantity of labor demanded. To the extent tht fluctuations
are   driven by aggregate     demand,   real   wages   should be
countercyclical. Yet in the data, real wages appear acyclical or

                               19
a bit procyclical.      For example, in the severe 1982 recession,

which was allegedly driven by contractionary monetary policy,
real wages were not very different from what they were a few
years earlier or a few years later.            The prediction of
countercyclical real wages cannot be easily reconciled with
observation.
     These     three problems with the view emphasizing the
stickiness of nominal wages has turned the attention of Keynesian
macroeconomists in the 1980s away from the labor market and
towards the goods market.        A "new Keynesian" view has been
emerging.      (See Rotemberg, 1987, for a survey.)   According to
this view, the problem in a recession is not that labor costs are
too high but that sales are too low.    This emphasis on the goods
market can avoid the three problems that plagued the textbook
story.
     First, even though the problem in a recession is low sales,
monopolistically competitive firms do not have much incentive to
cut their prices to restore equilibrium. The benefit of a price
reduction to the firm may be small (second-order) even though the
benefit to society can be large (first-order).    If firms face a
small "menu cost" to changing prices or if they are only "near
rational," they might maintain their old prices despite the
substantial social loss from this price stickiness.    (See Mankiw
1985, Akerlof and Yellen 1985, Blanchard and Kiyotaki 1987.)
Unlike the nominal wage rigidity of the old Keynesian view, the
price rigidity of the new Keynesian view does not require any

                                 20
apparent substantial departure from rationality.
     Second, unlike nominal wages, observed rigid prices serve an

obviously important allocative function. For example, the prices
of magazines at newsstands often stay unchanged for years at a
time (Cecchitti 1986).    One cannot argue that these prices are
merely installment payments within the context of a long-term
relationship.
     Third,     the   new Keynesian view    does      not     imply   a


countercyclical nominal wage.    Once price rigidity is introduced
as an important element to explain the response of the economy to

changes in aggregate demand, real wages can be procyclical or
acyclical.      Moreover, if price rigidity is combined with the
view that observed wages are merely installment payments, one can
obtain Keynesian results while leaving the path of wages
completely indeterminate and completely irrelevant.
     For these reasons, the search for nominal rigidities has
shifted from the labor market to the goods market.          It would be
incorrect to infer, however, that the new Keynesian view embraces
an equilibrium labor market.     Rather, the new Keynesian view
explains unemployment with various sorts of real rigidities; it
is only in explaining nominal rigidities and the non-neutrality
of money that emphasis has turned to the goods market.3
        Of the many sorts of real rigidities in the labor market
that have received attention, the "efficiency wage" models are
probably the most popular.      (See the surveys of Yellen 1985,
Stiglitz 1986, and Katz 1986.) The common feature of this class

                                21
of models is that firms do not reduce wages in the face of
persistent unemployment, because doing so would also reduce
productivity.     The reason for the reduction in productivity may
be that lower paid workers put out less effort, that lowering the
wage reduces the average quality of workers since only the best
workers quit, or a variety of other factors.             In all of these
stories, the forces moving the labor market to the equilibrium of
supply and demand are absent.


Conclusion
     I      began by suggesting         that   recent    developments   in

macroeconomics     are akin   to    the Copernican revolution in
astronomy:     immediately having little practical value but
ultimately pointing the way toward a greater understanding.
Perhaps the analogy is too optimistic.           Copernicus had a vision
not only of what was wrong with the prevailing paradigm, but also
of what a new paradigm might look like.          Macroeconomists have in
the past decade realized only the first part of such a vision;
there remains much disagreement on the second part.                 It is
undoubtedly easier to criticize the state of the art than to
improve it.
     Some developments of the past two decades are now widely
accepted.      The notion of rational expectations is no longer
controversial among macroeconomists.           Although the debate over
rules versus discretion continues,              time    inconsistency   is

generally acknowledged to be a serious problem with the use of

                                   22
discretionary      policy.        Most   fundamentally,   almost   all

macroeconomists     agree that basing macroeconomics         on    firm
microeconomic principles should be higher on the research agenda
than it has been in the past.

        Yet on the crucial issue of business cycle theory, there
appears to be little movement toward a new consensus.        The "new
classicals" and the "new Keynesians" each have made substantial
advancements within their own paradigms.         To explain economic
fluctuations, new classical theorists now emphasize the roles of

technological disturbances, intertemporal substitution, and real
business cycles.         New Keynesian theorists now speak of
monopolistic competition, menu costs, and efficiency wages. More
generally, the classicals continue to believe that the business
cycle can be understood within a model of frictionless markets,
while the Keynesians believe that market failures of various
sorts     are   essential    to   explaining fluctuations     in   the

macroeconomy.
        Recent developments in macroeconomic theory will ultimately
be judged by whether they prove to be useful to applied
macroeconomists. The passage of time will make efficiency wages,
real business cycles, and the other "breakthroughs" of the past
decade less novel.     The attention of academic researchers will
surely turn to other topics. Yet it is likely that at least some
of these recent developments will permanently change the way in
which economists of all sorts think about and discuss economic
behavior and economic policy.        A decade from now we will know

                                   23
which of these developments has the power to persevere past the
initial debate and permeate economists' conception of how the
world works.




                              24
Notes

1. A caveat: Not being a historian of science, I cannot vouch for
the accuracy of the details of the story.      But regardless of
whether it is fully accurate, the story serves nicely as a
parable for macroeconomics.
2. I discuss my views on real business cycles in Mankiw (1987).
3. The interaction between nominal and real rigidities is a
research topic that is beginning to be explored.        See, for
example, Ball and Romer (1987).




                                  25
References
Akerlof, George, and Janet Yellen, "A Near-Rational Model
   of the Business Cycle with Wage and Price Inertia,"
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (Supplement 1985)
   823-838.

Ball, Laurence, and David Romer, "Real Rigidities and the

   Non-Neutrality of Money," unpublished, 1987.
Barro, Robert, and Robert King, "Time Separable Preferences
   and Intertemporal Substitution Models of the Business Cycle,"
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 99 (November 1984), 817-839.

Blanchard, Olivier J., and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, "Monopolistic
   Competition and the Effects of Aggregate Demand,"
   American Economic Review 77 (September 1987), 647-666.

Cecchettif Stephen G. , "The Frequency of Price Adjustment:
   A Study of the Newsstand Prices of Magazines," Journal of
   Econometrics 31 (1986), 255-274.

Fischer, Stanley, "Long-term Contracts, Rational Expectations,
   and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political

   Economy 85 (February 1977), 191-205.
Friedman, Milton, "The Role of Monetary Policy," American
   Economic Review 58 (March 1968), 1-17.

Hicks, John, "Mr. Keynes and the Classics," Econometrica 5 (April
   1937), 147-159.

Katz, Lawrence, "Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial
  Evaluation," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1 (1986), 235-276.

                                26
Keynes, John Maynard, The General Theory of Employment. Interest
   and Money, 1936.
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott, "Rules Rather Than
   Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of

   Political Economy 85 (June 1977), 473-491.
Long, John B. Jr., and Charles I. Plosser, "Real Business

   Cycles," Journal of Political Economy 91 (February 1983),
   39-69.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,"
   Journal of Economic Theory 4 (1972), 103-124.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr., "International Evidence on Output-Inflation
   Tradeoffs," American Economic Review 63 (1973), 326-334.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A
   Critique," Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy 1
   (1976), 19-46.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, "Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycle:
   A Macroeconomic Model of Monopoly," Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 100 (May 1985), 529-537.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, "Real Business Cycles: A Neo-Keynesian
   Perspective," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1987,

   forthcoming.
Muth, John F., "Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price
   Movements," Econometrica 29 (July 1961), 315-335.

Phelps, Edmund S., "Money Wage Dynamics and Labor Market
   Equilibrium," Journal of Political Economy 76 (1968), 687-711.

Prescott, Edward, "Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement,"

                               27
   Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy 25 (Autumn

   1986), 11-44.

Rotemberg, Julio J. , "The New Keynesian Microfoundations,"
   NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2 (1987), 69-104.

Sargent, Thomas, and Neil Wallace, "Rational Expectations, the
   Optimal Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply
   Rule," Journal of Political Economy 83 (April 1975), 241-254.
Stiglitz, Joseph, "Theories of Wage Rigidity," in Keynes'
   Economic Legacy: Conteinyorarv Economic Theories, edited
   by J.L. Butkiewicz, K.J. Koford, and J.B. Miller,

   Praeger Publishers, 1980.

Taylor, John, "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,"
   Journal of Political Economy 88 (February 1980), 1-23.

Yellen, Janet, "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment,"
   American Economic Review 74 (May 1984), 200-205.




                                28
