                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 TRADE DIVERSION AND THE INITIATION EFFECT:
             A CASE STUDY OF U.S. TRADE REMEDIES IN AGRICULTURE

                                        Colin A. Carter
                                       Sandro Steinbach

                                      Working Paper 24745
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24745


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2018




Carter: University of California Davis and member of the Giannini Foundation of Agricultural
Economics, 3108 Social Sciences and Humanities, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616
(email: cacarter@ucdavis.edu); Steinbach: Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich (ETH
Zurich), Center for Economic Research, Zurichbergstrasse 18, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland (email:
ssteinbach@ethz.ch). The corresponding author of this paper is Sandro Steinbach. We
acknowledge financial support from the Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of
Agriculture. We are also grateful to Yolanda Pan and Yixing Tian for research assistance. We
also thank participants at the NBER Agriculture and Trade Conference for their comments on this
paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Colin A. Carter and Sandro Steinbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Diversion and the Initiation Effect: A Case Study of U.S. Trade Remedies in Agriculture
Colin A. Carter and Sandro Steinbach
NBER Working Paper No. 24745
June 2018
JEL No. F12,F14,Q17

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the impact of U.S. trade remedy (TR) actions on agricultural trade from
1990 to 2014. Most previous studies of the effects of TR actions have left out agricultural
products. We use a four-country oligopolistic trade model to study the impact of TR duties on
imports from non-named countries, and we improve on methodological issues present in earlier
studies. Our empirical results show that TR investigations benefit non-named foreign exporters
and U.S. imports from non-named countries increase even before the implementation of a TR
duty. The extent of trade diversion is positively related to the size of the duty. Moreover, we find
evidence of an initiation effect revealed by a significant increase in imports from non-named
countries that did not previously trade the relevant product with the United States. The
considerable extent of trade diversion in agriculture provides robust evidence for leakage effects
of TR laws which has a detrimental impact on their protective effect.


Colin A. Carter
University of California at Davis
Agricultural and Resource Economics
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
colin@primal.ucdavis.edu

Sandro Steinbach
ETH Zurich
Center for Economic Research
Zurichbergstrasse 18
8092 Zurich (Switzerland)
sandro.steinbach@gmail.com
1      Introduction

The Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture (URAA) was a milestone for the liberalization

of agricultural trade. The agreement helped to reduce trade distortions as it tamed traditional

policy instruments such as tariffs, export subsidies, and import quotas. Although the agreement

contributed to a significant reduction of market distortions, it also fostered the use of alternative

instruments of trade protectionism as many countries still prefer to regulate agricultural markets

and subsidize farmers. The issue gained additional importance in recent years, because developing

and transition countries started to expand their financial support to the farming sector, partly

driven by the fact that developed countries continued to support their farmers (He and Sappideen,

2012). Trade remedy (TR) laws are a prominent example of such an alternative protection mech-

anism for agriculture. Article VI (GATT, 1994) allows member states to protect their domestic

industry from injuries caused by foreign competitors that price discriminate or export at a price

below production costs.1 Even though TR actions are widely used, their impact on agricultural

trade is poorly understood as studies mostly leave out agriculture (Blonigen, 2004).

The agricultural sector provides an interesting environment to study the impact of TR laws because

this industry has many unique characteristics compared to manufacturing. First, TR duties levied

against agricultural exporters are typically larger than for manufacturing (Blonigen, 2004). For

instance, China’s exporters of fresh garlic to the U.S. face a country-wide duty of 376.67 percent.

Second, the garlic trade example indicates an additional issue that relates to the storability of

agricultural products. While manufactured products are storable for many months or even years,

many agricultural products perish rapidly (Jaffee and Gordon, 1992). Notably, high perishability

is associated with larger transaction costs. Third, the timing of agricultural production decisions is

different from the timing in the manufacturing industry since farmers have to determine their crop

choices months or even years in advance. For instance, environmental regulations and crop rotation

requirements make agricultural supply inelastic and diminish the ability of agricultural producers

to react to trade shocks caused by TR duties. A final issue relates to the ability to adapt in a

changing trade environment which is more difficult for agricultural than manufacturing producers

1
    Although countervailing duties are governed by the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, their
    application is also regulated by Article VI.


                                                        1
because trade standards for agricultural products are usually higher and often involve sanitary and

phytosanitary regulations (Disdier et al., 2008). These characteristics of the agricultural sector

motivate us to study the impacts of TR duties on agriculture.

The interest in TR laws has grown substantially in the course of their proliferation as trade restric-

tion instruments (Cheng et al., 2001; Feinberg and Reynolds, 2006; Zanardi, 2006). Kerr (2006)

argues that these duties are often fraudulently used to suppress imports and support domestic

industries. Not only do TR laws cause trade distortions, but they also hinder further multilat-

eral trade liberalization efforts (Prusa, 2005). The empirical and theoretical literature devoted to

the study of antidumping (AD) and countervailing duty (CVD) laws is fairly substantial. Yet,

most studies focus solely on manufactures (Staiger and Wolak, 1994; Prusa, 2001, 2005; Bown and

Crowley, 2007; Vandenbussche and Zanardi, 2010), whereas only a few studies are concerned with

agricultural trade (Keithly and Poudel, 2008; Carter and Gunning-Trant, 2010; Li et al., 2011;

Carter and Steinbach, 2013; Carter and Mohapatra, 2013).

The literature has discussed different channels through which TR duties can affect agricultural

trade. First, a duty can destroy trade in the particular product (destruction effect). Second, a duty

can result in larger imports from other countries (diversion effect). Third, an exporter that faces

a duty can increase exports to third countries to compensate for the lost market share (deflection

effect). Fourth, a TR duty can affect downstream or upstream products. Fifth, since trade is

part of a strategic decision process, a country which is continuously exposed to TR investigations,

might avoid trading with the complainant country. This effect is called trade deterrence. Although

various studies have looked at these different aspects, the literature is still far from being conclusive,

particularly when it comes to agricultural trade.

We identified three major empirical limitations in the literature on trade remedies. A first potential

limitation is the level of data aggregation. Most studies use trade data at the 6-digit HS code

level. The aggregation level can blur away the effect of antidumping or countervailing duties

because a 6-digit HS code can cover hundreds of commodities that are not targeted by a particular

ruling and are potential substitutes for the targeted products. Carter and Gunning-Trant (2010)

circumvent this problem by collecting trade data at the detailed 10-digit level of the Harmonized

Tariff Schedule (HTS). Besedeš and Prusa (2017) also use quarterly 10-digit HTS-level import data.


                                                    2
In fact, we believe that this level of data detail is necessary to provide meaningful estimates, but

we encountered a further limitation which related to the time consistency of available trade data.

The HTS codes are frequently updated, which can result in inconsistent time series. We solve this

problem by constructing consistent time series with HTS codes that are based on revisions of the

tariff schedule.

A further limitation of earlier studies is the extent of temporal aggregation. Almost all studies use

annual trade data that is either based on a calendar year or constructed based on the date when a

petition was filed.2 Relying on annual data is a limitation because it makes it impossible to identify

the extent of trade diversion that is caused by the different stages of a TR investigation. Instead of

using annual trade data, we exploit variation in monthly import trade data for the United States.

This allows us to measure the extent of trade diversion that is caused by a preliminary duty and

disentangle it from that of the final duty. Moreover, our study is the first to measure the degree

of trade diversion resulting from the initiation of a TR investigation for countries that did not

previously trade with the complainant.

Our paper contributes to the literature on the impact of TR laws by investigating the diversion

effect for the intensive and extensive margins of agricultural trade.3 The analysis relies on a four-

country oligopolistic trade model with Cournot competition. The theoretical model provides two

testable hypotheses: First, the imposition of a TR duty results in higher imports from non-named

countries (trade diversion); and second, foreign producers from countries that did not export to

the complainant country before the initiation of a TR investigation are incentivized to contest the

market (initiation effect). Our empirical approach is an important improvement over the existing

literature as we pay particular attention to product-level heterogeneity by including a full set of

time and commodity fixed effects. Moreover, we also pay particular attention to econometric

issues that can affect the validity of our estimation results by fitting the regression model with a

maximum likelihood estimator that accounts for zero observations in the data. This is of exceptional

importance for studies that are concerned with the diversion effects of TR duties. Our results
2
    A benefit of this approach is that it circumvents the problem of zero trade flows. However, doing so wastes much
    of the information contained in the trade data.
3
    We deviate from the trade literature in our definition of intensive and extensive trade margins. Usually, the intensive
    trade margin refers to the volume of sales per firm, while the extensive trade margin denotes the number of firms
    selling in a market. To test our propositions, we define the intensive trade margin as the quantity and value of
    imports, while the extensive trade margin refers to the number of trading partners.


                                                             3
provide strong evidence for a significant trade diversion effect along the intensive and extensive

trade margins and indicate that the applied duties have a significant impact on imports from non-

named countries. Moreover, we also find compelling evidence in support of the initiation effect.

Our empirical results show a considerable increase in imports from non-named countries that did

not previously trade with the United States. This initiation effect is positively associated with the

size of the TR duty.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. After the introduction, the theoretical model

is described and our motivation for the investigation of the trade diversion and initiation effects

is provided. The third section explains our methodology and describes the empirical specification,

estimation strategy, and robustness checks. We discuss the issue of zero trade flows and introduce

an efficient and consistent estimator. The section also discusses data sources and expectations

regarding the parameter signs. The fifth section presents and discusses the regression results. We

analyze the implications of TR laws for the intensive and extensive trade margins. Our conclusions

summarize the study, discuss limitations, and pose questions for further research.



2    Theoretical Model

TR laws have become an essential instrument of agricultural protectionism in the United States.

The two principal trade remedies are the AD and the CVD law which are both set out in Title VII

of the Tariff Act of 1930. TR duties reduce imports from named countries. Consequently, domestic

producers and non-named foreign producers enjoy a higher price for the targeted product, giving

domestic producers an incentive to expand their production and motivating non-named foreign

producers to increase their exports. Moreover, some foreign producers for whom participation in

the market was noneconomic before the duty was imposed, are now incentivized to step in and

contest the market as they are aware that TR orders tend to remain in place for decades due to

weak sunset reviews.

Most studies that investigate the implications of TR laws do not provide a theoretical motivation

for their empirical work. The choice of a theoretical framework is mainly driven by the market

characteristics. For instance, Bown and Crowley (2007) rely on an oligopolistic competition setting


                                                 4
to examine the impacts on third markets. Their model builds on the assumption that the exporting

firm exerts market power in the import market. Although agricultural markets are usually perfectly

competitive at the producer level due to the large number of price-taking primary producers, the

issue of market power is still of relevance because of the characteristics of the food supply chain.

Notably, market concentration beyond the farm gate is typically very high (Howard, 2016). In

particular, agricultural trade is increasingly dominated by a few large trading companies and food

processors. These characteristics of the food supply chain make an oligopolistic competition setting

a suitable environment to study the implications of TR laws. Following Bown and Crowley (2007),

we use the oligopolistic competition setting to illustrate the diversion effects of trade remedies and

demonstrate the initiation effect.4

Assume there are four countries indexed i ∈{A, B, C, D}. In each country, one firm, also indexed

as i, produces one good. Moreover, assume for simplification that firm A only serves its domestic

market, while firms B, C and D serve their domestic market and export to country A. Table 1

illustrates the markets to which each firm can export. The quantity that is produced for domestic

consumption is denoted qi , while exports are denoted qij , where i indicates the country of origin

and j the country in which the good is consumed. Consumers in the importing country consider

the domestically produced good and the imported good as strategic substitutes, i.e., they derive

the same utility from the consumption of either good. We denote total market supply in the home
                   P                                                          P
market as Qi =       j qji + qi and the supply in the foreign market as Qj =    i qij + qj , while

total output in each country is therefore given by qi∗ = qij + qi . Each firm regards its domestic

market and the foreign market as separated, implying that the quantity in each market is allocated

independently and firms are subject to Cournot perception.5

The same technology is used by each competitor and firms face an inverse demand function denoted

as p(Qi , Yi ), where Yi is a set of demand shifters such income. Production cost in i is represented

by a cost function c(qi∗ , Wi ), where Wi is a set of cost factors that occur with qi∗ . We assume

4
    Bown and Crowley (2007) investigate trade deflection and trade depression effects of remedy laws while we study
    “trade diversion”. The authors use the notion “trade creation via import source diversification” to denote trade
    effects for non-named countries, whereas we follow Carter and Gunning-Trant (2010) and use the term “trade
    diversion”. The term trade creation is misleading because trade remedies do not create trade, but rather the
    investigating country diversifies its trade relations to compensate the reduction of foreign supply.
5
    Cournot perception implies that the other firms will hold output fixed. We assume a Cournot-Nash equilibrium
    instead of a Bertrand-Nash equilibrium because agents regard the domestic and the foreign good as strategic
    substitutes. This implies that firms compete in quantities and not in prices.


                                                          5
                          Table 1: Potential market access of competing firms

                                       Country A Country B Country C Country D

                          Firm A            X
                          Firm B            X               X
                          Firm C            X                          X
                          Firm D            X                                         X



that marginal costs are strictly convex in qi∗ with c0 (qi∗ , Wi ) > 0 and c00 (qi∗ , Wi ) > 0 which reflects

increasing marginal cost. Now, suppose that there are no other trade costs between i and j than a

tariff τ , where τji denotes a duty that j levied against i. For simplicity we assume that the burden

of the duty falls entirely on the exporter. Thus, the profit function can be expressed in its general

form as follows:
                                                 Sales                       Costs
                                   z             }|             { z          }|         {
                              Πi = p(Qi , Yi )qi + p(Qj , Yj )qij − τji qij − c(qi∗ , Wi ),              (1)
                                   | {z } |             {z      } | {z } | {z }
                                       in Home           in Foreign   Duty       Production

where sales are determined by sales at home and in the foreign country and costs are a function

of the duty and the production cost. A firm’s objective is to maximize its profits by choosing the

quantity of sales in each market such that


                      max Πi = p(Qi , Yi )qi + p(Qj , Yj )qij − τji qij − c(qi∗ , Wi ).                  (2)


If we now assume that country A imposes a duty against country B, the first order conditions for

home markets are given by:

                   ∂ ΠA
                          = p(QA , YA ) + p0 (QA , YA )qA − c0 (qA∗ , WA ) ≡ 0                          (3a)
                   ∂ qA
                   ∂ ΠB
                          = p(QB , YB ) + p0 (QB , YB )qB − c0 (qB∗ , WB ) ≡ 0                          (3b)
                   ∂ qB
                   ∂ ΠC
                          = p(QC , YC ) + p0 (QC , YC )qC − c0 (qC∗ , WC ) ≡ 0                          (3c)
                   ∂ qC
                   ∂ ΠD
                          = p(QD , YD ) + p0 (QD , YD )qD − c0 (qD
                                                                 ∗
                                                                   , WD ) ≡ 0                           (3d)
                   ∂ qD

and the first order conditions for the profit maximizing quantity of exports for firms B, C and D

to country A are:


                                                            6
                         ∂ ΠB
                               = p(QA , YA ) + p0 (QA , YA )qBA − τAB − c0 (qB∗ , WB ) ≡ 0                     (4a)
                         ∂ qBA
                         ∂ ΠC
                               = p(QA , YA ) + p0 (QA , YA )qCA − c0 (qC∗ , WC ) ≡ 0                           (4b)
                         ∂ qCA
                         ∂ ΠD
                               = p(QA , YA ) + p0 (QA , YA )qDA − c0 (qD∗
                                                                          , WD ) ≡ 0                           (4c)
                         ∂ qDA

The solution to the first order conditions yields each firm’s best reaction (or response) function

with respect to the sales decisions of the other firms, which can be expressed in the general form

for the home market as:

                                           qi = Ri [p(Qi , Yi ), c(qi∗ , Wi )],                                 (5)

and i’s best reaction function for the foreign market is given by:


                                       qij = Rij [p(Qj , Yj ), τji , c(qi∗ , Wi )].                             (6)


Solving the seven best reaction functions simultaneously yields the Cournot-Nash equilibrium quan-

tities which are sold by each firm in each market. Because marginal costs are strictly convex in qi∗ ,

the exporting firms B, C and D will choose to allocate total sales between their home market and

the foreign market so that the net marginal revenue, which is defined as marginal revenue less the

the duty, is the same in the home and the foreign market. This is a crucial assumption because it

forces firms to reallocate their sales across markets when a TR duty is imposed.

The theoretical model allows us to make three propositions regarding the potential effects of TR

actions:


− First, a TR duty levied by country A against exports from firm B causes a decline in B’s exports

     to country A which is know as the trade destruction effect.6

− Second, a duty imposed by country A against exports from firm B will cause an increase in firm

     C’s exports to country A. This effect is called trade diversion.


6
    We do not measure the extent of trade destruction caused by trade remedies in agriculture. This question remains
    open for future research.


                                                            7
− Third, a TR against firm B motivates firm D to contest the other firms in market A. Here we

   rely on the assumption that firm D did not initially export to country A and only served its

   domestic market before the duty was imposed against firm B, implying that the costs of entering

   market A were larger than the benefits. The duty raised the price of the good in country A,

   which made it profitable for firm D to contest the market in country A. We call this the initiation

   effect. The propositions can be proved by totally differentiating the first order conditions and
                                                                                           ∂ qA
   applying Cramer’s rule after dividing by τAB . We find for firm A that                 ∂ τAB   > 0, whereas we
                          ∂ qBA                                   ∂ qCA
   find for firm B that   ∂ τAB   < 0 and for firm C that         ∂ τAB   > 0. The firm in country D reacts to
                                             ∂ qDA
   the duty imposed against firm B by        ∂ τAB   > 0.


Trade diversion via import source diversification and the initiation effect are illustrated in Fig-

ure 1. The reaction functions Ri and Rij represent a firm’s best response to the decision of the

other firms. The Cournot-Nash equilibrium for firm C’s sales in country A is (qC∗ ; qCA
                                                                                     ∗ ) is shown in


the left hand panel. Once country A imposes a duty against country B, sales of firm C increase to
 τ and home sales of firm A decrease to q τ . This effect is called trade diversion via import source
qCA                                      A

diversification. On the other hand, due to the introduction of a TR duty by country A against

country B, the Cournot-Nash equilibrium shifts for firm D in market A from (qA∗ ; qDA
                                                                                   ∗ ) to (q τ ; q τ )
                                                                                            A     DA

as shown in the right hand panel.
             qCA                                              qDA
                   RA                                                 RA




           τ
          qCA

                                                τ
                                              RCA
           ∗                                                 τ
          qCA                                               qDA
                                                                                                    τ
                                              RCA                                   RDA           RDA
                                                 qA          ∗                                       qA
                                                            qDA
                              qAτ      qA∗                                                qAτ qA∗

            (1) Trade diversion effect (country C)                (2) Initiation effect (country D)

           Figure 1: Effects of a TR duty on exports from firm C and D to country A




                                                       8
The model allows us to analyze the trade diversion and initiation effects for the intensive and

extensive trade margins. The terms intensive and extensive trade margins are traditionally used

to distinguish the patterns of international trade at the firm level. In our case, the intensive trade

margin refers to the quantity and value of imports, while the extensive trade margin denotes the

number of trading partners. Although we would prefer to investigate the propositions with firm

level data, such detailed data are not available. Therefore, our notion of the intensive trade margins

derives from the oligopolistic trade model, where we assume that only one firm operates in each

home market. The notion of an extensive trade margin also relates to the oligopolistic trade model,

but we have to assume that firm C did not export to country A prior to the duty. Hence, a change

in the extensive trade margin due to a TR duty would be reflected in a lower or higher number of

trading partners.



3      Data and Empirical Approach

3.1      Data

TR investigations

TR investigations in the U.S. always follows the same predefined procedure. Although the statuary

timetable of an AD investigation is similar to the timetable of a CVD investigation, both procedures

differ in terms of time required to complete the different stages of the investigation.7 Typically an

industry, or some group representing an industry (e.g., a trade association), simultaneously files a

petition with the Commerce Department’s International Trade Administration (ITA) and with the

International Trade Commission (ITC). In order for duties to be levied against foreign firms, the

ITA must determine that goods have been sold at less than fair value (LTFV) and the ITC must

determine that the domestic industry has been or is threatened with material injury by reason of

dumped or subsidized imports. It is noteworthy that each AD petition is filed against firms in

a single country. However, if the domestic industry believes that several countries have sold at

LTFV, it will simultaneously file a petition against groups of firms in each country. A multiple

petition filing increases the likelihood of an affirmative injury decision because the ITC follows the

7
    Figures A1 and A2 in the Appendix provide a detailed overview of the different stages of a TR investigation.


                                                          9
“cumulation principle” when making the injury decision. The cumulation principle allows the ITC

to consider the total volume of allegedly dumped imports from all named countries.

Once the petition has been filed, the ITA and ITC make a series of decisions. Within 45 days

the ITC makes a preliminary injury decision. If this decision is negative, the case is terminated.

Review of ITC cases suggests that the material injury standard is lower at the preliminary stage

than at the final decision, and therefore cases terminated at the preliminary injury stage do not

appear to have merit (Moore, 1988). The purpose of the preliminary determination is to filter out

“frivolous” petitions. If the ITC’s preliminary decision is affirmative, the ITA makes a preliminary

LTFV decision within 160 days and then a final LTFV decision within 75 days of its preliminary

decision. A final LTFV determination is made regardless of the preliminary decision (i.e., the ITA’s

preliminary decision does not terminate the investigation). The chief purpose of the preliminary

LTFV decision is to set a temporary bond rate that is in effect until the case is officially resolved.

The bond grants the domestic industry temporary protection for the course of the investigation.

If the respondents lose, the bond is forfeit. If the ITA’s final decision is affirmative, the ITC must

make its final injury decision no longer than 75 days after the ITA’s final determination of the duty

size. If the ITC’s final decision is affirmative, duties are collected for a period of no less than two

years. If the ITC’s final decision is negative, the case is terminated and any bond paid during the

course of the investigation is refunded to the respondents.

In this paper, we explore the variation in the timing of TR investigations to quantify the trade

diversion and investigation effects. We obtained detailed information on the timing of all TR inves-

tigations from the ITC. Their database contains information on each agricultural investigation filed

between 1990 and 2014. We use their database as a starting point to identify the relevant stages

of each TR investigation. For this purpose, we rely on the U.S. Federal Register which publishes

detailed information on the timing of each investigation and information on the scope (HTS codes).

Overall, we identified 30 TR investigations that led to an affirmative final decision. These investi-

gations are summarized in Table A1 in the Appendix. Most investigations were initiated against

developing countries and only few against developed countries. For each investigation, we obtained

information on the scope and the timing of the major investigation stages (initiation, preliminary

duty, and final duty). These measures allow us to draw inferences for each period of an investigation


                                                  10
and to deconstruct the investigation effect.8 We are able to decompose the investigation effect for

the different stages of a TR investigation because we rely on highly disaggregated trade data that

are collected for every month of the investigation period.

Trade Data

Our monthly trade data are from the U.S. Imports of Merchandise Trade published by the Census

Bureau. The import trade data are recorded at the 10-digit HTS level and cover the period January

1990 to December 2014. The dataset includes information on trade values, shipped quantities, and

collected duties at the port level. For our analysis, we consider imports for consumption, which

measures the total value of merchandise that physically clears customs and goods withdrawn from

customs bonded warehouses or U.S. Foreign Trade Zones. These products enter the consumption

channels immediately. Notably, the data do not include goods that are held in bonded warehouses.

A potential issue with detailed import trade data is the frequent revision of HTS codes (Pierce

and Schott, 2012). Particular commodities that face a TR investigation are frequently reclassified

to better account for product heterogeneity. To account for these changes, we construct consistent

synthetic HTS codes that reflect changes of the tariff schedule over time. For this purpose, we

rely on the approach outlined by Pierce and Schott (2012). The synthetic HTS codes allow us to

disentangle the duty effect and account for breaks in the trade data series. The procedure is applied

to all 30 affirmative TR investigations investigated in this paper. We find that each investigation

has a minimum of one HTS code that changes over the course of a TR investigation.

Control variables

We follow the TR literature and include additional control variables. We use a measures of the gross

domestic product to capture country effects. Moreover, we account for domestic and foreign supply

with measures of total agricultural output. To account for price effects, we include the consumer

price index in our regression model. Furthermore, the census trade data allow us to calculate

the paid tariff and transportation costs. We include these parameters as further covariates. All

covariates are derived from databases maintained by the U.S. Census Office, the U.N. Food and

8
    Staiger and Wolak (1994) argue that the initiation of a TR investigation investigation reduces imports from targeted
    countries which could increase imports from non-targeted countries. This perspective is supported in Prusa (2001)
    who argues that the initiation of an investigation influences firm’s decisions. The claim finds further support in
    Carter and Gunning-Trant (2010).


                                                           11
Agriculture Organization, and the World Bank. The covariates are included selectively in the

regression analysis.


3.2     Empirical approach

We use a reduced form regression model to estimate the diversion and initiation effects of U.S.

TR investigations in agriculture.9 The empirical analysis extends from two years prior–to three

years after–the initiation of a TR investigation.10 Our baseline regression specification accounts

for unobserved factors with case and time fixed effects. In contrast to earlier studies, we do not

rely on a double-log regression model to identify the parameters of interest (Prusa, 2001; Bown

and Crowley, 2007; Carter and Gunning-Trant, 2010), but instead, we use a count data model that

allows us to account for zero observations in the trade data. Our baseline specification is given in

its generalized form as follows:

                                                                                      
                                                         3
                                                         X
                             Ikt = exp αk + αt +              γp ln(τc )Pp + X it γ x  ηkt ,                           (7)
                                                         p=1




where k denotes an 8- or 10-digit HTS product, t time in months, and p the stages of a TR

investigation. The dependent variable Ikt maps into three different specifications. We capture

the intensive trade margin by the value (vkt ) and the quantity (qkt ) of consumption imports,

while the extensive trade margin is quantified by the number of trading partners (nkt ). Our

preferred regression specification includes fixed effects for the HTS codes and each month of a TR

investigation. To ensure the robustness and sensitivity of our empirical approach, we compare

different combinations of fixed effects.11 Depending on the regression specification, we include a

9
   We dropped trade events with countries named in a TR investigation. The aggregated response of the non-named
   countries is the outcome of interest. Therefore, we aggregate imports from all other countries to reveal the trade
   diversion and initiation effects.
10
   The beginning of an investigation is defined by the date when a domestic industry files a petition. To give an
   example, a petition was filed on February 28, 1994 on behalf of the Fresh Garlic Producers Association. The
   preliminary duty was imposed on July 7, 1994 and the final decision was announced on September 26, 1994.
11
   For the baseline specification, we compare nine different combinations of fixed effects. We include fixed effects for
   quarters and years in specification (1), for the investigation months in specification (2), for the cases in specification
   (3), for the HTS codes in specification (4), for the quarters, years, and investigation months in specification (5),
   for the quarters, years, and cases in specification (6), for the quarters, years, and HTS codes in specification (7),
   for the investigation months and cases in specification (8), and for the investigations months and HTS codes in
   specification (9), respectively.


                                                             12
number of additional covariates, which are summarized by the matrix X it and vary at the HTS

code level over time. These control variables are the gross domestic products, the domestic and

foreign supply (measured by the global and U.S. agricultural output), the U.S. consumer price

index, the tariff rate, and transport costs. We denote the multiplicative error term with ηit . The

key parameters of interest are denoted by γp . These shift parameters account for the main stages

of a TR investigation (initiation, preliminary duty, and final duty). Moreover, to account for the

impact of the duty rate, we interact the preliminary and final duties with the dummies for the

different stages of the TR investigation. Lastly, we also specify an autoregressive regression model

to account for the dependency of imports over time. For this specification, we follow the literature

and assume that imports in one month depend on imports in the previous month (Prusa, 2001;

Bown and Crowley, 2007; Carter and Gunning-Trant, 2010).

To empirically explore the relationship between our variables of interest and the count outcomes,

we use the Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood (PML) estimator (Gong and Samaniego, 1981;

Gourieroux et al., 1984). The Poisson PML estimator is consistent in the presence of heteroskedas-

ticity, and even if the conditional variance is not proportional to the conditional mean, the Poisson

PML estimator is consistent (Wooldridge, 1999; Cameron and Trivedi, 2013). Because the estimator

does not assume anything about the dispersion of the fitted values, we do not test for this aspect.

An advantage of the Poisson PML estimator is that the scale of the dependent variable has no

effect on the parameter estimates, which is a challenge for the Negative Binomial PML estimator.

Moreover, as long as the conditional mean is correctly specified, the Poisson PML estimator yields

estimates that are similar in size to the estimates of both the Gaussian and Negative Binomial

PML estimators. Lastly, to address heteroskedasticity in the error term, we use a robust variance

estimator and account for clustering at the investigation level (Cameron and Miller, 2015).




                                                 13
4        Results

We start by summarizing our findings regarding trade diversion. We compare two model specifica-

tions to capture the trade effect of TR investigations. First, we account for differences in the trade

diversion effect across the main stages of a TR investigation (initiation, preliminary duty, and final

duty) using dummies for the investigation stages. Second, we interact these period dummies with

the applied duty rates to account for differences in the TR effect according to the duty size. We

then measure the initiation effect by analyzing imports from countries that did not trade with the

United States before the initiation of the TR investigation. We focus on the estimation results for

our preferred regression specification which interacts the period dummies with the applied remedy

duties.


4.1       Trade diversion effect

Our estimation results show that trade remedies have a significant effect on imports from non-

named countries. The regression results for the empirical specification with period dummies for

the different stages of a TR investigation are presented in Table 2. The table shows the coefficient

estimates for the regression specification with month and HTS code fixed effects.12 We present

the estimates for the baseline specification in columns 2-4 and add the first temporal lag of the

dependent variables as a further regressor in columns 5-7. We study the trade diversion effect for

the intensive margin by analyzing the import quantity (1) and value (2), and the extensive margin

by focusing on the number of trading partners (3). According to our theoretical model, we can

expect an increase of imports from non-named countries after the imposition of a TR duty. Our

empirical results are largely in support of this hypothesis as the coefficient estimates are positive

and highly significant for the baseline specification. Although we find that the standard errors are

larger when including the lagged dependent variable, the coefficient estimates convey the same

picture. Moreover, we find that the trade diversion effect is different for the quantity and value

specifications (intensive margins). Although we find strong evidence for trade diversion in the value


12
     The detailed regression results for the model specifications with different combinations of fixed effects are presented
     in the Tables A2, A4, and A6 in the Appendix. Overall, the estimation results for the trade diversion effect are
     fairly stable across regression specifications.


                                                             14
specification, we only find limited statistical evidence in the quantity specification. This difference

implies that firms in non-named countries do not significantly increase their export volumes to the

United States after the initiation of a remedy investigation, but rather increase the price of their

products. We also find robust statistical evidence for a diversification of import source after the

initiation of a remedy investigation which is indicated by the positive and statistically significant

coefficient estimates for the extensive margin (number of trading partners). Overall, the estimates

provide strong evidence of a significant trade diversion effect along the intensive and extensive

trade margins.


                       Table 2: Trade diversion effect for non-named countries (stage
                       of investigation specification)

                                   Baseline specification           Specification with lag

                                   (1)        (2)       (3)         (1)       (2)          (3)

                          P1    0.333**    0.239*** 0.049        0.171     0.277*** 0.048*
                               (0.136)    (0.069)    (0.032)     (0.128)   (0.064)   (0.025)

                          P2   -0.205**    0.156**    0.060*     -0.129    0.135*        0.053*
                               (0.186)    (0.072)    (0.035)     (0.082)   (0.069)   (0.028)

                          P3   -0.128      0.295*** 0.063        -0.120    0.282*** 0.088**
                               (0.122)    (0.088)    (0.043)     (0.122)   (0.084)   (0.035)

                          (1) quantity, (2) value, and (3) number of trading partners.
                          Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses.
                          * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01



Our estimation results also indicate that the size of the duty determines the degree of trade

diversion. Table 3 summarizes the regression results for the duty specification.13                         Instead of

including period dummies in the regression specification, we now include the interaction between

period dummies and the preliminary and final duty rates. This table is organized in the same

fashion as Table 2. Our regression results show that the initiation of a TR investigation has

a significant and lasting effect on imports from non-named countries.                             The trade diversion

effect is present in the intensive and extensive margins. Comparing the baseline specification

13
     The regression results for the alternative model specifications are presented in the Tables A3, A5, and A7 in the
     Appendix. The estimates are fairly stable across regression specifications.


                                                            15
with the specification that includes the first temporal lag of the dependent variable, we find

that both specifications convey a similar picture regarding the significance level and size of the effect.


               Table 3: Trade diversion effect for non-named countries (duty spec-
               ification)

                                  Baseline specification           Specification with lag

                                  (1)       (2)          (3)       (1)       (2)      (3)

                  P1           0.442*** 0.196*** 0.071*** 0.258**         0.169*** 0.062***
                               (0.133)   (0.066)    (0.026)    (0.124)   (0.059)   (0.022)

                  ln(τ1 ) P2   -0.027     0.035**    0.023*** -0.010      0.006     0.019***
                               (0.020)   (0.015)    (0.007)    (0.018)   (0.014)   (0.006)

                  ln(τ2 ) P3   0.028      0.057*** 0.031*** 0.017         0.048*** 0.032***
                               (0.021)   (0.014)    (0.006)    (0.020)   (0.013)   (0.006)

                  (1) quantity, (2) value, and (3) number of trading partners.
                  Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses.
                  * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01



Notably, the coefficient estimate for the investigation effect is larger for the intensive margin than

for the extensive margin. More specifically, we find that the effect is almost double in size for

the quantity, compared to the value specification. Our findings imply that the assumption of our

theoretical model regarding market structure (Cournot competition) is appropriate. Moreover, the

interaction between the period dummies and the duty rates are largely significant and positive.

The significant estimates indicate that the duty rate is a driving factor of trade diversion. Our

estimation results also show that the larger the applied duty is, the stronger the trade diversion

effect. The trade diversion effect is more pronounced when the final duty comes into force than

when the preliminary duty is effective. This is because uncertainty is resolved and transactions

costs are reduced. Overall, the estimates provide strong evidence for a significant trade diversion

effect along the intensive and extensive trade margins and indicate that the applied duty rate has

a substantial effect on import trade with non-named countries.




                                                         16
4.2       Initiation effect

Table 4 summarizes the regression results for the initiation effect and the duty specification.14

We focus on the duty specification because this specification allows us to account for the impact

of the duty size. The regression results indicate that a TR investigation has a strong and lasting

impact on trade with non-named countries that were not previously trading partners with the

U.S. for the relevant product. We find that the initiation of a remedy investigation leads to a

significant increase in imports from non-named countries and a substantial diversification of trade

relationships.


                    Table 4: Trade diversion effect for non-named countries previously
                    not exporting relevant product to the U.S. (duty specification)

                                       Baseline specification           Specification with lag

                                       (1)       (2)          (3)       (1)       (2)       (3)

                       P1           6.294*** 4.676*** 1.801*** 6.223*** 4.082*** 1.905***
                                    (0.646)   (1.049)    (0.169)    (0.667)   (0.859)   (0.145)

                       ln(τ1 ) P2   1.548*** 1.160*** 0.580*** 1.533*** 1.048*** 0.639***
                                    (0.167)   (0.227)    (0.062)    (0.168)   (0.181)   (0.053)

                       ln(τ2 ) P3   2.056*** 1.294*** 0.651*** 2.034*** 1.162*** 0.623***
                                    (0.235)   (0.242)    (0.063)    (0.238)   (0.194)   (0.058)

                       (1) quantity, (2) value, and (3) number of trading partners.
                       Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses.
                       * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01



Again, we find evidence for a stronger diversion effect in the quantity specification which implies that

firms mainly compete in quantities (Cournot competition) and not in prices (Bertrand competition).

The estimates are about 1.5 times as large for the quantity versus the value specification. These

findings apply to the baseline specification and to the specification which includes the first temporal

lag of the dependent variable. Notably, we also find substantial evidence for the initiation effect

in the extensive margin. Including the first temporal lag of the dependent variable does not alter

the regression results significantly. Moreover, we find that the applied duty has a substantial trade
14
     The estimation results for the alternative regression specification are presented in the Tables A8, A9, and A10 in
     the Appendix. Overall, the estimation results are fairly stable across regression specifications.


                                                              17
diversion effect. This effect is more significant for the intensive margins than for the extensive

margins. Overall, our regression results provide strong empirical evidence for the initiation effect

which we argued for in our theoretical model. The degree of trade diversion is influenced by the

duty size, which is also consistent with our theoretical assumptions.



5    Conclusions

Our paper highlights two essential properties of trade implications caused by TR laws in agriculture

using detailed U.S. import trade data. First, our empirical investigation shows that TR duties result

in a substantial degree of trade diversion. We find that trade diversion is present in the intensive and

extensive trade margins and is influenced by the duty size. Although our findings are qualitatively

in line with earlier studies on the diversion effects of TR actions (Carter and Gunning-Trant, 2010;

Prusa, 1997), we find evidence of a stronger diversion effect, mainly when interacting the applied

TR duties with the different TR investigation stages. Moreover, our estimates of the investigation

effect are substantially smaller than the estimates presented in earlier studies. We believe that

these differences are mainly due to methodological limitations in previous studies that result in an

overestimation of the investigation effect. Second, we find substantial evidence for the existence of

an initiation effect which is revealed by the significant increase in imports from non-named countries

that did not export the relevant product to the U.S. before the TR investigation. The initiation

effect is strongly related to the duty size and higher duties lead to more trade diversion through

the initiation effect.

We acknowledge some limitations of our study design. The first issue relates to the scope of our

analysis, as we are focusing on TR investigations initiated by the agricultural industry in the United

States. This selection is limiting because the U.S. is a developed economy which sources a significant

share of its food imports from emerging countries. A second issue relates to heterogeneous effects

of trade diversion across countries. One can expect that non-named developed economies are more

capable of filling in for named countries because their food industry has a larger export capacity.

Hence, we should expect stronger trade diversion potential with developed than with developing

countries. The third issue relates to the role of sunset reviews that are usually conducted every



                                                  18
five years. Our trade data suggest that a sunset review leads to an increase in trade with named

countries as some of the firm-specific duties are lowered due to the review. To our knowledge,

there is no literature on this issue which makes it an interesting area for future research. Lastly, we

would like to address the issue of firm heterogeneity. The applied duty is time variant for most firms

which implies not only different transactions costs but also different cost structures which allows

these firms to apply to the ITC for a lower duty rate. Firm-specific trade data would provide more

precise estimates of the dynamics of TR investigations. In summary, our paper provides valuable

insights into an important agricultural trade policy issue. We show evidence that TR duties cause

a substantial amount of trade diversion in agriculture which lowers the level of protection provided

by TR laws.




                                                  19
6    References
Besedeš, T. and Prusa, T. J. 2017. The hazardous effects of antidumping. Economic Inquiry
  55(1), 9–30.
Blonigen, B. (2004). Agricultural Policy Reform and the WTO: Where Are We Heading?. Edward
  Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, U.K.. chapter Food Fight: Antidumping in Agricultural Goods,
  pp. 568–592.
Bown, C. P. and Crowley, M. A. 2007. Trade deflection and trade depression. Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics 72(1), 176–201.
Cameron, A. C. and Trivedi, P. K. 2013. Regression Analysis of Count Data. Econometric Society
  Monographs (Book 53). 2 edn. Cambridge University Press.
Cameron, C. and Miller, D. 2015. A Practitioner’s Guide to Cluster-Robust Inference. Journal of
  Human Resources 50(2), 317–372.
Carter, C. A. and Gunning-Trant, C. 2010. U.S. trade remedy law and agriculture: Trade diversion
  and investigation effects. Canadian Journal of Economics 43(1), 97–126.
Carter, C. and Mohapatra, S. 2013. Inventories and antidumping: The case of orange juice trade.
  Empirical Economics pp. 1–20.
Carter, C. and Steinbach, S. 2013. China’s growing role in agricultural trade. ARE Update 17(1), 9–
  11.
Cheng, L. K., Qiu, L. D. and Wong, K. P. 2001. Anti-dumping measures as a tool of protectionism:
  A mechanism design approach. Canadian Journal of Economics 34(3), 639–660.
Disdier, A., Fontagne, L. and Mimouni, M. 2008. The impact of regulations on agricultural trade:
  Evidence from the SPS and TBT agreements. American Journal of Agricultural Economics
  90(2), 336–350.
Feinberg, R. and Reynolds, K. 2006. The spread of antidumping regimes and the role of retaliation
  in filings. Southern Economic Journal 72(4), 877–890.
Gong, G. and Samaniego, F. J. 1981. Pseudo maximum likelihood estimation: Theory and appli-
 cations. Annals of Statistics 9(4), 861–869.
Gourieroux, C., Monfort, A. and Trognon, A. 1984. Pseudo maximum likelihood methods: Appli-
 cations to Poisson models. Econometrica 52(3), 701–720.
He, L. L. and Sappideen, R. 2012. Mapping anti-dumping disputes from 1995 to 2011: The changing
  pattern. The Journal of World Investment & Trade 13, 125–143.
Howard, P. H. 2016. Concentration and power in the food system: Who controls what we eat?.
  Vol. 3. Bloomsbury Publishing.
Jaffee, S. and Gordon, P., eds 1992. Exporting High-value Food Commodities: Success Stories from
  Developing Countries. Vol. 198. World Bank Discussion Papers.
Keithly, W. R. and Poudel, P. 2008. The southeast us shrimp industry: Issues related to trade and
  antidumping duties. Marine Resource Economics 23(4), 459–483.


                                                20
Kerr, W. 2006. Dumping: Trade policy in need of a theoretical make over. Canadian Journal of
 Agricultural Economics 54(1), 11–31.
Li, X., Gunter, L. and Epperson, J. (2011). Effects of China’s antidumping tariffs on US-China
  bilateral poultry trade. in ‘Southern Agricultural Economics Association Annual Meeting, Corpus
  Christi, TX, February’.
Moore, M. (1988). U.S. Anti-Dumping Procedure as a Repeated Game: A Theoretical and Empirical
 Analysis. PhD thesis. University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Pierce, J. R. and Schott, P. K. 2012. Concording U.S. harmonized system categories over time.
  Journal of Official Statistics 28(1), 53–68.
Prusa, T. 2005. Anti-dumping: A growing problem in international trade. The World Economy
  28(5), 638–700.
Prusa, T. J. (1997). The trade effects of U.S. antidumping actions. in ‘The Effects of U.S. Trade
  Protection and Promotion Policies’. University of Chicago Press. pp. 191–214.
Prusa, T. J. 2001. On the spread and impact of anti-dumping. Canadian Journal of Economics
  34(3), 591–611.
Staiger, R. W. and Wolak, F. A. (1994). Measuring industry specific protection: Antidumping in
  the United States. Report. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. NBER Working Paper
  Series.
Vandenbussche, H. and Zanardi, M. 2010. The chilling trade effects of antidumping proliferation.
  European Economic Review 54(6), 760–777.
Wooldridge, J. 1999. Handbook of Applied Econometrics Volume II: Quasi-Likelihood Methods for
 Count Data. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing Inc.
Zanardi, M. 2006. Antidumping: A problem in international trade. European Journal of Political
  Economy 22(3), 591–617.




                                               21
7    Appendix
Tables

A1   Affirmative TR investigations of the United States between 1990 and 2014 . . . . . . . . . 23
                                                                                                 .

A2   Trade diversion effect on non-named countries (quantity specification with investigation

     stage dummies) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
                                                                                                         .

A3   Trade diversion effect on non-named countries (quantity specification with interacted

     investigation stage dummies) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
                                                                                                       .

A4   Trade diversion effect on non-named countries (value specification with investigation

     stage dummies) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
                                                                                                         .

A5   Trade diversion effect on non-named countries (value specification with interacted in-

     vestigation stage dummies) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
                                                                                                       .

A6   Trade diversion effect on non-named countries (number of trading partner specification

     with investigation stage dummies) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
                                                                                                      .

A7   Trade diversion effect on non-named countries (number of trading partner specification

     with interacted investigation stage dummies) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
                                                                                                     .

A8   Trade diversion effect on non-named countries that did not trade before of the case

     initiation with the United States (quantity specification with interacted investigation

     stage dummies) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
                                                                                                         .

A9   Trade diversion effect on non-named countries that did not trade before of the case

     initiation with the United States (value specification with interacted investigation stage

     dummies) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
                                                                                                         .

A10 Trade diversion effect on non-named countries that did not trade before of the case

     initiation with the United States (number of trading partner specification with interacted

     investigation stage dummies) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
                                                                                                       .
Figures

A1   Statuary timetable of AD investigations. Source: https://www.usitc.gov/trade_

     remedy/documents/timetable.pdf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
                                                                                                 .

A2   Statuary timetable of CVD investigations. Source: https://www.usitc.gov/trade_

     remedy/documents/timetable.pdf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
                                                                                                 .

                                                   22
                       Table A1: Affirmative TR investigations of the United States between 1990 and 2014

     Investigated country                  Product description                   Initiation   Preliminary decision Final decision Duty rate
     China                  Fresh Garlic                                         02/28/1994       07/11/1994        09/26/1994      376.67
     Thailand               Canned Pineapple                                     07/05/1994       01/11/1995        07/18/1995        3.02
     Italy                  Pasta                                                06/08/1995       01/19/1996        06/14/1996       12.09
     Turkey                 Pasta                                                06/08/1995       01/19/1996        06/14/1996       60.87
     Italy                  Pasta                                                06/08/1995       10/17/1995        06/14/1996       11.23
     Turkey                 Pasta                                                06/08/1995       10/17/1995        06/14/1996       15.82
     China                  Crawfish Tail Meat                                   10/15/1996       03/26/1997        08/01/1997      201.63
     Chile                  Fresh Atlantic Salmon                                07/10/1997       01/16/1998        06/09/1998        4.57
     Chile                  Certain Preserved Mushrooms                          02/02/1998       08/05/1998        10/22/1998      148.51
     China                  Certain Preserved Mushrooms                          02/02/1998       08/05/1998        12/31/1998      198.63
     India                  Certain Preserved Mushrooms                          02/02/1998       08/05/1998        12/31/1998       11.30
     Indonesia              Certain Preserved Mushrooms                          02/02/1998       08/05/1998        12/31/1998       11.26
     China                  Non-Frozen Apple Juice Concentrate                   07/06/1999       11/23/1999        04/13/2000       51.74
     Argentina              Honey                                                11/02/2000       05/11/2001        04/10/2001       30.24
     China                  Honey                                                11/02/2000       05/11/2001        10/04/2001      183.80
     Argentina              Honey                                                11/02/2000       03/13/2001        10/04/2001        5.85




23
     Chile                  Individually Quick Frozen Red Raspberries            06/06/2001       12/31/2001        05/21/2002        6.33
     Vietnam                Frozen Fish Fillets                                  07/24/2002       01/31/2003        06/23/2003       63.88
     Canada                 Hard Red Spring Wheat                                10/29/2002       05/08/2003        09/05/2003        8.86
     Canada                 Hard Red Spring Wheat                                10/29/2002       03/10/2003        09/05/2003        5.29
     Brazil                 Frozen and Canned Warmwater Shrimp and      Prawns   01/27/2004       08/04/2004        02/01/2005        7.05
     China                  Frozen and Canned Warmwater Shrimp and      Prawns   01/27/2004       07/16/2004        02/01/2005      112.81
     Ecuador                Frozen and Canned Warmwater Shrimp and      Prawns   01/27/2004       08/04/2004        02/01/2005        3.58
     India                  Frozen and Canned Warmwater Shrimp and      Prawns   01/27/2004       08/04/2004        02/01/2005       10.17
     Thailand               Frozen and Canned Warmwater Shrimp and      Prawns   01/27/2004       08/04/2004        02/01/2005        5.95
     Vietnam                Frozen and Canned Warmwater Shrimp and      Prawns   01/27/2004       07/16/2004        02/01/2005       25.76
     Brazil                 Orange Juice                                         01/04/2005       08/24/2005        01/13/2006       16.51
     Argentina              Lemon Juice                                          09/27/2006       04/26/2007        09/21/2007       85.00
     Mexico                 Lemon Juice                                          09/27/2006       04/26/2007        09/21/2007      205.37
            Table A2: Trade diversion effect on non-named countries (quantity specification with investigation stage dummies)

                                                         Baseline specification                                             Specification with lag
                       (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)       (11)      (12)        (13)
     P1             0.084      0.126         0.350*** 0.350*** 0.126       0.258*    0.258** 0.333*      0.333** 0.180        0.197*   -0.166     0.171
                   (0.301)    (0.464)       (0.124) (0.090) (0.464)       (0.145)   (0.111) (0.201)     (0.136) (0.145)      (0.106)   (0.176)   (0.128)

     P2            -0.231     -0.513         0.014     0.014    -0.513    -0.133    -0.133    -0.205    -0.205** -0.066      -0.114    -0.055    -0.129
                   (0.327)    (0.488)       (0.091)   (0.071)   (0.488)   (0.140)   (0.096)   (0.145)   (0.086) (0.157)      (0.097)   (0.159)   (0.082)

     P3             0.146      0.173         0.224*** 0.224*** 0.173      -0.073    -0.073    -0.128    -0.128    -0.024     -0.070    -0.242    -0.120
                   (0.149)    (0.172)       (0.057) (0.044) (0.172)       (0.175)   (0.120)   (0.193)   (0.122)   (0.191)    (0.121)   (0.214)   (0.122)

     It−1                                                                                                          0.023*** 0.008*** 0.059*** 0.017***
                                                                                                                  (0.003) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002)

     δq                Yes        No           No        No       Yes       Yes       Yes        No        No       Yes         Yes       No         No

     δyr               Yes        No           No        No       Yes       Yes       Yes        No        No       Yes         Yes       No         No




24
     δt                No        Yes           No        No       Yes        No        No       Yes       Yes        No         No        Yes        Yes

     µK                No         No          Yes        No        No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes         No        Yes        No

     µk                No         No           No       Yes        No        No       Yes        No       Yes        No         Yes       No         Yes
     Observations 8,113        8,113         8,052     4,636     8,113     8,052     4,636     8,052     4,636     7,920     4,560      7,920     4,560
     R2           0.007        0.015         0.769     0.870     0.015     0.777     0.881     0.829     0.955     0.678     0.881      0.895     0.961
     AIC         67,600       66,670        24,768    10,306    66,670    24,690    10,227    24,314     9,851    22,383     9,902     19,980     9,486
     BIC         67,768       68,175        24,985    10,814    68,175    25,047    10,865    26,006    11,719    22,746    10,544     21,668    11,349
     Standard errors in parentheses
     * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
      Table A3: Trade diversion effect on non-named countries (quantity specification with interacted investigation stage dummies)

                                                         Baseline specification                                             Specification with lag
                       (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)       (11)      (12)        (13)
     P1             0.106      0.159         0.338*** 0.338*** 0.159       0.307** 0.307*** 0.442** 0.442*** 0.208            0.240** -0.091      0.258**
                   (0.289)    (0.443)       (0.126) (0.091) (0.443)       (0.150) (0.113) (0.203) (0.133) (0.137)            (0.104) (0.166)     (0.124)

     ln(τ1 ) P2    -0.062     -0.135        -0.001    -0.001    -0.135    -0.018    -0.018    -0.027    -0.027    -0.007     -0.015     0.012    -0.010
                   (0.087)    (0.130)       (0.026)   (0.021)   (0.130)   (0.033)   (0.023)   (0.036)   (0.020)   (0.039)    (0.024)   (0.037)   (0.018)

     ln(τ2 ) P3     0.055*     0.064*        0.061*** 0.061*** 0.064*      0.015     0.015     0.028     0.028     0.013      0.011    -0.026     0.017
                   (0.031)    (0.035)       (0.015) (0.012) (0.035)       (0.033)   (0.021)   (0.034)   (0.021)   (0.037)    (0.022)   (0.037)   (0.020)

     It−1                                                                                                          0.023*** 0.008*** 0.059*** 0.017***
                                                                                                                  (0.003) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002)

     δq                Yes        No           No        No       Yes       Yes       Yes        No        No       Yes         Yes       No         No

     δyr               Yes        No           No        No       Yes       Yes       Yes        No        No       Yes         Yes       No         No




25
     δt                No        Yes           No        No       Yes        No        No       Yes       Yes        No         No        Yes        Yes

     µK                No         No          Yes        No        No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes         No        Yes        No

     µk                No         No           No       Yes        No        No       Yes        No       Yes        No         Yes       No         Yes
     Observations 8,113        8,113         8,052     4,636     8,113     8,052     4,636     8,052     4,636     7,920     4,560      7,920     4,560
     R2           0.007        0.015         0.768     0.869     0.015     0.777     0.881     0.830     0.955     0.679     0.881      0.895     0.961
     AIC         67,527       66,584        24,772    10,310    66,584    24,690    10,227    24,313     9,850    22,383     9,902     19,987     9,487
     BIC         67,695       68,090        24,989    10,819    68,090    25,046    10,865    26,005    11,718    22,745    10,545     21,675    11,351
     Standard errors in parentheses
     * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
              Table A4: Trade diversion effect on non-named countries (value specification with investigation stage dummies)

                                                         Baseline specification                                          Specification with lag
                       (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)      (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)         (13)
     P1             -0.388*** -0.556*** -0.138        -0.138*** -0.556*** -0.046   -0.046     0.239*    0.239*** 0.270** 0.053       0.192*    0.227***
                    (0.130) (0.140) (0.125)           (0.050) (0.140) (0.157)      (0.058)   (0.127)   (0.069) (0.110) (0.054)      (0.106)   (0.064)

     P2             -0.036     0.123         0.171     0.171*** 0.123     0.087     0.087     0.156     0.156** -0.100     0.087     0.078     0.135*
                    (0.146)   (0.141)       (0.140)   (0.047) (0.141)    (0.186)   (0.060)   (0.141)   (0.072) (0.183)    (0.057)   (0.129)   (0.069)

     P3             -0.595*** -0.624*** 0.081          0.081*** -0.624*** -0.029   -0.029     0.295** 0.295*** 0.597*** 0.144*       0.270** 0.282***
                    (0.079) (0.082) (0.077)           (0.027) (0.082) (0.218)      (0.080)   (0.148) (0.088) (0.206) (0.075)        (0.136) (0.084)

     It−1                                                                                                       4.532*** 1.077*** 5.531*** 1.167***
                                                                                                               (0.190) (0.103) (0.166) (0.084)

     δq                Yes        No           No        No       Yes       Yes      Yes        No       No       Yes        Yes       No           No

     δyr               Yes        No           No        No       Yes       Yes      Yes        No       No       Yes        Yes       No           No




26
     δt                No        Yes           No        No       Yes       No        No       Yes       Yes      No         No        Yes         Yes

     µK                No         No          Yes        No       No        Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes        No        Yes          No

     µk                No         No           No       Yes       No        No       Yes        No       Yes      No         Yes       No          Yes
     Observations   8,113      8,113        8,052     4,636     8,113     8,052    4,636     8,052     4,636    7,920      4,560     7,920        4,560
     R2             0.061      0.066        0.214     0.895     0.066     0.224    0.936     0.232     0.962    0.539      0.942     0.714        0.969
     AIC            2,032      2,401        1,756     1,256     2,401     1,788    1,289     2,161     1,662    1,427      1,270     1,772        1,643
     BIC            2,200      3,906        1,972     1,765     3,906     2,144    1,926     3,854     3,530    1,790      1,913     3,460        3,506
     Standard errors in parentheses
     * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
           Table A5: Trade diversion effect on non-named countries (value specification with interacted investigation stage dummies)

                                                         Baseline specification                                           Specification with lag
                       (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)     (10)       (11)      (12)         (13)
     P1             -0.310** -0.440*** -0.135         -0.135*** -0.440*** -0.019   -0.019     0.196     0.196*** -0.008     0.016     0.039     0.169***
                    (0.127) (0.133) (0.124)           (0.049) (0.133) (0.150)      (0.054)   (0.140)   (0.066) (0.122)     (0.051)   (0.101)   (0.059)

     ln(τ1 ) P2      0.015     0.069         0.052     0.052*** 0.069     0.035     0.035*** 0.035      0.035** -0.145** 0.009       -0.130*** 0.006
                    (0.045)   (0.049)       (0.042)   (0.013) (0.049)    (0.051)   (0.013) (0.060)     (0.015) (0.058) (0.013)       (0.044) (0.014)

     ln(τ2 ) P3     -0.163*** -0.164*** 0.033          0.033*** -0.164*** 0.016     0.016     0.057     0.057*** 0.042      0.031** -0.001      0.048***
                    (0.022) (0.022) (0.023)           (0.008) (0.022) (0.044)      (0.016)   (0.046)   (0.014) (0.031)     (0.014) (0.029)     (0.013)

     It−1                                                                                                        4.562*** 1.077*** 5.561*** 1.167***
                                                                                                                (0.179) (0.101) (0.164) (0.086)

     δq                Yes        No           No        No       Yes       Yes      Yes        No        No       Yes        Yes       No           No

     δyr               Yes        No           No        No       Yes       Yes      Yes        No        No       Yes        Yes       No           No




27
     δt                No        Yes           No        No       Yes       No        No       Yes       Yes       No         No        Yes         Yes

     µK                No         No          Yes        No       No        Yes       No       Yes        No       Yes        No        Yes          No

     µk                No         No           No       Yes       No        No       Yes        No       Yes       No         Yes       No          Yes
     Observations    8,113     8,113        8,052     4,636     8,113     8,052    4,636     8,052     4,636     7,920      4,560     7,920        4,560
     R2              0.062     0.067        0.214     0.895     0.067     0.224    0.936     0.232     0.963     0.556      0.942     0.718        0.969
     AIC             2,032     2,402        1,755     1,256     2,402     1,788    1,289     2,161     1,662     1,426      1,270     1,771        1,643
     BIC             2,200     3,907        1,972     1,765     3,907     2,144    1,926     3,853     3,530     1,789      1,913     3,459        3,506
     Standard errors in parentheses
     * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
      Table A6: Trade diversion effect on non-named countries (number of trading partner specification with investigation stage
      dummies)

                                                         Baseline specification                                             Specification with lag
                       (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)       (11)      (12)        (13)
     P1             0.063      0.043         0.030     0.030*    0.043     0.056     0.056** 0.049       0.049     0.030      0.048** 0.022       0.048*
                   (0.075)    (0.081)       (0.064)   (0.016)   (0.081)   (0.076)   (0.025) (0.073)     (0.032)   (0.044)    (0.021) (0.047)     (0.025)

     P2             0.194** 0.256*** 0.044             0.044*** 0.256*** 0.050       0.050*    0.060     0.060*    0.035      0.048** 0.035       0.053*
                   (0.082) (0.087) (0.068)            (0.016) (0.087) (0.084)       (0.028)   (0.079)   (0.035)   (0.051)    (0.024) (0.049)     (0.028)

     P3             0.117** 0.113** 0.097** 0.097*** 0.113** 0.065                   0.065*    0.063     0.063     0.105      0.096*** 0.081      0.088**
                   (0.050) (0.050) (0.038) (0.010) (0.050) (0.098)                  (0.034)   (0.088)   (0.043)   (0.065)    (0.030) (0.062)     (0.035)

     It−1                                                                                                          0.114*** 0.047*** 0.116*** 0.051***
                                                                                                                  (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003)

     δq                Yes        No           No        No       Yes       Yes       Yes        No        No       Yes         Yes       No         No




28
     δyr               Yes        No           No        No       Yes       Yes       Yes        No        No       Yes         Yes       No         No

     δt                No        Yes           No        No       Yes        No        No       Yes       Yes        No         No        Yes        Yes

     µK                No         No          Yes        No        No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes         No        Yes        No

     µk                No         No           No       Yes        No        No       Yes        No       Yes        No         Yes       No         Yes
     Observations 8,113        8,113         8,052     4,636     8,113     8,052     4,636     8,052     4,636     7,920     4,560      7,920     4,560
     R2           0.035        0.038         0.212     0.925     0.038     0.215     0.936     0.216     0.938     0.790     0.944      0.808     0.948
     AIC         97,044       97,157        77,421    17,388    97,157    77,173    17,140    77,463    17,431    32,859    16,224     32,894    16,487
     BIC         97,212       98,662        77,638    17,897    98,662    77,529    17,778    79,156    19,299    33,222    16,867     34,583    18,351
     Standard errors in parentheses
     * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
      Table A7: Trade diversion effect on non-named countries (number of trading partner specification with interacted investigation
      stage dummies)

                                                         Baseline specification                                        Specification with lag
                       (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)      (8)      (9)     (10)      (11)      (12)        (13)
     P1             0.022      0.002         0.035     0.035** 0.002      0.070     0.070*** 0.071    0.071*** 0.046     0.052*** 0.059      0.062***
                   (0.073)    (0.078)       (0.063)   (0.015) (0.078)    (0.072)   (0.021) (0.070)   (0.026) (0.039)    (0.018) (0.043)     (0.022)

     ln(τ1 ) P2     0.035*     0.053** 0.012           0.012*** 0.053** 0.018       0.018*** 0.023    0.023*** 0.014     0.014*** 0.020      0.019***
                   (0.020)    (0.023) (0.017)         (0.004) (0.023) (0.020)      (0.006) (0.021)   (0.007) (0.012)    (0.005) (0.012)     (0.006)

     ln(τ2 ) P3     0.017*     0.017         0.033*** 0.033*** 0.017      0.028     0.028*** 0.031    0.031*** 0.041*** 0.030*** 0.045*** 0.032***
                   (0.010)    (0.011)       (0.009) (0.003) (0.011)      (0.019)   (0.006) (0.020)   (0.006) (0.013) (0.005) (0.012) (0.006)

     It−1                                                                                                      0.114*** 0.047*** 0.116*** 0.051***
                                                                                                              (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003)

     δq                Yes        No           No        No       Yes       Yes      Yes       No       No      Yes        Yes       No         No




29
     δyr               Yes        No           No        No       Yes       Yes      Yes       No       No      Yes        Yes       No         No

     δt                No        Yes           No        No       Yes       No        No      Yes      Yes       No        No        Yes        Yes

     µK                No         No          Yes        No       No        Yes       No      Yes       No      Yes        No        Yes        No

     µk                No         No           No       Yes       No        No       Yes       No      Yes       No        Yes       No         Yes
     Observations 8,113        8,113         8,052     4,636    8,113     8,052     4,636    8,052    4,636    7,920    4,560      7,920     4,560
     R2           0.035        0.037         0.213     0.926    0.037     0.215     0.936    0.217    0.939    0.791    0.945      0.810     0.949
     AIC         97,108       97,220        77,385    17,352   97,220    77,159    17,126   77,448   17,415   32,831   16,212     32,861    16,472
     BIC         97,276       98,725        77,601    17,861   98,725    77,515    17,764   79,140   19,283   33,194   16,854     34,549    18,336
     Standard errors in parentheses
     * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
      Table A8: Trade diversion effect on non-named countries that did not trade before of the case initiation with the United States
      (quantity specification with interacted investigation stage dummies)

                                                        Baseline specification                                        Specification with lag
                       (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)     (7)      (8)       (9)     (10)       (11)      (12)         (13)
     P1              0.640     0.321         4.534*** 4.534*** 0.321     4.984*** 4.984*** 6.294*** 6.294*** 5.101*** 5.131*** 6.148*** 6.223***
                    (1.142)   (1.264)       (1.416) (1.416) (1.264)     (0.831) (0.833) (0.641) (0.646) (0.888) (0.847) (0.661) (0.667)

     ln(τ1 ) P2     -0.128    -0.068         1.022*** 1.022*** -0.068    1.087*** 1.087*** 1.548*** 1.548*** 1.068*** 1.062*** 1.558*** 1.533***
                    (0.105)   (0.074)       (0.238) (0.238) (0.074)     (0.242) (0.242) (0.175) (0.167) (0.226) (0.225) (0.194) (0.168)

     ln(τ2 ) P3      0.222*** 0.225*** 2.014*** 2.014*** 0.225*** 1.720*** 1.720*** 2.056*** 2.056*** 1.738*** 1.745*** 1.987*** 2.034***
                    (0.024) (0.034) (0.261) (0.260) (0.034) (0.232) (0.234) (0.250) (0.235) (0.241) (0.239) (0.248) (0.238)

     It−1                                                                                                   -0.026     -0.033     0.200     0.016
                                                                                                            (0.046)    (0.043)   (0.317)   (0.063)

     δq                Yes        No          No        No       Yes       Yes     Yes       No       No      Yes         Yes       No           No




30
     δyr               Yes        No          No        No       Yes       Yes     Yes       No       No      Yes         Yes       No           No

     δt                No        Yes          No        No       Yes       No      No       Yes      Yes       No         No        Yes         Yes

     µK                No         No          Yes       No       No        Yes     No       Yes       No      Yes         No        Yes          No

     µk                No         No          No       Yes       No        No      Yes       No      Yes       No         Yes       No          Yes
     Observations   4,335      4,265        4,514     4,514    4,265     4,335   4,335    4,265    4,265    4,272       4,272     4,202        4,202
     R2             0.016      0.029        0.501     0.514    0.029     0.695   0.702    0.929    0.926    0.760       0.776     0.925        0.925
     AIC            2,584      2,656        1,247     1,133    2,656     1,121   1,007    1,310    1,196    1,120       1,003     1,305        1,197
     BIC            2,724      3,851        1,446     1,627    3,851     1,434   1,612    2,677    2,855    1,438       1,614     2,676        2,859
     Standard errors in parentheses
     * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
     Table A9: Trade diversion effect on non-named countries that did not trade before of the case initiation with the United States (value
     specification with interacted investigation stage dummies)

                                                          Baseline specification                                         Specification with lag
                         (1)        (2)         (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)         (13)
       P1            -1.056** -1.256** 2.215*** 2.215*** -1.256** 1.216              1.216     4.675*** 4.676*** 2.615** 2.312*      3.764*** 4.082***
                     (0.483) (0.537) (0.570) (0.566) (0.537) (1.704)                (1.701)   (1.063) (1.049) (1.109) (1.303)       (0.860) (0.859)

       ln(τ1 ) P2     0.065      0.080         1.133*** 1.133*** 0.080     0.805*    0.805*    1.160*** 1.160*** 0.924*** 0.936*** 1.101*** 1.048***
                     (0.085)    (0.071)       (0.138) (0.136) (0.071)     (0.453)   (0.451)   (0.232) (0.227) (0.306) (0.336) (0.177) (0.181)

       ln(τ2 ) P3     0.242*** 0.241*** 1.681*** 1.681*** 0.241*** 1.238*** 1.238*** 1.294*** 1.294*** 1.259*** 1.217*** 1.162*** 1.162***
                     (0.024) (0.031) (0.110) (0.107) (0.031) (0.456) (0.453) (0.249) (0.242) (0.301) (0.335) (0.198) (0.194)

       It−1                                                                                                    30.420***17.868***63.085***23.141***
                                                                                                               (5.117) (3.487) (10.194) (3.263)

       δq                Yes        No          No       No        Yes       Yes      Yes       No       No       Yes        Yes       No           No




31
       δyr               Yes        No          No       No        Yes       Yes      Yes       No       No       Yes        Yes       No           No

       δt                No        Yes          No       No        Yes       No        No       Yes      Yes       No        No        Yes         Yes

       µK                No         No          Yes      No        No        Yes       No       Yes      No       Yes        No        Yes          No

       µk                No         No          No       Yes       No        No       Yes       No       Yes       No        Yes       No          Yes
       Observations 4,335        4,265        4,514    4,514     4,265     4,335    4,335     4,265    4,265    4,272      4,272     4,202        4,202
       R2           0.021        0.037        0.639    0.710     0.037     0.740    0.858     0.821    0.974    0.781      0.896     0.926        0.974
       AIC            112          441          112      199       441       147      234       477      564      146        235       476          566
       BIC            253        1,637          311      693     1,637       459      839     1,844    2,224      464        845     1,846        2,228
       Standard errors in parentheses
       * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
      Table A10: Trade diversion effect on non-named countries that did not trade before of the case initiation with the United
      States (number of trading partner specification with interacted investigation stage dummies)

                                                        Baseline specification                                       Specification with lag
                       (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)     (7)      (8)       (9)     (10)      (11)      (12)         (13)
     P1              0.150    -0.077         1.938*** 1.938*** -0.077    1.626*** 1.626*** 1.801*** 1.801*** 1.863*** 1.793*** 1.980*** 1.905***
                    (0.164)   (0.192)       (0.175) (0.174) (0.192)     (0.161) (0.156) (0.180) (0.169) (0.131) (0.133) (0.147) (0.145)

     ln(τ1 ) P2      0.148*** 0.177*** 0.776*** 0.776*** 0.177*** 0.511*** 0.511*** 0.580*** 0.580*** 0.607*** 0.590*** 0.657*** 0.639***
                    (0.038) (0.039) (0.065) (0.064) (0.039) (0.061) (0.059) (0.067) (0.062) (0.051) (0.049) (0.058) (0.053)

     ln(τ2 ) P3      0.348*** 0.350*** 1.119*** 1.119*** 0.350*** 0.632*** 0.632*** 0.651*** 0.651*** 0.617*** 0.628*** 0.607*** 0.623***
                    (0.017) (0.020) (0.053) (0.051) (0.020) (0.065) (0.060) (0.069) (0.063) (0.060) (0.056) (0.063) (0.058)

     It−1                                                                                                    0.262*** 0.119*** 0.297*** 0.132***
                                                                                                            (0.040) (0.029) (0.042) (0.031)

     δq                Yes        No          No        No       Yes       Yes     Yes       No       No      Yes        Yes       No           No




32
     δyr               Yes        No          No        No       Yes       Yes     Yes       No       No      Yes        Yes       No           No

     δt                No        Yes          No        No       Yes       No      No       Yes      Yes       No        No        Yes         Yes

     µK                No         No          Yes       No       No        Yes     No       Yes       No      Yes        No        Yes          No

     µk                No         No          No       Yes       No        No      Yes       No      Yes       No        Yes       No          Yes
     Observations   4,335      4,265        4,514     4,514    4,265     4,335   4,335    4,265    4,265    4,272      4,272     4,202        4,202
     R2             0.069      0.085        0.600     0.726    0.085     0.665   0.798    0.716    0.849    0.692      0.840     0.815        0.872
     AIC            9,347      9,278        6,724     5,443    9,278     6,384   5,103    6,504    5,223    5,598      4,916     5,677        5,057
     BIC            9,487     10,473        6,923     5,937   10,473     6,696   5,708    7,871    6,882    5,916      5,527     7,047        6,719
     Standard errors in parentheses
     * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
       FIGURE 2
       STATUTORY TIMETABLES FOR ANTIDUMPING AND COUNTERVAILING DUTY
       INVESTIGATIONS
                      

                             ,&        #!!%                                                                                                                                  #' ,&
                                             '%!"'&                                                                  #!!%%!')"            ,&     "        
                                           ")&''#"                                             ,&             '%!"'#"&#"'"(&                 '%!"'#"
                                             &"&
                                                                                                                           #!!%"')"
                                                                                #!!%              ,&                '%!"'#"&"&
                                                                         %!')$% !"%,
                                                             ,&          '%!"'#"                       +'"&#!!%%!')"             "
                                                                              &#"'"(&        ,&             '%!"'#"&#"'"(&         ,&                     
                                                                                                                                                                      '%!"'#"
                                                                                                                   +'"&#!!%"')"
                                                                                                    ,&               '%!"'#"&"&

                                                                                                                         #!!%%!')"                      "       
                                                                                                      ,&             '%!"'#"&#"'"(&         ,&
                                                                                                                                                                      '%!"'#"
                                                                                                                           #!!%"')"
                                                                             #!!%                 ,&                '%!"'#"&"&
                                                             ,&     "')$% !"%,
                                                                           '%!"'#"                          +'"&#!!%%!')"             "
                                                                           &#"'"(&           ,&             '%!"'#"&#"'"(&         ,&                     
                                                                                                                                                                      '%!"'#"
          ''#"                                                                                            +'"&#!!%"')"
          *'"                                                                           ,&               '%!"'#"&"&
                                ,&
         #!!%#%                        %!')
          & -"''                    $% !"%,
         ,#!!%                      '%!"'#"                                                                 #!!%%!')"            ,&     "       
                                                                                                      ,&             '%!"'#"&#"'"(&                 '%!"'#"
                                          &#"'"(&
                                                               ,&     #!$ '&                                #!!%"')"
                                                                         #!!%%!')         ,&                '%!"'#"&"&
                                                                             $% !"%,
                                                                           '%!"'#"                          +'"&#!!%%!')"             "




33
                                                                           &#"'"(&           ,&             '%!"'#"&#"'"(&         ,&                    
                                                                                                                                                                      '%!"'#"
                                                                                                                   +'"&#!!%"')"
                                                                                                    ,&               '%!"'#"&"&

                                                                                                      ,&              #!!%%!')"            ,&     "
                                                               ,&                                                   '%!"'#"&#"'"(&                 '%!"'#"     
                                                                         #!$ '&            ,&                #!!%"')"
                                                                         #!!%"')                                 '%!"'#"&"&
                                                                             $% !"%,
                                           "')                    '%!"'#"           ,&        +'"&#!!%%!')"             "        
                                                                           &#"'"(&                               '%!"'#"&#"'"(&         ,&
                                            $% !"%,                                                                                                               '%!"'#"
                                ,&      '%!"'#"
                                            &"&                                               ,&        +'"&#!!%"')"
                                                                                                                          '%!"'#"&"&


                  #%! &  !, +'" ' '!  #* #% ' '# "'' " ")&''#" %#!  ,& '# ($ '#  ,& '%  $''#" &    ' +'%
     Figure A1: Statuary      timetable of AD investigations. Source: https://www.usitc.gov/trade_remedy/documents/timetable.pdf
                 '! & " '# '%!" "(&'%, &($$#%' #% ' $''#" " ' )"' # &( " +'"&#" '  " #% ' & $% !"%,
                           '%!"'#" "  # #*" '& *#(   "%& , ' !#("' # ' +'"&#"
                   

                          #       
                                                                                                                                                   #
                                    !
                                                                                             !    #               
                                                                                          #                  
                                                                        
                                                                !#
                                                                                         !
                                                                                          #      
                                                     #          




                                                                                                      !     #               
                                                                                          #                  
                                                                      
                                                     #    !#
                                                                                         !
                                                                             #      
          
         "                        
                            !
         $    #     #
        #                  
                                     
                                                     #                         !    #                
                                                                                          #                  
                                                                 !
                                                                    #
                                                                  




34
                                                                                                      !
                                                                             #      




                                                     #
                                                                                      !     #               
                                                                                          #                  
                                                                  !
                                                                     #
                                      !                                         !
                                     #                             #      
                           #   
                                      




     Figure A2: Statuary timetable of CVD investigations. Source: https://www.usitc.gov/trade_remedy/documents/timetable.pdf
