                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               TWO BLADES OF GRASS:
                        THE IMPACT OF THE GREEN REVOLUTION

                                          Douglas Gollin
                                       Casper Worm Hansen
                                        Asger Wingender

                                       Working Paper 24744
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24744


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2018




We would like to thank Philipp Ager, Felipe Valencia Caicedo, Carl-Johan Dalgaard, Stefan Dercon,
Dave Donaldson, Cheryl Doss, James Fenske, Nicola Gennaioli, Walker Hanlon, Peter Sandholt Jensen,
Nicolai Kaarsen, Tim Kelley, Nathan Nunn, James Stevenson, David N. Weil, and seminar participants
at the University of Copenhagen, McGill, the 7th Annual Workshop on Growth, History and Development
at the University of Southern Denmark, the 2016 annual European Economic Association meeting
in Geneva, the 2017 annual AEA meeting in Chicago, and the NBER conference on Trade and Agriculture
for helpful comments and suggestions. Douglas Gollin currently serves as chair of the Standing Panel
on Impact Assessment (SPIA) of the Independent Science and Partnership Council (ISPC) of the CGIAR,
the publicly funded agricultural research and development consortium under whose auspices many
of the Green Revolution varieties were developed. Gollin's views do not represent those of SPIA, the
ISPC, or the CGIAR. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Douglas Gollin, Casper Worm Hansen, and Asger Wingender. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Two Blades of Grass: The Impact of the Green Revolution
Douglas Gollin, Casper Worm Hansen, and Asger Wingender
NBER Working Paper No. 24744
June 2018
JEL No. N50,O11,O13,O50,Q16

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine the economic impact of high-yielding crop varieties (HYVs) in developing countries
1960-2000. We use time variation in the development and diffusion of HYVs of 10 major crops,
spatial variation in agro-climatically suitability for growing them, and a differences-in-differences
strategy to identify the causal effects of adoption. In a sample of 84 counties, we estimate that a
10 percentage points increase in HYV adoption increases GDP per capita by about 15 percent.
This effect is fully accounted for by the direct effect on crop yields, factor adjustment, and
structural transformation. We also find that HYV adoption reduced both fertility and mortality.


Douglas Gollin                                    Asger Wingender
University of Oxford                              Department of Economics
Department of International Development           University of Copenhagen
Queen Elizabeth House                             Oester Farimagsgade 5, building 26
3 Mansfield Road                                  DK-1353 Copenhagen K
Oxford OX1 3TB                                    Denmark
United Kingdom                                    amw@econ.ku.dk
Douglas.Gollin@qeh.ox.ac.uk

Casper Worm Hansen
University of Copenhagen
Øster Farimagsgade 5
Copenhagen, Denmark
casper.worm.hansen@econ.ku.dk




An online appendix is available at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24744
                                              “Whoever makes two ears of corn, or two blades of grass, to grow
                                              upon a spot of ground where only one grew before, would deserve
                                              better of mankind, and do more essential service to his country,
                                              than the whole race of politicians put together.”

                                                                                 Jonathan Swift in Gulliver’s Travels



1        Introduction

How important is agricultural productivity growth in development? Early views of development
assumed that most of the impetus for development and economic growth would necessarily come from
the industrial sector, which was thought to offer the potential for rapid rates of productivity growth. In
contrast, the agricultural sector in most developing countries was seen as backward and stagnant, with
limited potential for growth (e.g., Lewis (1951)). In recent years, agriculture’s potential significance
has been a theme in a renewed literature on structural transformation and growth. A new literature
has offered theoretical models in which agricultural productivity growth may prove important for
subsequent industrialization and in which agricultural productivity differences may play a role in
explaining cross-country disparities in income.1 However, it has proved difficult to assess the overall
importance of agriculture’s contributions to growth, and a lively policy debate remains on whether
(and when, where, and how) governments should focus their development efforts on agriculture.
        This paper takes advantage of new data sources that make it possible to examine the impacts of
what is arguably the most important episode of agricultural innovation in modern history – the Green
Revolution that began in the 1960s. As Evenson and Gollin (2003a) argued, the Green Revolution
is best understood as an increase in the rate of growth of agricultural productivity, based on the
application of modern crop breeding techniques to the agricultural challenges of the developing world.
The Green Revolution emerged from philanthropic efforts – arguably shaped by geopolitical interests
– to address the challenges of rural poverty and agrarian unrest in the late 1950s and early 1960s,
and it involved a concerted effort to apply scientific understandings of genetics to the development of
improved crop varieties that were suited to the growing conditions of the developing world. The Green
Revolution delivered a massive and nearly immediate impact in some locations in the developing world
    1
    See, for example, Caselli and Coleman (2001); Caselli (2005); Córdoba and Ripoll (2009); Gollin et al. (2002, 2007);
Restuccia et al. (2008); Vollrath (2011). However, as stressed by Matsuyama (1992), from a basic theoretical perspective,
the relationship between agricultural productivity and economic growth is ambiguous, depending on whether economies
are open or closed, and so in that sense it is not ex-ante obvious how the adoption HYVs should influence economic
growth, which ultimately makes it an empirical question.



                                                           2
– particularly in the irrigated rice-growing areas of Asia and the wheat-growing heartlands of Asia
and Latin America. These were the focal points for the greatest initial research efforts, and they were
also the easiest places in which to develop widely adapted new varieties. Other parts of the developing
world received little benefit, however, from these early efforts – for reasons that will be discussed in
detail below.
   How much did the Green Revolution matter? Did the agricultural productivity increases generate
large and long-lasting benefits? Answering this question has been difficult, because of the obvious
challenges to causal identification. Because growth in one sector of an economy will inevitably link
(positively and/or negatively) to growth in other sectors, it is challenging to find compelling evidence at
the national level for the causal impacts of agricultural productivity growth. There is more evidence –
and more convincing evidence – of such impacts at the micro level or at the regional level. Several recent
papers have made use of quasi-natural experiments (e.g., Bustos et al. (2016) and Hornbeck and Keskin
(2011)) or structural estimation (e.g., Foster and Rosenzweig (2004), Foster and Rosenzweig (2007))
to look at the cross-sectoral impacts of shocks to agricultural productivity. However, these localized
effects can be difficult to generalize to full general equilibrium impacts on aggregate economies. The
local movements of people across sectors are only a relatively small part of the transformation process.
In particular, for poor countries with large fractions of their workers initially in agriculture, the main
mechanisms of structural transformation are not played out within local labor markets. Instead, they
involve large-scale movements of people across locations – from rural to urban or from one region
to another. Studies that emphasize the local movements of people will miss these broader and more
secular changes.
   This paper models the impact of the Green Revolution on national economies, rather than on
local labor markets. The main idea is to use exogenous variation in geography, combined with the
essentially exogenous (to individual countries) timing of agricultural research successes in a differences-
in-differences strategy, to instrument for the timing and magnitude of agricultural productivity shocks
received by countries. This allows us to trace the impact of agricultural productivity increases across
a large set of countries. We observe strong and robust impacts of these Green Revolution productivity
shocks. Most striking is the impact on per capita GDP. Depending on the specification, we find that
a 10-percentage point increase in the share of area under high-yielding varieties (HYVs) in 2000 is
associated with a 10-15 percentage point increase in per capita GDP. Moreover, we find no evidence
that the Green Revolution was offset substantially by Malthusian effects; the increased availability of
food was not eroded by population increases. Instead, population appears to have declined, if anything,


                                                    3
in response to the growth in agricultural productivity. Our paper also sheds light on a concern often
expressed in the literature about the potential for agricultural productivity improvements to pull
additional land into agriculture at the expense of forests and other environmentally valuable land
uses. We find that, to the contrary, increases in the area under HYV has tended to reduce the amount
of land devoted to agriculture – consistent with what has been termed the “Borlaug hypothesis.” Under
this hypothesis, improvements in the productivity of food crops leads to intensification of agriculture
on a smaller land area, preventing expansion on the extensive margin.2
    We further show that the impact of the Green Revolution on per capita GDP comes from effects on
total factor productivity (TFP) beyond those simply derived from increases in crop yields – including,
for instance, changes in the quality of land, fertilizer use, labor, and capital. Our analysis also finds
that per capita GDP rises due to factor adjustments of various kinds. Likewise, we can look at the
channels through which the Green Revolution appears to have altered population size. Our analysis
suggests that the main effect occurs through an effect of the Green Revolution on lower birthrates. In
the data, this effect is only partly offset by an increase in life expectancy; the net result is a negative
effect on population growth.
    A large literature considers the social, economic, and environmental impacts of the Green Rev-
olution; it would be too ambitious to review this literature here. Recent surveys in the economics
literature include Renkow and Byerlee (2010) and Pingali (2012). Our paper addresses some of the
same macro-scale questions that have previously been considered using different methods by Evenson
and Rosegrant (2003), Perez and Rosegrant (2015), and others. These studies have used a range of
models of varying structures and with differing assumptions. A recent survey of these models can
be found in Godfray and Robinson (2015). In contrast to these approaches, our analysis is based
on econometric evidence from a panel of countries. As noted above, our identification approach uses
agroecological variation combined with time variation arising from the Green Revolution as an in-
strument for technology change. This type of empirical strategy has been used previously to look
at the effects of the adoption of potatoes in Europe following the Columbian Exchange (Nunn and
Qian (2011a)), and the impact of agricultural productivity improvements on local economic develop-
ment (Bustos et al. (2016)), for example. Other studies that have been exploiting the agroecology
   2
     Norman Borlaug (1914-2009) was a wheat scientist closely associated with the early years of the Green Revolution.
Borlaug won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1970 for his work in developing and promoting the Green Revolution, most notably
through his efforts in wheat breeding for yield and rust resistance. Borlaug argued forcefully that improved varieties
and higher agricultural productivity would lead to reduced pressure on land resources, as higher production would be
achieved through intensification rather than extensive expansion of agricultural area. This argument was dubbed the
“Borlaugh hypothesis” by Angelsen et al. (2001), p. 3.



                                                          4
component directly include, Easterly (2007), who looks at the impact of plantation agriculture on long-
run development patterns, and Bentzen et al. (forthcoming) who investigate the impact of irrigated
agriculture on political outcomes. This paper is also related to an even larger literature which has
considered the impact of agricultural science or research on economic and social outcomes at a more
geographically limited scale. This literature has been surveyed by Maredia and Byerlee (2000); other
important contributions include Fan et al. (2002); Meinzen-Dick et al. (2003); Thirtle et al. (2003);
Pingali and Kelley (2007); Dalrymple (2008); Raitzer and Kelley (2008); Rusike et al. (2010).
    In the remainder of this paper, we begin in Section 2 by documenting the historical context in which
the Green Revolution unfolded, including the institutional background for the scientific research that
gave rise to the Green Revolution. Section 3 presents data on the diffusion of HYV crops that were
at the core of the Green Revolution. Section 4 describes the estimation strategy, including a detailed
discussion of our identifying assumptions. Section 5 presents our estimates of the long-term and large-
scale consequences of the Green Revolution. In Section 6, we explore the potential channels for these
impacts; Section 7 concludes with implications for long-term strategies of growth and development.


2    Background: The Green Revolution

Although formal programs of scientific research on crop improvement in developing countries can be
traced back into the nineteenth century and before, the Green Revolution of the 20th century can be
dated fairly precisely. Following some early exploratory work in the 1940s and 1950s, the major efforts
can be traced to the creation in 1960 of the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), located near
the town of Los Baños in the Philippines, and in 1967 of a sister institution, the International Center
for Maize and Wheat Improvement (CIMMYT), with headquarters near Texcoco, Mexico. These two
research centers were funded by a group of aid donors, including the Ford and Rockefeller Foundations
as well as a number of national aid agencies. CIMMYT grew out of an ongoing program of wheat
research that the Rockefeller Foundation had been funding in Mexico since the late 1940s, under the
leadership of Norman Borlaug, a plant pathologist and wheat breeder who went on to win the Nobel
Peace Prize in 1970 for his efforts. The history of the early Green Revolution has been documented
previously in a number of sources, e.g., Dalrymple et al. (1974); Dalrymple (1978, 1985, 1986); Barker
et al. (1985). Breeding efforts at these institutions were subsequently extended to other crops and
other research centers, as discussed below.
    For the purposes of this paper, it is important that the timing of the initial Green Revolution and



                                                   5
its subsequent patterns of diffusion were largely exogenous to individual countries. The argument we
will make is based on two claims. The first is that the timing of the initial research was driven by a
mixture of humanitarian and geopolitical concerns and coincided with the birth of the international
aid community; in this sense, it was not driven by an assessment of the subsequent growth prospects
of any particular country or set of countries. The second is that the principal initial research behind
the Green Revolution in rice and wheat diffused rapidly from the locations where the research was
initially carried out. Diffusion took place very rapidly in similar agroecological areas and more slowly
in areas with less favorable geographies. The research targeted particular agronomic and phenotypic
problems thought to have widespread relevance, rather than focusing on specific countries. And in
spite of the rapid success of research on rice and wheat, it took much longer for the Green Revolution
to be extended to other crops, reflecting large differences in the initial stock of scientific knowledge as
well as the greater heterogeneity of growing environments. On all counts, we argue that the differential
impact of agricultural research on developing economies reflected factors substantially exogenous to
those countries.


2.1   The Timing of the Green Revolution

The start of the Green Revolution can be defined quite precisely. Although many developing countries
had some indigenous and colonial programs of crop improvement, it is a reasonable generalization to
say that few developing countries had large or systematic programs of crop improvement before 1950.
Colonial programs of agricultural research tended to focus on non-food crops, such as sugar, that
provided raw materials for industry or were consumed in the colonial heartland. Food crops tended
to receive a low priority. To the extent that there were active programs of research on food crops, as
in India, in the first half of the twentieth century, they tended to focus on identifying vigorous strains
of existing varieties rather than developing new lines. According to De Datta (1981), rice research
in the developing world in the early 20th century tended to consist of little more than selection of
high-performing varieties from farmers’ fields, along with some efforts to introduce materials from
other geographies and to select them for local adaptation. Very little cross-fertilization was attempted
– essentially the effort to create new genetic mixes through deliberate breeding of one variety to
another – because of the relative technical difficulty of this process and perhaps also because of the
limited familiarity with the principles of Mendelian genetics that are required to make sense of cross-




                                                    6
fertilization.3
       For rice and wheat, the first large-scale programs of cross-fertilization (henceforth, “breeding”)
were those carried out by IRRI and CIMMYT (including the precursor Rockefeller program on wheat
in Mexico), beginning in the 1950s and early 1960s.4 In both crops, these early efforts reflected an
emerging view that rich countries had both obligations and opportunities to encourage development in
the newly independent countries of Africa and Asia, in the wake of the Second World War. This view
coincided with geostrategic concerns triggered by the Cold War. The threat of agrarian revolutions
in Asia and Latin America seemed to call for efforts to promote rural development – and in turn to
focus on agricultural productivity (for a detailed discussion, see Perkins (1997)). It was presumably
not a coincidence that the United States, being pulled steadily into a war in Indochina and fearing
a domino effect, chose to support investments in rice research; nor that it would support a wheat
research program that was based in Mexico.
       Against this backdrop, rice breeding began at IRRI in 1965, several years after the founding of the
institute, and within the first weeks of breeding effort, scientists made a cross that gave rise to what
would eventually prove to be the first “mega-variety” of rice. For wheat, it is similarly possible to
identify a zero-date for the Green Revolution: the first successful crosses from the Rockefeller wheat
program took place in 1955, and the first varieties were released in Mexico in 1961.
       The sections below will describe the diffusion of HYVs of rice, wheat, and other crops. A key
point is that the diffusion patterns were initially shaped largely by the extent of research effort and
by agroecological similarity to the locations where the initial research was carried out. Diffusion of
high-yielding rice and wheat to less favorable areas was more gradual and reflected the time required to
address different geographies and agronomic problems of narrower significance. Similarly, the eventual
development and spread of HYVs of maize, sorghum, millet, root crops, and legumes was driven in
significant measure by the timing and scale of the international research efforts. These efforts can be
   3
      Rice and wheat are self-pollinating crops in which each small flower on a stalk tends to pollinate itself. Cross-
fertilization is a painstaking process that (in the 1960s) required emasculating certain stalks by carefully removing the
male portion of the flower with a tweezers so that it will be unable to pollinate itself and can then be pollinated from
another source chosen by the scientist. This contrasts with the relative ease of cross-fertilization (hybridization) in maize,
where the tassels growing at the top of the plant are the male flowers and can be removed very simply by “de-tasseling”
a row of plants.
An understanding of genetics is important for cross-fertilization programs because the first generation offspring of a cross
will typically display considerable heterogeneity, with different traits expressed in predictable ratios. An inexperienced
breeder may not be able effectively to identify desirable offspring; these must in turn be selected and reselected through
five or six generations before they display sufficient uniformity to be acceptable to farmers.
    4
      IRRI too had a modest precursor program, a small breeding effort initiated under the auspices of the UN Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) in the 1940s and 1950s. It is safe to say, however, that there was no large-scale or
systematic effort to breed new rice varieties for the developing world before 1960.




                                                              7
identified in large degree with the creation of new research centers and programs. Thus, in the wake
of the successes of IRRI and CIMMYT, two additional centers were created in 1967, the International
Institute for Tropical Agriculture (IITA) in Ibadan, Nigeria, and the International Center for Tropical
Agriculture (CIAT) in Cali, Colombia. These institutions were assigned mandates for additional crops
and different agroecologies; the subsequent rolling out of additional centers provides a valuable tool
for identification in our analysis. There are now fifteen such institutions that carry out agricultural
research on subjects ranging from aquaculture to livestock science to climate adaptation.5
       To a degree, adaptive breeding – the effort to tailor HYVs to specific agroecological niches and
to address problems of local importance – has been carried out by national governments through
agricultural research systems, university-based research programs, and other local research. A concern
for our identification strategy is that this effort may thereby reflect institutional capacity, raising the
possibility that the diffusion curves for different countries are related to general institutional factors
that might lead to growth through other channels. But what is clear is that even for the most advanced
developing countries, adaptive breeding has continued even to the present day to rely heavily on
research emerging from the CGIAR. Many or most HYV crops in the developing world continue to
use genetic material that can be traced to the CGIAR, and almost all national research programs in
the developing world maintain close connections to CGIAR institutions. In that sense, the research
products of the CGIAR continue to play a significant role in shaping the diffusion of HYVs. The
role of the CGIAR and of international research institutions through the late 1990s is documented
fully in Evenson and Gollin (2003b); a more recent study by Walker and Alwang (2015) describes the
continuing importance of international research for the diffusion of HYVs in sub-Saharan Africa.6
       Beyond the institutional role of the CGIAR in the development of HYVs, an additional source of
exogeneity is the sheer difficulty of achieving research success in different crops. The rapid progress of
varietal improvement in rice and wheat for favorable environments turned out to be a happy accident.
As discussed below, it turned out that in both crops, substantial yield gains could be achieved through
the introduction of a single gene for dwarfism. But an additional underlying reason for the rapid
successes in these crops was that research built on a large stock of scientific knowledge. Both crops
had been heavily researched prior to the 1960s in advanced countries, and scientists could work with
   5
     These centers operate collectively as an entity known as the CGIAR (formerly known as the Consultative Group on
International Agricultural Research). CGIAR defines itself today as a “worldwide partnership addressing agricultural
research for development.” Its research is funded by national and multilateral development agencies, non-governmental
organizations, private philanthropies, and other donors, with an annual budget approaching $1 billion in 2015.
   6
     A chapter (Pandey et al. (2015)) in the book also by Walker and Alwang (2015) discusses international research
impacts in recent times in South Asia.



                                                         8
elite breeding lines. Moreover, they had a good understanding of the extent of genetic diversity and
the sources of useful genes. The situation was very different for tropical root crops such as cassava and
sweet potato; it was also quite different for crops that were relatively minor in rich countries, such as
millet and sorghum. These differing initial stocks of knowledge and improved genetic materials create
another source of exogenous variation in the timing and extent of the Green Revolution. Evenson and
Gollin (2003a) argued that the slow diffusion of HYVs in sub-Saharan Africa reflected the differences
in crop mix and agroecology relative to Asia. Because crop varieties can be highly location specific,
there were limited spillovers of crop varieties from Asia to Africa. The Green Revolution varieties of
rice proved poorly suited to Africa; maize varieties that had performed well in Mexico also proved
disappointing under farmers’ conditions in Africa.


2.2   History of the Green Revolution in Rice

This section considers the detailed case of the Green Revolution in rice in South and Southeast Asia.
We argue here that genetic and agroecologic factors created a strong element of exogeneity to the
diffusion of HYVs of rice.
   As noted by ?, varietal improvement efforts in rice and wheat can be dated well back into the 19th
century and beyond; but the distinctive feature of the early Green Revolution was the development and
introduction of short semi-dwarf varieties of rice and wheat that were adapted to tropical and semi-
tropical environments. These short varieties were well suited to intensive cultivation. In particular,
they responded well to heavy doses of fertilizer. For both rice and wheat, traditional varieties tended
to be substantially taller; it was not uncommon for tropical Asian rice varieties to be two meters
tall, whereas the semidwarfs were closer to one meter tall. The taller varieties suffered from two
disadvantages. First, a large amount of the plant’s energy was devoted to the production of leaves and
stalks, with a relatively small fraction of the plant biomass being allocated to grain. Second, the tall
varieties were subject to an architectural design flaw; since grain grows near the top of a rice plant or
wheat plant, heavy grain yields would make the plants top-heavy and would induce them to fall over
– a problem known as “lodging.” For rice, Barker et al. (1985) note that lodging was a constraint on
crop yields in tropical Asia: “Particularly in the irrigated areas, fields of lodged rice (with stalks bent
over and panicles lying flat on the ground) were a familiar sight at harvest-time. Fertilizer was not
used because the application of nitrogen to tall indica varieties weakened the stalks, advancing the
date of lodging and further reducing yields” (Barker et al. (1985)).
   The architecture of rice and wheat plants thus implied that chemical fertilizers were little used


                                                     9
in tropical production of these crops through the 1950s. As reported by Barker et al. (1985) (Table
6.2, p. 77), NPK fertilizer use on rice in India in the 1956-60 period was approximately 2 kg/ha,
compared with over 200 kg/ha in Japan or Taiwan. Essentially zero fertilizer was used on rice in
Bangladesh, Indonesia, Thailand, or other countries in the global heartland of rice cultivation. Crop
yields were correspondingly low, as plants were starved for nutrients: in 1965, Indian rice yields were
1.3 t/ha, and similarly low levels prevailed in Cambodia (1.1 t/ha), Indonesia (1.8 t/ha), Bangladesh
(1.7 t/ha), Pakistan (1.4 t/ha), and the Philippines (1.3 t/ha). By contrast, in northern Asia and in
rich countries, yields were commonly 4.5-6.5 t/ha (FAOSTAT).
   The rice and wheat scientists involved in forming the nascent IRRI and CIMMYT were clear that
one of their first research challenges was to develop shorter varieties of these crops, with stiffer straw,
that would tolerate more intensive use of fertilizer. They also sought shorter duration varieties with
broad adaptability to different environments. Short varieties of rice and wheat were known and had
been cultivated in northern Asia, possibly for many centuries, although ? writes that the agronomic
potential of these varieties did not become clear until the 20th century and the advent of chemical
fertilizers. These varieties were not well suited to tropical and semi-tropical conditions, however. As a
result, the earliest breeding efforts at IRRI involved focusing on crosses of these semi-dwarf varieties
with sturdy and well adapted tropical rice varieties. The eighth cross made, in the first weeks of IRRI’s
existence, was of an Indonesian variety (Peta) with a semi-dwarf from Taiwan (Dee-Geo-Woo-Gen, or
DGWG). The resulting cross, known as IR8, was arguably one of the most successful innovations in
human history. IRRI released seed of IR8 in 1965, and by 1969 approximately 10 percent of Asia’s
rice area was planted in IR8 or other varieties, most of them derived from IR8 or closely related to
it (Herdt and Capule (1983)). By 1980, about 16 million ha, accounting for around 40 percent of
Asia’s rice area, was planted in what became known as high-yielding rice varieties, as estimated by
Dalrymple (1986).
   Diffusion HYVs of rice was extraordinarily rapid in those areas where the varieties were well
adapted. Although at the micro level, adoption was associated with a variety of individual farmer
characteristics such as education, land tenure, and farm size, the aggregate patterns suggested very
large disparities within and across countries based on agroclimatic and agroecological factors. The
reliable availability and controlled supply of water proved to be an important determinant of the
diffusion of the HYVs. In the most favorable agroecologies, diffusion was rapid and pervasive. In less
favorable ecologies (e.g., in areas characterized by cold temperatures, short growing seasons, flooding,
or drought, among other challenging conditions), the profitability of the new seeds was far more


                                                    10
marginal and seems to have been much more localized.
   These patterns are evident in both national and sub-national statistics. Some countries with
favorable agroecology – especially those with extensive irrigation and/or lowlands with reliable rainfall
– saw very rapid adoption. For example, Sri Lanka introduced HYV seeds in 1968-69; by 1973-74,
48 percent of the rice area was planted in HYVs, a figure that rose to 71 percent by 1980-81, a mere
twelve years after the introduction of the new seeds. In the Philippines, HYV seeds were introduced in
1965-66, and by 1970-1971, over 50 percent of the national rice area was planted in HYVs. But other
countries with less ideal conditions (e.g., Bangladesh, Cambodia, Nepal) saw much slower diffusion
Herdt and Capule (1983); Dalrymple (1986). Similar disparities in diffusion arose within countries. For
instance, across Indian states, by 1975-76, a mere decade after the introduction of HYVs, adoption was
recorded at over 99 percent in Punjab and nearly as high in Haryana (both relatively minor producers
of rice), but closer to 50 percent in Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. And in the rainfed states of
eastern India (West Bengal, Orissa, and Bihar), which accounted for the largest shares of national rice
cultivation, adoption rates averaged around 25 percent, based on Indian statistics reported in Barker
et al. (1985), Table 10.4, p. 149.


2.3   History of the Green Revolution in Wheat

The Green Revolution in wheat followed a similar pattern to that in rice. The research effort began
with the Rockefeller Foundation’s program on wheat improvement based in Mexico and with the effort
to develop shorter varieties that would respond better to chemical fertilizer. As described in Dalrymple
(1978), semi-dwarf wheats were reported by international agricultural experts traveling in Japan in
the 19th century. Over the succeeding decades, a number of semi-dwarf wheat varieties from Japan
entered breeding programs in Italy and other countries; at the same time, a reciprocal flow of varieties
brought a number of American improved varieties to Japan, where eventually the variety Norin 10 was
developed in the 1930s. Dalrymple (1978) writes that Norin 10 was brought to the United States in
1946. It entered breeding programs in the United States and also formed one of the key ingredients of
the Rockefeller breeding program in Mexico. By 1961, the first semi-dwarf varieties were released from
the Rockefeller program, based on a cross of Norin 10 with the variety Brevor. Within a year, these
varieties were taken to India for trial; by 1965, two semi-dwarf varieties originating from the Mexican
program had been released in India; more or less concurrently, semi-dwarf varieties were released
in Pakistan. By 1970, nearly 10 million ha of HYV wheat had been planted in Bangladesh, India,
Nepal, and Pakistan; by 1977-78, the area planted to HYVs had reached 20 million ha, accounting for


                                                   11
approximately two-thirds of the wheat area in those countries (Dalrymple (1985)).
   As was the case in rice, the HYVs of wheat diffused somewhat more gradually to countries outside
the Indo-Gangetic plain. By 1997, CIMMYT estimated that nearly 50 million ha globally were planted
in wheat varieties developed at CIMMYT or based on varieties that had a CIMMYT parent. An
additional 17 million ha were planted with varieties derived from CIMMYT grandparents or other
CIMMYT ancestors, accounting for 62 percent of total world wheat area (Pingali (1999)).
   The major determinant of diffusion for HYVs of wheat was the water regime. By 1977, just fifteen
years after the development of the first semi-dwarf wheat varieties, 83 percent of the wheat area defined
as “favorable production environments” (i.e., having good rainfall or irrigation) was planted to semi-
dwarfs Byerlee and Moya (1993). Diffusion of HYVs in dryland areas was much lower – possibly only
about 20-25 percent. This pattern resulted was evident within countries as well as across counries; by
1983, adoption of wheat HYVs in North Africa and the Middle East was only 31 percent, compared to
79 percent in South Asia. As for rice, the pre-existing patterns of irrigation and climate were primarily
responsible for the differing patterns of diffusion.


2.4   History of the Green Revolution in Other Crops

Patterns of diffusion in other crops were similarly shaped by the starting date of modern research,
the stock of knowledge and improved genetic material, the extent of the research effort, and the
heterogeneity of the farming ecologies for those crops. For some crops (e.g., barley), international
research targeted at developing countries did not begin until 1975. For others, such as cassava, the
initial stock of scientific knowledge was essentially nil. Evenson and Gollin (2003b) concluded that
these factors essentially explained the differential levels of adoption and the patterns of diffusion across
crops and countries. In this view, the low rates of adoption of HYVs in sub-Saharan Africa reflect the
late starting date of research; the relative (un)importance of crops for which research progress came
late and slow; the heterogeneity of production environments and the complexity of farming systems
(i.e., the lack of large tracts of agroecologically similar land, comparable to the irrigated lowlands of
Southeast Asia or the Indo-Gangetic plane of South Asia). Given these challenges, we can defend
the claim that Africa’s delayed and weak Green Revolution was largely exogenous – and that more
generally, the timing and intensity of the Green Revolution is largely due to exogenous differences
across geographies and agroecologies.




                                                       12
3        Data

Our empirical analysis is based on data from 84 developing and middle income countries for which
we have data on our key variables over the period 1960-2000. A list of the countries in our sample
can be found in the Online Appendix to this paper. The key variables are actual adoption of HYVs,
the agroclimatically attainable yields we use to construct our instrument, and a range of outcome
variables. We discuss these in turn below.


3.1        The Diffusion of High-Yielding Varieties

Evenson and Gollin (2003b) provide approximate HYV adoption rates for 11 major food crops: barley,
cassava, dry beans, groundnut, lentils, maize (corn), millet, potatoes, rice, sorgum, and wheat. We do
not have data on agro-climatically attainable yields for lentils, so we focus on the remaining 10 crops
in our analysis. Combined, these 10 crops account for about 60 percent of the total harvested area in
the 84 countries we are analyzing.7 The remaining 40 percent is mostly cash crops, such as sugar and
cotton, and crops used for fodder, so our 10 crops give us a reasonable proxy for total non-meat food
production.
        The HYV adoption rate of a crop is defined by Evenson and Gollin (2003b) as the harvested area
planted to HYVs divided by the total total harvested area for the crop. Figure 1 depicts the average
adoption rate in our sample for four selected crops.8 Adoption of HYVs of wheat has been fastest.
Starting from zero in 1960 – before HYVs of wheat were available – adoption gradually increased
to about 40 percent in 2000. Adoption of HYVs of other crops was slower, partly because research
into crop improvement started earlier for wheat. HYVs of wheat were for that reason commercially
available decades before HYVs of cassava (for example). This heterogeneity in introduction and
adoption provides us with both spatial and temporal variation in the diffusion of HYV crops.
        The heterogeneity is also visible when looking at individual countries. For example, Figure 2
shows the aggregate adoption rate for four countries in four different regions: Brazil, India, Turkey,
and Nigeria. The three former countries are big producers of wheat and, except Turkey, rice. That
made it possible for them to adopt HYVs relatively early on compared to Nigeria, which mainly grows
crops like Cassava and Sorghum of which HYVs were developed more recently.
        Income, investment, human capital, and agricultural policies also matter for adoption, so perhaps
another reason why Nigeria adopted HYV crops relatively late is that Nigeria developed more slowly
    7
        Source: calculations based on FAO data. Average for the period 1960-2000.
    8
        The average adoption rates for each crop are only calculated across countries where the crop is actually grown.


                                                              13
than the three other countries. To avoid such endogeneity in our empirical analysis, we use geograph-
ically determined suitability for HYV crops, combined with the timing of the Green Revolution, as a
source of exogenous variation in adoption rates.


                                          [Figures 1 and 2 about here]


3.2      Attainable Yields and Adoption

The backbone of our empirical analysis is a database of agro-climatically attainable crop yields com-
puted by FAO, called the Global Agro-ecological Zone (GAEZ) data. These estimates are based on
complex models that include biological models of crop growth as well as detailed gridcell-level data on
various climatic factors.9 The agro-climatically attainable yield is the highest attainable yield under
the local climatic conditions. Naturally, the attainable yield varies both across locations and across
crops. Sorghum, for example, requires a certain combination of temperature, moisture, and sunlight
in order to thrive. Moreover, the optimal combination of these climatic factors varies over the growing
season. Deviations from the optimal climate reduce agro-climatically attainable yields. We note that
the GAEZ data have been widely used by economists in recent years; e.g., Galor and Özak (2015),
Bustos et al. (2016), Costinot et al. (2012), Costinot and Donaldson (2011), and Adamopoulos and
Restuccia (2015). The agro-climatically attainable sorghum and wheat yields are depicted in Figure 3.
Green areas indicate high yields, whereas hues going toward orange signify progressively lower yields.
White areas are completely unsuitable for growing the crop in question. The map for sorghum, for
example, shows that sorghum thrives in warm and arid climates, whereas attainable yields are lower
in the temperate zones and in the tropics.10
      The cost of purchasing HYV seeds is independent of climate, so the net return of adopting them
is larger when agro-climatically attainable yields are high. This prediction is supported by the data.
For example, only 20 percent of the area planted with sorghum in humid Thailand was of HYVs in
year 2000, whereas it was 87 percent in arid Iran. In the next section, we statistically show that this
pattern of adoption holds for all crops in our sample taken together (Figure 4).
      We refer the reader to the FAO GAEZ webpage for all the technical details of the computation of
agro-climatically attainable yields. A few of them should be noted here, however. FAO computes agro-
climatically attainable yields under different assumptions about the agricultural technology in use, or,
  9
      The data can be downloaded from http://www.fao.org/nr/gaez/en/.
 10
      The corresponding maps for the remaining crops can be found in the Online Appendix (see Figures 1A–8A).



                                                         14
in the FAO terminology, the input level. In our analysis, we use the agro-climatically attainable yields
for high input levels. A high input level corresponds to modern farming techniques: full mechanization,
application of synthetic fertilizer and, crucial for our analysis, HYVs. Moreover, we use the attainable
yields with irrigation, as countries like Egypt otherwise would appear to be unsuitable for agriculture.
We should emphasize that these assumptions about input levels and irrigation are independent of the
actual production methods in use. The agro-climatically attainable yields based on these assumptions
reflect the potential yields if modern farming techniques are adopted. We show in Section 5.2.1 that
our results are not sensitive to these particular assumptions.


                                         [Figure 3 about here]


3.3   Outcome Variables

Our two main outcome variables in our analysis are income, measured as log GDP per capita, and log
population size. These data are taken from The Maddison-Project (2013), but we obtain similar results
if we use alternative data sources, such as various vintages of Penn World Tables or Word Development
Indicators. We use the The Maddison-Project (2013) data in our main empirical analysis, as they
are available before 1960. This allows us to perform a falsification check in which we ask whether
the adoption of HYV crops after 1960 is statistically related to income growth before 1960. As we
demonstrate in Section 5.1, it turns out not to be the case, and we conclude that our estimated
coefficients of HYV adoption do not pick up unobserved pre-treatment trends.
   In Table 1, we divide our samples into countries with below median HYV adoption in year 2000,
and countries with above median HYV adoption. We find that countries with above median adoption
rate in 2000 had larger populations, and were more densely populated and slightly richer in 1960 than
countries below the median. We control for such initial differences in our empirical analysis.
   In addition to our main outcome variables, we also study the effect of the adoption of HYV crops
on yield per agricultural worker, harvest area, agricultural population, agricultural employment share,
life expectancy, infant mortality, adult mortality, and the rate of natural population increase. All
variables are expressed in logarithms except the rate of natural population increase. The variables
are taken from FAO and World Development Indicators. The descriptive statistics for all the main
outcome variables are reported in Table 2.

                                     [Tables 1 and 2 about here]



                                                  15
4         Estimation Strategy

Our baseline estimation equation has the following form:
                                                    2000
                                                    X                       N
                                                                            X
                        yit = β0 + β1 HY V it +             γk yeartk   +         δc countryic + εit ,               (1)
                                                   k=1970                   c=2

where yit is the outcome of interest (e.g., log GDP per capita, log population size, etc.) in country i at
time t∈1960, 1970, .., 2000.11 Time and country fixed effects are given by k yeartk and c countryic ,
                                                                            P               P

and εit is an error term. We estimate the coefficient of interest, β1 , by OLS as well as by the 2SLS
strategy outlined in the next subsection. The main explanatory variable, HY Vit , is the actual adoption
rate of HYV crops, defined as the harvested land with HYVs of the 10 crops in our data set as a share
of total harvested land with the 10 crops (i.e., of both high yielding and traditional varieties). We
pool all the HYV crops into one adoption variable since we need a large shock to discern any effect in
the aggregate data.12
         Our data on HYV adoption do not cover cash crops. This is no limitation to our empirical analysis,
as the scientific effort behind the Green Revolution in developing countries was aimed at food security.
However, the adoption of HYVs of other crops becomes an omitted variable in our estimating equation.
Our 2SLS strategy partly solves this problem. Moreover the development of HYVs of cash crops was
driven by commercial rather than philantropic considerations, and their diffusion followed a different
pattern than HYVs of the food crops in our data set. Any potential omitted variable bias to our
estimates should therefore be relatively small. And this is indeed what we find in Section 5.2.4 when
we add reduced-form versions of our instrument for the most important cash crops (cotton, soybeans,
and sugar) to the baseline regression.
         Any omitted variable bias from adoption of HYVs of cash crops only matter for the interpretation
of the point estimate of β1 . According to our definition, β1 is the effect on outcomes from full adoption
of HYVs of the 10 crops in our data, including potential spillovers to adoption of HYVs of other
crops. By implication, when we later in the paper calculate the growth contribution of HYVs in the
average country as the estimated β1 multiplied by the average HYV adoption rate in year 2000, we
get the correct magnitude. Likewise, the fact that we do not have cash crops in the denominator of
    11
      The Online Appendix to this paper also reports results from specification starting in 1940, but due to missing data
for some countries, these samples are unbalanced.
   12
      Acemoglu and Johnson (2007) follow a similar strategy when estimating the aggregate impact of health on GDP
per capita due to the introduction antibiotics in the 1940s, for example. Nevertheless, our Online Appendix also reports
crop-specific effects. We find similar effects as in our baseline regression for the most widely grown crops (wheat and
rice), as well as for the minor crops pooled together.




                                                            16
HY Vit matters only for the scaling of estimated β1 , and the scaling cancels out when we use the actual
HYV adoption rate to calculate the size of the effect.
   While agriculture was the predominant economic activity in all countries the sample at the begin-
ning of the period, it was more important in some countries than others. Such heterogeneity should
matter for our estimates when we use GDP per capita or population size as our dependent variable, as
the impact of HYV adoption should matter more the more weight agriculture has in the economy. We
do find this effect in our data. The estimated β1 increases when we weight the regression by the share
of agriculture in GDP, or when we include HYV adoption interacted with the share of agriculture in
GDP. However, we prefer the unweighted estimates as they are econometrically simpler, and because
the estimates of β1 in this case can be interpreted as the effect of the Green Revolution in the average
developing country.


4.1   Identification

The speed of adoption of HYV crops is likely to be influenced by many factors, including income
growth and population growth. To remove such endogenous components of HY Vit , we construct an
instrument based on two sources of exogeneous variation: the differentiated timing of the development
of HYVs of different crops, and the cross-sectional variation in the climatic suitability for growing them.
Our differences-in-differences strategy is in this way close to that of Nunn and Qian (2011b), who use
agroclimatic suitability to identify the impact of the potato on European development following the
Colombian Exchange, and to Bustos et al. (2016), who use a similar strategy to identify the effect
of adopting of genetically modified variants of soy and maize in Brazil. In both cases, the effects are
estimated by including agro-climatic suitability directly as an explanatory variable for the outcome of
interest. By contrast, we have the luxury of having actual data on HYV adoption, which allows us to
go one step further than the reduced-form and estimate the effect of adoption by 2SLS.
   We construct our instrument for HY Vit in two steps. Since we have data on the adoption of each
HYV crop j, we estimate the following equation in the first step:
                        2000                                  2000                  N
           HY Vitj =            αkj potentialij × yeartk +                                δc countryic + ujit ,
                        X                                     X                     X
                                                                      θk yeartk +                                 (2)
                       k=1970                                k=1970                 c=2


where HY Vitj is the HYV adoption rate for crop j. potentialij is the average agro-climatically attainable
yield for crop j across all land suitable for agriculture within a country. To capture that HYVs of
some crops were developed earlier than others, we interact potentialij with a full set of time-period



                                                        17
                   θk yeartk .13 We also add country fixed effects, N             c
                  P                                                P
fixed effects,                                                      c=2 δc countryi , to the regression. The

unexplained part is denoted ujit .
       In the second step, we multiply the predicted adoption rates for each crop from equation (2),
         j
HY
\  V it , by the crops’ share of harvested land in 1960. We then sum across crops to arrive at the
aggregate to country-level predicted adoption rate of HYVs:
                                                PJ          j                  j
                                                   j=1 HY V it × harvested areai1960
                                                       \
                                   pHY Vit =         PJ                              .                      (3)
                                                        j=1 harvested area1960

       The predicted adoption rate, pHY Vit , is our instrumental variable for the actual adoption of
HYVs in Equation (1). The relationship between the actual and the predicted HYV shares is shown
in Figure 4 for the year 2000 (or equivalently, the change in adoption rate between 1960 and 2000, as
HYV adoption was zero for all countries in 1960). There is a strong positive correlation (p-val=0.00).
The correlations in 1970, 1980, and 1990 are similarly strong.
       The figure also shows that some Asian and South American countries have higher adoption rates
than predicted by their climatic suitability for growing them. This could be a manifestation of endo-
geneity if, for instance, rapid growth in South-East Asia was a cause of rapid HYV adoption rather
than the other way around. By using the predicted HYV share as an instrument, we avoid that such
effects show up as a bias to our estimates.
       With our instrumental variable at hand, we estimate the following first-stage equation:
                                                           2000
                                                           X                     X
                        HY Vit = λ0 + λ1 pHY Vit +                 λk yeartk +       λc countryic + uit ,   (4)
                                                         k=1970                  c

where pHY Vit is the predicted adoption rate, which is the excluded instrument for actual adoption rate
in Equation (1). The remaining variables are defined as above. Contrary to regressions with generated
regressors, parameter estimates in 2SLS regressions with generated instruments are asymptotically
distributed as in standard 2SLS regressions. The standard errors of the 2SLS estimate of β1 are,
therefore, asymptotically valid.14
       In addition to our baseline 2SLS specification, represented by Equation (1) and (4), we perform a
number of robustness checks. In particular, we add control variables to the regressions by including
P2000     0       k                                               0
  k=1970 Xi × yeart ρk on the right hand sides of the equations. Xi is a vector of, e.g., geographical

characteristics or initial values of outcome variables. They are interacted with the time-period fixed
effects, yeartk , to pick up potential trends in the outcomes related to the specific controls.
        P

  13
       We obtain similar results if we interact with a post-1960 indicator instead (see Table 5).
  14
       Wooldridge (2010), p117.


                                                              18
                                         [Figure 4 about here]


5    Empirical results: Income and Population

We begin by documenting the relationship between the actual HYV adoption rate and income and
population. Income is a natural outcome variable in our analysis, as it is closely related to economic
development and human welfare. We also look at the effect on the size of the population to test
whether there is a Malthusian drag on income growth when agricultural productivity increases.
    The OLS estimates Column 1 of Table 3 shows that the impact of HYV adoption on income, β1
in Equation (1), is 0.99 and statistically significant at the one percent level. The point estimate can,
in principle, be interpreted as the effect on income of full adoption of HYVs. However, this is an
out-of-sample prediction, since no country in our sample achieved full adoption in year 2000; the av-
erage adoption rate in year 2000 is 27 percent. In what follows, we therefore discuss the quantitative
implications of our estimates in the context of a hypothetical 10 percentage points increase in the
HYV adoption rate. That also has the added benefit that, for such small values, the estimated β1 ap-
proximates percentage changes in the outcome variable. The OLS estimate in Column 1 consequently
shows that a 10 percentage points increase in HYV adoption is associated with a 10 percent increase
in GDP per capita.
    The OLS estimate is, due to endogeneity, possibly a biased estimate of the causal impact of
adopting HYV crops. According to Boserup (1965), for example, population pressures influence the
rate of technological progress in the agricultural sector. Consistent with this view, our data shows
that more densely populated countries in 1960 have higher rates of adoption (see Table 1). Adoption
may similarly depend on income growth, as more advanced countries may be better able to adopt the
new seeds. Our OLS estimates will then be downward biased if income growth also imply less scope
for subsequent cath-up growth.
    To handle such endogeneity, we estimate β1 in equation (1) by the 2SLS strategy outlined above
using Equation (4) as the first stage. The point estimate, reported in column 2 of Table 3, is 1.48. While
it is about 50 percent larger than the corresponding OLS estimate, the difference is not statistically
significant. The point estimate implies that a 10 percentage points increase in adoption of HYVs
causes GDP per capita to increase by 15 percent.
    In Column 3, we report the reduced-form estimate, i.e., the results when income is regressed directly



                                                   19
on predicted HYV adoption. Unsurprisingly, we find a large positive (and statistically significant)
effect.
    Columns 4-6 report OLS, 2SLS, and reduced-form estimates of the effect of HYV adoption on pop-
ulation size. All estimates are negative and statistically significant. The 2SLS estimate is numerically
larger than the OLS counterpart, but, as in the income regressions, the difference is not statistically
significant at conventional levels. The 2SLS point estimate of -0.54 indicates that a 10 percentage
point increase in HYV adoption reduces population size by five percent. This is a relatively small
effect relative to the variation in the population variable. In section 6.3, we demonstrate that this
finding is explained by counteractive effects from decreasing mortality and fertility rates, where the
later effect appears to dominate.
                                          [Table 3 about here]

    We regard the 2SLS estimates in Table 3 as our baseline estimates. Such panel estimates do not lend
themselves to simple graphical illustration, so in Panel A of Figure 5, we depict partial correlation plots
between income and predicted HYV adoption in a long-difference specification for the entire period. A
similar correlation plot is depicted in Panel B for the population size. The long differences specification
provide readable figures, while still holding time and country fixed effects constant, and they are, in
this way, equivalent to the reduced-form estimates from the 10-year panel models. Well-known growth
success stories, such as Botswana, Mauritius, and China, and war-torn growth disasters, such as Sierra
Leone, Liberia, and Iraq, are clearly visible in Panel A, but our results for income do not appear to be
driven by such outliers. The same is true for our results for population size in Panel B. The conclusion
from visual inspection of Figure 5 is confirmed by outlier-robust estimation approaches.


                                          [Figure 5 about here]


5.1       Falsification Tests

Our identification strategy allows us to carry out a falsification exercise in which we check whether
changes in the outcomes variables in the period 1940-1960, before HYV crops became available, are
correlated with post-1960 changes in our instrument. A non-zero correlation implies that countries
with predicted higher HYV adoption were on a different growth path before the Green Revolution.
This would violate the identifying assumption of parallel pre-treatment trends underlying our analysis.
The estimation results from this falsification test are reported in Table 4. In Columns 1 and 3, we use



                                                    20
the pre-treatment years 1940, 1950, and 1960, while we use the pre-treatment years 1950 and 1960 in
Columns 2 and 4. All estimated coefficients are close to zero and statistically insignificant, suggesting
that β̂1 is not contaminated by pre-existing trends in income or population.

                                              [Table 4 about here]


5.2     Robustness

5.2.1    Alternative Specifications of the Instrument

We now check the robustness of our results to alternative specifications of our instrument. Our base-
line instrument exploits heterogeneity in agro-climatically attainable yields when modern agricultural
practices (a high input level) and irrigation, if necessary, are in use. One might worry that this treat-
ment measure picks up heterogeneity in the suitability for growing traditional varieties with traditional
agricultural methods as well, so our first alternative instrument is the gain in attainable yields when
agriculture moves from a low input level to a high input level. This specification corresponds to the
one used by Bustos et al. (2016). The drawback is that low-input agriculture is assumed to be solely
rainfed, so this alternative instrument might also pick up variation in the gain from irrigation projects.
It is no problem in the context of Brazil, analyzed by Bustos et al. (2016), but our sample with many
arid countries it might be. We therefore construct a second alternative instrument which is similar to
the first, except that we now assume that irrigation is not used even at high input levels. The problem
with this specification is that some arid countries that rely on major rivers as water sources now appear
to be unsuitable for agriculture, a problem we avoid in our baseline regression. The third alternative
instrument is the baseline measure of attainable yields interacted with a post-1960 indicator, rather
than with a full set of year fixed effects.
   In Table 5, we report the results of our main regressions when our preferred instrument is replaced
by the alternative instruments described above. The estimated coefficients are all well within the
95-percent confidence bands of the baseline estimates, and we conclude that our baseline instrument
specification is robust to alternative assumptions about treatment.


                                              [Table 5 about here]




                                                      21
5.2.2    The Locations of International Research Centers

Nine of the international research centers responsible for developing HYV crops were located in coun-
tries of our sample. If the location of these research centers is correlated both with the climatic
variables used to construct our instrument and with economic variables, such as subsequent foreign
aid or trade agreements; and if HYV adoption were higher in countries with a research center, then
the exclusion restriction of our instrument would be violated. These are a lot of “ifs,” and based
on our reading of the historical evidence, we find this conjunction of contingencies to be implausible.
Nevertheless, we perform a series of robustness checks to our baseline 2SLS estimates in order to check
this possibility.
    In Column 1 of Table 6, we include a dummy for whether a country is the host of a research
center in our baseline income regression. The dummy is interacted with time dummies to make it
comparable to our time-varying HYV adoption variable. (Any constant effect that arises from hosting
a research center would already be picked up by the country fixed effects). Controlling for the location
of research centers in this way does not change our baseline result: the coefficient on actual HYV
adoption is virtually unchanged compared to our baseline 2SLS specification in Table 3. The same
is true in Column 2, where we include distance to nearest research center as a control variable (also
interacted with time dummies), and in Column 3, where we exclude the nine countries with research
centers from the regression.
    We obtain similar results in Columns 4–6 of Table 6, where we perform the same robustness test
for our baseline population estimate.

                                         [Table 6 about here]




5.2.3    Asian tigers

East Asian and South Asian countries proved particularly suitable for HYV crops, and their economic
performance has been exceptional compared to other regions in the sample. Our estimates indicate
that part of this rapid growth may have come from HYV adoption. It may, however, also be a spurious
correlation, so in Table 7 we check whether our baseline 2SLS estimates are driven by East and South
Asia alone.
    In Column 1, we include a region dummy for East Asia interacted with a full set of time-period
fixed effects. In Column 2 we replace it with a dummy for the South Asia region, and in Column 3 we


                                                  22
combine both regions into one. Finally, in Column 4, we drop the 14 South-East Asian countries from
the sample. The estimated coefficient is slightly smaller when an East Asia dummy is included and
slightly larger in the three other cases. The differences are insignificant, however, and our baseline
results do not appear to be driven by time-varying region effects between Asia and the remaining
countries in our sample.
    We report the comparable results for population size in Columns 5–8 of Table 7. All the points
estimates are negative and relatively close to the baseline.

                                                [Table 7 about here]


5.2.4    Unobserved Changes Correlated with Geography

The baseline 2SLS estimates may pick up time-varying omitted variables with heterogeneous impact
in countries with different geography and climate. One possibility is that other technological advances
disproportionately benefit countries with certain geographical characteristics that correlate with our
instrument. Table 8 reports the robustness of our findings when different geographical controls, inter-
acted with a full set of time-period fixed effects, are included. In Column 1, we add absolute latitude
to our baseline income regression. These basic geographical variables capture anything from climate
to colonial history, and they are widely used as control variables in the long-run economic growth
literature. In Column 2, we include the suitability of cotton, sugar and soybeans interacted with their
1960 share of total harvested area in the regression. These variables are constructed in the same way
as our instrument, and serves to control for possible omitted variable bias coming from adoption of
HYV cash crops. In Column 3, we control for mean temperature, precipitation and evapotranspira-
tion, which are the most important variables used in the calculation of the agro-climatically attainable
yields which we use to construct our instrument.15 These climatic variables may, however, also be
related to, for instance, the disease environment, and are therefore important controls. In Column 4,
we control for additional geographical variables widely used as controls in the literature: arable land
as a share of total land, average elevation, average distance to waterways, and average agricultural
suitability.16 In Column 5, we include all the control variables from Columns 1-4 simultaneously.
    The estimated effect of HYV adoption on income remains significant across all five columns. The
point estimate for HYV adoption increases compared to the baseline when we control for cash crops,
  15
     In the Online Appendix, we demonstrate that our findings are also robust to controlling for time-varying temperatures
and precipitation; see Table 3a.
  16
     We lose some observations in this specification due to missing data for Mauritius and Jamaica. Excluding these
countries from our baseline regression without controls has a negligible effect on our results.


                                                           23
and decreases in the other specifications, notably in Column (3), where we control for the climatic
variables used to construct our instrument. Of course, this was to be expected as we are thereby
removing some of the relevant variance in our instrument in addition to any violations to the exclusion
restriction coming from the three variables. When all controls are included, the point estimate is
somewhat smaller than in our baseline regression, but the difference is highly insignificant. Our
instrument remains strong even if we include eleven geographical control variables interacted with
time dummies (Kleibergen-Paap=15.27 in Column 5). It is also worth noting that we can control for
average agricultural suitability (interacted with time dummies) without diluting our result. This is a
strong indication that our instrument is picking up crop-specific trends related to HYV adoption, and
not just time trends general technical change favoring areas highly sutiable for agriculture.
   In column 6–10 of Table 8, we perform the same robustness checks for our baseline population
regression. The estimated effect of HYV adoption on population size remains negative and numerically
large across all specifications.
                                           [Table 8 about here]


5.2.5   Further Robustness Checks

In this section, we briefly summarize the results of additional robustness checks, reported in the Online
Appendix to the paper. Our baseline results are robust to reducing the sample period to cover only
the first wave of the Green Revolution (i.e., exluding the 1990s), and to starting the analysis in 1940.
The latter produces an unbalanced panel, but this approach has the advantage of considering more
pre-treatment years for comparison. Beginning the analysis in 1940 turns out to give rise to the same
conclusions (see Table 1a). We also demonstrate that our results are not driven by initial differences
in income, population density, institutional quality, trade openness, or urbanization. These observable
differences are measured in 1960 and interacted with a full set of year fixed effects in the regression (see
Table 2a). While the estimates from Table 8 suggested that our results are not driven by differential
development across climate zones, one could worry that they may be driven by climate change or
weather shocks such as extended periods of drought. We control for this possibility by adding actual
temperature and precipitation to the baseline specification (Table 3a). Our estimates increase slightly,
but not significantly so. We show in Table 4a that our baseline results are robust to augmenting
our regression with country-specific linear time trends. While our baseline specification pools all 10
HYVs into one HYVs adoption variable, Table 5a finally investigates possible crop-specific effects:
We construct HYV adoption variables in wheat, rice, and the remaining eight crops. Following our


                                                    24
proposed 2SLS strategy, we find that the effects on income of HYV adoption in wheat and rice are
positive, statistically significant, and of the same magnitude, while the negative effects on population
seem to be primarily related to the adoption of HYV in rice.


6     Channels

Our baseline estimate implies that a 10 percentage points higher adoption rate of HYV crops increases
GDP per capita in developing countries by circa 15 percent. A naı̈ve partial equilibrium calculation
would suggest a substantially lower effect. HYVs have, on average, roughly 50 percent higher yields
than their traditional counterparts (Evenson and Gollin (2003b)), and agriculture accounted for less
than 50 percent of GDP in our sample of countries in 1960. Combining these two statistics suggests
that GDP per capita should increase by a mere 2.5 percent.
    The naı̈ve calculation is, of course, naı̈ve because it does not take factor adjustment, sectoral shifts
and potential spillover effects into account. The question is, then, whether such general equilibrium
effects can account for the gap between the naive estimate of 2.5 percent and our econometric estimate
of around 15 percent. We address this question in two steps. First, we look at agricultural productivity,
measured as yields per agricultural worker, and then we proceed to look at structural transformation.
At the end of this section, we similarly decompose our estimated effect on population size into effects
on mortality and fertility.


6.1    The Effect on Agricultural Productivity

To structure the discussion of the effect on agricultural productivity, we assume that agricultural
production, Ya , is a constant-returns-to-scale Cobb-Douglas function of land, X, agricultural capital,
K, and agricultural labor, L:

                              Ya = ZAX α K β L1−α−β , 0 < α + β < 1, α, β > 0.                          (5)

We omit a-subscripts on the inputs for simplicity. K is defined broadly to cover everything from
tractors to irrigation systems. Z is the component of total factor productivity that depends directly
on the variety of crops grown. The introduction of HYVs should be interpreted as a shock to Z. The
parameter A is other components of total factor productivity, which may or may not be indirectly
affected by the introduction of HYV crops. For instance, it will show up in A if the introduction of
HYVs has an impact on human capital formation. We discuss such indirect TFP effects in greater


                                                    25
detail below.
    We divide by the labor input to obtain the production function for yields per worker:

                                                      ya = ZAxα k β .                                                  (6)

Profit maximization leads to the following first-order condition for capital:
                                                                                  1
                                             α β−1                    β            1−β
                                     βZAx k           =r⇔k=             ZAxα             ,                             (7)
                                                                      r

where r is the real interest rate, which we assume to be exogenous and constant in the long run. By
taking logs of the per worker production function and substituting the first-order condition for capital
for k, we get:
                                     1          1          α          1    β
                          ln ya =       ln Z +     ln A +     ln x +     ln .                                          (8)
                                    1−β        1−β        1−β        1−β   r
    To evaluate the consequences of the introduction of HYV crops, we differentiate with respect to
the share of HYVs grown, which in this section is denoted by hyv:
                                                                    
                           ∂ ln ya      1     ln Z     ln A     ln x
                                   =                +       +α                                                         (9)
                            ∂hyv      1 − β ∂hyv ∂hyv          ∂hyv

    This equation shows that HYVs can affect yields per worker through the direct effect on yields
ln Z                                       ln A
∂hyv ,   the indirect effects on TFP,      ∂hyv ,   which we return to below, and through adjustments of the
                        ln x
land to labor ratio,    ∂m .   Each of these three channels are magnified by capital adjustment, which is a
                                        1
fourth channel captured by the         1−β   in front of the bracket.
                                                                   ∂ ln ya
    We estimate the total effect on yields per worker,              ∂hyv ,   by the same empirical approach as we
used to estimate the effect on GDP per capita and population in the previous section.17 The results,
reported in Column 1 of Table 9, show that a 10 percentage points higher HYV adoption rate increases
yields per worker measured in this way by about 19 percent.18
                                                                                                                         1
    We use Equation (9) to decompose this effect into its parts. We know from prior studies that β ≈                     3

in agriculture, so one third of the 19 percent productivity increase comes from capital adjustment,
   17
      Our yield per worker variable is based on data on produced quantities and harvested area for a large number of
crops. To compute a measure of yields that resemble a quantity index without having access to crop-specific prices, we
normalize yields of each crop with their average yield in 1961. For a given year and country, we then weigh the normalized
yields with the crops’ 1960 area share multiplied by the actual extent of harvested land in that country during that year.
Our measure of yield per worker consequently abstract from possible substitution from one crop to another. We do not
have data for yields and the harvested area before 1961, so we assume that the 1960 level of these variables were as in
1961.
   18
      Due to missing data, we have three fewer observations in the regressions in Table 8 than in our baseline regressions.
We therefore report estimates of the effects on GDP per capita and population size in this smaller sample in the two
rightmost columns of Table 8.




                                                            26
leaving 12 percentage points to be explained by what is inside the bracket.19 As mentioned above,
HYVs have, on average, 50 percent higher yields than traditional varieties, implying that the direct
TFP effect of a 10 percentage points higher HYV adoption rate is 5 percent. The estimated effect on
yields is, however, based on the ten crops for which we have data on HYV adoption. The aggregate
area share of these crops was 62 percent in 1960 in the average country in our sample, so we set
ln Z
∂hyv     = 0.5 · 0.62, which leaves about 9 percentage points of the effect on yield per worker to be
explained by the two other terms inside the bracket in Equation (9).
       The effect on land per worker can be decomposed into an effect on total agricultural land, and an
                                                                      ln x       ln X       ln L
effect on the total number of agricultural workers, i.e.,            ∂hyv    =   ∂hyv   −   ∂hyv .   We report the estimates
of the two right-hand terms in Columns 2 and 3 of Table 9. The introduction of HYVs is associated
with significantly less land use and significantly fewer agricultural workers.20 The effect on workers
                                   ln x
is largest, so the net effect     ∂hyv    is 0.09. The higher land-to-labor ratio has a relatively modest effect
on yields per worker, however, as α, the output elasticity of land, is around 0.2; see Valentinyi and
Herrendorf (2008).
                                                                             ln A
       As it always is the case with total factor productivity,              ∂hyv   is not observed. But since we have
pinned down all other terms in the equation down either through statistical means or through evidence
                                                 ln A
from earlier studies, we can infer that          ∂hyv   ≈ 0.7, meaning that a 10 percentage points increase in
HYV adoption increases total factor productivity by seven percentage points beyond the direct effect
on yields.
       Before we discuss whether this magnitude is plausible, we should note that it is not statistically
different from zero, given the statistical uncertainty on the estimates from Columns 1-3 used in the
                                                                   ln A
calculation. Yet, there are reasons to believe that                ∂hyv   is both large and positive. Many HYVs
respond better to fertilizer than traditional varieties, where the application of fertilizer sometimes is
counterproductive (see Section 2.2). As our results in Column 4 show, this complementarity means
that adoption of HYVs is followed by adoption of synthetic fertilizer, which increases yields even
further, and consequently A in our framework.
       Additionally, the income effect from adopting HYVs allows farmers to invest more in health and
human capital, and gives them better access to markets. Foster and Rosenzweig (2004), for instance,
show that the Green Revolution increased both demand and supply of schooling in India, and better
  19
     See, e.g., Valentinyi and Herrendorf (2008).
  20
     We compute the number of agricultural workers as the agricultural employment share multiplied by total population.
Time-invariant differences in participation rates across sectors are implicitly controlled for in our regressions by the fixed
effects.




                                                             27
educated individuals adopted new agricultural technologies faster. The experience with HYVs of the
10 crops in our sample may likewise make farmers more inclined to adopt HYVs of other crops, and
new agricultural methods more generally. Improved health will also increase agricultural productivity.
We return to possible health effects in Section 6.3, where we show that the introduction of HYV
reduced mortality. All these mechanisms related to human capital and health are not part of the
                                                                         ln A
accounting framework above, and are therefore captured by                ∂hyv .   Moreover, since we are looking at a
40-year period, these effects have had a long time to accumulate.
    Changes in average soil quality are also reflected in changes in A. We assume constant returns
to scale in the production function, which implies that there are no productivity gains from reducing
the extent of crop land. In reality, marginal lands are likely to be abandoned first, or brought into
use last. Consistent with the Borlaug hypothesis, the negative coefficient of total agricultural land in
Column 2 of Table 9 shows that countries that successfully went through Green Revolution expanded
agricultural land less rapidly. The average soil quality of their crop lands is therefore likely to be
higher.
    Based on our data set, we cannot say whether these effects can account for the entire calculated
              ln A
coefficient   ∂hyv   ≈ 0.7, but the magnitude does seem plausible given the statistical uncertainty in our
regressions. It is consequently also plausible that a 10 percentage points higher HYV adoption rate
can increase yields per worker by 19 percent.

                                                 [Table 9 about here]


6.2    Structural Change and Non-agricultural Productivity

Agriculture accounted for 69 percent of employment in 1960 in our sample, and about 44 percent of
GDP. Although we find a slightly smaller effect on GDP per capita than on agricultural productivity,
our results imply that there has to be a substantial contribution to GDP per capita from either
structural transformation or spillover effects on non-agricultural productivity (or from both).
    The negative coefficient of the log of agricultural employment share in Column 5, Table 9, confirms
that the introduction of HYV crops has initiated migration of workers from agriculture to other sec-
tors.21 Non-agricultural sectors are usually more productive than agriculture in developing countries,
   21
      Eberhardt and Vollrath (2016b,a) show that the speed of structural transformation depends on the output elasticity
with respect to labor in agriculture, and that the elasticity is related to the type of crops a country grows. Wheat stands
out as a crop which facilitates faster structural change when productivity increases. We find supporting evidence for this
result when we split the HYV adoption rate in wheat and non-wheat. However, or baseline results for GDP per capita
is similar for wheat and non-wheat, as the faster pace of structural transformation following adoption of HYV wheat is
offset by stronger effects of adopting non-wheat HYVs in other parts of the decomposition.


                                                            28
so such a shift could provide a significant boost to GDP per capita. A shift to non-agriculture may
also cause aggregate productivity to grow faster if economic growth is driven by learning-by-doing or
scale effects in the non-agricultural sector.
       To quantify the channels through which adoption of HYVs increases GDP per capita, we use the
following relationship:
                                               gdp = AESya + (1 − AES) yn ,                                       (10)

where gdp is GDP per capita, AES is the agricultural employment share, and ya and yn are average
labor productivity in agriculture and non-agriculture, respectively. Taking logs and differentiating
with respect to the share of HYV crops, we get:
                                                                                  
                ∂ ln gdp     1     ∂ya          ∂yn              ∂AES
                         =             AES +         (1 − AES) +        (ya − yn )                                (11)
                  ∂hyv      gdp ∂hyv           ∂hyv               ∂hyv
                             ∂ya ya AES     ∂yn yn 1 − AES ∂AES AES ya − yn
                         =               +                   +
                            ∂hyv ya gdp    ∂hyv yn gdp          ∂hyv AES gdp
                                                            
                            ∂ ln ya Ya    ∂ ln yn         Ya     ∂ ln AES yn − gdp
                         ≈              +           1−         −                     .
                            ∂hyv GDP       ∂hyv         GDP        ∂hyv      gdp
                                                                      ∂x
       To arrive at the last expression, we use that ∂ ln x ≈          x .   The equation shows that the effect on log
GDP per capita can be decomposed into direct productivity effects in agriculture and non-agriculture
( ∂∂hyv
    ln ya
          and    ∂ ln yn
                  ∂hyv ),   weighted by their respective shares of GDP, and structural transformation. By
                                                   ∂ ln AES
how much structural transformation,                  ∂hyv ,   affects GDP per capita depends on the productivity
                                                                     yn −gdp
gap between non-agriculture and the general economy,                   gdp .

       We assess the relative importance of the three channels for the average country in our sample. The
average country had an agricultural employment share of 0.7 in 1960. We do not have comprehensive
data on relative sectoral productivity in 1960, but contemporary data suggest that countries with
agricultural employment shares around 0.7 have non-agricultural sectors that are between three and
10 times more productive than agriculture.22 We choose yn = 3ya to be on the conservative side.
                                                                     Ya                yn −gdp
These numbers imply that our average country has                    GDP   = 0.44 and     gdp     = 0.88. Combined with
                      ∂ ln ya         ∂ ln AES
the estimates of       ∂hyv     and     ∂hyv ,   reported in Table 9, we have that:

                                              ∂ ln ya Ya
                                                         = 1.92 · 0.44 = 0.84,                                    (12)
                                               ∂m GDP
                                          ∂ ln AES yn − gdp
                                      −                     = −(−0.77) · 0.88 = 0.67.                             (13)
                                            ∂hyv      gdp
       According to these calculations, higher agricultural productivity (including productivity gains from
  22
       Calculations based on data from Gollin et al. (2014).



                                                               29
factor adjustment) and structural change contribute by approximately 8.4 and 6.7 percentage points to
economic growth, respectively, when HYV adoption increase by 10 percentage points. Taken together,
these two effects increase GDP per capita by 15.1 percent, which is almost exactly equal to our
                                                                          ∂ ln yn
estimated GDP effect of 15 percentage points. This suggests that           ∂hyv     is close to zero, meaning
that we do not need to look for spillover effects on non-agricultural productivity to rationalize the
relatively large effect of the introduction of HYV on GDP per capita. In fact, we may be looking for
moderate negative spillover effects, a realistic possibility since the average out-migrant from agriculture
is unlikely to obtain the non-agricultural average productivity level immediately.


6.3   Decomposing the Population Effect

In this section, we decompose the estimated impact of HYVs on population size into the effects on
mortality and fertility. The results are reported in Table 10.
   Adoption of HYVs had a positive, but only borderline statistically significant effect on life ex-
pectancy at birth. According to the point estimate reported in Column 1, a 10 percentage points
increase in HYV adoption increases life expectancy by 1.34 percent. In comparison, the average in-
crease in the actual share of HYV 1960–2000 was 27 percentage points and life expectancy increased
by 14 percent over the same time period. Columns 2–4 show negative and statistically significant
effects on infant mortality and adult mortality (for both sexes). These results show that the positive
point estimate for life expectancy is driven by mortality decreases of all age groups and for both sexes,
albeit the adult mortality impact for females (compared to males) are somewhat larger in magnitude.
The lack of significance of the coefficient of life expectancy, therefore, seems to be a statistical artifact
rather than an indication that life expectancy was unaffected by the Green Revolution. Since mor-
bidity and mortality are highly correlated, the documented decrease in mortality also suggests that
adoption of HYVs improved health, which may have contributed to the positive effect on TFP we
found above.
   The negative impact on mortality would, by itself, increase the population, so the impact on
fertility (or migration) needs to be negative and large to rationalize our baseline results for population
size. Columns 5 reveals that we indeed find a large negative impact on the fertility rate. Moreover,
the impact is larger than the mortality effect. The estimate in Column 6 shows that the effect on
the rate of natural population increase (crude birth rates minus crude death rates) is negative and
statistically significant. The magnitude is very similar to the effect on population growth (Column 7),
so our baseline results are not driven by cross-border migration.


                                                     30
    Our findings are in line with the results of Conley et al. (2007), who find a negative correlation
between fertility and infant mortality on the one hand and actual adoption of HYV on the other (at
the country level). Bharadwajy et al. (2015) likewise find a negative effect of HYV adoption on infant
mortality within districts in India.
                                        [Table 10 about here]


7    Lessons and Perspectives

We have so far concentrated on getting the right point estimates for the effects of adopting HYV
crops. We have used an instrumental variable based on spatial variation in the climatic suitability for
growing HYV and the time variation from their introduction in the late 1960s to avoid endogeneity.
We have then subjected our baseline estimates to numerous robustness tests to make sure that they
are not contaminated by confounders or other statistical problems. Finally, in the case of income, we
have used an accounting framework to show that our rather large estimated effect of HYVs adoption is
consistent with a standard production function framework and the magnitudes of general equilibrium
effects that we should expect from the results of previous research. Based on these checks, we have
enough confidence in our estimates to use them to evaluate the actual effect of the introduction of
HYV in developing countries.
    We do so by multiplying our point estimates with the actual adoption rates in year 2000. We then
transform them into growth contributions by taking the exponential, i.e., by computing exp(β̂1 HY V2000 )−
1. Since adoption is correlated with country size, we calculate this expression for both the average
country in our sample, and for the developing world as a whole. The results are reported in Table 11.
    The average country had an HYV adoption rate of 27 percent in 2000, which translates into a
50 percentage points contribution to growth in GDP per capita during the period 1960-2000. By
comparison, the actual observed growth in the average country during the 40-year period was 56
percent. Our results, naturally, are surrounded by statistical uncertainty, and observed growth rates
mask both negative and positive shocks during the period. We might also miss possible global general
equilibrium effects of the Green Revolution going through international prices or trade (we find no
effect on cross-border migration in Section 6.3.). Nevertheless, the numbers strongly suggest that the
Green Revolution has been a very important source of economic growth in developing countries.
    Turning to the developing world as a whole, defined as the 84 countries in our sample, HYV
adoption was 58%. Combined with our point estimate, it implies a whopping 139 percentage points



                                                  31
growth contribution. Nonetheless, due to rapid GDP growth in the largest countries, this is a somewhat
smaller fraction of actual growth than in the average country.
      Our results in Section 6 show that about 60 percent of the effect on income per capita can be
attributed to productivity increases in agriculture, whereas the remaining 40 percent comes from the
movement of workers out of agriculture and into more productive occupations. The productivity
increase in agriculture comes from the direct effect on yields, factor adjustment, and indirect effects
on TFP, which may reflect human capital accumulation, health improvements, increased fertilizer use,
and possibly other sources which our empirical framework does not allow us to identify.
      Compared to the income effect, the relative impact of HYV adoption on population size is rather
modest. In the average country, HYVs have reduced the population size by 14 percentage points
compared to a counterfactual with no adoption. For developing world as a whole, the contribution is
minus 27 percentage points. These numbers should be compared to actual population growth of 162
percent in the average country, and 129 percent in total. Yet, a 27 percent reduction in population
size can still give a substantial boost to incomes in economies facing Malthusian constraints. It will
also have substantial positive effects on the climate and the environment in general, since our results
indicate that the developing world would have contained more than one billion more people in 2000
if the Green Revolution had not happened. This estimate is, of course, based on the assumption that
an additional billion people could be fed in a counterfactual world without HYV crops. While this
may be doubtful, the result nevertheless dispels the pessimistic Malthusian view that improvements
in agricultural productivity in the poorest countries of the world results in growing populations rather
than rising incomes. It also shows that the Green Revolution is likely to have eased environmental
pressures from overpopulation. Consistent with this view, we find in Section 6 that adoption of HYVs
have reduced land use compared to the counterfactual.

                                              [Table 11 about here]

      The Green Revolution is often associated with the 1960s and 1970s, but rather than slowing down,
the rate of adoption and the number of new crop varieties released increased in the 1980s and 1990s,
and the acceleration seems to have continued to the present day. Scattered evidence from sub-Saharan
Africa suggests that the HYV adoption rate has increased by as much in the 2000s as in the four
preceding decades.23 Coincidentally, the 2000s has also been a period of very rapid growth in Africa.
      Our results can be viewed in both a pessimistic and an optimistic light. A pessimist would argue
 23
      Source: Calcualations based on DIIVA data.



                                                       32
that our results show that the average developing country has been unsuccessful at fostering produc-
tivity growth outside of agriculture. If this continues, the growth prospects of developing countries
will decline in the future as they move down the path of structural transformation. An optimist would
retort that a huge potential for improving living standards in developing countries through new crop
varieties remains. Adoption is far from universal, and agriculture is still a crucial sector in most poor
countries. Moreover, new biological technologies are available to increase productivity of some crops,
both by increasing yields and by reducing costs (e.g., disease-resistant varieties that minimze the need
for spraying with costly pesticides). Technology continues to have a huge potential for improving
incomes in the poorest places on our planet. Indeed, our results suggest that the investments in the
development of HYV crops by far have been the most successful form of foreign aid to developing
countries in the past half century. This fact should be recognized in considering further investments
in agricultural science targeted to the developing world.




                                                   33
References

Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., 2007. Disease and development: the effect of life expectancy on economic
  growth. Journal of political Economy 115 (6), 925–985.

Adamopoulos, T., Restuccia, D., 2015. Geography and agricultural productivity: Cross-country evi-
  dence from micro plot-level data. Working paper.

Angelsen, A., Kaimowitz, D., et al., 2001. Agricultural technology and forests: a recapitulation.
  Agricultural technologies and tropical deforestation.

Barker, R., Herdt, R. W., Rose, B., 1985. The rice economy of Asia. Vol. 2. Int. Rice Res. Inst.

Bentzen, J. S., Kaarsen, N., Wingender, A. M., forthcoming. Irrigation and autocracy. Journal of the
  European Economic Association.

Bharadwajy, P., Fenske, J., Mirzax, R. A., Kala, N., 2015. The green revolution and child mortality
  in inida. Working paper.

Bustos, P., Caprettini, B., Ponticelli, J., June 2016. Agricultural productivity and structural transfor-
  mation: Evidence from brazil. American Economic Review 106 (6), 1320–65.

Byerlee, D., Moya, P., 1993. Impacts of international wheat breeding research in the developing world,
  1966-1990. CIMMYT.

Caselli, F., 2005. Accounting for cross-country income differences. In: Aghion, P., Durlauf., S. (Eds.),
  Handbook of Economic Growth. Elsevier: North-Holland.

Caselli, F., Coleman, W. J., 2001. The u.s. structural transformation and regional convergence: A
  reinterpretation. Journal of Political Economy 109 (3), 584–616.

Conley, D., McCord, G. C., Sachs, J. D., 2007. Africa’s lagging demographic transition: evidence from
  exogenous impacts of malaria ecology and agricultural technology. Tech. rep., National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Córdoba, J. C., Ripoll, M., 2009. Agriculture and aggregation. Economics Letters 105 (1), 110–112.

Costinot, A., Donaldson, D., 2011. How large are the gains from economic integration? theory and
  evidence from us agriculture, 1880-2002. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Mimeo.


                                                   34
Costinot, A., Donaldson, D., Smith, C., 2012. Evolving comparative advantage and the impact of
  climate change in agricultural markets: evidence from a 9 million-field partition of the earth. Journal
  of Political Economy, Forthcoming.

Dalrymple, D. G., 1978. Development and spread of high-yielding varieties of wheat and rice in the
  less developed nations.

Dalrymple, D. G., 1985. The development and adoption of high-yielding varieties of wheat and rice in
  developing countries. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 67 (5), 1067–1073.

Dalrymple, D. G., 1986. Development and spread of high-yielding rice varieties in developing countries.
  Int. Rice Res. Inst.

Dalrymple, D. G., 2008. International agricultural research as a global public good: concepts, the
  CGIAR experience and policy issues. Journal of International Development 20 (3), 347–379.
  URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/wly/jintdv/v20y2008i3p347-379.html

Dalrymple, D. G., et al., 1974. Development and spread of high-yielding varieties of wheat and rice in
  the less developed nations. Tech. rep., United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research
  Service.

De Datta, S. K., 1981. Principles and practices of rice production. Int. Rice Res. Inst.

Easterly, W., 2007. Inequality does cause underdevelopment: Insights from a new instrument. Journal
  of Development Economics 84 (2), 755–776.

Eberhardt, M., Vollrath, D., 2016a. The effect of agricultural technology on the speed of development.
  World Development Forthcoming.

Eberhardt, M., Vollrath, D., 2016b. The role of crop type in cross-country income differences. CEPR
  Discussion Paper No. DP11248.

Evenson, R. E., Gollin, D., 2003a. Assessing the impact of the green revolution, 1960 to 2000. Science
  300 (5620), 758–762.

Evenson, R. E., Gollin, D., 2003b. Crop variety improvement and its effect on productivity: The
  impact of international agricultural research. Cabi.




                                                   35
Evenson, R. E., Rosegrant, M., 2003. The economic consequences 23 of crop genetic improvement
  programmes. Crop variety improvement and its effect on productivity: the impact of international
  agricultural research, 473–497.

Fan, S., Zhang, L., Zhang, X., 2002. Growth, inequality, and poverty in rural China: the role of public
  investments. Research reports 125, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
  URL http://ideas.repec.org/p/fpr/resrep/125.html

Foster, A. D., Rosenzweig, M. R., 2004. Agricultural productivity growth, rural economic diversity,
  and economic reforms: India, 1970–2000*. Economic Development and Cultural Change 52 (3),
  509–542.

Foster, A. D., Rosenzweig, M. R., 2007. Chapter 47 economic development and the decline of agricul-
  tural employment. Vol. 4 of Handbook of Development Economics. Elsevier, pp. 3051 – 3083.
  URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1573447107040478

Galor, O., Özak, Ö., 2015. Land productivity and economic development: Caloric suitability vs.
  agricultural suitability. Agricultural Suitability (June 30, 2015).

Godfray, H. C. J., Robinson, S., 2015. Contrasting approaches to projecting long-run global food
  security. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 31 (1), 26–44.
  URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/oup/oxford/v31y2015i1p26-44..html

Gollin, D., Lagakos, D., Waugh, M. E., 2014. The agricultural productivity gap. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 129 (2), 939–993.

Gollin, D., Parente, S. L., Rogerson, R., 2002. The role of agriculture in development. American
  Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 92 (2).

Gollin, D., Parente, S. L., Rogerson, R., 2007. The food problem and the evolution of international
  income levels. Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 1230–1255.

Herdt, R. W., Capule, C., 1983. Adoption, spread, and production impact of modern rice varieties in
  Asia. Int. Rice Res. Inst.

Hornbeck, R., Keskin, P., 2011. The evolving impact of the ogallala aquifer: Agricultural adaptation
  to groundwater and climate. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lewis, W. A., 1951. Principles of economic planning.

                                                   36
Maredia, M. K., Byerlee, D. R., January 2000. Efficiency of research investments in the presence of
  international spillovers: wheat research in developing countries. Agricultural Economics of Agricul-
  tural Economists 22 (1).
  URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/ags/iaaeaj/175302.html

Matsuyama, K., December 1992. Agricultural productivity, comparative advantage, and economic
  growth. Journal of Economic Theory 58 (2), 317–334.
  URL http://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/jetheo/v58y1992i2p317-334.html

Meinzen-Dick, R. S., Adato, M., Haddad, L. J., Hazell, P. B. R., 2003. Impacts of agricultural research
  on poverty. FCND briefs 164, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
  URL https://ideas.repec.org/p/fpr/fcndbr/164.html

Nunn, N., Qian, N., 2011a. The potato’s contribution to population and urbanization: Evidence from
  a historical experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2), 593–650.

Nunn, N., Qian, N., 2011b. The potato’s contribution to population and urbanization: Evidence from
  a historical experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2), pp. 593–650.
  URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/23015685

Pandey, S., Velasco, M. L., Yamano, T., Walker, T., Alwang, J., et al., 2015. 13 scientific strength in
  rice improvement programmes, varietal outputs and adoption of improved varieties in south asia.
  Crop improvement, adoption, and impact of improved varieties in food crops in sub-Saharan Africa,
  239–264.

Perez, N., Rosegrant, M. W., 2015. The impact of investment in agricultural research and development
  and agricultural productivity.

Perkins, J. H., 1997. Geopolitics and the green revolution. Oxford University Press.

Pingali, P., Kelley, T., 2007. The Role of International Agricultural Research in Contributing to Global
  Food Security and Poverty Alleviation: The case of the CGIAR. Vol. 3 of Handbook of Agricultural
  Economics. Elsevier, Ch. 45, pp. 2381–2418.
  URL https://ideas.repec.org/h/eee/hagchp/5-45.html

Pingali, P. L., 1999. World Wheat Facts and Trends 1998/99: Global Wheat Research in a Changing
  World: Challenges and Achievements. Centro Internacional de Mejoramiento de Maiz y Trigo.


                                                  37
Pingali, P. L., 2012. Green revolution: Impacts, limits, and the path ahead. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences 109 (31), 12302–12308.

Raitzer, D. A., Kelley, T. G., March 2008. Benefit-cost meta-analysis of investment in the International
  Agricultural Research Centers of the CGIAR. Agricultural Systems 96 (1-3), 108–123.
  URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/agisys/v96y2008i1-3p108-123.html

Renkow, M., Byerlee, D., 2010. The impacts of {CGIAR} research: A review of recent evidence. Food
  Policy 35 (5), 391 – 402.
  URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306919210000503

Restuccia, D., Yang, D., Zhu, X., 2008. Agriculture and aggregate productivity. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 55 (2), 234–250.

Rusike, J., Mahungu, N., Jumbo, S., Sandifolo, V., Malindi, G., April 2010. Estimating impact of
  cassava research for development approach on productivity, uptake and food security in Malawi.
  Food Policy 35 (2), 98–111.
  URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/jfpoli/v35y2010i2p98-111.html

The      Maddison-Project,        2013.     Database.      http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/maddison-
  project/home.htm.

Thirtle, C., Lin, L., Piesse, J., December 2003. The Impact of Research-Led Agricultural Productivity
  Growth on Poverty Reduction in Africa, Asia and Latin America. World Development 31 (12),
  1959–1975.
  URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/wdevel/v31y2003i12p1959-1975.html

Valentinyi, A., Herrendorf, B., 2008. Measuring factor income shares at the sectoral level. Review of
  Economic Dynamics 11 (4), 820–835.

Vollrath, D., 2011. The agricultural basis of comparative development. Journal of Economic Growth
  16, 343–370.
  URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10887-011-9074-1

Walker, T. S., Alwang, J., 2015. Crop Improvement, Adoption and Impact of Improved Varieties in
  Food Crops in Sub-Saharan Africa. CABI.

Wooldridge, J. M., 2010. Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT press.

                                                  38
                       Table 1: Initial di¤erences in outcomes by
                                 actual HYV adoption

                                                   Actual HYV adoption
                                                        in year 2000
                                                          Median:                P-value
                                                   above         below           (2)-(1)
                                                    (1)           (2)              (3)

          Log GDP/capita 1960                      7.332          6.970           0.015
                                                   (0.106)        (0.010)
          Log population 1960                      9.391          7.798           0.000
                                                   (0.221)        (0.156)
          GDP/capita growth 1950-1960              0.201          0.200           0.988
                                                   (0.024)        (0.026)
          Population growth 1950-1960              0.244          0.213           0.032
                                                   (0.010)        (0.010)
          Log population density 1960              4.409          3.493           0.003
                                                   (0.207)        (0.219)

          Countries                                  42             42

Notes. This table reports initial di¤erences (in year 1960) by the actual adoption rate in 2000. Column
1 provides means and standard errors for the group of countries above (or equal to) the median value of
the actual HYV adoption in year 2000, and Column 2 provides means and standard errors for the group of
countries below the median value of the actual HYV adoption in year 2000. Column 3 reports whether the
means are statistically signi…cant from each other.
                                Table 2: Descriptive statistics
                                               (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
                                                N        mean          sd           min          max

 Log Life expectancy at birth                  420      3.970        0.206          3.454        4.340
 Log Population                                420      9.085        1.494          5.863        14.05
 Log GDP/capita                                420      7.437        0.803          5.827        9.494
 Actual HYV adoption                           420      0.115        0.187            0          0.927
 Predicted HYV adoption (baseline)             420      0.0413       0.0711        -0.280        0.264
 Predicted HYV adoption (A. 1)                 420      0.0424       0.0724        -0.280        0.264
 Predicted HYV adoption (A. 2)                 420      0.0450       0.0683        -0.181        0.264
 Predicted HYV adoption (A. 3)                 420      0.0695       0.0630           0          0.295
 Log Harvested Area                            420      14.55        1.554          11.32        19.04
 Log Agri. population                          405      8.471        1.529          4.904        13.43
 Log Agri. employment share                    405      -0.697       0.545         -2.797       -0.0513
 Log Yield/worker                              405      7.336        1.089          5.199        11.11
 Log Fertility rate                            420      1.652        0.358          0.412        2.196
 Log Adult mortality (female)                  420      5.514        0.478          4.256        6.497
 Log Adult mortality (male)                    420      5.757        0.353          4.775        6.501
 Log Infant mortality                          381      4.298        0.668          1.872        5.410
 Rate of natural increase                      420      0.250        0.0662       -0.0457        0.400


Notes: This table reports summary statistics for the main variables used in the empirical analysis for the
period 1960–2000.
                               Table 3: The e¤ect of HYV on population and GDP/capita
                                                      (1)         (2)     (3)          (4)          (5)                   (6)
                                                                      Dependent Variable (in logs):
                                                              GDP/capita                        Population

                Actual HYV adoption               0.987*** 1.482***                        -0.198*** -0.543***
                                                    (0.178)      (0.402)                     (0.0701)      (0.178)
                Predicted HYV adoption                                      1.801***                                   -0.659***
                                                                             (0.539)                                     (0.198)

                Observations                         420          420         420             420           420          420
                Countries                             84          84           84              84           84            84
                Estimator                            OLS         2SLS         OLS             OLS          2SLS          OLS
                Kleibergen-Paap                        .         25.98          .               .          25.98           .

Notes: The table reports OLS and 2SLS estimates based on estimation equations (1) and (4). Variables are observed decenially over the period
1960–2000. All regressions include country and time …xed e¤ects. The dependent variables are in logs and indicated at the top column. The main
explanatory variable are: Actual HYV adoption, which is the actual share planted with HYV crops and Predicted HYV adoption, which is the
predicted share of HYV crops according to equation (3). Standard errors (in parentheses) account for arbitrary heteroskedasticity and are clustered
at the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                   Table 4: Falsi…cation test
                                             (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)
                                                  Dependent variable (in logs):
                                               GDP/capita               Population

      Predicted HYV adoption                0.113         -0.0149           0.0759         0.117
      leaded 2 periods                      (0.312)       (0.310)           (0.109)        (0.109)

      Period                             1940–1960 1940–1960              1940–1960 1950–1960
      Observations                          198       168                    198       168
      Countries                              84        84                     84        84
      Estimator                             OLS       OLS                    OLS       OLS

Notes: In this table we checking whether changes in the outcomes during the pre-period (i.e., 1940-1960 or
1950 and 1960) correlate with future values of the instrumental variable from Table 3. The dependent vari-
ables are measured in the pre-period 1940-1960 (odd numbered columns) or 1950 and 1960 (even numbered
columns), while the explanatory variable is measured in the post-period 1960-1980 (odd numbered columns)
or 1970 and 1980 (even numbered columns). The explanatory variable is predicted HYV adoption as defned
in equation (3). Standard errors (in parentheses) account for arbitrary heteroskedasticity and are clustered
at the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                         Table 5: Robustness to instrument speci…cation
                                                       (1)          (2)     (3)          (4)         (5)                      (6)
                                                                       Dependent variable (in logs):
                                                               GDP/capita                        Population

                   Actual HYV adoption              1.429*** 1.742*** 1.422***                -0.520*** -0.650*** -0.395**
                                                     (0.398)      (0.446)       (0.337)         (0.167)       (0.207)       (0.156)

                   Observations                        420          420          420              420           420          420
                   Countries                           84           84           84               84            84           84
                   Estimator                          YES          YES          YES              YES           YES          YES
                   Alternative IV                       I            II          III               I             II          III
                   Kleibergen-Paap                    27.64        21.23        28.79            27.64         21.23        28.79

Notes: The table reports 2SLS estimates based on estimation equations (1) and (4). Variables are observed decenially over the period 1960–2000.
All regressions include country and time …xed e¤ects. The dependent variables are in logs and indicated at the top column. The main explanatory
variable is the Actual HYV adoption, which is instrumented with the Predicted HYV adoption. Alternative I is based on equation (3), using the
di¤erence in attainable yields between high and low input levels. As low input attainable yields always is under the assumption of rainfed agriculture,
Alternative II replaces high input under irrigation in Alternative I with high input under rainfed agriculture. Finally, Alternative III changes the
baseline, so that instead of interacting the baseline treatment measure with a full set of year …xed e¤ects, it is interacted with a post-1960 indicator.
Standard errors (in parentheses) account for arbitrary heteroskedasticity and are clustered at the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                             Table 6: Robustness to research centers
                                                                (1)         (2)     (3)           (4)         (5)                   (6)
                                                                                Dependent variable (in logs):
                                                                        GDP/capita                        Population

       Actual HYV adoption                                  1.487*** 1.495*** 1.593***               -0.541*** -0.543*** -0.445***
                                                              (0.403)      (0.371)     (0.409)         (0.178)       (0.175)      (0.161)

       Controls (      yr) :
       Hosting research center dummy                           Yes          No           No              Yes          No            No
                    P


       Distance to research center                             Yes          Yes          No              Yes          Yes           No

       Excluding countries with research centers                No          No           Yes             No            No           Yes

       Observations                                            420          420          380             420          420           380
       Countries                                               84           84           76              84           84            76
       Estimator                                              2SLS         2SLS         2SLS            2SLS         2SLS          2SLS
       Kleibergen-Paap                                        24.87        27.95        26.69           24.87        27.95         26.69

Notes: The table reports 2SLS estimates based on estimation equations (1) and (4). Variables are observed decenially over the period 1960–2000.
All regressions include country and time …xed e¤ects. The dependent variables are in logs and indicated at the top column. The main explanatory
variable is Actual HYV adoption, which is the actual share planted with HYV crops, which is then instrumented with Predicted HYV adoption, which
is the predicted share of modern-variety crops according to equation (3). Standard errors (in parentheses) account for arbitrary heteroskedasticity
and are clustered at the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                  Table 7: Robustness to East and South Asian countries
                                             Full sample              w.o. East/               Full sample                     w.o. East/
                                                                     South Asian                                              South Asian
                                                                       countries                                                countries
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)        (7)                 (8)
                                                                      Dependent variable (in logs):
                                                    GDP/capita                                          Population

   Actual HYV adoption           1.247*** 1.613*** 1.371**              1.360**          -0.550** -0.590*** -0.625**            -0.671**
                                   (0.466)      (0.454)    (0.561)       (0.565)          (0.222)      (0.201)     (0.269)        (0.272)

   Controls (     yr) :
   East Asian region                Yes          No         No             No              Yes          No           No            No
                P


   South Asian region               No           Yes        No             No              No           Yes          No            No
   East & South                     No           No         Yes            No              No           No           Yes           No
   Asian region

   Observations                     420          420        420           350              420          420          420           350
   Countries                        84           84         84            70                84           84           84            70
   Estimator                       2SLS         2SLS       2SLS          2SLS             2SLS         2SLS         2SLS          2SLS
   Kleibergen-Paap                 22.32        26.43      22.39         21.84            22.32        26.43        22.39         21.84

Notes: The table reports 2SLS estimates based on estimation equations (1) and (4). Variables are observed decenially over the period 1960–2000.
All regressions include country and time …xed e¤ects. The dependent variables are in logs and indicated at the top column. The main explanatory
variable is Actual HYV adoption, which is the actual share planted with HYV crops, which is then instrumented with Predicted HYV adoption, which
is the predicted share of modern-variety crops according to equation (3). East Asia includes the countries: China, Indonesia, Cambodia, Lao PDR,
Myanmar, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam. South Asia includes the countries: Bangladesh, India, Sri Lanka, Nepal, and Pakistan.
Standard errors (in parentheses) account for arbitrary heteroskedasticity and are clustered at the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                     Table 8: Robustness to time varying geographical characteristics
                                           (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)           (7)            (8)          (9)       (10)
                                                                                       Dependent variable (in logs):
                                                                GDP/capita                                                     Population

 Actual HYV adoption                    1.341*** 1.637*** 1.068** 1.684*** 1.253** -0.500*** -0.587*** -0.458** -0.680*** -0.484*
                                          (0.486)     (0.425)      (0.525)    (0.580)      (0.616)     (0.189)       (0.187)      (0.198)      (0.213)   (0.215)

 Controls (      yr) :
 Absolute latitude                         Yes          No          No          No           Yes         Yes           No           No          No        Yes
                P


 Suitability for cash crops
  (cotton, sugar, soybeans)                No           Yes         No          No           Yes         No           Yes           No          No        Yes
 Mean temperature and
  precipitation                            No           No          Yes         No           Yes         No            No          Yes          No        Yes
 Arable land, dist. to waterway,
  elevation, agri. suitability             No           No          No          Yes          Yes         No            No           No          Yes       Yes

 Observations                              420          420         415         420          415        420           420          415          420       415
 Countries                                 84           84          84          82           82         84            84           84           82        82
 Estimator                                2SLS         2SLS        2SLS        2SLS         2SLS       2SLS          2SLS         2SLS         2SLS      2SLS
 Kleibergen-Paap                          22.73        25.69       17.57       14.60        14.12      22.73         25.69        17.57        14.60     14.12

Notes: The table reports 2SLS estimates based on estimation equations (1) and (4). Variables are observed decenially over the period 1960–2000.
All regressions include country and time …xed e¤ects. The dependent variables are in logs and indicated at the top column. The main explanatory
variable is Actual HYV adoption, which is the actual share planted with HYV crops, which is then instrumented with Predicted HYV adoption, which
is the predicted share of modern-variety crops according to equation (3). Standard errors (in parentheses) account for arbitrary heteroskedasticity
and are clustered at the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                      Table 9: The agricultural sector
                                             (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)                 (6)          (7)
                                                                       Dependent variable (in logs):
                                           Yield/       Harvest    Fertilizer/  Agri.         Agri               Pop-         GDP/
                                           worker        area       hectare      pop-       employ-             ulation       capita
                                                                               ulation    ment share

           Actual HYV adoption            1.919***       -0.538*     2.162**      -1.339***     -0.767***      -0.572*** 1.505***
                                            (0.468)      (0.326)     (0.905)        (0.338)       (0.252)        (0.186)      (0.422)

           Observations                      405           405         405           405            405           405           405
           Countries                         81            81          81            81             81            81            81
           Estimator                        2SLS          2SLS        2SLS          2SLS           2SLS          2SLS          2SLS
           Kleibergen-Paap                  24.75         24.75       24.75         24.75          24.75         24.75         24.75

Notes: The table reports 2SLS estimates based on estimation equations (1) and (4). Variables are observed decenially over the period 1960–2000.
All regressions include country and time …xed e¤ects. The dependent variables are in logs and indicated at the top column. The main explanatory
variable is Actual HYV adoption, which is the actual share planted with HYV crops, which is then instrumented with Predicted HYV adoption, which
is the predicted share of modern-variety crops according to equation (3). Standard errors (in parentheses) account for arbitrary heteroskedasticity
and are clustered at the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                      Table 10: Demographic e¤ects
                                              (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)                (6)          (7)
                                                                            Dependent variable:
                                                                      (in logs)                                    (in rates)
                                             Life       Infant         Adult Mortality     Fertility         Rate of        Pop-
                                            Expec-     mortality     female      male        rate             natural     ulation
                                            tancy                                                            increase      growth

             Actual HYV adoption            0.134      -1.958*** -1.689*** -0.996*** -1.524*** -0.270*** -0.274***
                                           (0.0870)     (0.382)       (0.314)       (0.254)      (0.293)      (0.0636)      (0.0774)


             Observations                    420          381          420           420           420          420           420
             Countries                       84           84           84            84            84           84            84
             Estimator                      2SLS         2SLS         2SLS          2SLS          2SLS         2SLS          YES
             Kleibergen-Paap                25.98        23.70        25.98         25.98         25.98        25.98         25.98

Notes: The table reports 2SLS estimates based on estimation equations (1) and (4). Variables are observed decenially over the period 1960–2000.
All regressions include country and time …xed e¤ects. The dependent variables are in logs and indicated at the top column. The main explanatory
variable is Actual HYV adoption, which is the actual share planted with HYV crops, which is then instrumented with Predicted HYV adoption, which
is the predicted share of modern-variety crops according to equation (3). Standard errors (in parentheses) account for arbitrary heteroskedasticity
and are clustered at the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                     Table 11: The impact of HYV adoption, 1960–2000
                                                            Average developing country Developing world total
HYV adoption rate year 2000                                            27 %                     59 %
HYVs contribution to GDP/capita growth 1960-2000                       50 pp                  139 pp
Actual GDP/capita growth 1960-2000                                     57 %                    171 %
HYVs contribution to population growth 1960-2000                      -14 pp                  -27 pp
Actual population growth 1960-2000                                    162 %                    129 %
                 Notes: Calculations based on our baseline regression results. See text for details.
                    40           30
Adoption rate (percent of cropland)
 0         10         20




                                1960   1970            1980            1990   2000
                                                       Y ear

                                                  Rice             Wheat
                                                  Barley           Cassav a


           Figure 1: Adoption of high-yielding varieties of selected crops

                                       Source: Gollin and Evenson (2003)
                    80            60
Adoption rate (percent of cropland)
 0          20         40




                                1960   1970            1980            1990   2000
                                                       Y ear

                                                  India             Brazil
                                                  Turkey            Nigeria


Figure 2: Adoption of high-yielding varieties in selected countries

                                       Source: Gollin and Evenson (2003)
                  Figure 3: Agro-climatically attainable yields, selected crops




                                            Panel A: sorghum




                                              Panel B: wheat


Notes: The maps depict agro-climatically attainable yields for sorghum and wheat under the assumptions
of a high-input level and irrigation is used. Similar maps for the other eight crops we use in our analysis are
available in the Online Appendix. Source: FAO.
                     1




                                                                                  CHN
                                                                                   MYS
                                                                            LKA
                                                                                            PAK
                     .8




                                                                                ARG
                                                                IND            VNM
                                                                         IDN PHL
                                                                                                    CHL
                                                                                                    TUN
                                                                                   BGD
                            .6
          Actual HYV adoption




                                                                      BRA
                                                             DOM            MMR   DZA
                                                                              NPL            IRN
                                                                                           TUR
                                                                   KENMAR          THA
                                                                                    SYR
                  .4




                                         NAM                               IRQ
                                                                  PER
                                                                   CUB MEX                    LBN
                                                             PRYSAU
                                                                                     EGY
                                                                                   LAO
                                                       GHA            ECUMDG
                                                                          COL
                                                                     CRI    SLE
                                            MLI
                                           NGABWA
                     .2




                                                           ETH      VEN
                                                  RWA  ZWE
                                                      CMR                                    URY
                                            SDN         BEN
                                                      TZA          BOL          KHM
                                          UGAGAB                 HND
                                                         HTI GINNIC
                                        TCD        MOZ AGO              GTM
                                       SEN BFA                  SWZ
                                                               ZMB
                                                               SLV
                                                TGO              MWI      PAN ZAF
                                   NER     COG
                                             LBY
                                             GMB
                                             MRT
                                              YEM
                                               CAF     MUS
                                                      GNB             JAMLBR                                MNG
                     0




                                 .05              .1               .15                .2              .25
                                                        Predicted HYV adoption


                           Figure 4: Actual and predicted HYV adoption (in the year 2000)


Notes: This …gure shows the scatter plot between actual HYV adoption and predicted HYV adoption in the
year 2000 (corresponding to the change between 1960 and 2000 as HYV adoption was zero for all countries
in 1960). The line is the …tted value between these two variables (coe¤=2.91, p-val=0.00).
                                                             Figure 5: Partial Correlation Plots




                           3
                           2                                    BWA



                                                                                                       THA
                                                                                                        MYS
                                                                                                      CHN
              Change in log GDP/capita




                                                                          MUS
                                                                                                                              TUN
                                                                                            IDN         EGY      PAK
                                                                                                                TUR
                                                              YEM            DOM SWZ            LKA
                              1




                                                                                  IND    BRA  PAN
                                                                                               MMR    SYR
                                                                                 SAU CRI MEX        VNM            IRN    CHL
                                                                             PRY         MARCOL
                                                                                                                                         MNG
                                                              MRT                   MWI               LAO
                                                                                                  NPLBGD
                                                            MLI
                                                            COG
                                                          NAM                     SLV BOL GTM PHL
                                                                                GIN                  ARG
                                                                                                     KHM               URY
                                                            BFA
                                                            NGA           ZWE
                                                                         GNB
                                                                           BEN
                                                                         CMR  ETH     KEN
                                                                                     HNDECU
                                                                                          JAM      ZAF DZA              LBN
                                                              LBY
                                                              GMB RWA               PER
                                                                                     CUB
                                                           UGA       MOZ TZA
                                                        SEN SDN
                 0




                                                                GAB GHA                VEN
                                                                  TGO              NIC
                                                         TCD                HTI
                                                                 CAF               ZMB       LBR
                                                                           AGO              MDG
                                                  NER
                                                                                               IRQ
                                                                                                SLE
                           -1




                                              0                        .2                     .4                                    .6
                                                               Predicted change in HY V adoption


                                                           Panel A: income (i.e., log GDP/capita)



                                                                                  SAU
                               1.5




                                                              GMB
                                                              LBY
                                                                                      KEN
                                                                                                        SYR
                                                                 T GO
                                                           SDN           T ZA                   IRQ
                                                  NER   UGA                         NIC
                                                                                     SWZ     GTM
                                                       NAMNGA BWA           BEN
                                                                          ZWE
                                                                                      HND
                                                                                      MWI
                                                                                        VEN                       IRN
                                                      SEN COG
                                                            YEM               PRY
                                                                                    ZMB CRI
                                                                                         ECU LBR
                                                         T CD GAB GHA
                                                                                 GIN         MDG PHL DZA         PAK
                                                                                     PER                                                 MNG
                                          1




                                                                         CMR DOM                       MYSEGY
                  Change in log population




                                                                               ETH          MEX
                                                             BFA                          BRA COL
                                                                                               PAN NPLVNM
                                                               MRT
                                                             MLI CAFRWA                   MAR        ZAF
                                                                                                       BGD
                                                                                                        LAO
                                                                                   SLV BOL
                                                                                   IND                 KHM      T UR      T UN
                                                                     MOZ                     IDNSLE T HA
                                                                         GNBAGO
                                                                                                                       LBNCHL
                                                                             HTI                  LKA
                                                                                                     CHN
                                                                                                 MMR ARG
                                                                          MUS
                       .5




                                                                                     CUB JAM


                                                                                                                   URY
                               0




                                              0                         .2                   .4                                     .6
                                                                Predicted change in HY V adoption


                                                                      Panel B: Log Population


Notes: These …gures show the partial correlation plots for long-di¤erences speci…cations that only use the
years 1960 and 2000. The plots hold country and time-period …xed e¤ects constant
