NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NOTCHING R&D INVESTMENT WITH CORPORATE INCOME TAX CUTS IN
CHINA
Zhao Chen
Zhikuo Liu
Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
Daniel Yi Xu
Working Paper 24749
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24749

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018, Revised October 2020
We are very grateful for comments from Manuel Adelino, Ashish Arora, Pierre Bachas, Michael
Best, Lysle Boller, Wesley Cohen, Dhammika Dharmapala, Michael Devereux, Rebecca
Diamond, Liran Einav, Bronwyn Hall, Jim Hines, Damon Jones, Henrik Kleven, Ben Lockwood,
Jill Popadak, Jim Poterba, Nirupama Rao, Mark Roberts, Joel Slemrod, Stefanie Stantcheva, John
Van Reenen, Mazhar Waseem, Shang-Jin Wei, Daniel Wilson, and Eric Zwick as well as seminar
participants at ASSA, CEPR, Chicago (Booth & Becker Friedman), Cornell, Drexel, Duke
(Fuqua & Econ), FRB Minneapolis, FRB Philadelphia, FRB San Francisco, Hitsotsubashi
University, Hong Kong University, IIPF, LSE, MIT, National School of Development (PKU),
NBER (Dev, Ent, China, CCER), NTA, Oxford, Penn State, Stanford (SIEPR & Econ), Toronto,
UCLA, UCSD (Econ & Bunching Conference), University of Alberta, University of Maryland,
University of Melbourne, Warwick University, and ZEW MaTax. Dan Garrett, Yuxuan He, and
Matt Panhans provided outstanding research assistance. This project is funded by NSF grant
#17300024, and Suárez Serrato is also grateful for funding from the Kauﬀman Foundation. All
errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Zhao Chen, Zhikuo Liu, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Daniel Yi Xu. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Notching R&D Investment with Corporate Income Tax Cuts in China
Zhao Chen, Zhikuo Liu, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Daniel Yi Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 24749
June 2018, Revised October 2020
JEL No. H2,O3
ABSTRACT
We study a Chinese policy that awards substantial tax cuts to ﬁrms with R&D investment over a
threshold or “notch.” Quasi-experimental variation and administrative tax data show a signiﬁcant
increase in reported R&D that is partly driven by ﬁrms relabeling expenses as R&D. Structural
estimates show relabeling accounts for 24.2% of reported R&D and that productivity increases by
9% when real R&D doubles. Policy simulations show ﬁrm selection and relabeling determine the
cost-eﬀectiveness of stimulating R&D, that notch-based policies are more eﬀective than tax
credits when relabeling is prevalent, and that modest spillovers justify the program from a welfare
perspective.
Zhao Chen
China Center for Economic Studies
Fudan University
Shanghai, 200433
China
zhaochen@fudan.edu.cn
Zhikuo Liu
China Center for Economic Studies
School of Economics
Fudan University
600 Guoquan Rd, Shanghai
China
liuzhikuo@fudan.edu.cn

Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
jc@jcsuarez.com
Daniel Yi Xu
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Science Bldg
419 Chapel Drive
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
daniel.xu@duke.edu

1

Introduction

The belief that innovation is crucial for economic growth inspires governments around the world to
encourage R&D investment through tax incentives. While these incentives are meant to stimulate
real R&D expenditures, firms can also respond by relabeling other expenses as R&D. Relabeling
raises important questions about how tax incentives affect productivity growth. To what extent is
reported R&D real or relabeled? How does relabeling affect estimates of the productivity effects of
R&D? How should governments incentivize R&D while taking relabeling behavior into account?
We answer these questions using a novel administrative dataset of corporate tax returns of
Chinese firms covering a period of sharp and changing tax incentives. The tax incentive that
we study—China’s InnoCom program—provides substantial corporate income tax cuts to firms
that report R&D investment over a given threshold or “notch.” Before 2008, firms with an R&D
intensity (R&D investment over revenue) above 5% could qualify for a special high-tech-firm status
that was accompanied by a lower average tax rate of 15%—a large reduction from the statutory
rate of 33%. After 2008, the government established three thresholds at 3%, 4%, and 6% for firms
in different size categories. By changing average tax rates, as opposed to marginal incentives, the
program generates very large incentives for firms to increase reported R&D.
Our empirical analysis starts by using tax data to document a significant increase in reported
R&D in response to the policy. We show that firms respond to this tax incentive by bunching at
the required R&D notch. Leveraging the detailed cost breakdown in our administrative data, we
also provide evidence that firms relabel other expenses as R&D to take advantage of the policy.
Using these empirical patterns, we specify and estimate a model of R&D investment and relabeling.
The model matches the joint distribution of R&D and firm productivity as well as the relabeling
response to the notch.
Using the estimated model, we find that one-fourth of the reported R&D increase is due to
relabeling. We then show that accounting for relabeling is important when estimating the productivity effects of R&D. Because relabeled expenses do not impact firm productivity, relabeling
behavior lowers the measured effect of reported R&D on productivity. By accounting for relabeling, the model finds that real R&D raises the productivity of Chinese firms and estimates a
productivity elasticity of real R&D of 9%. These results are robust to a number of alternative
specifications, including ones that incorporate information from bunching estimators (Kleven and
Waseem, 2013; Kleven, 2016).
We use the estimated model to study how governments can best incentivize R&D in the
presence of relabeling. First, we show that the effectiveness of the policy in stimulating R&D
depends on relabeling and how firms select into the program. Targeting the program toward
larger, more productive firms and those with weaker incentives for relabeling increases program
effectiveness. Second, we compare the InnoCom program to a more standard R&D tax credit. We
1

find that governments may prefer to deviate from standard incentives in the presence of relabeling
(e.g., Best et al., 2015). Specifically, an InnoCom-style program can focus monitoring efforts on
fewer firms, limit relabeling, and stimulate R&D at a lower fiscal cost. Finally, we find that the
policy can be justified from a welfare perspective when the strength of knowledge spillovers is in
the range of the estimates in the literature (e.g., Lucking et al., 2019).
Overall, this paper shows that relabeling is an important concern for both understanding empirical facts surrounding R&D and designing policies aimed at encouraging innovation. Relabeling
affects the measurement of actual R&D expenses, the contribution of R&D to TFP growth, and
how tax incentives link fiscal costs to economic growth. Because the decision to invest in R&D or
relabel also depends on firms’ underlying productivity as well as on limits to their technological
opportunities, accounting for the relabeling behavior of heterogeneous firms in designing R&D tax
incentives is crucial. Policies that may otherwise be suboptimal—such as notches—may be more
effective at alleviating under-investment in R&D than standard tax credits, especially when such
policies target firms with better prospects for technological improvement and limit the potential
for relabeling.
China is the perfect laboratory to study fiscal incentives for R&D. Figure 1 shows that China
has experienced explosive growth in R&D investment even relative to its rapid GDP expansion. As
China’s development through industrialization reaches a mature stage, the government is fostering
technology-intensive industries as a source of future economic growth. In Section 2, we describe the
details of the fiscal incentive for R&D investment and discuss the potential for relabeling of R&D
expenses in China. One concern is that these R&D investments will not translate into improved
firm performance if the private return to R&D is low. Our results show that the seemingly low
return to reported R&D is an artifact of relabeling (König et al., 2018) and that tax incentives for
R&D may be more costly in emerging economies where the corporate tax is imperfectly enforced
(Cai et al., 2018).
We begin our analysis in Section 3 by showing graphically that tax notches have significant
effects on the distribution of reported R&D intensity and that part of this response may be due
to relabeling. We show that a large number of firms choose to locate at tax notches and that
introducing the tax cut led to a large increase in R&D investment. Using a group of firms that
were unaffected prior to 2008, we show that the bunching patterns are driven by the tax incentive
and are not a spurious feature of the data. We also quantify the percentage increase in R&D
investment that is due to the tax notch using the bunching estimator. We find large increases in
R&D investment of 25% for large firms, 17% for medium firms, and 10% for small firms in 2011.1
1

These estimates are supported by a number of robustness checks. We obtain very similar results when we
exclude SOEs, firms that had extensive-margin responses during our sample period, low-profitability firms, or lowtech firms. We also obtain similar estimates of the counterfactual distribution when we use a set of firms that were
not affected by the InnoCom program, when we use different parametric choices for the density or the exclusion
region, or when we estimate the counterfactual density using only data from the right tail of the distribution.

2

We then analyze relabeling responses by exploiting the fact that, under Chinese Accounting
Standards, R&D is reported as a subcategory of administrative expenses. Using our detailed
tax data to separate R&D from other administrative expenses, we provide graphical evidence that
firms may relabel non-R&D expenses as R&D to qualify for the tax cut. Specifically, we document
that non-R&D expenses drop significantly at the R&D notches, which suggests that the increase
in reported R&D is partly driven by relabeling of non-R&D expenses. We also study other forms
of manipulation, including relabeling of other expenses as well as retiming of sales, and we do not
find evidence of manipulation along these margins.
We develop a model of R&D investment and relabeling in Section 4. Firms’ decisions to invest
or relabel depend on tax incentives, the effect of R&D on productivity, and the costs of relabeling,
as well as on heterogeneous productivity and adjustment costs. The model shows that the InnoCom
program incentivizes firms that would otherwise be at the low end of the R&D intensity distribution
to bunch at the notch. Firms in the model can bunch either by increasing real R&D investments
or by relabeling non-R&D expenses. The optimal real R&D investment decision and relabeling
strategy depends on the relative strength of the cost of relabeling and the productivity elasticity
of R&D. Our model also allows for rich patterns of firm heterogeneity that are consistent with
important features of the data. First, firms in the model face heterogeneous adjustment costs of
investing in R&D, which rationalizes a highly dispersed R&D intensity distribution. Second, the
model allows for random certification costs that account for non-R&D requirements of the InnoCom
program and that explain why firms close to the notch do not participate in the program. Overall,
the model captures competing mechanisms for bunching—real R&D vs. relabeling—and is rich
enough to fit the main features of the data.
In Section 5, we estimate the model using a simulated method of moments approach. The
main parameters of the model—the productivity elasticity of R&D and the cost of relabeling—
are informed by the bunching response in reported R&D, the relabeling response at the notch,
and the joint distribution of R&D and productivity. By specifying the distributions of fixed and
adjustment costs, the model also characterizes how firms select into the program, which allows us
to study the effects of alternative policies. We estimate that, on average, 24.2% of the reported
R&D investment is due to relabeling and that a 100% increase in real R&D would increase TFP
by 9%. Our estimated model fits the data moments very well. The structural estimates are also
consistent with reduced-form bunching estimates, which provide a valuable cross-validation of the
model. Our results are also robust to a number of checks that ensure that our main conclusions
are not artificially driven by the parameterization of the model.2
2

Specifically, our results are robust to using alternative specifications of the costs of relabeling and the adjustment
cost function, allowing for heterogeneous returns to R&D, and allowing for a correlation between certification costs
and firm productivity. Additionally, we explore the effects of assuming that the drop in administrative costs at the
notch is partly driven by real responses. Finally, we also validate the model using estimates of the effects of the
program on relabeling and productivity as out-of-sample moments.

3

We highlight the value of our estimated model in Section 6 by studying the fiscal effectiveness of
alternative policies. We first study the effects of changing the size of the tax cut and the location
of the notch. Policies with a larger tax cut and those with a notch at a lower R&D intensity
select firms with lower productivity, higher adjustment costs, and greater motives to relabel. Firm
selection into the program plays a crucial role in determining the economic effects of the program
and the fiscal cost of incentivizing real R&D.
As a second use of the model, we compare the fiscal effectiveness of the InnoCom program
to that of a linear tax credit. In a setting where firms have low incentives to relabel, a linear
tax credit is more effective at stimulating R&D. However, a notch may be more effective than
a linear tax credit when firms can relabel. The key intuition is that, under a linear tax credit,
the government’s monitoring efforts are spread across many firms, which lowers firms’ relabeling
costs. By focusing monitoring efforts on fewer firms, an InnoCom-style program can raise the cost
of relabeling and incentivize real R&D at a lower fiscal cost.
Fiscal incentives for R&D are often motivated by the possibility that firms may under-invest
in R&D in the presence of knowledge spillovers. As a final use of our model, we study the welfare
effects of the InnoCom program by extending our empirical model into an equilibrium setting
with potential R&D spillovers. In the absence of externalities, the InnoCom program distorts firm
behavior and reduces tax revenue, leading to an overall reduction in welfare. We then calculate
the magnitude of R&D spillovers that could justify the InnoCom program. The program is welfare
neutral when spillovers are such that firm productivity increases by 6.9% in response to a doubling
of average R&D investment in the economy. Since the empirical literature often estimates larger
spillover effects (e.g., Lucking et al., 2019), InnoCom-style programs can possibly improve welfare
and help alleviate the under-investment in R&D.
This paper contributes to several literatures. First, this paper is related to a large literature
analyzing the effects of tax incentives for R&D investment. Hall and Van Reenen (2000) and
Becker (2015) survey this literature. The empirical evidence is concentrated in OECD countries,
where micro-level data on firm innovation and tax records have become increasingly available.
While earlier work relied on matching and panel data methods, there is an emerging literature
that explores the effects of quasi-experimental variation in tax incentives for R&D. Examples
include Agrawal et al. (2019), Dechezlepretre et al. (2016), Einiö (2014), Guceri and Liu (2019),
Akcigit et al. (2018), and Rao (2016). To our knowledge, this is the first paper to analyze R&D
tax incentives in a large emerging economy such as China. It is also one of the first studies to
use administrative tax data to study the link between fiscal incentives, R&D investment, and
firm-level productivity.
Second, a previous literature has long documented relabeling as an important challenge to
identifying the real impact of tax incentives for R&D (Eisner et al., 1984; Mansfield and Switzer,
1985). This is a salient issue for policymakers in developed countries (GAO, 2009; Bloom et
4

al., 2019) and is likely a more severe problem in developing economies (Bachas and Soto, 2019;
Best et al., 2015). Our paper exploits unique data on firm expenditures to jointly model and
estimate firms’ R&D bunching and relabeling decisions. Our policy simulations also improve our
understanding of the effectiveness of different policies when firms may engage in relabeling.
Third, although there has been a dramatic increase in innovation activities in China, researchers
and policymakers are concerned that innovation resources could be misallocated. Wei et al. (2017)
show that state-owned firms produce significantly fewer patents per yuan of investment than foreign or private domestic firms. König et al. (2018) compare the effects of R&D on productivity
growth in Taiwan and mainland China and find that R&D investments are significantly less effective in mainland China. They conjecture that misreported R&D in China may explain this
discrepancy. Our paper validates this conjecture by using detailed micro-level data to examine an
important policy that can lead firms to misreport R&D investment.
Finally, our paper is related to a recent literature that uses bunching methods to recover
estimates of behavioral responses to taxation by analyzing the effects of sharp economic incentives,
such as kinks or notches in tax schedules.3 While most of the literature studies kinks or notches in
taxable income, the notch in the InnoCom program targets a particular action: R&D investment.
We develop a simulated method of moments estimation approach that is consistent with results
from reduced-form bunching estimators. The model clarifies the interpretation of reduced-form
estimates, as suggested by Einav et al. (2017).4 Our model quantifies the extent of misreporting,
measures the returns to real R&D, and simulates the effects of alternative policies. The model also
clarifies how selection and relabeling determine the fiscal effectiveness and the welfare implications
of a notch-based policy.5

2

Fiscal R&D Incentives and the Chinese Corporate
Income Tax

China had a relatively stable Enterprise Income Tax (EIT) system from 2000 to 2007. During this
period, the EIT ran on a dual-track scheme with a base tax rate of 33% for all domestic-owned
3

These methods, pioneered by Saez (2010), have been used by researchers analyzing a wide range of behaviors.
Kleven (2016) provides a recent survey. Our project is most related to a smaller literature analyzing firm-level
responses (Devereux et al., 2014; Patel et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2019; Almunia and Lopez-Rodriguez, 2018; Bachas
and Soto, 2019) as well as to papers analyzing the effect of constraints to optimizing behavior (Kleven and Waseem,
2013; Best and Kleven, 2017; Gelber et al., 2019). Blomquist and Newey (2017) and Bertanha et al. (2018) show
that variation in incentives helps identify bunching estimators from notches. We use changes in the location of
the notch and a set of unaffected firms to confirm that our bunching patterns are due to the policy. In robustness
checks, we obtain similar estimates when we use unaffected firms to estimate the counterfactual density.
4
Lockwood (2018) also notes that reduced-form effects from bunching on notches are not sufficient to analyze
the effects of changes in policy. This result motivates the use of a structural model for policy analysis.
5
Blinder and Rosen (1985) discuss selection patterns under which notches can be desirable, and Slemrod (2013)
discusses administrative costs as a motivation for notches. Gordon and Li (2009) discuss broader motivations for
why tax policies in developing countries may differ from standard optimal tax models when firms can evade taxes.

5

enterprises (DOEs) and a preferential rate for foreign-owned enterprises (FOEs) ranging from 15%
to 24%. The government implemented a major corporate tax reform in 2008 that eliminated the
dual-track system based on domestic/foreign ownership and established a common rate of 25%.6
This paper analyzes the InnoCom program, which targets qualifying high-tech enterprises
(HTEs) and awards them a flat 15% income tax rate. Since a firm’s average tax rate can fall from
33% to 15%, this tax incentive is economically very important and may lead firms to invest in
projects with substantial fixed costs. This program is most important for DOEs, including both
state- and privately-owned enterprises, as they are not eligible for many other tax breaks.
Table 1 outlines the requirements of the program and how they changed as part of the 2008
reform. A crucial requirement of the program is that firms must have an R&D intensity above a
given threshold. The reform changed the threshold from a common R&D intensity of 5%, to a
size-dependent threshold with a lower hurdle for medium and large firms, 4% and 3%, respectively,
and a larger hurdle of 6% for small firms. This requirement provides a large fiscal incentive to
invest above these thresholds, and the reform generates quasi-experimental variation across firms
of different size and ownership categories. Notably, because the reform eliminated preferential tax
rates for foreign firms, the incentive of FOEs to qualify for the InnoCom program grew after the
reform.
In addition to increasing R&D intensity, the InnoCom program requires firms to employ collegeeducated workers and to sell “high-tech” products. Unlike the R&D intensity requirement, these
guidelines—such as which products are classified as high tech—are easily influenced. It is also hard
for tax authorities to verify the employment composition of a given firm. While these requirements
are not sharp incentives, they increase the cost of participating in the program. Importantly, these
costs may even prevent some firms from bunching at the notch despite having an R&D intensity
immediately below the notch. To capture this cost of participating in the program, our model in
Section 4 assumes that firms differ by an unobserved fixed cost of certification.
As a final program requirement, firms have to actively apply for the program and undergo a
special audit. The reform improved enforcement of the program by changing the certifying agency
from the Local Ministry of Science and Technology to a joint effort between the National Ministry
of Science and Technology, the Ministry of Finance, and the National Tax Bureau. By focusing
enforcement efforts on fewer firms, the InnoCom program increased the cost of relabeling R&D
relative to a more standard setting where all firms are able to claim an R&D tax credit.7
6

We discuss details of other preferential tax policies in Appendix A.
The original government regulations also require that firms operate in a number of selected state-encouraged
industries. Due to the breadth and vagueness of these industry definitions, this requirement does not constitute
a substantial hurdle. In addition, after the reform, the state authorities further require that firms meet all these
criteria in the previous three accounting years or from whenever the firm is registered, in case the firm is less than
three years old.
7

6

Table 1: Requirements of the InnoCom Program
Requirement
R&D Intensity
Sales of High Tech Products
Workers with College Degree
R&D Workers
Certifying Agency

Before 2008

After 2008

6% if sales < 50M
4% if sales > 50M & sales < 200M
3% if sales > 200M
60% of total sales
30% of workforce
10% of workforce
Local Ministry of
Ministries of Science & Technology,
Science & Technology
Finance and National Tax Bureau
5%

Notes: Size thresholds in millions of RMB, where 50 M RMB ≈ 7.75 M USD and 200 M RMB ≈ 30 M USD.

Potential for Evasion and Relabeling
One concern is that firms’ reported R&D investment is contaminated by evasion or relabeling.
Relabeling of other expenses as R&D is a significant concern for policymakers (GAO, 2009) and
for academics studying the effects of R&D investment (Eisner et al., 1984; Mansfield and Switzer,
1985). In our setting, the institutional environment limits some forms of evasion and suggests that
the most likely form of relabeling is the miscategorization of administrative expenses as R&D.
The hypothesis that the entirety of the response is due to evasion is likely ruled out by the
requirements of the InnoCom certification.8 A second hypothesis is that firms manipulate their
reported R&D intensity by reporting “phantom expenses” or by manipulating sales. China relies
on a value-added tax (VAT) system with third-party reporting, and China’s State Administration
of Tax (SAT) keeps records of transaction invoices between a given firm and its third-party business
partners. As in other settings (e.g., Kleven et al., 2011), this type of third-party reporting limits
the degree to which firms can completely make up “phantom” R&D expenses.
From conversations with the State Administration of Tax as well as with corporate executives,
we recognize that the most likely source of manipulation is the miscategorization of expenses. This
is a natural channel for relabeling since, in the Chinese Accounting Standard, R&D is categorized
under “Administrative Expenses,” which includes various other expenses related to general management.9 Thus, firms may relabel non-R&D administrative expenditures as R&D to over-report
their R&D intensity. These types of expenses are easily shifted, and it may be hard to identify
relabeling in any given audit. Relabeling may also be a way for firms to reach the R&D intensity
8

Part of this certification includes an audit of the firm’s tax and financial standings. In addition, the Chinese
State Administration of Tax, together with the Ministry of Science and Technology, conducts regular auditing of
the InnoCom HTE firms.
9
Examples include administrative worker salaries, business travel expenses, office equipment, etc. While we
interpret changes in administrative expenses as relabeling, they may also be consistent with reallocating resources
from other expenses toward R&D or more precise accounting of previously undercounted R&D expenses. In Section
5, we explore how this interpretation affects our estimates.

7

threshold when it is hard for them to perfectly forecast their sales. A firm with unexpectedly
high sales, for instance, might choose to characterize administrative expenses as R&D to meet
the InnoCom requirement for a given year.10 Our empirical strategy to detect relabeling leverages
these institutional features and exploits the detailed cost reporting in our administrative tax data,
which contain information on the breakdown of operating expenses and R&D expenses.

3

Descriptive Evidence of Firms’ Responses to Tax Notches

We now describe our data and provide evidence that the R&D investment of Chinese manufacturing firms responds to the InnoCom program. We then show that part of this response may be due
to relabeling. Specifically, we document stark bunching patterns precisely above the tax notches,
and we show that the ratio of administrative expenses to sales drops sharply at the notch. These
data patterns motivate our model in Section 4 and inform the structural estimation in Section 5.

3.1

Data and Summary Statistics

Our main data come from the Chinese State Administration of Tax (SAT). The SAT is the
counterpart of the IRS in China and is in charge of tax collection and auditing. Our data are
comprised of administrative enterprise income tax records for the years 2008–2011 (Appendix B
discusses our data sources). These panel data include information on firms’ total production,
sales, inputs, and R&D investment. The detailed cost breakdowns allow us to measure different
subcategories of administrative expenses. We use these data to construct residualized measures
of firm productivity.11 The SAT’s firm-level records of tax payments contain information on tax
credits, such as the InnoCom program, as well as other major tax breaks. This allows us to
precisely characterize the effective tax rate for individual manufacturing firms. We supplement
these data with the Chinese Annual Survey of Manufacturing (ASM), which extends our sample
to the years 2006–2007.
Table 2 reports descriptive statistics of the firms in our analysis sample. In panel A, we report
summary statistics of our tax data for all surveyed manufacturing firms from 2008 to 2011. Our
data are comprised of around 1.2 million observations, with about 300, 000 firms in each year. A
total of 8% of the sample reports positive R&D. Among firms with positive R&D, the ratio of
R&D to sales, i.e., R&D intensity, is highly dispersed. The 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles are
0.3%, 1.5%, and 4.3%, respectively. The administrative expense-to-sales ratio, which is a potential
margin for relabeling, is close to 5.8% at the median. While our measure of residualized TFP is
10

While we recognize that it is possible for firms to relabel R&D intensity through other means, we do not find
systematic evidence for this hypothesis. In Section 3, we show that sales are not manipulated around the R&D
thresholds. Similarly, we do not find evidence of manipulation of other expenses.
11
See Appendix C for details, where we also show that we obtain similar productivity estimates using the method
of Ackerberg et al. (2015).

8

normalized by construction, the distribution of productivity has a reasonable dispersion with an
interquartile range of 0.8 log points. As one might expect, firms with higher R&D intensities
also have higher values of TFP. For instance, large firms with R&D intensity below 3% have a
(normalized) TFP of -1.5%, while firms with R&D intensity greater than 3% have an average TFP
of 2.7%.
Panel B of Table 2 reports summary statistics of Chinese manufacturing firms with R&D
activity in the ASM for the years 2006–2007. We have a similar sample size of around 300, 000
firms per year. Firms in the ASM sample are noticeably larger than those in the SAT sample,
and the difference is more pronounced when we look at lower quartiles (i.e., the 25th percentile)
of the distribution of sales, fixed assets, and the number of workers. This is consistent with the
fact that the ASM is weighted toward medium and large firms. The fraction of firms with positive
R&D is slightly larger than 10%, and R&D intensity ranges from 0.1% to 1.7% at the 25th and
75th percentiles of this sample.

3.2

Bunching Response

We first analyze data from the post-2008 period since the multiple tax notches based on firm size
generate rich variation in R&D bunching patterns. Figure 2 plots the empirical distribution of the
R&D intensity of Chinese firms in 2011. We limit our sample to firms with R&D intensity between
0.5% and 15% to focus on firms with non-trivial innovation activities. The first panel in Figure 2
shows the histogram of overall R&D intensity distribution. There are clear bunching patterns at
3%, 4%, and 6% of R&D intensity, corresponding to the three program thresholds. This first panel
provides strong prima facie evidence that fiscal incentives provided by the InnoCom program play
an important role in firms’ R&D investment choices.
To further validate that these R&D bunching patterns are motivated by this specific policy, we
plot the histograms of R&D intensity for the three different size categories in the remaining panels
of Figure 2. For firms with annual sales below 50 million RMB, we find clear bunching at 6%, and
we find no evidence of bunching at other points. Similarly, for firms with annual sales between 50
million and 200 million RMB, we find bunching only at 4%, while for firms with more than 200
million RMB in annual sales, we observe bunching only at 3%. These patterns are consistent with
the size-dependent tax incentive in the InnoCom program.12
We now compare bunching patterns before and after the 2008 tax reform. Figure 3 compares
the R&D intensity distribution for large FOEs before and after 2008. Large FOEs have no clear
pattern of bunching before 2008. This is consistent with the fact that FOEs had a very favorable
EIT treatment before the reform, which severely reduced the appeal of the InnoCom program. In
12

In comparison, Figure A.1 plots the empirical distribution of R&D intensity in the ASM for 2006–2007. The
InnoCom tax incentive was not size-dependent before 2008 and kicked in uniformly at a 5% R&D intensity. It is
reassuring that we observe the R&D intensity bunching solely at 5% and no significant spikes at 3%, 4%, and 6%.

9

contrast, FOEs start behaving like DOEs after 2008, when the InnoCom program became one of
the most important tax breaks for FOEs. Their R&D intensity distribution shows a clear bunching
pattern at 3% after the reform, which is the exact threshold required for these firms to qualify as
HTEs. The figure demonstrates that the change in the EIT system had a large impact on firm
behavior.
While Figures 2–3 show that the InnoCom program led to pronounced bunching patterns in the
distribution of R&D intensity, these graphs alone do not allow us to quantify the overall increase
in R&D. One approach to quantifying the increase in R&D is to use the observed density of R&D
intensity, f1 (·), to infer the density in the counterfactual world without the InnoCom program,
f0 (·). This approach relies on the assumption that only firms with R&D intensity in a given region
[d∗− , d∗+ ] respond to the program. This assumption allows us to use firms drawn from f1 (·) that
are outside this region to estimate f0 (·). Following the literature (e.g., Kleven, 2016), we first
group the data into bins of R&D intensity, d, and then estimate the following flexible polynomial:
cj =

p
X



βk · (dj )k + γj · 1 d∗− ≤ dj ≤ d∗+ + νj ,

k=0

where cj is the count of firms in the bin corresponding to R&D intensity dj and p is the order of
p
P
β̂k · (d)k is then an estimate for f0 (d) . Intuitively, when only
the polynomial regression. ĉj =
k=0

firms in the exclusion region [d∗− , d∗+ ] respond to the program, fˆ0 (d) will be equal to f1 (·) outside
this region. To ensure that the estimation is not contaminated by firm responses to the program,
d∗− and d∗+ are determined by a data-driven procedure that ensures that fˆ0 (·) has the same mass
over the excluded region as f1 (·).13
Figure 4 displays the results of this estimation. In each panel, the red line with diamond
markers displays the observed distribution of R&D intensity f1 (·), the vertical dashed lines display
the omitted region, and the blue line displays the estimated counterfactual density fˆ0 (·). To
characterize the impact of bunching on average R&D intensity, we compute ∆d as the percentage
increase in average R&D intensity for firms in the exclusion region.14 Panels A and B report results
for small firms in 2009 and 2011, including the percentage increases in R&D over the excluded
region of ∆d = 5.4%–10.3%. The size of these effects is constrained by the fact that many firms
are not able to respond to the program. The fraction of firms that do not respond to the program
Specifically, we use K-fold cross-validation to select p, d∗− , and d∗+ assuming that f0 (·) is downward-sloping.
We obtain standard errors by bootstrapping residuals. See Appendix D for details. Appendix E shows that our
results are robust to excluding firms with extensive-margin responses. Appendix I shows that the assumption that
only firms in [d∗− , d∗+ ] respond to the program is consistent with our model in Section 4.
14
We use f1 (·) and fˆ0 (·) to directly calculate E[d|Notch, d ∈ (d∗− , d∗+ )] and E[d|No Notch, d ∈ (d∗− , d∗+ )],
respectively. ∆d is then the increase in R&D relative to the average R&D intensity in the exclusion region.
13

10

in 2011 is a∗ = 79.6%.15,16 Panels C and D show larger responses for medium firms, with ∆d
of 12%–17.2%. These average increases are driven by heterogeneous firm-level responses. Firms
immediately below the notch only require a marginal increase in R&D, while firms at d∗− see
much larger R&D increases. Panels E and F report the results for large firms, where we estimate
∆d = 15.6% for 2009 and ∆d = 24.5% for 2011. These graphs also show that even large firms may
be unable to satisfy some of the requirements of the program, since 50%–64% of firms that could
have participated in the program opt not to do so. These results show that bunching patterns are
persistent over time.17 Appendix E shows that these bunching estimates are robust to a battery
of specification tests.18 Figure 4 contributes to our understanding of the effects of the InnoCom
program by quantifying the average increase in R&D, by clarifying the significant heterogeneity in
firm-level responses, and by showing that firms face idiosyncratic barriers to fulfilling the non-R&D
requirements of the program.

3.3

Detecting Relabeling of R&D Investment

We now explore the degree to which the bunching response may be due to expense misreporting.
Figure 5 explores how the ratio of non-R&D administrative expenses to sales is related to R&D
intensity. For each size group, this figure groups firms into bins of R&D intensity and plots the
mean non-R&D administrative expense-to-sales ratio for each bin. We report the data along
with an estimated cubic regression of the expense ratio on R&D intensity with heterogeneous
coefficients above and below the notches. The green squares are for large firms, red diamonds for
medium firms, and blue dots for small firms. There is an obvious discontinuous jump downward
at the notch for each size category. This drop suggests that some firms that report R&D intensity
at the notch may partly relabel non-R&D expenses as R&D to qualify for the policy. When firms
are farther away from the bunching threshold, there is no systemic difference in the administrative
expense-to-sales ratio. This pattern is consistent with the hypothesis that firms miscategorize
Rα
Because the total mass of firms that could have responded is given by d∗ − fˆ0 (v)dv, for a given notch α, the
Rα
Rα
fraction of firms that do not respond is a∗ = d∗ − f1 (v)dv/ d∗ − fˆ0 (v)dv. Note that small firms may be constrained
in their ability to increase investment to a significant degree or to develop a new product. In addition, a higher
failure rate among small firms implies that a long process of certification may never pay off in lower taxes.
16
These graphs also report that we cannot reject the specification test that fˆ0 (·) has the same mass as f1 (·) over
the excluded region for all types of firms.
17
Consistent with the intent of the program, firms’ bunching patterns are persistent over time: 76% of firms that
report an R&D intensity greater than the notch in 2011 also bunched in 2010. For this reason, our model considers
the choice of R&D as a medium-term investment plan.
18
Specifically, we show that our estimator is able to recover a null effect in the absence of a notch and that our
results are robust to excluding firms with extensive-margin responses and to excluding state-owned enterprises,
low-tech firms, or low-profitability firms from the estimation. We also find similar estimates when we vary the
choices of (p, d∗− , d∗+ ), and we even obtain similar estimates when we rely only on data above d∗+ to estimate the
counterfactual density. Our results are also robust to using data from large foreign firms before 2008 that were not
subject to the incentives of the InnoCom program to inform the shape of the density in the excluded region. This
check uses the insight of Blomquist and Newey (2017) that variation in non-linear incentives can help in identifying
responses when bunching approaches are used.
15

11

non-R&D expenses as R&D when they approach the bunching thresholds.19
The structural breaks in Figure 5 are statistically significant for all three groups. Large firms
see a drop of 0.8% of sales, which corresponds to 26% of the R&D intensity required to participate
in the program. Small and medium firms see drops of 1.4% and 1.3%, respectively (see Table A.2).
Because firms select into the program based on idiosyncratic factors (e.g., productivity, adjustment
and certification costs), these estimates do not have a causal interpretation.20 Nonetheless, these
estimates present strong descriptive evidence that firms may respond to the InnoCom program by
relabeling non-R&D expenses.
Lack of Sales Manipulation
The stark bunching patterns in Figures 2–4 raise the concern that firms may also manipulate
their sales. There are two ways in which firms may do this. First, since the incentives of the
InnoCom program are stated in terms of R&D intensity (R&D/Sales), firms could increase their
R&D intensity by under-reporting sales. Panel A in Figure 6 plots firms’ log sales relative to their
R&D intensity. For each group of firms, we report average log sales for small bins of R&D intensity
as well as an estimated cubic regression that is allowed to vary below and above each threshold. If
firms under-report sales to achieve the target, we might expect a sudden drop in sales to the right
of each threshold. In contrast, this figure shows that both the data and the estimated polynomial
regressions are remarkably stable at each notch.21
Second, if a firm wants to be categorized as a larger firm to qualify for a lower R&D intensity
threshold, it may over-report sales. Panels B and C in Figure 6 show the histogram of firms around
the size thresholds. Since larger firms face lower R&D intensity thresholds, we might expect firms
to bunch on the right of the size threshold. These figures show that firms do not respond to the
incentives by manipulating their size.22 Overall, it does not appear that firms misreport sales to
quality for the InnoCom program. One reason for this result is that, in addition to the limits
placed by third-party reporting in the VAT system, firm managers may not want to misreport
sales, as these are seen as a measure of their job performance.
The data patterns discussed in this section reveal a number of facts that motivate our model.
19

The existence of different thresholds across size groups also allows us to rule out other explanations for these
discontinuities. In particular, there is no observable discontinuity when we impose the “wrong” thresholds of the
other size groups. In Appendix G, we explore whether firms adjust other costs that are not in the administrative
cost category, and we show that firms do not respond to the program by manipulating other expenses. We also
conduct a similar set of analysis focusing on the ratio of R&D to total administrative expenses. In this case, expense
miscategorization would result in discontinuous increases in this ratio at the notch. This is confirmed in Table A.4
and in Figure A.2.
20
Appendix F uses the methods of Diamond and Persson (2016) to estimate causal effects of the notch. Consistent
with Figure 5, we estimate that the program led to a significant decrease in the average administrative cost ratio
for firms in the excluded region, and we also find a statistically significant increase in TFP.
21
Table A.3 reports statistically insignificant estimates of the structural breaks at these notches.
22
In our estimations, we further restrict our sample to exclude firms that are close to the size threshold, and this
does not affect our estimates.

12

First, the dispersed density of R&D intensity suggests firms face heterogeneous costs of adjusting
R&D expenditures. Second, the InnoCom program led to significant increases in reported R&D
investment for firms close to the notch. Third, the overall increase in R&D is driven by heterogeneous responses that depend on firms’ pre-existing innovation activities. Fourth, differences in
TFP between firms with low and high levels of R&D intensity suggest both that R&D investment
may increase productivity and that firms may select into the InnoCom program partly based on
heterogeneous adjustment costs of R&D investment. Fifth, the fact that many firms with R&D
intensity close to the notch do not participate in the InnoCom program suggests firms face different obstacles that prevent them from obtaining the InnoCom certification. Finally, sharp drops in
other administrative expenses at program notches suggest that firms inflate reported R&D expenditures by relabeling administrative expenses as R&D. A model of firm behavior that is consistent
with these facts must therefore account for firm differences in underlying productivity as well as
idiosyncratic costs of both adjusting R&D and obtaining the InnoCom certification. In addition, it
is important to consider that firms may respond to the program by investing in R&D (to increase
future productivity) or by relabeling other expenses (to obtain a preferential tax rate).

4

A Model of R&D Investment and Corporate Tax Notches

This section develops a model of R&D investment where firms can respond to notches in the
corporate income tax schedule by investing in R&D and by relabeling non-R&D expenses. The
model is motivated by the empirical facts in the previous section and shows that these data
patterns inform structural parameters that are key for studying the effectiveness of alternative tax
incentives.

4.1

Model Setup

Consider a firm i with a unit cost function c(φit , wt ) = wt exp{−φit }, where wt is the price of
inputs.23 φit is log TFP and has the following law of motion:
φi,t = ρφi,t−1 + ε ln(Di,t−1 ) + uit ,

(1)

where Di,t−1 is R&D investment and ui,t ∼ i.i.d. N (0, σ 2 ). Because our empirical analysis focuses
on firms with non-trivial R&D, this law of motion applies to firms with Di,t−1 > 0.24 This setup
is consistent with the R&D literature where knowledge capital depreciates over time (captured by
ρ) and is influenced by R&D expenditures (captured by ε).
23

We provide additional model details in Appendix H. Note that any homothetic production function with
Hicks-neutral productivity admits this representation.
24
If firms do not engage in R&D, we assume that their productivity process is φit = ρφi,t−1 + uit . In Appendix
L, we further generalize our setup to allow knowledge spillovers across firms.

13

We assume that the firm faces a demand function with a constant elasticity: θ > 1. This setup
implies that firm sales are given by θπit and that we can write expected profits as follows:
(θ−1)ε

E[πit ] = π̃it Di,t−1 ,
where π̃it ∝ E[exp{(θ − 1)φit }|φi,t−1 ] measures the non-R&D expected profitability of the firm.
In our empirical setting, firms are only eligible to apply to the InnoCom program after demonstrating high levels of R&D over a three-year period (see Section 2). Since firms commit to
maintaining sustained levels of R&D to obtain the tax cut, the relevant investment margin is a
medium-term decision. We therefore model the firm’s investment decision as a two-period problem.25
R&D Choice under a Linear Tax
We first model how R&D investment decisions would respond to a linear income tax:
(θ−1)ε

max (1 − t1 ) (πi1 − Di1 − g(Di1 , θπi1 )) + β(1 − t2 )π̃i2 Di1
Di1

.

In addition to the direct R&D investment cost Di1 , firms pay a cost g(Di1 , θπi1 ) to adjust their
R&D. Following the investment literature, we adopt a quadratic formulation for g(Di1 , θπi1 ) =
i2
h
Di1
b × θπ21i θπ
. Absent adjustment costs, our model would predict a deterministic relationship
1i
between log R&D and log TFP. In reality, however, the distribution of R&D investment in China
varies significantly across firms, even conditional on firm TFP. This variability reflects the fact
that firms have different opportunities to improve their technology and face different costs of
implementing R&D projects. Our model incorporates these real-world features by assuming that
firms face heterogeneous adjustment frictions b of conducting R&D.
∗
is given by:26
The optimal choice of Di1



Di1
(θ−1)ε−1
F OC : −(1 − t1 ) 1 + b
+ β(1 − t2 )ε(θ − 1)Di1
π̃i2 = 0.
θπi1

The marginal benefit of R&D depends on the potentially unobserved, firm-specific productivity
φi1 , as it determines non-R&D profitability, π̃i2 . The marginal cost, on the other hand, is linear
in R&D and depends on the heterogeneous adjustment cost b. Intuitively, the law of motion for
TFP (Equation 1) implies that increasing R&D has a proportional increase in the TFP of all
units of production within a firm. As a result, firm’s R&D expenditure is increasing in φi1 . Since
25

While this simplifying assumption yields a more tractable model, it abstracts away from the effects of R&D
on long-run profitability. Because this effect is dissipated both by time-discounting and by the depreciation of
knowledge capital (ρ in Equation 1), it is unlikely that accounting for these long-run considerations will impact a
firm’s decision to participate in the program. Nonetheless, this assumption implies that our estimate of ε should be
interpreted as the medium-term effect of R&D investment on productivity. Appendix K.8 compares our estimate
of ε to a medium-term treatment effect of the program on firm productivity and finds similar magnitudes.
26
As we discuss in Appendix H, we assume (θ − 1)ε < 1 to ensure a well-behaved second-order condition.

14

adjustment costs are proportional to firm size, they limit the scale effect of R&D investment and
play an important role connecting the distribution of TFP to the distribution of R&D intensity.27
R&D intensity, defined as the R&D-to-sales ratio, has an ambiguous relationship with φi1 . To
see this, we express the firm’s FOC in terms of the choice of R&D intensity, di1 =

Di1
,
θπi1

such that

π̃i2
= 0.
−(1 − t1 ) (1 + bd∗i1 ) + β(1 − t2 )ε(θ − 1)d∗i1 (θ−1)ε−1
|
{z
}
(θπi1 )1−(θ−1)ε
|
{z
}
Increase in Investment Cost

(2)

Productivity Gain from R&D

This equation shows that the relation between d∗i1 and φi1 depends on whether the term

π̃i2
(θπi1 )1−(θ−1)ε

is increasing or decreasing in TFP. Because φi1 affects both expected profitability (π̃i2 ) and current
sales (πi1 ), ε plays an important role in shaping the joint distribution of R&D intensity and TFP,
a fact that we use in the estimation of our model.
A Notch in the Corporate Income Tax
Assume now that the tax in the second period has the following structure, modeled after the
incentives in the InnoCom program:

t2 =

tLT
if di1 < α
2
,
tHT
if
di1 ≥ α
2

where tLT
> tHT
and where LT /HT stands for low-tech/high-tech. In practice, firms with high
2
2
R&D intensity may not participate in the program if other constraints prevent them from hiring a
sufficient number of technical employees, if they do not obtain a significant fraction of their sales
from high-tech products, or if the compliance and registration costs are too high. We model these
constraints by assuming that firms pay a fixed cost of certification: c × θπ1i , where c varies across
firms.
A firm decides whether to bunch by comparing the value of the firm from bunching, by setting
d∗1

= α, to the value of the firm at its optimal R&D intensity below the notch, i.e., d∗i1 from

Equation 2. The value-to-sales ratio of the firm conditional on bunching,

Π(α|tHT
2 )
,
θπi1

is given by:

 


Π(α|tHT
1
π̃i2
bα
2 )
HT
(θ−1)ε
≡ (1 − t1 ) + β(1 − t2 )α
− (1 − t1 ) α 1 +
+c .
θπi1
θ
(θπi1 )1−(θ−1)ε
2
Similarly, the value-to-sales ratio at the interior optimal d∗i1 ,

Π(d∗i1 |tLT
2 )
,
θπi1

is:



Π(d∗i1 |tLT
1
π̃i2
bd∗i1
2 )
LT
∗ (θ−1)ε
∗
≡ (1 − t1 ) + β(1 − t2 )di1
− (1 − t1 )di1 1 +
.
θπi1
θ
(θπi1 )1−(θ−1)ε
2
A firm that previously chose d∗i1 < α will bunch at the notch if
27

Π(α|tHT
2 )
θπi1

≥

Π(d∗i1 |tLT
2 )
.
θπi1

Appendix K.3 shows that the results of our empirical model are robust to allowing for more flexible adjustment
costs.

15

There are strong theoretical predictions regarding the effect of the tax notch on the crosssectional distribution of R&D intensity. To build intuition, we refer to the simple case where the
adjustment cost b is equal to zero. Substituting the term

π̃i2
(θπi1 )1−(θ−1)ε

using Equation 2, we can

express the decision to bunch or not as:

|

d∗i1
α

1−(θ−1)ε 

1 − tHT
2
1 − tLT
{z2



1
−1−c≥
(θ − 1)ε
}

Relative Profit from Bunching

d∗i1
α
|




1
−1 .
(θ − 1)ε
{z
}

(3)

Relative Profit from Not Bunching

Panel A of Figure 7 visualizes this inequality by plotting the relative profits from bunching
and not
as a function of R&D intensity. For firms that were already close to

 the
 ∗bunching
di1
1−tHT
2
notch α ≈ 1 , bunching has small costs and productivity benefits, but the tax cut 1−tLT > 1
2

incentivizes firms to bunch. This figure shows that, when c = 0, bunching is optimal for firms with
d∗i1 close to α. For firms farther from the notch (as d∗i1 decreases from α), the additional investment
costs increase faster than the productivity benefits, which reduces firms’ incentive to bunch. Let
d∗− be the marginal firm such that Equation 3 holds with equality. Firms with d∗i1 ∈ (d∗− , α)
would decide to bunch at the notch, since the difference between the left- and right-hand sides of
∗−
∗
Equation
 HT  3 is increasing in di1 . It can also be shown that d is decreasing in both (θ − 1)ε and
1−t2
, so that we would observe more bunching if firms have a higher valuation of R&D or if
1−tLT
2

the tax incentive is larger.
To visualize the role of fixed costs, Panel A of Figure 7 shows that the relative profit from
bunching shifts down as c increases. This implies that firms with d∗i1 farther from α are less likely
to bunch at the notch. When c is large enough, however, firms with d∗i1 ≈ α may not be able
to participate in the program. Panel B of Figure 7 depicts this prediction for the cross-sectional
R&D intensity distribution. The green dashed line plots f0 (d): the distribution of optimal R&D
intensity under a linear tax. The black line plots f1 (d): the density of R&D intensity with a
notch.28 In addition, the presence of adjustment costs implies that each firm’s bunching decision
depends on its idiosyncratic value of b. Firms with similar productivity will therefore differ in how
they respond to the InnoCom program.29

4.2

Real and Relabeled R&D Investment under a Tax Notch

This section extends the model by allowing firms to inflate reported R&D expenditures by relabeling non-R&D costs as R&D. Denote a firm’s reported level of R&D spending by D̃i1 . Firms
qualify for the lower tax whenever D̃1 ≥ αθπ1 . We assume that firms face an expected cost of
misreporting that is given by h(Di1 , D̃i1 ), which represents the likelihood of being caught and the
Note that, in the special case of no fixed costs, the range (d∗− , α) would be dominated by the notch α and
there would be an empty region below the notch. This prediction is not consistent with the data patterns that we
documented in Section 3.
29
Equation H.6 generalizes Equation 3 by including both adjustment and fixed costs.
28

16

punishment from the tax authority. We further assume that the cost of misreporting is proportional to the reported R&D and depends on the percentage of misreported R&D, δi1 =

D̃i1 −Di1
,
D̃i1

so that:
h(Di1 , D̃i1 ) = D̃i1 h̃ (δi1 ) ,
where h̃ satisfies h̃(0) = 0 and h̃0 (·) ≥ 0.30
Notice first that if a firm decides not to bunch at the level αθπ1 , firms have no incentive to
misreport R&D spending, as it does not affect total profits or the tax rate. However, a firm might
find it optimal to report D̃1 = αθπ1 even if it actually invested in a lower level of R&D. Conditional
on bunching, the firm’s optimal relabeling strategy solves the following problem:
 K 2 !


K
bθπ
Di1
αθπ1 − Di1
i1
K (θ−1)ε
K
max (1 − t1 ) πi1 − Di1 − θπi1 c −
− αθπ1 h̃
+ β(1 − tHT
2 )π̃i2 (Di1 )
K
2
θπi1
αθπ1
Di1
DK

1
The first-order condition for relabeling in terms of the real R&D intensity dK
1 = θπ1 is then:



dK∗
π̃i2
i1
K∗
0
K∗ (θ−1)ε−1
−(1 − t1 ) 1 + bdi1 + h̃ 1 −
+ β(1 − tHT
= 0. (4)
2 )ε(θ − 1)di1
α
(θπi1 )1−(θ−1)ε
|
{z
}
|
{z
}

Productivity Gain from Real R&D

Increase in Investment Cost and Reduction in Relabeling Cost

Comparing Equation 4 with the first-order condition Equation 2 for d∗i1 in the case without relabeling, we find that—despite the presence of relabeling—firms generally increase their real R&D
∗
intensity when they bunch, i.e., dK∗
i1 > di1 . The marginal incentive of investing in real R&D is

< tLT
higher for two reasons. First, since certified firms face a lower tax rate, tHT
2 , the after-tax
2
benefits of productivity improvements are larger. Second, real R&D investment also makes it less
likely that a firm will be caught and punished for its relabeling behavior. This feature is known as
the avoidance-facilitating effect, whereby real R&D lowers the marginal cost of relabeling (Slemrod
K∗
∗
and Gillitzer, 2013). Based on dK∗
i1 , we define the fraction of relabeled R&D δi1 = 1 − di1 /α and
HT
the resulting firm value Π(dK∗
i1 , α|t2 ) from reporting R&D intensity α and conducting real R&D

intensity dK∗
i1 .
When firms can relabel, they decide whether to bunch by comparing the firm value from the
HT
optimal relabeling strategy, Π(dK∗
i1 , α|t2 ), with the firm value at the optimal interior solution,

Π(d∗i1 , d∗i1 |tLT
2 ). To gain further intuition, consider the simple case where b = c = 0. Using Equation
HT
2 to simplify Π(dK∗
i1 , α|t2 ), it follows that firms decide to bunch when the following inequality

holds:
 K∗ (θ−1)ε  ∗ 1−(θ−1)ε 

∗
di1
di1
1 − tHT
1
dK∗
h̃(δi1
)
2
i1
−
≥
−
LT
α
α
(θ − 1)ε
α
α(1 − t1 )
1 − t2
| {z }
|
{z
}
Relabeling Cost

Relative Profit from Bunching

d∗i1
α
|




1
−1 .
(θ − 1)ε
{z
}

Relative Profit from Not Bunching

30
Our formulation of h̃(·) is consistent with general features of evasion cost functions in the literature (Slemrod,
2001). We assume that the misreporting cost depends on δ (the percentage of misreported R&D) because the
InnoCom program is based on R&D intensity rather than total R&D expenditures. Appendix K.4 shows that the
results of our empirical model are robust to an alternative relabeling cost function that can accommodate separable
relabeling costs.

17

(5)

Equations 3 and 5 are very similar and are identical in the case when c = 0 and dK∗
i1 = α —i.e.,
∗
= 0.
when there is no relabeling δi1

Panel C of Figure 7 visualizes Equation 5 to show how the possibility of relabeling impacts
a firm’s decision to bunch. Intuitively, since firms can elect to report truthfully (δ = 0), firms’
profits from bunching in the case with relabeling are greater than in the case without relabeling.
Matching this intuition, the figure shows that the value of firms from bunching and relabeling is
greater than in the case without relabeling. The figure also shows that, when relabeling is possible,
the marginal firm (such that Equation 5 holds with equality) will have a lower threshold d∗− . Panel
D of Figure 7 shows that we should see more bunching when firms can misreport R&D, such that
the observed bunching patterns likely combine real increases in R&D with increases in relabeling.
Therefore, while Equation 3 provides a tight connection between the extent of bunching and ε,
Equation 5 shows that it is crucial to account for relabeling when bunching patterns are used to
infer the returns to R&D.

5

Structural Estimation

The previous section described a model motivated by the data patterns in Section 3. The model
links the observed bunching patterns to the distributions of productivity, adjustment costs, and
certification costs, and allows firms to respond to tax incentives through productivity-enhancing
investments in real R&D as well as through misreporting. This section proposes a method of
simulated moments (MSM) framework to estimate the structural parameters of the model and
uses these estimates to quantify the extent of relabeling and the increase in real R&D.

5.1

Estimation Framework

We first discuss how we parameterize the model. We begin by calibrating θ, which we set at
θ = 5 based on the survey by Head and Mayer (2014).31 We use the fact that the evolution of
productivity in Equation 1 is an AR(1) process with persistence ρ and a normally distributed
shock with variance σ 2 . Given a value of θ, the persistence and volatility of log sales of nonR&D performing firms map directly into ρ and σ 2 , which yields the following calibrated values of
ρ = 0.725 and σ = 0.385. This process implies a stationary normal distribution for the underlying
productivity φ1 . Finally, we set β = 0.925.
We now parameterize the distributions of b and c, which we assume are i.i.d. across firms. We
assume b is log-normally distributed, b ∼ LN (µb , σb2 ), and that c has an exponential distribution,
c ∼ EX P(µc ). We adopt the following functional form for the costs of relabeling:

exp{ηδ}−1
,
η

where

δ is the fraction of reported R&D corresponding to relabeling. While it is necessary to specify a
θ
This value implies a gross markup of θ−1
= 1.25. We calibrate θ since, without data on physical production
quantities, we are not able to separately identify this parameter from the productivity distribution.
31

18

functional form, this specification is quite flexible, as the function can be linear, convex, or concave
depending on the value of η (e.g., Notowidigdo, 2019).
We use the method of simulated moments to estimate the parameters Ω = {ε, η, µb , σb , µc }. For
a given value of these parameters, we simulate productivity and adjustment and fixed costs for
30,000 firms. We determine whether each firm finds it optimal to bunch depending on the firm’s
optimal R&D investment conditional on not bunching (Equation 2) and the optimal relabeling
strategy conditional on bunching (Equation 4). Based on these firm-level decisions, we compute
data moments that are analogous to those discussed in Section 3. We obtain the simulated
moments by repeating this process 10 times and averaging over these instances. Our estimate of
Ω minimizes the difference between data moments and moments generated by the distribution of
simulated firms as measured by the criterion function:
 D
0  D

m (Ω)
m (Ω)
W
Q(Ω) =
,
mB (Ω)
mB (Ω)
where W is a bootstrapped weighting matrix. mD (Ω) and mB (Ω) are moment conditions based on
the descriptive statistics and on the bunching estimator, respectively. Because large firms account
for more than 80% of all R&D investment (see Figure A.4), we use data for this group of firms to
estimate the structural model.
mD (Ω) includes four types of moments based on the data patterns in Section 3. The first set of
moments uses information from the histogram of R&D intensity. We include the fraction of firms
falling in three equally spaced intervals below the 3% notch (i.e., [0.003, 0.012], [0.012, 0.021], and
[0.021, 0.03]).32 We summarize the top of the R&D intensity distribution by including moments
that measure the fraction of firms falling in three equally spaced intervals between 5% and 9%
(i.e., [0.05, 0.063], [0.063, 0.076], and [0.076, 0.09]). Second, we include the average R&D intensity
for firms that potentially respond to the InnoCom program (i.e., over the interval [0.03,0.05]).
Third, we include the average TFP for firms below and above the notch. As we discuss below,
these moments play an important role in identifying key model parameters. Finally, we include
the drop in the administrative cost ratio from Figure 5. This last moment plays an important role
in disciplining the costs of relabeling.
Our initial model relies solely on the moments in mD (Ω) to estimate the model. For robustness,
we show that we obtain similar structural estimates when we also consider additional moments
based on the bunching estimator mB (Ω). These moments include the following: (1) the lower
threshold of the excluded region d∗− ; (2) the fraction of firms in the excluded region that do not
bunch a∗ ; and (3) the percentage increase in R&D intensity over the excluded region ∆d. In this
case, our model parameters are additionally disciplined by the results from Figure 4.
32

As in Figures 2–4, we exclude observations that are very close to conducting no R&D.

19

Identification
While each of the simulated moments depends on multiple parameters, we give a heuristic description of the data patterns that identify each parameter.
Consider first the model that only relies on moments based on descriptive data patterns mD (Ω).
We start by discussing the identification of the distribution of fixed and adjustment costs. First,
the parameters of the distribution of adjustment costs, µb and σb , are identified by the distribution
of R&D intensity below the notch and in the top of the R&D intensity distribution. Next, given
that the R&D intensity distribution is smooth, intuitively, there are three determinants of the
excess mass of firms above the notch (over the interval [3,5]). Firms are more likely to bunch
when the average certification cost µc is lower, when R&D has a larger effect on productivity ε,
or when it is easier to relabel (lower η). The drop in the administrative cost ratio at the notch
disciplines the relabeling cost η. The sorting of more productive firms into higher R&D intensity
bins helps determine ε. Given η and ε, the magnitude of the certification cost µc is determined by
the average R&D intensity right above the notch as well as the density of firm R&D right below
the notch. This heuristic argument shows that our model is over-identified since our descriptive
data patterns include the full empirical distribution of R&D intensity.
One benefit of using the additional moments in mB (Ω) is that these moments compare the
observed density of R&D to a flexibly estimated counterfactual density without the program. This
density extracts additional information including the minimum bunching point d∗− , the average
increase in reported R&D ∆d, and the fraction of firms not bunching a∗ . Similar to the excess
mass of firms above the notch, these moments jointly inform the three parameters that determine
bunching: ε, η, and µc , providing additional over-identifying restrictions.

5.2

Estimates of Structural Parameters

Following Chernozhukov and Hong (2003), we estimate the model using a Laplace-type estimator
that is based on Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. This procedure provides a numerically attractive way of obtaining point estimates and conducting inference. We construct the
weighting matrix W based on the bootstrapped covariance matrix of our data moments.
Table 3 reports estimates of our structural parameters: (ε, η, µb , σb , µc ). Panel A reports parameter estimates and standard errors for our two models. All the estimates are statistically
significant in both models. We estimate remarkably similar parameters when we rely on the descriptive moments mD (Ω) or when we also include the bunching moments mB (Ω) in the estimation.
Thus, while the bunching moments provide independent information, our model’s quantification
of the forces that generate the R&D bunching patterns are also consistent with those moments.
Consider the estimate of the returns to R&D, ε. The estimate from the full model in Table 3
panel A implies that doubling R&D increases measured TFP by 9%. Hall et al. (2010) survey the
20

extensive literature on this R&D elasticity in similar production function setups. Our estimate
lies within the broad range of previous results, that is, between 2% and 17%. Since most previous
studies use micro-data from developed countries, it is interesting to see that the returns to R&D
of Chinese firms are comparable in magnitude.
Consider now the relabeling cost parameter, η. The estimates from both models are around
6. These values indicate that, at the margin, the cost of relabeling is highly convex in terms of δ.
That is, it is easy for firms to overstate their R&D by a small amount, but the cost rises quickly
for firms that are farther away from the required threshold α. To understand this result, note
that the marginal benefit of relabeling includes reductions in investment costs and in adjustment
costs, which include technological opportunity constraints. For this reason, firms that face a higher
shadow cost of R&D (i.e., a higher b) will be more willing to engage in relabeling. On average,
we calculate that firms’ realized relabeling cost is 9.8% of the implicit R&D savings. Finally, the
estimated certification cost is quite modest: for the firms that decide to bunch and certify as
high-tech firms, the fixed certification cost is on average 4.4% of their expected profit.
Panel B of Table 3 compares the simulated moments with the data moments and shows that
our models do a very good job of matching the data. The first model—based only on descriptive
moments—replicates the distribution of firm-level R&D intensity, the bunching pattern, and the
break in the administrative cost ratio very well. This model also matches the positive correlation
between R&D intensity and measured productivity. Studying the predicted values of the (untargeted) bunching moments, we find that they match the data moments quite closely. The second
column of Panel B reports the simulated moments for the full model. As would be expected, this
model trades off a slightly better fit of the bunching moments for slight deviations from the baseline descriptive moments. However, these trade-offs are very minor: both models do a remarkable
job of fitting the data.
Because the model is consistent with both sets of moments, one of the benefits of adding mB (Ω)
in the full model is an increase in the precision of the estimated parameters. While the full model
features smaller standard errors for all the parameters, the biggest difference is in the standard
error of µc , which drops from 0.06 to 0.01. This increased precision follows from the rationale
that the bunching moments extract information from the counterfactual R&D intensity that we
estimated in Section 3.2, including the fraction of firms that are below the notch and that do not
bunch. These additional restrictions reduced the uncertainty of the estimate for certification cost
µc .
Benchmark Model Implications
Given our model estimates, we can simulate our full model to gain a deeper understanding of how
heterogeneous firms respond to the existing policy.
First, we find that firms that comply with the policy are positively selected on several margins.
21

Complier firms are, on average, 13.5% more productive than firms in the excluded region that
do not comply with the policy. They also have idiosyncratic adjustment costs that are 24.3%
lower than non-compliers, which indicates much better technological opportunities from R&D
investment. Finally, they also have substantially smaller certification costs.
Second, our model shows that 24.2% of the reported R&D investment is due to relabeling,
on average. This fraction is dispersed across firms, with the 10th percentile firm relabeling 4.3%
and the 90th percentile relabeling 42.3%. This dispersion is driven mostly by dispersion in the
adjustment costs, b. Conditional on firm productivity, firms with higher adjustment costs relabel a
higher fraction of their R&D. Intuitively, firms with limited technological opportunities are willing
to risk punishment for relabeling to reach the program threshold.
Lastly, we also find heterogeneous increases in real R&D for complying firms. Our model
suggests that the distribution of real R&D investment is such that the 10th percentile firm sees an
increase of 10.4%, the 90th percentile firm an increase of 29.0%, and the median firm an increase
of 16.4%. This dispersion in investment then results in a dispersed distribution of gains in TFP.

5.3

Robustness and Sensitivity

We now show that our structural estimates are robust to relaxing many of the assumptions of our
structural model. We discuss each of these cases in more detail in Appendix K.
We first investigate the parametric assumption that total factor productivity exp(φ1 ) follows a
log-normal distribution. We find that the distribution of measured empirical TFP closely matches
that of a log-normal distribution, which implies that this assumption is consistent with our data
(see Appendix K.1).
In Appendix K.2, we discuss estimates from alternative models that allow heterogeneous εs
and a constant b. While these models result in similar average values of ε and b, the models do
not match the data as well as our benchmark model. Specifically, these models cannot match the
joint distribution of TFP and R&D intensity.
One potential concern is that firms’ adjustment costs may depend on the scale of a given firm.
In Appendix K.3, we estimate an extended adjustment cost function that allows these costs to
vary by firm size. Our results show that adjustment costs do not exhibit a firm-size bias and that
we obtain very similar estimates of our main parameters with a more flexible adjustment cost
function.
An additional concern is that our structural estimates may be influenced by the functional
form of the relabeling costs. Appendix K.4 reports results from an alternative formulation that
can accommodate relabeling costs that are separable from real choices. This model results in
similar estimates of the productivity effects of R&D and implies a similar fraction of relabeled
R&D as our baseline model.

22

As we mention in Section 2, it is possible that the drop in administrative costs that we observe
in Figure 5 may be partly driven by a real reallocation of resources. For instance, firms may reduce
administrative costs if the tax incentive causes them to pay closer attention to their accounting of
R&D expenses or if firms substitute inputs in response to the policy. In Appendix K.5, we explore
this issue by assuming that 25% of the drop in administrative costs in Figure 5 is due to real
responses and 75% is due to relabeling. As we show in Table A.7, while this assumption implies
slightly larger costs of relabeling, it does not impact the rest of our structural estimates.
An important force in the model is the selection of firms into the InnoCom program. This
selection is driven by differences in firm productivity and fixed costs, which we assume to be
independently distributed. Appendix K.6 shows that our results are robust to allowing fixed costs
to be correlated with firm productivity. Specifically, we show that an expanded model that allows
an arbitrary correlation between c and φ yields a negligible correlation between these parameters
and results in very similar estimates of our structural parameters.
As we discuss above, the productivity elasticity of R&D, ε, is partly identified by the productivity difference between firms above and below the notch. To ensure our estimates are robust
to our measurement of productivity, in Appendix K.7, we report results where we replace these
moments with alternative measures of firm productivity based on the methods of Ackerberg et al.
(2015). Our results are robust to using these alternative productivity moments.
An additional way to validate our structural model is to test out-of-sample predictions. In
Appendix F.1, we use the methods of Diamond and Persson (2016) to estimate treatment effects
of the InnoCom program. As we show in Appendix K.8, the estimated model implies increases in
firm-level TFP and relabeling that are consistent with reduced-form estimates of the effects of the
InnoCom program on the administrative cost ratio and on TFP growth.
Finally, we evaluate the sensitivity of our point estimates to each individual moment. We
calculate the local derivative of our estimated parameters in the full model with respect to each
moment using the methods of Andrews et al. (2017). In general, the sensitivity matrix conforms
with our heuristic discussion above. The joint distribution of TFP and R&D intensity are important determinants of ε. The extent of bunching, measured by the mean R&D intensity between
[3%, 5%], is also informative of the gains from innovation. The structural break in the administrative cost-to-sales ratio is by far the most important determinant of evasion cost η. We report
the complete set of sensitivity results for ε and η in Figure A.10.
Overall, the structural model exploits the estimates from our descriptive and bunching analysis
for identification and is able to replicate these data patterns quite well. While the structural
model combines information from multiple moments and leverages functional form assumptions
to increase the precision of the estimates, the benefit of the bunching approach is that it places no
restrictions on the parameters of the model. By estimating a model that is consistent with both
approaches, we reduce the risk that functional form assumptions are constraining the estimated
23

parameters in ways that would bias the effects of the InnoCom program. For these reasons, the
model provides a robust micro-foundation for simulating the effects of counterfactual policies.

6

Simulating Counterfactual Policies

We now use our model estimates to simulate the effects of alternative R&D tax incentives, and
we quantify their implications for reported R&D investment, real R&D investment, tax revenue,
productivity growth, and welfare. We first simulate alternative versions of the InnoCom program
that vary the tax advantage and the location of the notch. We then compare our results with
a counterfactual policy that follows a more standard investment tax credit. Finally, we consider
whether knowledge spillovers can justify the InnoCom program from a welfare perspective.

6.1

Alternative Notches and Tax Cuts

We analyze alternative versions of the InnoCom program that vary the tax advantage and the
location of the notch for two reasons. First, even though standard policy recommendations avoid
prescribing discontinuous incentives, notches are present in many settings (Slemrod, 2013) and
may be justified in cases where governments can use them as a way to limit relabeling (Best et
al., 2015). Second, given the explosive growth in R&D in China and the fact that the government
has chosen to use this policy, it is important to understand the economic and fiscal consequences
of this type of policy.
Figures 8-9 study the effects of changing the preferential tax rate for three values of the notch:
2%, 3%, and 6%. Each line shows the change in a given outcome from moving the preferential tax
rate to between 10% and 22% for a given notch, relative to the current benchmark where α = 0.03
= 15%.
and tHT
2
Panels A and B of Figure 8 analyze how changes in the policy parameters affect the characteristics of the compliers. We find that higher values of the notch lead to a selection of more
productive firms and of firms with lower adjustment costs, on average. This graph also shows
that, as we increase the tax break for high-tech firms (lower the preferential tax rate), the program selects firms with lower productivity and higher adjustment costs. The selection effect is
more pronounced for adjustment costs than for productivity. For instance, when we change the
threshold from 3% to 2%, the average adjustment cost for the compliers almost doubles, while the
productivity is only around 2% lower. These results show that there are decreasing returns from
expanding the InnoCom program by increasing the tax advantage and that a larger tax break
might exacerbate misallocation of R&D by incentivizing R&D investment in firms with lower
productivity and higher adjustment costs.
Panels C and D of Figure 8 show how real R&D investment and relabeling respond to changes
in the InnoCom program. Panel C shows that there is more real investment when firms face a
24

lower preferential tax rate. However, the fraction of R&D due to relabeling also increases in the
size of the tax cut. As panel D illustrates, when we set the notch threshold at 6%, moving the
preferential tax rate from 21% to 10% increases the fraction of reported R&D attributable to
relabeling by almost 10 percentage points.
Panel A of Figure 9 plots the average growth in productivity induced by the InnoCom program
for firms in the excluded region. This effect is driven by two forces. First, as in panel C of Figure
8, complier firms invest more when the preferential tax rate is lower. Second, the fraction of firms
that participate in the program also increases with a lower preferential tax rate. When α = 3%
and the preferential tax is reduced to 10%, the average firm sees a TFP increase of 1.4%. This is
a larger increase than in the benchmark case, where firms see a 0.8% increase in TFP.
Finally, we use our simulations to answer the question: What is the lowest-cost policy for a
government that wants to increase R&D by a given amount? To answer this question, we first
estimate the elasticity of the tax revenue cost to the real increase in R&D investment for different
values of α and tHT . We then plot these ratios in panel B of Figure 9 according to the total increase
in real R&D. This graph thus represents the cost frontiers for a government that wants to increase
real R&D by a given amount. The current policy of α = 3% and tHT = 15% corresponds to a cost
ratio of about 2.5. The black line shows that a policy defined by α = 6% and tHT = 17% would
result in a similar increase in real R&D investment, but at a lower average cost. Alternatively, a
policy defined by α = 6% and a larger tax advantage tHT = 12% would result in twice as large
of an increase in R&D investment for a similar tax-to-R&D ratio. This result is driven by the
fact that policies with larger α positively select more productive firms as well as firms with better
technological opportunities. Nonetheless, as shown in panel D of Figure 8, policies with lower
preferential tax rates invite relabeling.
These simulations show that the effectiveness of notch-based programs depends strongly on
firm selection. Stronger incentives for R&D may misallocate R&D to firms with worse technological opportunities. Moreover, incentives that encourage R&D investment at the lowest cost to
taxpayers may lead firms to engage in relabeling activities, which are likely socially undesirable.

6.2

R&D Tax Credit

A more common R&D subsidy policy is the R&D tax credit, which is prevalent in a large number of
European and North American countries. We now use our estimated model to evaluate the effects
of drastically changing the Chinese InnoCom program to an R&D tax credit system comparable
to that of the US. While the US system has numerous accounting details, we define it by its two
most fundamental features: the base amount D̄i and the tax credit rate τ . The US government

25

provides a credit of τ = 20% for qualified R&D expenditures that exceed the base amount D̄i .33
If firms find it optimal to not misreport (δ ∗ = 0), then the R&D tax credit effectively reduces
the marginal cost of real R&D, DK , by (1 − t1 )τ . When there is no relabeling, an R&D tax
credit is a relatively cheap way to induce incremental R&D investment. Indeed, the tax-to-R&D
elasticity equals (1 − t1 )τ ≈ 0.15, which is significantly more effective than the 2.5 elasticity of the
benchmark InnoCom program. If we impose the estimated cost of relabeling of η = 6.76, as in our
benchmark case, firms find it very costly to misreport and set δ ∗ = 0. In this case, the R&D tax
credit system is a superior policy.
However, there are reasons to suspect that tax enforcement will be more difficult under an R&D
tax credit system since the tax authority will need to audit all firms. This implies that individual
firms will face lower costs of relabeling. With positive misreporting, the cost-effectiveness of the
R&D credit quickly worsens. To see this, note that the R&D tax credit is calculated as:
 K∗



D
δ∗
∗
K∗
K∗
∗
(1 − t1 )τ
− D1 ≡ (1 − t1 )τ (D − D1 ) +
D
.
1 − δ∗
1 − δ∗
If firms relabel δ ∗ > 0 of reported R&D, then the effective tax cost of inducing the marginal dollar
of real R&D becomes (1 − t1 )τ [1 +

DK∗
δ∗
].
1−δ ∗ DK∗ −D1∗

When the incremental real R&D, DK − D1∗ ,

is small, the misreported R&D dominates the tax-to-real R&D elasticity. When we rescale the
relabeling cost to match our benchmark relabeling of δ ∗ = 0.24, our simulated model implies a
tax-to-R&D elasticity of 4.13. This higher fiscal cost is largely driven by relabeling. Intuitively,
firms were already at their interior optimum. The tax credit therefore induces mostly a relabeling
response, with a very small increase in real R&D. In this case, the large relabeling response yields
the surprising result that an InnoCom-style program is more effective at stimulating real R&D
than a linear tax credit.
This analysis reveals that the choice of subsidy critically depends on the costs of relabeling.
Using our model’s estimates of firm-level R&D adjustment costs and returns to R&D, we search
for the relabeling cost parameter that equalizes the fiscal cost of an R&D tax credit regime with
the InnoCom program. We find that when we increase the evasion cost level such that it implies a
lower fraction of relabeling of 13.85% (in contrast to 24.2% in our benchmark), the R&D tax credit
policy achieves the same fiscal elasticity of 2.5. Therefore, a tax credit is a more cost-effective
policy if the government can significantly increase the cost of relabeling. However, this may come
at the cost of devoting additional government resources to detecting relabeling.
33

Since D̄i typically depends on an average of R&D intensity in previous years, it is natural to assume that
∗
D̄i = Di1
, the interior optimum. We can thus set up the firm’s optimal R&D decision problem as:
 K 
 K



D
D
DK
K
K
∗
max (1 − t1 ) π1 − g(D , θπ1 ) − D + t1
+ (1 − t1 )τ
− Di1 −
h(δ) + β(1 − t2 )E[π2 |DK ].
1−δ
1−δ
1−δ
D K ,δ
Note that the misreporting decision, δ, is separable from the real R&D choice, DK . Thus, the optimal proportional
evasion δ ∗ is determined by the evasion cost, η; the R&D tax credit, τ ; and the corporate tax rate, t1 . Given the
optimal evasion decision δ ∗ , firms choose real R&D amount DK .

26

6.3

Welfare Implications

Governments often justify the use of fiscal incentives for R&D with the argument that innovative
activities have positive spillover effects on the rest of the economy. When individual firms neglect
these positive externalities, aggregate R&D investment may be lower than is socially optimal (see,
e.g, Bloom et al., 2019). We now study whether the InnoCom program can be justified as a tool
to alleviate this market failure.
To consider this question, we extend our single-agent framework to an equilibrium setting and
consider the aggregate implications of this policy.34 As in Section 4, individual firms i engage
in monopolistic competition. Let Ct denote the CES composite good that is assembled from the
output of all firms. Firm optimization implies that the price of the composite good in period t
P
θ−1
θ
is given by Pt = θ−1
Φ−1
= i exp{(θ − 1)φi,t } is an aggregate measure of firms’
t , where Φt
log-productivity, φi,t , and where θ denotes the constant elasticity of demand.
As in our empirical setting, we assume that a subset of firms, N R&D , engages in R&D.35 We
consider the role of spillovers by assuming that φi,t follows an expanded version of Equation 1:36
φi,t = ρφi,t−1 + ε ln(Di,t−1 ) + ζSt−1 + uit , where St−1 =

1

R&D
NX

N R&D

ln(Di,t−1 ).

i=1

Past investments in R&D influence aggregate productivity Φt by directly increasing own-firm
productivity as well as through potential spillovers effects when ζ > 0.
We consider a representative household that derives utility Ct1−γ Gγt from private consumption,
Ct , and a public good, Gt . The household uses a per-period endowment L and after-tax firm
profits to purchase Ct at price Pt . The government produces the public good Gt with a linear
transformation of Ct , which is financed by taxing corporate profits.37
We now show how the InnoCom program impacts social welfare. To do so, we denote aggregate
R&D expenditures gross of adjustment and fixed costs by:
D1 =

R&D
NX

(Di,1 + gi (Di,1 , θπi,1 ) + I(InnoComi )ci ) ,

i=1
34

See Appendix L for detailed derivations. While previous analyses relied solely on individual firm decisions, the
results in this section further assume that firms correctly anticipate the future prices implied by aggregate R&D.
35
Table 2 shows that 8–10% of firms in our data engage in R&D. Since these firms are on average more productive,
the sales share of the R&D sector is close to 35%.
36
The evolution of log productivity for non-R&D-performing firms is similar but excludes the term ε ln(Di,t−1 ).
In Appendix L, we show that, since the choice of Di,t−1 is invariant to St−1 , our previous analyses are not affected
by the presence of spillover effects. For simplicity, we assume that St−1 is a simple average of all R&D-performing
firms; see Bloom et al. (2019) for a discussion of different weighted averages used in the empirical literature and
Benhabib et al. (2017); König et al. (2018) for a discussion of models of imitation and technology diffusion.
37
This setup builds on Samuelson (1954); Atkinson and Stern (1974) by incorporating a productive use of government funds that justifies the existing corporate tax rate. Corporate tax cuts would be trivially beneficial if tax
revenue is not used for productive purposes, i.e., when γ = 0. Our results are robust to assuming that government
production wastes a constant fraction of its budget, so that Gt = (1 − waste)Ct .

27

where I(InnoComi ) is an indicator for the event that firm i is in the InnoCom program. Similarly,
P
H1 = i I(InnoComi )h(Di,1 , D̃i,1 ) denotes aggregate relabeling costs and
P
(tLT − tHT ) i I(InnoComi )πi,2
P
τ=
i πi,2
is the fiscal cost of the InnoCom program relative to aggregate profits. Social welfare is then:

1−γ  γ

1−γ 
γ
t
t
t τ
t τ
Φ1 (L − D1 − H1 ) 1 −
+ βΦ2 L 1 − +
−
.
(6)
θ
θ
θ θ
θ θ
Welfare in each period combines three factors. Welfare increases with Φt since higher productivity
lowers the price of the composite good. Welfare is also increasing in the resources expended in a
given period. Finally, welfare depends on the allocation of resources between private and public
consumption.38
Equation 6 presents a welfare accounting of the costs and benefits of the InnoCom program.
First, the InnoCom program lowers first-period spending by D1 + H1 . Second, the fiscal cost of
the InnoCom program raises the share of private consumption by

τ
θ

at the expense of the public

good. Finally, by increasing R&D investment, the InnoCom program raises Φ2 . This last effect is
more pronounced when R&D has spillover effects on the productivity of other firms, i.e., ζ > 0.
We calibrate three additional parameters to implement Equation 6. First, we use the fact
that, in the absence of the InnoCom program, the tax rate t = γθ maximizes social welfare. We
thus set γ =

t
θ

=

25%
5

= 5%, which is the value of γ that rationalizes the observed tax rate.39

Second, we normalize L to equal payments to labor implied by our model. Finally, we calibrate
the importance of the R&D sector such that the aggregate sales share of R&D-performing firms
matches the share observed in our data.
We start by using Equation 6 to evaluate the welfare loss in the case where ζ = 0. In the absence
of spillover effects, the InnoCom program leads to (1) firm costs related to certification, compliance,
and relabeling, (2) over-investment in R&D—a form of inter-temporal distortion—and (3) underprovision of public goods, which distorts the consumption mix. Our model estimates imply that
welfare decreases by 0.14% in this case. While all three channels contribute to the welfare loss,
the first channel has the largest effect. With the InnoCom program, aggregate efficiency, Φ2 /Φ1 ,
improves by 0.12% more than without the program. We find that, because the consumption loss
from the additional R&D spending (including adjustment costs) increases by slightly more than
0.13%, the program has a very small inter-temporal distortion. The welfare loss of 0.14% is almost
completely accounted for by the increase in certification and relabeling costs. The intuition is that,
In the first period, the private expenditure share is 1 − θt , and the public goods share is θt . In the case without
the InnoCom program, where the optimal tax is given by t = θγ, the consumption mix of Equation 6 takes the
1−γ
γ
familiar Cobb-Douglas form (1 − γ)
(γ) .
39
Estimates of γ in the US range from 0.11 to 0.26 (Suárez Serrato and Wingender, 2014; Fajgelbaum et al.,
2018).
38

28

while channels (2) and (3) transfer resources across time or types of consumption, certification
and relabeling costs are unproductive uses of resources.40
We now use Equation 6 to find the value ζ̂ such that the InnoCom program for large firms (i.e.,
α = 0.03, tHT = 0.15) yields the same welfare as the case without the InnoCom program. Using
our estimated model, we find that ζ̂ = 0.069. This value of ζ̂ implies that a firm’s log-productivity
would increase by 6.9% if all R&D firms doubled their R&D investment. When spillovers are
small, i.e., ζ < 0.069, the distortions discussed above exceed the gains from incentivizing R&D.
The InnoCom program can be justified from a welfare perspective as long as spillover effects
are larger than ζ̂.41 Compared to empirical estimates, ζ̂ is relatively small. For instance, Bloom et
al. (2013) and Lucking et al. (2019) estimate significantly larger values of ζ ≈ 0.20. When we set
ζ = 0.20, we find that welfare increases by 0.27% and aggregate productivity increases by 0.53%.
These results suggests that the InnoCom program may be a valuable policy tool to alleviate the
under-investment in R&D.
The results of our policy simulations highlight the promises and limitations of an InnoComstyle program. Section 6.2 shows that such a program may be more effective than a linear tax
credit at stimulating R&D investment when relabeling is a significant concern. While Section 6.3
shows that an InnoCom-style program can be justified from a welfare perspective under moderate
spillover effects, the simulations in Section 6.1 also reveal the limits of this approach. Specifically,
Figure 8 shows that the potential to scale-up InnoCom-style programs is limited by the fact that
more generous tax credits or more accessible notches draw in firms that are less productive and
that have higher adjustment costs, which exacerbates the prevalence of relabeling.

7

Conclusions

Governments around the world devote considerable tax resources to incentivizing R&D investment.
However, there is widespread concern that firms respond by relabeling other expenses as R&D
expenditures. This paper takes advantage of a large fiscal incentive and detailed administrative
tax data to analyze these margins in the important case of China. We provide striking graphical
evidence consistent with both large reported responses and significant scope for relabeling. These
results suggest misreporting of R&D may contaminate estimates of the effectiveness of R&D
40

Slemrod (2006) discusses the compliance costs of business taxes and argues that compliance costs should be
incorporated in welfare analyses of tax systems.
41
Our framework makes three implicit assumptions that imply that our estimate of ζ̂ is a conservatively high
value. First, our static model implies that firms expect an instant and sizable equilibrium price response to R&D
tax policy, which may depress R&D investment. Second, by holding L constant, our model assumes that Φt is the
only source of gains. Finally, in contrast to empirical approaches to estimating ζ that condition spillover pools on
geographic or technological distance, we assume a broad spillover pool that includes all firms. Models with a more
rigid equilibrium price response, where income can increase in response to productivity growth, or with narrower
spillover pools would all imply a lower value of ζ̂.

29

investment and may lead to misallocation of R&D toward firms with less innovative projects.
Optimal subsidies for R&D depend on the fiscal cost for the government and the potential
positive externalities of R&D investment on other firms’ productivity. We provide a useful metric
that traces the government’s trade-off between own-firm productivity growth and tax revenues. We
also provide a bound on the size of the externality that would justify this government intervention.
Finally, while we find evidence consistent with relabeling, the unusual structure of the InnoCom program, characterized by pre-registration and auditing, may limit the scope of relabeling
and evasion. In contrast, R&D investment tax credits may be more susceptible to relabeling in
developing and even developed countries. As this paper demonstrates, accounting for relabeling
has important implications for the design of R&D subsidies.

30

References
Ackerberg, Daniel A., Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer, “Identification Properties of Recent
Production Function Estimators,” Econometrica, 2015, 83 (6), 2411–2451.
Agrawal, Ajay, Carlos Rosell, and Timothy S Simcoe, “Tax Credits and Small Firm R&D
Spending,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming, 2019.
Akcigit, Ufuk, John Grigsby, Tom Nicholas, and Stefanie Stantcheva, “Taxation and
Innovation in the 20th Century,” Working Paper 24982, National Bureau of Economic Research
September 2018.
Almunia, Miguel and David Lopez-Rodriguez, “Under the Radar: The Effects of Monitoring
Firms on Tax Compliance,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, February 2018, 10
(1), 1–38.
Andrews, Isaiah, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Measuring the Sensitivity
of Parameter Estimates to Estimation Moments*,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017,
132 (4), 1553–1592.
Atkinson, A. B. and N. H. Stern, “Pigou, Taxation and Public Goods12,” The Review of
Economic Studies, 01 1974, 41 (1), 119–128.
Auerbach, Alan J., “Taxes, firm financial policy and the cost of capital: An empirical analysis,”
Journal of Public Economics, 1984, 23 (1-2), 27–57.
Bachas, Pierre and Mauricio Soto, “Not(ch) Your Average Tax System: Corporate Taxation
Under Weak Enforcement,” Technical Report, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 8524
2019.
Becker, Bettina, “Public R&D Policies and Private R&D Investment: A Survey of the Empirical
Evidence,” Journal of Economic Surveys, 2015, 29 (5), 917–942.
Benhabib, Jess, Jesse Perla, and Christopher Tonetti, “Reconciling Models of Diffusion
and Innovation: A Theory of the Productivity Distribution and Technology Frontier,” Working
Paper 23095, National Bureau of Economic Research January 2017.
Bertanha, Marinho, Andrew H. McCallum, and Nathan Seegert, “Better Bunching,
Nicer Notching,” working paper, 2018.
Best, Michael Carlos and Henrik Jacobsen Kleven, “Housing Market Responses to Transaction Taxes: Evidence From Notches and Stimulus in the UK,” 2017.
, Anne Brockmeyer, Henrik Jacobsen Kleven, Johannes Spinnewijn, and Mazhar
Waseem, “Production versus Revenue Efficiency with Limited Tax Capacity: Theory and
Evidence from Pakistan,” Journal of Political Economy, 2015, 123 (6), 1311 – 1355.
Blinder, Alan S. and Harvey S. Rosen, “Notches,” The American Economic Review, 1985,
75 (4), 736–747.
Blomquist, Sören and Whitney Newey, “The Bunching Estimator Cannot Identify the Taxable Income Elasticity,” Working Paper 24136, National Bureau of Economic Research December
2017.
31

Bloom, Nicholas, “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (3), 623–685.
, John Van Reenen, and Heidi Williams, “A Toolkit of Policies to Promote Innovation,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, August 2019, 33 (3), 163–84.
, Schankerman Mark, and Van Reenen John, “Identifying Technology Spillovers and
Product Market Rivalry,” Econometrica, 2013, 81 (4), 1347–1393.
Cai, Jing, Yuyu Chen, and Xuan Wang, “The Impact of Corporate Taxes on Firm Innovation:
Evidence from the Corporate Tax Collection Reform in China,” Working Paper 25146, National
Bureau of Economic Research October 2018.
Chernozhukov, Victor and Han Hong, “An MCMC approach to classical estimation,” Journal
of Econometrics, 2003, 115 (2), 293 – 346.
Clauset, Aaron, Cosma Rohilla Shalizi, and Mark EJ Newman, “Power-law distributions
in empirical data,” SIAM review, 2009, 51 (4), 661–703.
Dechezlepretre, A., E. Einio, R. Martin, K.-T. Nguyen, and J. Van Reenen, “Do Fiscal
Incentives increase innovation? An RDD for R&D,” Technical Report, CEP Discussion Paper
1413 2016.
Devereux, Michael P., Li Liu, and Simon Loretz, “The Elasticity of Corporate Taxable
Income: New Evidence from UK Tax Records,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
2014, 6 (2), 19–53.
Diamond, Rebecca and Petra Persson, “The Long-term Consequences of Teacher Discretion
in Grading of High-Stakes Tests,” Technical Report, Stanford University 2016.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf, “Bunching at the kink: Implications
for spending responses to health insurance contracts,” Journal of Public Economics, 2017, 146,
27 – 40.
Einiö, Elias, “R&D subsidies and company performance: Evidence from geographic variation in
government funding based on the ERDF population-density rule,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 2014, 96 (4), 710–728.
Eisner, Robert, Steven H Albert, and Martin A Sullivan, “The new incremental tax credit
for R&D: incentive or disincentive?,” National Tax Journal, 1984, pp. 171–183.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D, Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Owen Zidar,
“State Taxes and Spatial Misallocation,” The Review of Economic Studies, 09 2018, 86 (1), 333–
376.
GAO, United States, “The Research Tax Credit’s Design and Administration Can Be Improved,” Technical Report 2009.
Gelber, Alexander M., Damon Jones, and Daniel W. Sacks, “Earnings Adjustment Frictions: Evidence from the Social Security Earnings Test,” Technical Report 1 2019.
Gordon, Roger and Wei Li, “Tax structures in developing countries: Many puzzles and a
possible explanation,” Journal of Public Economics, 2009, 93 (7), 855 – 866.

32

Guceri, Irem and Li Liu, “Effectiveness of Fiscal Incentives for RD: Quasi-experimental Evidence,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, February 2019, 11 (1), 266–91.
Hall, Bronwyn and John Van Reenen, “How effective are fiscal incentives for R&D? A review
of the evidence,” Research Policy, 2000, 29, 449–469.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Jacques Mairesse, and Pierre Mohnen, “Measuring the Returns to
R&D,” Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, 2010, pp. 1033 – 1082.
Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenson, “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior,” American
Economic Review, 1967, 57 (3), 391–414.
Head, K. and T. Mayer, “Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cookbook,” Handbook
of International Economics, Vol. 4, 2014.
Head, Keith, Thierry Mayer, and Mathias Thoenig, “Welfare and Trade without Pareto,”
American Economic Review, May 2014, 104 (5), 310–16.
Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, “Bunching,” Annual Review of Economics, 2016.
and Mazhar Waseem, “Using notches to uncover optimization frictions and structural elasticities: Theory and evidence from Pakistan,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013.
, Martin B. Knudsen, Claus Thustrup Kreiner, Søren Pedersen, and Emmanuel
Saez, “Unwilling or Unable to Cheat? Evidence From a Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark,”
Econometrica, 2011, 79 (3), 651–692.
König, Michael, Kjetil Storesletten, Zheng Song, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “From Imitation
to Innovation: Where is all that Chinese R&D Going?,” Technical Report 2018.
Kratz, Marie and Sidney I. Resnick, “The qq-estimator and heavy tails,” Communications
in Statistics. Stochastic Models, 1996, 12 (4), 699–724.
Liu, Li, Ben Lockwood, Miguel Almunia, and Eddy Tam, “VAT Notches, Voluntary
Registration, and Bunching,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming, 2019.
Lockwood, Ben, “Malas Notches,” working paper, 2018.
Lucking, Brian, Nicholas Bloom, and John Van Reenen, “Have R&D Spillovers Declined
in the 21st Century?,” Fiscal Studies, 2019, 40 (4), 561–590.
Mansfield, Edwin and Lorne Switzer, “The effects of R&D tax credits and allowances in
Canada,” Research Policy, 1985, 14 (2), 97–107.
Notowidigdo, Matthew, “The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks,” Journal of Labor
Economics, forthcoming, 2019.
Patel, Elena, Nathan Seegert, and Matthew Grady Smith, “At a Loss: The Real and
Reporting Elasticity of Corporate Taxable Income,” Technical Report, SSRN: 2608166 2016.
Rao, Nirupama, “Do Tax Credits Stimulate R&D Spending? The Effect of the R&D Tax Credit
in its First Decade,” Journal of Public Economics, 2016, 140.
Saez, Emmanuel, “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2010.
33

Samuelson, Paul A., “The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 1954, 36 (4), 387–389.
Slemrod, Joel, “A general model of the behavioral response to taxation,” International Tax
andPublic Finance, 2001, 8 (2), 119–128.
, “The (Compliance) Cost of Taxing Business,” 2006. University of Michigan Working Paper.
, “Buenas Notches: Lines and Notches in Tax System Design,” eJournal of Tax Research, Dec.
2013, 11 (3), 259–283.
and Christian Gillitzer, Tax Systems, MIT Press, 2013.
Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos and Philippe Wingender, “Estimating the Incidence of Government Spending,” December 2014. Mimeo.
Wei, Shang-Jin, Zhuan Xie, and Xiaobo Zhang, “From “Made in China” to “Innovated in
China”: Necessity, Prospect, and Challenges,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2017, pp. 49–
70.
Wilson, Daniel, “Beggar Thy Neighbor? The In-State, Out-of-State, and Aggregate Effects of
R&D Tax Credits,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2009, 91 (2), 431–436.

34

3

Figure 1: Cross-Country Comparison: R&D as Share of GDP

2.5

USA

R&D Intensity (%)
1.5
2

Canada

1

China

.5

India

1996

1999

2002

Year

2005

2008

2011

Notes: This figure plots the aggregate R&D Intensity, i.e., R&D expenditure as a share of GDP, in the
private sector for China, Canada, India, and the US. Chinese R&D intensity started in 1996 at 0.5%, a
similar level to India. It increased dramatically, by more than threefold, to above 1.5% in 2011, on par
with Canada. The R&D intensity of the US remained stable at 2.5% during the same period. The red
line marks the year of the tax reform. Source: World Bank.

35

Figure 2: Bunching at Different Thresholds of R&D Intensity (2011)
B. Small Firms

300

100

A. Full Sample

6%
75

6%

0

25

100

Frequency
50

Frequency
200

3% 4%

1%

5%

R&D Intensity

10%

15%

1%

5%

10%

15%

D. Large Firms

250

200

300

36

C. Medium Firms

R&D Intensity

4%

Frequency
150
200
0

0

50

50

100

Frequency
100
150

3%

1%

5%

R&D Intensity

10%

15%

1%

5%

R&D Intensity

10%

15%

Notes: This figure plots the empirical distribution of R&D intensity for all manufacturing firms with R&D intensity between 0.5% and 15%
in the Administrative Tax Return Database. Panel A reports the pooled data distribution with all sizes of firms. Panels B, C, and D report
the R&D intensity distribution of small, medium, and large firms, respectively. Note that large fractions of the firms bunch at the thresholds
(6% for large, 4% for medium, and 3% for large) at which they qualify to apply for the InnoCom certification. Source: Administrative Tax
Return Database. See Section 3.1 for details.

Figure 3: Effects of the 2008 Tax Reform on the Bunching of Foreign-Owned Large
Companies

250

A. Bunching before 2008 Tax Reform
Notch
Pre-2008
5%

0

50

Frequency
100
150

200

Notch
Post-2008
3%

1%

5%
R&D Intensity

10%

150

B. Bunching after 2008 Tax Reform
Notch
Pre-2008
5%

0

50

Frequency

100

Notch
Post-2008
3%

1%

5%
R&D Intensity

10%

Notes: This figure compares the R&D intensity distribution for large foreign-owned firms before and
after the 2008 tax reform. To make the two samples comparable, the figure plots only firms that we
observe in both the SAT and ASM data. The tax reform eliminated the preferential corporate income
tax for foreign-owned firms and increased their incentives to qualify for the InnoCom program. Compared
with panel A, panel B shows that these firms increased their bunching behavior substantially after 2008.
Source: Administrative Tax Return Database and Annual Survey of Manufacturers. See Section 3.1 for
details.

37

Figure 4: Estimated Counterfactual Densities of R&D Intensity

Density
.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

B. Small Firms (2011)
∆d = 0.103(0.007)***
P-value (M=B) = 0.8707
Frictions: a = 0.796(0.078)***

0

∆d = 0.054(0.038)
P-value (M=B) = 0.9841
Frictions: a = 0.784(0.764)

0

Density
.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

A. Small Firms (2009)

.03

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

.07

.08

.09

.02

.03

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

.07

f0(D): Density With Linear Tax
f1(D): Density With Notch

C. Medium Firms (2009)

D. Medium Firms (2011)
Density
.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

f0(D): Density With Linear Tax
f1(D): Density With Notch

.08

.09

.08

.09

∆d = 0.172(0.097)*
P-value (M=B) = 0.8255
Frictions: a = 0.574(0.058)***

0

∆d = 0.120(0.083)
P-value (M=B) = 0.4293
Frictions: a = 0.822(0.079)***

0

Density
.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

.02

.01

.02

.03

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

.07

.08

.09

.01

.02

.03

f0(D): Density With Linear Tax
f1(D): Density With Notch

.07

f0(D): Density With Linear Tax
f1(D): Density With Notch

F. Large Firms (2011)
∆d = 0.245(0.035)***
P-value (M=B) = 0.8750
Frictions: a = 0.499(0.066)***

0

0

∆d = 0.156(0.004)***
P-value (M=B) = 0.2762
Frictions: a = 0.641(0.016)***

Density
.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

E. Large Firms (2009)
Density
.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

.01

.02

.03

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

.07

f0(D): Density With Linear Tax
f1(D): Density With Notch

.08

.09

.01

.02

.03

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

.07

.08

.09

f0(D): Density With Linear Tax
f1(D): Density With Notch

Notes: This figure reports the results of our bunching estimator for small, medium, and large firms in
2009 and 2011. In each panel, we plot the empirical density of R&D intensity in red and the estimated
counterfactual R&D intensity in blue. The lower bound d∗− and upper bound d∗+ for the excluded
region are indicated by vertical dashed lines. ∆d is the percentage increase in R&D in the excluded
region, and a∗ is the fraction of firms that are constrained from participating in the program. We report
the p-value of the test that the missing mass equals the excess mass. See Section 3.2 for details. Source:
38
Administrative Tax Return Database.

0

Admin Expense to Sales Ratio
.02
.04
.06
.08
.1

.12

Figure 5: Empirical Evidence of Relabeling

.02

.03

Small (6%)

.04
.05
R&D Intensity
Medium (4%)

.06

.07

.08

Large (3%)

Notes: This figure plots the non-R&D administrative expense-to-sales ratio at each level of R&D
intensity. The green dots/line are for the large firms, the red dots/line are for the medium firms, and the
blue dots/line are for the small firms. The threshold of R&D intensity for firms to qualify for InnoCom
certification differs by firm size: 6% for small firms, 4% for medium firms, and 3% for large firms. For
each size category, there is a pronounced drop in the administrative expense-to-sales ratio when the
R&D intensity approaches the required threshold. Source: Administrative Tax Return Database. See
Section 3 for details.

39

Figure 6: Lack of Sales Manipulation

10

11

Ln Sales

12

13

A. Lack of Sales Manipulation around R&D Intensity Thresholds

.02

.03

.04
.05
R&D Intensity

Small (6%)

Medium (4%)

40

B. Lack of Firm Size Manipulation
Small and Medium Firms

.08

Large (3%)

250
200

400

Frequency
100
150

300

Medium Firms: α = 4%

Medium Firms: α = 4%

Large Firms: α = 3%

0

Small Firms: α = 6%

50

Frequency
200
100

.07

C. Lack of Firm Size Manipulation
Medium and Large Firms

0
40000

.06

45000

50000
R&D Intensity

55000

60000

160000

180000

200000
R&D Intensity

220000

240000

Notes: This figure examines the potential manipulation of sales data. Panel A shows that firms do not manipulate sales by under-reporting
their sales to reach their respective notch. Panels B and C show that firms do not attempt to over-report their sales to move into the next size
category and thus reduce the threshold of R&D intensity needed to qualify for the InnoCom program. Overall, there is no evidence of sales
manipulation. Source: Administrative Tax Return Database and Annual Survey of Manufacturers. See Section 3 for details.

Figure 7: Theoretical Bunching Predictions
A. Firms’ Bunching Decision
d

*--

α

B. Predicted Bunching

Profit
Bunching

*--

d

α

Density

Relative Firm Value

Profit Not
Bunching

Profit
Bunching
High C

R&D Intensity
Counterfactual Density: f0(d)
Density w/ Fixed Costs: f1(d)

R&D Intensity

C. Firms’ Bunching Decision
with Relabeling
*--

d w/
Relabeling

*--

α

d

D. Predicted Bunching
with Relabeling
*--

d w/
Relabeling

Profit
Bunching

*--

d

α

Profit
Bunching w/
Relabeling

Density

Relative Firm Value

Profit Not
Bunching

R&D Intensity
Density w/Relabeling & Fixed Costs: f1(d)

R&D Intensity

Notes: This figure provides intuition for when a firm decides to bunch and describes empirical implications of our model for R&D investment and bunching. Panel A visualizes Equation 3 by plotting
 ∗ 1−(θ−1)ε  HT 
d
1−t2
1
the relative value from bunching, αi1
LT
(θ−1)ε − 1 − c, and the relative profit from not
1−t
2


d∗
1
bunching, αi1 (θ−1)ε
− 1 , as functions of the optimal R&D intensity level in the absence of the notch,
d∗i1 . Absent fixed costs (c = 0), the value from bunching exceeds the value of not bunching when d∗i1 ≈ α.
All firms with c = 0 and with d∗i1 ∈ [d∗− , α] decide to bunch. When ε is small, the profit from bunching is
steeper, which shifts the value of d∗− to the right and reduces the likelihood that firms will bunch. The
firm value from bunching shifts down for c > 0 so that firms with d∗i1 farther from α are less likely to
bunch. When c is large enough, firms with d∗i1 ≈ α may not participate in the program. Panel B shows
how the incentives of the InnoCom program impact the density of R&D intensity, f1 (d), relative to a
counterfactual density without the program, f0 (d). Panel C plots the relative firm value from relabeling
(from Equation 5) and shows that, by flattening the slope of this line, relabeling decreases the R&D
intensity of the marginal buncher. Panel D shows that the possibility of relabeling shifts d∗− to the left
and increases the likelihood that firms will bunch. See Section 4 for details.

41

Figure 8: Simulated Counterfactual Policies: Selection and Relabeling
A. Mean φ1 for Compliers
Relative to Benchmark

B. Mean b for Compliers
Relative to Benchmark
150

4

,=.02
,=.03
,=.06

,=.02
,=.03
,=.06

3

Percentage Difference in b

Percentage Difference in ? 1

100

2

1

0

-1

50

0

-50
-2

-3
10

12

14

16

18

20

-100
10

22

12

14

16

18

20

22

Preferential Tax Rate (%)

Preferential Tax Rate (%)

C. Real R&D Increase for Compliers

D. Fraction due to Relabeling for Compliers
30

28

26

28

Fraction due to Relabeling

Percentage Increase in R&D

24

22

20

18

16

14

26

24

22

20

18
12

10

,=.02
,=.03
,=.06

16

Benchmark:,=.03,t H =0.15

Benchmark:,=.03,t H =0.15
8
10

12

14

,=.02
,=.03
,=.06

16

18

20

14
10

22

12

14

16

18

20

Preferential Tax Rate (%)

Preferential Tax Rate (%)

Notes: These figures report the effects of different policy parameters on the selection of firms into the
InnoCom program and on aggregate outcomes of interest. Panels A and B show that lower preferential
tax rates select firms with higher adjustment costs and lower productivity. Panels C and D show how
real and relabeled R&D respond to changes in parameters of the policy. See Section 6 for details on the
structural model and the simulation.

42

22

Figure 9: Simulated Counterfactual Policies: Productivity and Fiscal Cost of
Stimulus
A. Average TFP Increase (Excluded Region)
2

1.8

Percentage Increase in TFP

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

,=.02
,=.03
,=.06

0.4

0.2

Benchmark:,=.03,t H =0.15
0
10

12

14

16

18

20

22

Preferential Tax Rate (%)

B. Tax Revenue Cost of Stimulating Real R&D
4.5

Benchmark:,=.03,t H =0.15
,=.02
,=.03
,=.06

Elasticity of Tax to R&D Ratio

4

3.5
10
11

10

12

3

11

13

12

14
2.5

16
17
19
20

12
13
14

17
15
16

19
17
18

21

1.5

11

15

18

20

21

14

16

18
2

10

13

15

19
20
21

1
0

5

10

15

Percentage Increase in Total Real R&D (%)

Notes: These figures report the effects of different policy parameters on aggregate outcomes of interest.
Panel A shows how different reforms affect TFP. Panel B plots the elasticity of the tax cost to the
government to the real R&D increase. This figure represents the fiscal cost curve of incentivizing R&D
investment for the government and shows that notches that target larger firms have lower fiscal costs.
See Section 6 for details on the structural model and the simulation.

43

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics
A. State Administration of Tax Data 2008–2011
Mean

Std

p25

Sales (mil RMB)
118.263 1394.828 2.579
Fixed Asset (mil RMB)
32.912 390.406 0.402
# of Workers
175.402 852.494 17.000
R&D or not
0.081
0.273
0.000
R&D/Sales (%, if>0)
3.560
7.019
0.337
Administrative Expense/Sales (%) 9.417
11.886
2.809
TFP
2.058
0.522
1.638

p50

p75

10.608 42.056
2.089 10.743
48.000 136.000
0.000
0.000
1.544
4.296
5.814 11.103
2.007
2.434

Observations
1202257
1139038
1213497
1219630
98258
1171365
1100845

B. Annual Survey of Manufacturing 2006–2007
Mean
Sales (mil RMB)
Fixed Asset (mil RMB)
# of Workers
R&D or not
R&D/Sales (%, if>0)
Notes: Various sources; see Section

Std

p25

p50

110.801 1066.080 10.760 23.750
42.517 701.282 1.630 4.492
238.379 1170.327 50.000 95.000
0.102
0.303
0.000 0.000
1.631
3.184
0.118 0.461
3.1 for details.

44

p75

Observations

59.513
13.370
200.000
0.000
1.736

638668
638668
638668
638668
65267

Table 3: Structural Estimates
A. Point Estimates
TFP Elasticity
of R&D
ε

Relabeling
Cost
η

Distribution of
Adjustment Costs
µb
σb

Distribution of
Fixed Costs
µc

Model 1: Excluding Bunching Moments
Estimate
0.089
Standard Error
(0.002)

5.900
(0.493)

7.989
(0.086)

2.047
(0.076)

0.687
(0.062)

Model 2: All Moments
Estimate
Standard Error

6.755
(0.449)

8.011
(0.075)

2.014
(0.073)

0.532
(0.012)

0.091
(0.002)

Notes: Estimates based on calibrated values of θ = 5, ρ = 0.725, and σ = 0.385. Model 1 estimates the
structural parameters using all moments except the bunching estimates. Model 2 uses all the available
moments to estimate the structural parameters. See Section 5 for estimation details.

B. Simulated vs. Data Moments
Data

Simulated
Model 1:
Excluding Bunching

Model 2:
All Moments

0.373
0.113
0.067

0.382
0.157
0.080

0.379
0.146
0.069

0.056
0.026
0.012
0.037
-0.015
0.027
0.9%

0.055
0.037
0.026
0.035
-0.017
0.023
0.8%

0.057
0.038
0.027
0.035
-0.020
0.025
0.7%

0.009
0.157
0.641

(0.009)
(0.124)
(0.738)

0.010
0.150
0.665

R&D Dist. Moments: mD (Ω)
Below the notch (%)
[0.3, 1.2]
[1.2, 2.1]
[2.1, 3]
Above manipulated region (%)
[5, 6.3]
[6.3, 7.6]
[7.6, 9]
Mean R&D intensity [3%, 5%]
Average TFP below notch
Average TFP above notch
Admin cost ratio break at notch
Bunching Moments: mB (Ω)
Bunching Point d−∗
Increase in Reported R&D: ∆d
Fraction of firms not bunching

Notes: This table compares the moments generated by our simulations with those from the data. The
simulation is based on 30, 000 firms. The moments that are not targeted by model 1 are in parentheses.
The table shows our model does a remarkable job of matching 10 (13) moments from the data using a
relatively parsimonious model based on 5 parameters.

45

Online Appendix: Not For Publication
This appendix contains multiple additional analyses. Appendix A includes additional details
on the Chinese corporate income tax system. Appendix B describes in more detail the data that we
use in our analysis. Appendix C discusses the estimation of our measure of log TFP. Appendix D
discusses details of the implementation of the bunching estimator. Appendix E discusses additional
robustness checks of our bunching estimates. Appendix F describes details of the implementation
of the estimator of Diamond and Persson (2016). Appendix G shows that firms do not respond to
the InnoCom program by manipulating sales expenses. Appendix H provides a detailed derivation
of the model. Appendix I links the model to more traditional bunching estimates used in the
public finance literature. Appendix J provides additional details behind the structural estimation.
Appendix K explores the robustness of our structural estimation. Finally, Appendix L provides
details on the welfare implications of the program.

A

Additional Details on the Chinese Corporate Income
Tax System

China had a relatively stable Enterprise Income Tax (EIT) system in the early part of our sample,
from 2000 to 2007. During that period, the EIT ran on a dual-track tax scheme with the base
tax rate for all domestic-owned enterprises (DOE) at 33% and that for foreign-owned enterprises
(FOE) ranging from 15% to 24%. The preferential treatment of FOEs has a long history dating
to the early 1990s, when the Chinese government started to attract foreign direct investment in
the manufacturing sector. The government offered all new FOEs located in the Special Economic
Zones (SEZ) and Economic and Technology Development Zones (ETDZ) a reduced EIT of 15%.
It also offered a reduced EIT of 24% for all FOEs located in urban centers of cities in the SEZs
and ETDZs. The definition of foreign-owned is quite broad: it includes enterprises owned by Hong
Kong, Macau, and Taiwan investors. It also includes all joint-venture firms with a foreign share
of equity larger than 25%. The effective tax rates of FOEs are even lower since most had tax
holidays that typically left them untaxed for the first 2 years and then halved their EIT rate for
the subsequent 3 years.
In addition to the special tax treatments of FOEs, the Chinese government started the first
round of the West Development program in 2001. Both DOEs and FOEs that are located in
West China and are part of state-encouraged industries enjoy a preferential tax rate of 15%.
West China is defined as the provinces of Chongqing, Sichuan, Guizhou, Yunnan, Tibet, Shaanxi,
Gansu, Ningxia, Qinghai, Xinjiang, Inner Mongolia and Guangxi. Finally, there is also a small
and medium enterprise tax break, which is common in other countries. However, the revenue
threshold is as low as $50, 000, making this tax break effectively irrelevant for our sample.
46

The Chinese government implemented a major corporate tax reform in 2008 to eliminate the
dual-track system based on domestic/foreign ownership and established a common rate of 25%.
Some of the existing tax breaks for FOEs were gradually phased out. For instance, FOEs that
had previously paid an EIT of 15% paid a tax rate of 18% in 2008, 20% in 2009, 22% in 2010, and
24% in 2011. In contrast, the West Development program will remain in effect through 2020.42

B

Data Sources

We connect three large firm-level databases of Chinese manufacturing firms. The first is the relatively well-studied Chinese Annual Survey of Manufacturing (ASM), an extensive yearly survey of
Chinese manufacturing firms. The ASM is weighted towards medium and large firms and includes
all Chinese manufacturing firms with total annual sales of more than 5 million RMB (approximately $800,000) as well as additional state-owned firms with lower sales. This survey provides
detailed information on the ownership, location, production, and balance sheet of manufacturing
firms. This dataset allows us to measure total firm production, sales, inputs, and, for a few years,
detailed skill composition of the labor force. We supplement these data with a separate Chinese
National Bureau of Statistics survey that includes firms’ reported R&D. We use these data for the
years 2006–2007.
The second dataset that we use is the administrative enterprise income tax records from the
Chinese State Administration of Tax (SAT). The SAT is the counterpart of the IRS in China and
is in charge of tax collection and auditing. In addition, the SAT supervises various tax assistance
programs such as the InnoCom program. The SAT keeps its own firm-level records of tax payments
as well other financial statement information used in tax-related calculations. We acquire these
administrative enterprise income tax records for 2008–2011, which allows us to construct detailed
tax rate information for individual manufacturing firms. Our main sample of analysis includes
firms with a positive tax liability. We also use these data to construct residualized measures of
firm productivity.43 The scope of the SAT data is slightly different from that of the ASM data,
but there is a substantial amount of overlap for the firms that conduct R&D. For instance, the
share of total R&D that can be matched with ASM records is close to 85% for 2008.
The third dataset that we use is the list of firms enrolled in the InnoCom program from 2008
42

After the phase-out of the FOE preferential tax treatment, InnoCom became the largest preferential tax
program based on the EIT in China. From a financial accounting perspective, firms in China can potentially choose
to expense or amortize R&D expenses. This is consistent with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).
However, while Chinese accounting principles allow firms in research-intensive industries to book a restricted fraction
of “development R&D” as an intangible asset and to amortize it over time, R&D expenditures are predominantly
expensed. More importantly, from a tax accounting perspective, the Chinese State Administration of Tax (SAT)
defines the taxable profit based on total R&D expenditure, regardless of whether it was amortized or expensed in
financial accounts. In our model, we follow the SAT in computing taxable profits by immediately deducting all
R&D expenditures from operating profit.
43
We discuss the details of this procedure in Appendix C.

47

to 2014. For each of these manufacturing firms, we have the exact Chinese name and the year the
firm was certified with high-tech status. This list is available from the Ministry of Science and
Technology website, and we have digitized it to link it to the SAT and ASM data. We use these
data to cross-validate the high-tech status recorded in the SAT data.

C

Estimation of Residual Productivity

This appendix describes how we construct the empirical measure of firm-level productivity, φˆit .
First, we use the structure in our model of constant elasticity demand to write firm revenue
(value-added) as:

ln rit =

θ−1
θ


[κ ln kit + (1 − κ) ln lit + φit ],

where lit is the labor input, which we assume may be chosen in each period. Second, we obtain
the following relation from the first-order condition of cost minimization for the variable input lit :





wlit
θ−1
l
ln sit ≡ ln
= ln (1 − κ)
+ vit ,
rit
θ
where vit ∼ iid, and E[vit ] = 0 is measurement error or a transitive shock in factor prices. Third,
we obtain a consistent estimate of (1 − κ)( θ−1
) for each 3-digit manufacturing sector. Finally,
θ
given our benchmark value of θ = 5, we construct a residual measure of log TFP as follows:
φˆit =

θ
ln rit − κ̂ ln kit − (1 − κ̂) ln lit .
θ−1

Robustness of TFP Estimates
We also follow the empirical literature to directly estimate sector-specific production functions
using the method of Ackerberg et al. (2015). We use only data from firms that do not perform
R&D and thus are not affected by the notch in the InnoCom program. We then construct measured
productivity based on these production function estimates. We find estimates similar to those
from the cost-share based “index number” approach. For instance, the correlation of the labor
coefficient in the production function across the two methods is 0.7 across 30 3-digit manufacturing
industries. More importantly, the two estimates of measured TFP have a correlation of 0.88.

D

Cross-Validation of p and (d∗−, d∗+) in Bunching Analysis

We follow Diamond and Persson (2016) in using a data-based approach to selecting the excluded
region (i.e., (d∗− , d∗+ )), and the degree of the polynomial, p. In particular, we use K-fold crossvalidation to evaluate the fit of a range of values for these three parameters.
48

Our cross-validation procedure searches over values of p and possible discrete values of d∗− < α
and d∗+ > α that determine the excluded region. Given the monotonically decreasing shape of
the R&D intensity distribution, we restrict the estimated βk ’s to result in a decreasing density.
For each triple (p, d∗− , d∗+ ), the procedure estimates the model in K = 5 training subsamples
of the data and computes two measures of model fit on corresponding testing subsamples of the
data. First, we test the hypothesis that f0 (·) and f1 (·) have equal mass over the exclusion restriction. Second, we compute the sum of squared errors across the test subsamples. We select the
combination of parameters that minimizes the sum of squared errors, among the set of parameters
that do not reject the test of equality of the first test at the 10% level.
Note that a common practical problem in the literature is the higher frequency in the reporting
of round numbers. As Figure 2 in Section 3 demonstrates, our data does not display the roundnumber problems that are often present in other applications.
Finally, we obtain standard errors by bootstrapping the residuals from the polynomial regression, generating replications of the data, and re-estimating the parameters.

E

Robustness of Bunching Estimates

This section explores the robustness of our bunching estimates. First, we show in panel A of
Figure A.5 that our estimator is able to recover a null effect in the absence of the policy. This
panel estimates the effect of a non-existent notch on the pre-2008 distribution of R&D intensity of
large foreign firms, which were not subject to the incentives of the InnoCom program, and finds a
small and negative estimate of ∆d.
Second, we explore the potential for firms’ extensive-margin responses to bias our estimates.
If the bunching that we observe is driven by firms that previously did not perform any R&D, the
missing mass would not equal the excess mass. This would lead us to underestimate ∆d. In panel
B of Figure A.5, we use data for large firms in 2011, and we restrict the sample to firms that had
positive R&D in 2009 and 2010. This panel shows that we obtain a very similar estimate of ∆d
when we rule out extensive-margin responses.
Third, we show that our results are robust to using data from before 2008 for large foreign
firms that were not subject to the incentives of the InnoCom program to inform the shape of the
density in the excluded region. Panel C of Figure A.5 shows that using these data results in very
similar estimates of both the counterfactual density and ∆d.44
Fourth, Figure A.6 estimates the counterfactual density of R&D intensity when we exclude
certain groups of firms from the data. Panel A analyzes data on large firms from 2011 and shows
44

As discussed in Blomquist and Newey (2017), variation in non-linear incentives can help in identifying responses
when bunching approaches are used. We combine this non-manipulated density with the density in 2011, f1 (d), by
ensuring that the combined density is continuous at the boundaries of the excluded region, d∗− and d∗+ .

49

that excluding state-owned enterprises from our data does not have a meaningful effect on our
estimate of ∆d. Similarly, panels B and C show that excluding firms with low profitability and
firms that are not in designated high-tech industries, respectively, results in very similar estimates
of the effects of the notch on R&D investment.
Fifth, Figure A.7 shows that our estimates of counterfactual densities are robust to the choice
of (p, d∗− , d∗+ ). This figure shows that restricting (p, d∗− , d∗+ ) to the second-best estimate either
with p = 3 (panel A) or p = 4 (panel B) results in very similar estimates. Panel C of this graph
further restricts the estimation to have p = 2 and to only rely on data such that d > d∗+ to recover
the counterfactual density. This panel shows that even relying only on data beyond the bunching
region results in very similar estimates.
Overall, estimates from the bunching analysis consistently show that firms respond to the
InnoCom program by increasing their reported R&D intensity.

F

ITT Estimates on Productivity, Relabeling, and Tax
Revenue

Our structural estimates in Section 5 quantify the cost of relabeling and the productivity effects
of R&D. This appendix discusses an alternative and complementary approach to quantifying the
effects of the InnoCom program on relabeling and productivity. Because firms select into the
program by manipulating R&D, comparing firms that participate in the program to those that
do not can result in biased estimates of the effects of the program. To obtain unbiased estimates,
we follow a treatment effects approach that compares the (observed) average outcome of firms
that could have participated in the program to a counterfactual average without the InnoCom
program.
Diamond and Persson (2016) develop an estimator that formalizes this comparison and quantifies the average effect of the program on a given outcome Y :45
IT T Y = E[Y |Notch, d ∈ (d∗− , d∗+ )] − E[Y |No Notch, d ∈ (d∗− , d∗+ )],

(F.1)

where we define the manipulated region (d∗− , d∗+ ) to include all firms that could have responded
to the program. While d∗+ = α in theory, in practice, firms bunch in a neighborhood above α,
as can be seen in Figure 2. Equation F.1 compares the average potential outcome of firms in the
region (d∗− , d∗+ ), which includes firms that do not respond to the program, as well as firms whose
R&D intensity would be above the notch without the program. For this reason, we interpret this
quantity as an intent to treat (ITT).
45

Bachas and Soto (2019) implement a similar approach to analyze the effects of notches on other outcomes.

50

F.1

Implementing the Estimator of Diamond and Persson (2016)

For a given outcome Yit , such as TFP, R&D or administrative costs, the estimate is given by:
∗− ∗+
∗+
\
\
IT
T Yt = E[Yt |Notch, dt1 ∈ (d∗−
t1 , dt1 )] − E[Yt |No Notch, dt1 ∈ (dt1 , dt1 )]


"Z ∗+
#
dt
X
1
1


\
=  Exc.
Yit  −
fˆ0 (r)E[Yit |dt1 =
r, No Notch]dr .
∗−
N
dt
∗− ∗+
1
di,t1 ∈(dt ,dt )
1
1

(F.2)

When Yt is R&D or administrative costs, we estimate contemporaneous effects, so that t = t1 . For
the case when Yt is TFP, we study the effect of the program in time t1 on future TFP (t > t1 ). We
interpret this estimate as an intent to-treat (ITT).46 For example, the ITT on Y = ln d measures
∆d, the percentage increase in R&D intensity over the excluded region.
The first quantity in Equation F.2 is the observed average value of a given outcome Yit over the
excluded region. The second quantity is a counterfactual average value of Yit . We construct this
counterfactual by combining the counterfactual density of R&D intensity that we estimated as
part of the bunching analysis (fˆ0 (·)) with an estimated average value of the outcome conditional
on a given value of R&D. We estimate E[Yit |dt\
1 , No Notch] using a flexible polynomial regression
of Yit on R&D intensity over the same excluded region used to estimate fˆ0 (·):47
Yit =

p
X

|k=0



βk · (dit1 )k +γ · 1 d−∗ ≤ dit1 ≤ d+∗ + δYit1 + φs + νit ,
{z

}

E[Yt |dt1 =d,No Notch]

where we exclude observations in the manipulated region and control for industry fixed effects
φs and lagged outcomes Yit1 when t > t1 . Armed with an estimate of E[Yit |dt1 , No Notch], we
then compute the counterfactual average value for firms in the excluded region by integrating
E[Yit |dt1 , No Notch] relative to the counterfactual density f0 (d).
The interpretation of Equation F.2 as a treatment effect relies on two assumptions: first,
that we can consistently estimate the counterfactual density f0 (d) and, second, that the InnoCom
program does not change the relationship between R&D intensity and a given outcome outside the
excluded region. This assumption allows us to uncover the relationship between an outcome and
the running variable. We can then use this relationship to approximate E[Yit |dt1 , No Notch] inside
46

As detailed in our model, firms self-select into the treatment depending on whether they face fixed or adjustment
costs that prevent them from obtaining the high-tech certification. This selection implies that we cannot use data
just beneath the threshold as a control group for firms above the threshold. Our procedure does not rely on such
comparisons across firms but instead relies on the assumption that E[Yit |dt1 , No Notch] is smooth around the notch
and that it may be approximated with data outside the excluded region that, by definition, is not subject to a
selection problem.
47
Note that this regression is not causal. Its role is purely to predict the outcome over the excluded region. We
obtain standard errors for ITT estimates in Equation F.2 by bootstrapping this equation as well as the estimates
of the counterfactual density.

51

the excluded region. Given a consistent estimate of f0 (d), this assumption holds trivially for the
case where Y = ln d. When we estimate the effect on TFP growth, this assumption implies that
the only effect of the program on TFP growth is through real R&D investment. This assumption
is consistent with the model in the previous section. A similar argument applies to the case of
relabeling through administrative costs. Finally, note that this approach has the advantage that
it places no restrictions on the distributions of fixed costs, adjustments costs, and productivity
and does not rely on functional form assumptions for relabeling costs and the effects of R&D on
firm-level productivity.
Estimation of E[Y |d] for the ITT Analysis
We now discuss estimates of the functions E[Y |d, No Notch]. We focus on large firms since, as
shown in Figure A.4, they account for the vast majority of R&D in the economy. In addition, all
analyses report the effects of the notch in 2009 on outcomes in 2009 and 2011.
We estimate E[Y |d, No Notch] using the following regression:
Yit =

p
X

|k=0



βk · (dit1 )k +γ · 1 d−∗ ≤ dit1 ≤ d+∗ + δYit1 + φs + νit ,
{z

}

E[Yt |dt1 =d,No Notch]

where we use the same exclusion region as in panel E of Figure 4 (see Appendix D for details),
and we use either quadratic or cubic polynomials for each outcome.48
Figure A.8 shows the data for a given outcome as a function of R&D intensity in 2009 (blue
circles) along with the fitted values from these regressions (red lines). The size of the circles
indicates the weights based on the number of observations in each bin. Panel A considers the
case of log R&D intensity. Since this is a mechanical function of R&D intensity, we know what
E[Y |d, No Notch] should look like. This figure shows that, even though the polynomials are driven
by data outside of the exclusion region, we are able to fit non-linear functions very well. Other
panels show that the red lines provide a good fit for data outside of the exclusion region. As
firms self-select into the InnoCom program, we cannot evaluate the fit inside the exclusion region,
since these patterns may be due to selection. Finally, note that we allow the user cost to have a
discontinuous jump in panel C since, in contrast to other outcomes, we would expect participation
in the program to have a mechanical effect on the user cost of R&D.49
48

To comply with data availability policies, we first collapse the cleaned data into the bins of R&D intensity
displayed in panel E of Figure 4. For each bin, we make available the count of firms and the median value of a
given variable. We estimate this regression on the binned data, where we weight each bin by the number of firms
in each bin.
49
Diamond and Persson (2016) allow discontinuities in their estimates of E[Y |d, No Notch] since, in their application, manipulation above the notch may have a direct effect on outcomes. In our case, we would not expect a
direct effect of the program on firm-level outcomes apart from the effects related to tax incentives, which would
mechanically affect the user cost of R&D.

52

F.2

ITT Estimates

Panel A of Table A.1 presents estimates of ITT effects of the InnoCom program on several outcomes. We find that R&D investment for firms in the excluded region increased by 14.6% in
2009, which is very close to the bunching estimate of ∆d of 15.6%. We also find a decrease in
the administrative cost ratio of 9.6%. We find that administrative costs decreased, relative to the
average value of this ratio, by 0.33% of firm sales. Finally, we study how the decision to invest in
R&D in 2009 affected productivity in 2011. We find that between 2009 and 2011, the policy led
to an increase in TFP of 1.2%. These results show that, while the policy induces relabeling, it
also leads to real R&D investment and productivity gains.
To relate our estimates to the existing literature, we obtain estimates of the elasticity of R&D
investment to the user cost of capital (UCC). Panel A of Table A.1 shows that the policy lowered
the UCC in 2009 by 7.1%.50 The second panel of Table A.1 presents estimates of UCC elasticities
obtained by taking the ratio of the ITT on R&D to the ITT on the UCC, along with bootstrapped
confidence intervals. The first row shows that reported R&D increased by 2% for every 1% decrease
in the user cost. When we use the approximation above to obtain an estimate of the real increase
in R&D, we obtain a user cost elasticity closer to 1.3. Notice that the empirical literature focused
on OECD countries (see Hall and Van Reenen, 2000; Becker, 2015) has typically found an elasticity
ranging from 0.4 to 1.8 based on direct R&D tax credit programs. Thus, our estimates indicate
that, once we correct for the relabeling behavior of Chinese manufacturing firms, their user cost
elasticity is comparable to those in more developed economies.
As an alternative metric, we consider how much it costs the government to increase R&D
investment in terms of foregone revenue. Panel A of Table A.1 shows that the policy reduced
corporate tax revenues by 12.8%. Thus, we find that, for every 1% increase in R&D, there was
a 0.88% decrease in tax revenue. This statistic is a useful ingredient for deciding whether the
InnoCom policy is too expensive or whether externalities from R&D investment merit further
subsidies. However, this statistic does not line up perfectly with the government’s objective,
since part of the response may be due to relabeling and since this estimator relies on the average
percentage increase, which may differ from the percentage increase in total R&D. Our structural
model section bridges this gap by computing the fiscal cost of raising real R&D and by showing
how the fiscal cost depends on the design of the InnoCom program.
50

We compute the user cost of R&D by generating an equivalent-sized tax credit. This credit is the ratio of tax
savings to R&D investment. We then use the standard Hall and Jorgenson (1967) formula as in Wilson (2009).

53

G

Lack of Manipulation of Other Expenses

In Figure 5, we show a significant downward break in the administrative expense-to-sales ratio at
the notches for each firm size category. Given the fact that administrative expenses and R&D are
categorized together under the Chinese Accounting standard, we think that is the natural place to
find suggestive evidence of relabeling behavior. In this section, we address the question of whether
other types of expenses might also illustrate similar empirical patterns. We plot a similar graph
to Figure 5 in Figure A.3 for the sales expense-to-sales ratio for all three size categories. We find
that there are no detectable discontinuities at the notches for all firms. Note that, while there is a
drop for small firms at the 6% notch, Table A.5 shows that this drop is not statistically significant.
This analysis suggests that the drops that we observe in administrative costs are likely not due to
substitution of inputs and are likely due to relabeling.

H

Detailed Model Derivation

This appendix provides additional details behind the derivation of the model.

H.1

Model Setup

Consider a firm i with a constant-returns-to-scale production function given by:
qit = exp{φit }Vit
where Vit is static input bundle with price wt and where φit is log TFP, which follows the law of
motion given by:
φi,t = ρφi,t−1 + ε ln(Di,t−1 ) + uit ,
where Di,t−1 > 0 is R&D investment and ui,t ∼ i.i.d. N (0, σ 2 ). This setup is consistent with the
R&D literature where knowledge capital depreciates over time (captured by ρ) and is influenced
by R&D expenditure (captured by ε). In a stationary environment, it implies that the elasticity
of TFP with respect to a permanent increase in R&D is

ε
.
1−ρ

The unit cost function for this familiar problem is simply given by:
c(φit , wt ) =

wt
.
exp{φit }

The firm faces a constant elasticity demand function given by:
qit = p−θ
it Bt ,
where θ > 1 is the demand elasticity and Bt is the aggregate demand shifter. In a given period,
the firm chooses pit to:
−θ
max p1−θ
it Bt − pit Bt c(φit , wt ).
pit

54

The profit-maximizing pit gives the familiar constant markup pricing:
p∗it =
where

θ
θ−1

θ
c(φit , wt ),
θ−1

is the gross markup. Revenues then equal production costs multiplied by the gross-

markup:

Revenueit =

wt
θ
θ − 1 exp(φit )

1−θ
Bt .

Head and Mayer (2014) survey estimates of θ from the trade literature. While there is a broad
range of estimates, the central estimate is close to a value of 5, which implies a gross markup of
1.25. We also normalize the input cost wt ≡ 1 for the rest of our analysis. We can then write
per-period profits as:
(θ − 1)θ−1
1
[exp(φit )]θ−1 Bt .
πit = Revenueit =
θ
θ
θ
Uncertainty and R&D investment enter per-period profits through the realization of log TFP
φit . We can write expected profits as follows:
 (θ−1)ε
(θ − 1)θ−1 
Bt exp(ρ(θ − 1)φi,t−1 + (θ − 1)2 σ 2 /2) Di,t−1
θ
θ
(θ−1)ε
= π̃it Di,t−1 ,

E[πit ] =

where π̃it denotes the expected profit without any R&D investment.
We follow the investment literature and model the adjustment cost of R&D investment with a
quadratic form that is proportional to revenue θπi1 and that depends on the parameter b:

2
bθπit Dit
.
g(Dit , θπit ) =
2
θπit

H.2

R&D Choice under Linear Tax

Before considering how the InnoCom program affects a firm’s R&D investment choice, we first
consider a simpler setup without such a program. In a two-period context with a linear tax, the
firm’s inter-temporal problem is given by:
(θ−1)ε

max (1 − t1 ) (πi1 − Di1 − g(Di1 , θπi1 )) + β(1 − t2 )π̃i2 Di1
D1

,

where the firm faces an adjustment cost of R&D investment given by g(Di1 , θπi1 ). This problem
has the following first-order condition:



Di1
(θ−1)ε−1
F OC : −(1 − t1 ) 1 + b
+ β(1 − t2 )ε(θ − 1)Di1
π̃i2 = 0.
θπi1
55

(H.1)

Notice first that if the tax rate is constant across periods, the corporate income tax does not
affect the choice of R&D investment.51 In the special case of no adjustment costs (i.e., b = 0), the
optimal choice of Di1 is given by:
∗
Di1


=

β(1 − t2 )(θ − 1)ε
π̃i2
1 − t1

1
 1−(θ−1)ε

.

(H.2)

We observe that the choice of R&D depends on the potentially unobserved, firm-specific factor
φi1 that influences π̃i2 . If (θ − 1)ε < 1, then R&D investment is increasing in firm’s current
productivity φi1 .
Since the InnoCom program focuses on R&D intensity (i.e., the R&D-to-sales ratio), we also
rewrite the FOC in terms the optimal R&D intensity d∗i1 ≡

∗
Di1
:
θπi1

π̃i2
(1 − t1 ) (1 + bd∗i1 ) = β(1 − t2 )ε(θ − 1)(d∗i1 )(θ−1)ε−1
.
{z
}
|
(θπi1 )1−(θ−1)ε
|
{z
}
Increase in Investment Cost

(H.3)

Productivity Gain from R&D

When the profit return of R&D ε(θ − 1) is larger (smaller) than the depreciation rate of knowledge
(1 − ρ), firms’ R&D intensity di1 is increasing (decreasing) in firm’s current TFP φi1 and size.
In our data, R&D intensity is weakly positively correlated with firm TFP and size. We use this
pattern to discipline our key parameter ε in our model estimation.
We now write the optimal firm value-to-sales ratio as:





1
b
1
b
Π(d∗i1 |t2 )
∗
∗ 2
= (1 − t1 )
+ di1
− 1 + (di1 )
−
,
θπi1
θ
(θ − 1)ε
(θ − 1)ε 2
where we use Equation H.3 to substitute

π̃i2 (d∗i1 )(θ−1)ε
(θπi1 )1−(θ−1)ε

with

(H.4)

(1−t1 )(1+bd∗i1 )
.
β(1−t2 )ε(θ−1)(d∗i1 )−1

Second-Order Condition To ensure that our model results in a well-defined solution, we
confirm that the second-order condition holds at the estimated values. The SOC is given by:
 

1
∗ (θ−1)ε−2
SOC : −(1 − t1 ) b
+ β(1 − t2 )ε(θ − 1)((θ − 1)ε − 1)(Di1
)
π̃i2 < 0.
θπi1
It is sufficient to have (θ − 1)ε < 1 for the second-order condition to hold. We can also use the
∗
implicit function theorem to show that the R&D decision Di1
is increasing in φi1 if (θ − 1)ε < 1,

which is consistent with numerous empirical studies.

H.3

A Notch in the Corporate Income Tax

Assume now that the tax in the second period has the following structure that mirrors the incentives in the InnoCom program:

t2 =
51

tLT
if di1 < α
2
,
HT
t2
if di1 ≥ α

This simple model eschews issues related to source of funds, as in Auerbach (1984).

56

tLT
> tHT
and where α is the R&D intensity required to obtain the high-tech certification and
2
2
LT /HT stands for low-tech/high-tech. In addition, we introduced a fixed cost of certification c
such that firms need to pay c × θπi1 to obtain the tax benefit when they pass the R&D intensity
threshold.
We first calculate the optimal profit of the firm conditioning on bunching at the notch,
Π(αθπ1 |tHT
2 ):

2 !
bθπ
αθπ
i1
i1
(θ−1)ε
π̃i2 .
Π(αθπ1 |tHT
+ β(1 − tHT
2 ) = (1 − t1 ) πi1 − θπi1 (α + c) −
2 )(αθπi1 )
2
θπi1
Let

Π(α|tHT
2 )
θπi1

be the value-to-sales ratio of the firm conditional on bunching at the notch. We can

write it as:
Π(α|tHT
2 )
= (1 − t1 )
θπi1
We can similarly substitute



1
α2 b
− (α + c) −
θ
2

π̃i2
(θπi1 )1−(θ−1)ε

with



(θ−1)ε
+ β(1 − tHT
2 )α

(

)

(1−t1 ) 1+bd∗i1
LT
β(1−t2 )ε(θ−1)(d∗i1 )ε(θ−1)−1

π̃i2
.
(θπi1 )1−(θ−1)ε

and express the value-to-sales

ratio as
"

1
+α
(1 − t1 )
θ



d∗i1
α

1−(θ−1)ε


c  αb
(1 − tHT
1
2 )
−
1
+
−
(1 + bd∗i1 )
α
2
(1 − tLT
2 ) ε(θ − 1)

Π(α|tHT )

!#
.

(H.5)

Π(d∗ |t )

A firm will bunch at the notch if θπi12 ≥ θπi1i1 2 , which occurs when:
 ∗ 1−(θ−1)ε 
 ∗ 

di1
di1
(1 − tHT
c  αb
1
2 )
1 + αb
−
1
+
−
α
α
α
2
(1 − tLT
2 ) ε(θ − 1)






2
d∗
d∗i1
b
1
b
≥ i1
−1 +α
−
.
α (θ − 1)ε
α
(θ − 1)ε 2

(H.6)

For each specific realization of adjustment and fixed costs (b, c), we define the marginal firm with
interior optimal R&D intensity d∗−
b,c such that Equation H.6 holds with equality.

H.4

R&D Choice under Tax Notch with Relabeling

Assume now that firms may misreport their costs and shift non-R&D costs to the R&D category.
Following conversations with CFOs of large Chinese companies, we model relabeling as a choice
to misreport expenses across R&D and non-R&D categories. Misreporting expenses or revenues
overall is likely not feasible, as firms are subject to third-party reporting (see, e.g., Kleven et al.
(2011)).
Denote a firm’s reported level of R&D spending by D̃i1 . The expected cost of misreporting to
the firm is given by h(Di1 , D̃i1 ). We assume that the cost of misreporting is proportional to the
reported R&D, D̃i1 , and depends on the percentage of misreported R&D, δi1 =
h(Di1 , D̃i1 ) = D̃i1 h̃ (δi1 ) .
57

D̃i1 −Di1
,
D̃i1

so that:

We also assume that h̃ satisfies h̃(0) = 0 and h̃0 (·) ≥ 0.
The effects of the InnoCom program are now as follows:
 LT
if D̃1 < αθπ1
t2
,
t2 =
if
D̃1 ≥ αθπ1
tHT
2
Notice first that, if a firm decides not to bunch at the level αθπ1 , there is no incentive to misreport
R&D spending, as it does not affect total profits and does not affect the tax rate. However, a firm
might find it optimal to report D̃1 = αθπ1 even if the actual level of R&D is lower. We start by
∗
characterizing the firm’s optimal relabeling strategy δi1
conditional on bunching and its resulting

payoff function Π(αθπ1 , D1∗K |tHT
2 ).
max (1 − t1 ) πi1 −
K
Di1

K
Di1



K
Di1

bθπi1
− θπi1 c −
2
θπi1

2 !


− αθπ1 h̃

K
αθπ1 − Di1
αθπ1



K (θ−1)ε
+ β(1 − tHT
2 )π̃i2 (Di1 )
DK

1
The first order condition for relabeling in terms of the real R&D intensity dK
1 = θπ1 is then:



π̃i2
dK∗
i1
K∗ (θ−1)ε−1
K∗
0
= 0.
+ β(1 − tHT
−(1 − t1 ) 1 + bdi1 + h̃ 1 −
2 )ε(θ − 1)di1
α
(θπi1 )1−(θ−1)ε
|
{z
}
|
{z
}

Productivity Gain from Real R&D

Increase in Investment Cost and Reduction in Relabeling Cost

(H.7)
We again substitute for the expected productivity components of the firm decision, i.e., π̃i2
with the interior optimal R&D d∗i1 using Equation H.3. The FOC for dK
1 effectively characterizes
∗
≡1−
the optimal relabeling strategy δi1

dK∗
i1
.
α

HT
The firm decides to bunch if the profits from the optimal relabeling strategy Π(α, dK∗
i1 |t2 ) are

greater than when the firm is at the optimal interior solution (and truthful reporting) Π(d∗i1 , d∗i1 |tLT
2 ).
We write this in terms of a value-to-revenue ratio comparison and obtain:


d∗i1
dK∗
i1

1−(θ−1)ε
(1 +

bd∗i1 )

|

(dK∗ /α)
×
× i1
(θ − 1)ε
{z



1 − tHT
2
1 − tLT
2

Relative Profit from Bunching

h̃(1 −
d∗
−
≥ i1
(1 − t1 )
α
|
{z
} |
dK∗
i1 /α)

Relabeling Cost




−

dK∗
b K∗ 2
c
− i1 −
(d )
α
α
2α i1
}


 ∗ 2 

1
di1
b
b
−1 +α
−
.
(θ − 1)ε
α
(θ − 1)ε 2
{z
}

(H.8)

Relative Profit without Bunching

The marginal firm d∗−
b,c in this case is determined by Equation H.7 and Equation H.8 when it holds
with strict equality.

I

Connecting the Model with Bunching Estimates

Section 5 estimates the model in Section 4 by matching the descriptive statistics from Section 3.
This section shows that our model is also directly connected to bunching estimates, which are
commonly used in the public finance literature.
58

I.1

Empirical Implications for Bunching on R&D

Figure 7 provides intuition linking the model to bunching estimates. Panel B plots f0 (d): the
counterfactual distribution of R&D intensity under a linear tax. In a world where firms face no
adjustment or fixed costs, all of the firms in the range (d∗− , α) would bunch at the notch. Denote
B as the missing mass relative to the counterfactual distribution over this range. To see how the
model relates to the extent of bunching, note that a larger value of ε or a lower relabeling cost
will result in a larger missing mass B and a lower value of d∗− —i.e., the marginal bunching firm
has a lower R&D intensity.
Panel B also plots f1 (d), which shows that, in the presence of fixed and adjustment costs,
some firms do not respond to the incentives in the InnoCom program. For given values of (b, c), a
∗−
firm will be constrained from responding if d < d∗−
b,c , an event that we denote by I[d < db,c ]. The

fraction of constrained firms at a given value of r in the range (d∗− , α) is given by:
Z
Pr(Constrained|r) = I[r < d−
b,c ]f0 (r, b, c)d(b, c) = f1 (r),
b,c

where f0 (r, b, c) is the joint density of R&D intensity, fixed costs, and adjustment costs and where
the second equality notes that we observe this fraction of firms in the data. It follows from this
expression that measures of Pr(Constrained|r) are informative of the distributions of b and c.
The area B can be computed as follows:
Zα Z
I[r ≥

B =

d−
b,c ]f0 (r, b, c)d(b, c)dr

Zα Z
=

d∗− b,c
Zα

d∗− b,c
Zα

(f0 (r) − Pr(Constrained|r))dr =

=

(1 − I[r < d−
b,c ])f0 (r, b, c)d(b, c)dr

d∗−

(f0 (r) − f1 (r))dr.

(I.1)

d∗−

The first line shows that B depends on the distribution of fixed and adjustment costs. The
second line shows that frictions result in a smaller bunching mass B by subtracting the fraction
of constrained firms. The observed degree of bunching B is therefore a function of ε, relabeling
costs, adjustment costs, and certification costs.
This discussion highlights how bunching estimates can inform the parameters of the model.
Specifically, the model predicts that higher values of ε, lower costs of relabeling, and lower fixed
and adjustment costs will result in larger values of B, lower values of d∗− , and lower values of
Pr(Constrained|d).

I.2

Percentage Increase in the R&D Intensity of the Marginal Firm

We now connect the values of B, d∗− , and Pr(Constrained|d) to estimates of the effects of the
InnoCom program on the increase in R&D using approximations that are common in this literature
59

(e.g., Kleven and Waseem, 2013). Recall that:
Zα
(1 − Pr(Constrained|r))f0 (r)dr.

B =
d∗−

Using the assumption that Pr(Constrained|d) does not depend on d, we obtain:
Zα
B = (1 − Pr(Constrained))

f0 (r)dr

d∗−

α − d∗−
≈ (1 − Pr(Constrained))f0 (α)α
,
α }
| {z

(I.2)

∆D∗

where the second line approximates the integral under the assumption that f0 (d) is flat in the
interval (d∗− , α). While the assumptions behind this approximation may be strong, they provide
a useful approximation for ∆D∗ based on B and Pr(Constrained):
∆D∗ ≈

B
.
f0 (α)α(1 − Pr(Constrained))

This equation can be implemented using the following counterfactual estimates for f0 (α) and B:
!
p
p
α
X
X
X
k
k
β̂k · (dj ) − cj .
f[
β̂k · (α) and B̂ =
0 (α) =
dj =d∗−

k=0

k=0

Following Kleven and Waseem (2013), it is possible to estimate the fraction of constrained firms
at an R&D intensity α− such that firms would be willing to jump to the notch even if R&D had
no effects on productivity:52
a∗ (α− ) =

−)
\
Pr(Constrained|α
cα −
.
= p
P
−)
k
−
f\
(α
0
β̂k · (α )
k=0

Note that this expression differs from our expression for a∗ =

Rα

d∗ −

f1 (v)dv/

Rα

d∗ −

fˆ0 (v)dv because

the latter considers the average fraction of firms that respond to the program over the interval
(d∗− , α).

I.3

Connecting the Model with ITT Estimates

Our model generates intuitive predictions for the ITT effects on R&D, relabeling through administrative costs (ADM), and TFP. If some of the reported R&D intensity is real activity, our model
52

The “money-burning” point is easy to compute. Note that the tax benefit is given by Profits × (tHT − tLT ) and
the cost of jumping to the notch is Sales × (α − α− ), which implies that α− = α − (tHT − tLT ) × Profits
Sales . The average
net profitability ratio in our data of 7% implies that firms in the range (α − .07 × (tHT − tLT ), α) are not able to
respond to the incentives of the InnoCom program. For the case of large firms, we have (α− , α) = (2.3%, 3%).

60

would predict that IT T T F P ≥ 0. According to our model for the evolution of TFP in Equation
1, we would find larger values of IT T T F P for larger values of the parameter ε. We expect to
find IT T ADM < 0 if a fraction of the reported R&D is due to relabeling of administrative costs.
Intuitively, if firms over-report R&D by under-reporting administrative costs, the average ADM
over the excluded region would be artificially low. Our model predicts small values of IT T ADM
if firms face large costs of relabeling. Finally, consider the case where the outcome of interest is
reported R&D intensity. In this case, IT T d only depends on the counterfactual density f0 (d). Our
model predicts a larger fraction of compliers if ε is large or if relabeling costs are low.
This discussion shows that this treatment effects approach can also quantify the extent of
relabeling and the effects of the InnoCom program on productivity. In addition, the estimates of
Equation F.1 complement the model-based approach by providing additional moments that can
inform the parameters of the model.

J

Details of Structural Estimation

This appendix provides details on the structural estimation.
We first discuss how we compute the moments used in our structural estimation. To comply
with data availability policies, we first collapse the cleaned data into the bins of R&D intensity
displayed in panel E of Figure 4. For each bin, we make available the count of firms and the
average value of a given variable. We use these collapsed data to compute the following moments:
mD (Ω) : R&D Distribution Moments:
1. Density of R&D intensity for three intervals below the notch (at 3%): [0.3, 1.2], [1.2, 2.1], and
[2.1, 3]. We compute these moments by aggregating bin counts into these three categories.
The variance of these moments is computed using the closed-form expression for the variance
of a multivariate Bernoulli distribution.
2. Density of R&D intensity for three intervals above the manipulated region: [5, 6.3], [6.3,
7.6], and [7.6, 9]. We compute these moments by aggregating bin counts into these three
categories. The variance of these moments is computed using the closed-form expression for
the variance of a multivariate Bernoulli distribution.
3. Average R&D intensity over the interval [3,5]. We compute this moment by averaging the
bin averages based on the number of firms in each bin. We compute the variance of this
moment by bootstrapping over the number of firms for each bin.
4. Average TFP below the notch (at 3%). We compute this moment by averaging the bin
averages based on the number of firms in each bin. We compute the variance of this moment
by bootstrapping over the number of firms for each bin.
61

5. Average TFP above the notch (at 3%). We compute this moment by averaging the bin
averages based on the number of firms in each bin. We compute the variance of this moment
by bootstrapping over the number of firms for each bin.
6. Administrative cost ratio break at notch. We implement a version of Figure 5 using the
binned data. That is, we estimate a regression with third-order polynomials above and
below the notch that is weighted by the number of observations in each bin. The moment
used in the estimation is the difference between the residuals of this regression for the bins
above and below the notch, which matches our estimate of the structural break reported in
Table A.2. We obtain the variance of this moment by bootstrapping this difference over the
number of firms for each bin.
mB (Ω) : Bunching Moments:
7. Bunching point (R&D intensity of marginal buncher). We obtain this estimate based on the
procedure described in Appendix D. To estimate its variance, we solve Equation I.2 for d∗−
and compute the variance of the resulting expression.
8. Increase in reported R&D (in the manipulated region). We use the observed density f1 (·)
and the estimated counterfactual density fˆ0 (·) (see Section 3 and Appendix D) to compute
E[d|Notch, d ∈ (d∗− , d∗+ )] and E[d|No Notch, d ∈ (d∗− , d∗+ )], respectively. We then compute
the increase in R&D intensity relative to the observed average over the exclusion region. We
compute the variance of this moment by bootstrapping the counterfactual average over the
excluded region.
9. Fraction of firms not bunching. We use the observed density f1 (·) and the estimated counterRα
Rα
factual density fˆ0 (·) (see Section 3 and Appendix D) to compute a∗ = ∗ f1 (v)dv/ ∗ fˆ0 (v)dv.
d −

d −

We compute the variance of this moment by bootstrapping the counterfactual average over
the excluded region.
We now discuss the empirical implementation of the model. We simulate 30,000 firms that
differ in their initial productivity φi1 . For a given guess of the structural parameters of the model,
Ω, we first determine the R&D intensity conditional on not bunching by solving Equation H.3
for each firm. We then determine the optimal relabeling strategy conditional on bunching using
Equation H.7. Equation H.8 then determines whether a firm bunches at the notch. Using the optimal R&D investment and relabeling strategies of these 30,000 simulated firms, we then compute
distributional and bunching moments. We repeat this process 10 times and average the moments
over these instances to compute mD (Ω) and mB (Ω). The estimate of the structural parameters,
Ω̂, is determined by minimizing the criterion function as discussed in Section 5.
62

K

Robustness of Structural Model Assumptions

In this section, we conduct a few additional robustness checks of the parametric and modeling
assumptions that we make in our structural estimation.

K.1

Parametric Distribution of Firm Productivity

In our benchmark model, we micro-found the cross-sectional log TFP distribution from a normal
AR(1) process. We use the persistence and volatility of sales for non-R&D firms to calibrate
the persistence parameter ρ = 0.725 and variance parameter σ = 0.385. The assumption of this
process requires the cross-sectional distribution of firm TFP exp(φ1 ) to be log-normal. Since we
construct firm-level TFP in our data, we can check this parametric assumption directly with the
TFP data.
We use ideas proposed by Kratz and Resnick (1996) and Head et al. (2014) in this robustness
check. The basic idea is to compare the distribution of measured productivity with the distribution
implied by a given functional form. We first construct the empirical CDF of firms’ measured TFP
as F̂i , i = 1, 2, ...N , with i ranked based on firm TFP.
According to the log-normal parametric assumption, the theoretical CDF is ΦN (

ln T F P −µtf p
),
σtf p

with ΦN as the standard normal CDF. For a number Fi ∈ [0, 1], we can then write ln T F Pi as:
ln T F PiLN = µtf p + Φ−1
N (Fi )σtf p .
A commonly used alternative parametric assumption is that firm TFP follows a Pareto distribution. Building on the idea above, the implied ln T F Pi for a value Fi ∈ [0, 1] is given by:
ln T F PiP = ln αtf p −

1
ln(1 − Fi )
αtf p

where αtf p and αtf p are the Pareto scale and shape parameters.
With our frequency estimate F̂i , we can then impose the log-normal formula to predict ln T FˆP LN i
and the Pareto formula, which yields ln T ˆF P P i . This procedure allows us to evaluate how reasonable the log-normal or Pareto parametric assumptions are by comparing these predictions with
the observed distribution of log TFP, ln TˆF P i .
Figure A.9 shows the predicted TFP from imposing the log-normal CDF on the left panel and
the Pareto CDF on the right panel. The predicted TFP from imposing the log-normal CDF tracks
the 45 degree line, implying that this assumption is broadly consistent with the data. By contrast,
the predicted TFP based on the Pareto CDF does not fit the data well. This graph provides strong
evidence that log-normal is a reasonable parametric assumption for the TFP distribution.53
53

Head et al. (2014) draws a similar conclusion for export sales using micro-level data of French and Chinese
exporters. We also follow Clauset et al. (2009) and formally conduct a goodness-of-fit test based on a KolmogorovSmirnov (KS) statistic. The Pareto distribution is strongly rejected with our measured TFP data.

63

K.2

Heterogeneity in the TFP Elasticity: ε

Our benchmark model assumes firms have heterogeneous technological opportunities for R&D
investment, driven by the heterogeneity in adjustment costs, b. An alternative way of modeling
the heterogeneity in firms’ technological opportunities is to allow heterogeneity in ε.54 As we show
in this appendix, our average estimates of ε and b do not depend on which can be heterogeneous.
However, models where ε is allowed to be heterogeneous produce worse fits of the data. We
therefore believe that our benchmark model is superior to models with heterogeneous values of ε.
To investigate how this alternative setup affects our results, we estimated models where ε
follows a Beta distribution B(αε , βε ) between 0 and an upper bound of ε̄. We chose the Beta distribution since its probability density function is highly flexible in the interval [0, ε̄]. We estimated
two versions of the heterogeneous-ε model. In Model A, we assume a symmetric Beta distribution,
i.e., αε = βε , and jointly estimate αε and ε̄. In Model B, we impose ε̄ = 1/(θ − 1) = 0.25, a value
that guarantees the second-order condition of firm’s R&D choice problem. We then estimate αε
and βε . The results are reported in Table A.6.
Several findings are worth highlighting. First, several of the parameters are close to our baseline
estimates. We estimate average values of ε of 0.0725 and 0.102 in Models A and B, respectively.55
These values are close to our benchmark estimate of 0.09. Similarly, the average adjustment cost
parameter is 7.666 and 8.271 for the two cases, which bracket our benchmark estimate. This is
not surprising since adjustment costs are primarily identified by the distribution of R&D intensity
away from the notch.
Second, these models imply small variations in the forces that lead firms to bunch at the notch.
Model A combines a slightly lower mean value of ε with lower values of the fixed cost parameter
and the cost of relabeling. Because this model implies a lower productivity impact of R&D, the
model attempts to match observed bunching patterns via lower certification and relabeling costs.
In contrast, Model B combines a slightly larger mean estimate of ε of 0.102 with larger values of
the parameters that govern the fixed costs and the cost of relabeling. While a larger average value
of ε would lead to more bunching in this model, this force is limited by fixed and relabeling costs.
An important question is whether these alternative models yield better or worse fits of the data
moments. Panel B of Table A.6 shows that both of these models result in significantly lower values
for average TFP both below and above the notch. Model A, in particular, results in a smaller
gap between TFP above and below the notch, which may explain the smaller average estimate of
ε. In addition, these alternative models also have a harder time matching the extent of bunching,
reflected in lower values of ∆d∗ . These findings indicate that despite obtaining similar estimates
of key model parameters, our benchmark model of heterogeneous adjustment cost is a preferable
54
55

Note that our data variation cannot separately identify heterogeneity in both ε and b.
ε̄α
Recall that ε ∼ ε̄ × Beta(α, β) so that the mean value of ε is α+β
.

64

model for our data.

K.3

Robustness of the Adjustment Cost Function

We now explore the robustness of our structural model to variations in the adjustment cost function. Our baseline model assumes:

2
bθπit Dit
g(Dit , θπit ) =
.
2
θπit
While this function follows previous research in normalizing adjustment costs relative to firm scale
(e.g., Bloom, 2009), a potential concern is that this size-dependence may constrain our estimates.
To explore this possibility, we now consider a generalized function that can vary the dependence
on firm size:


2
(θπit )1−ν Dit
.
g(Dit , θπit ) = b
2
θπit

With this function, an R&D intensity of d has the overall cost of:


d
× θπit .
d 1+b
(θπit )ν
While our baseline specification assumes ν = 0, this formulation allows us to test whether adjustment costs for R&D intensity are increasing or decreasing as a function of firm size. For instance,
a positive value of ν would imply that larger firms are subject to smaller adjustment costs.
Column 3 in Table A.7 reports estimates of this extended model. We estimate a small and
positive value of ν that is not statistically different from zero. We do not find a significant
improvement in the fit of our moments, despite having one more parameter. Overall, we find
similar estimates of the effect of R&D on TFP (ε = 0.091) and on the extent of relabeling (fraction
of relabeled R&D at 24.2%). These results suggest that our main estimates are not biased by a
potential size-dependent property of adjustment costs.

K.4

Robustness of the Relabeling Cost Function

We now consider the robustness of our model to the formulation of the cost of relabeling. Our
baseline model assumes that the cost of misreporting is proportional to the reported R&D, D̃i1 ,
and depends on the percentage of misreported R&D, δi1 =

D̃i1 −Di1
,
D̃i1

so that:

h(Di1 , D̃i1 ) = D̃i1 h̃ (δi1 ) .
While this assumption is consistent with the literature on evasion (e.g., Slemrod and Gillitzer,
2013), one potential concern is that our results may depend on the degree to which real behavior
interacts with avoidance behavior—what Slemrod and Gillitzer (2013) call the “avoidance facilitating effect of real activity.”
65

To explore the robustness of our results, we consider an alternative cost of evasion. We modify
the formulation above by normalizing relative to firm sales θπi1 , as opposed to reported R&D
investment, so that:
h(Di1 , D̃i1 ) = θπi1 h̃

D̃i1 − Di1
θπi1

!
.

Normalizing by firm sales as a proxy for firm size is intuitive for two reasons. First, costs that
are not proportional to firm size will result in large-scale evasion by large firms and no evasion by
small firms, which is not consistent with our empirical results. Second, the policy itself is targeted
toward R&D intensity (R&D over sales), making it likely that the government monitors R&D
intensity directly. Importantly, this formulation only depends on the difference (D̃i1 − Di1 ) and is
separable from R&D. Using our specification for h̃(·) implies:
n
o
i1
exp η D̃i1θπ−D
−1
i1
h(Di1 , D̃i1 ) = θπi1
.
η
From this expression, it follows that for small values of η (i.e., as η → 0), we have:
h(Di1 , D̃i1 ) = η(D̃i1 − Di1 ).
That is, this specification accommodates a linear, separable cost of evasion that is also independent
of firm size.
Column 4 in Table A.7 reports estimates from this alternative model. Importantly, we find
similar estimates of the R&D effects on TFP of 10%. Because the coefficient of the cost of
evasion function, η, now has a different magnitude, it is not directly comparable to our benchmark
estimate. However, this new specification implies that 23.2% of the increase in R&D is due to
relabeling, which is similar to our baseline of 24.2%.
However, Panel B of Table A.7 shows that the fit of several of the moments is worse under
this specification of the cost of relabeling. For instance, this model predicts less bunching—both
in lower values of the average R&D intensity between 3% and 5% and in ∆d∗ —and results in a
worse fit of the moments measuring average TFP below and above the notch.
Overall, this robustness check shows that our model is not constraining the cost of evasion in
a way that biases our main estimates or that prevents us from improving the fit of the data.

K.5

Potential Real Responses to Administrative Costs

As we note in Section 6 (footnote 9), it is possible that the structural break in administrative
costs that we document in Figure 5 is partly driven by “reallocating resources from other expenses
toward R&D or more precise accounting of previously undercounted R&D expenses.” To study
the sensitivity of our results to this possibility, we estimate an alternative version of the model
where we multiply the coefficient from the structural break regression by (1 − ξ), where ξ = 0.25.
66

Column 5 of Table A.7 reports the results from this model. Remarkably, we obtain very
similar estimates for most of our structural parameters. The only exception is the cost of evasion
parameter η. Under the assumption that 75% of the drop is due to real responses, our estimate
of η increases from our baseline of 6.755 to 7.655. This increase makes sense, since a larger cost
of relabeling would result in a lower extent of relabeling.
This model is informative of the sensitivity of our results to how we interpret the estimates from
Figure 5. First, the productivity effects of R&D are not significantly affected by this alternative
formulation. Second, while the estimate of η increases in a predictable way, this increase is
relatively small and does not affect our main results. In this case, the fraction of the relabeled
R&D is 21.7%, which is lower than our baseline finding but still quite substantial.

K.6

Robustness to Allowing a Correlation between Fixed Costs and
Productivity

An important force in our model is the firm-level decision of whether to bunch. Our baseline
model assumes that firm-level TFP φ is distributed independently of firms’ adjustment and fixed
costs. One potential concern is that firm-level TFP may be correlated with adjustment costs and
that this correlation may bias our main estimates.
We explore this possibility by considering a non-zero correlation between the certification cost c
and productivity φ. We specify the dependence of the certification cost on productivity as follows:
ĉ = c × exp{κφ}.
The exponential form allows the costs of certification to be smaller or larger depending on φ. We
then estimate the parameter κ along with the other parameters. This model nests our baseline
model in the case that κ = 0.
One way that this variation can improve the fit of the model is through the selection channel.
That is, if our baseline model is not properly capturing the selection of high-productivity firms
into the program, by allowing for a dependence of ĉ on φ, this extended model can help improve
the fit of the ITT of TFP. A different pattern of selection would also have different implications
for the policy simulations.
To estimate this parameter, we use an additional moment in our structural estimation: the
ITT effect on TFP. Based on the discussion above, this moment can help us discern the degree
to which higher-productivity firms have smaller certification costs, which would imply a positive
value of κ.
Column 6 of Table A.7 reports the results of this estimation. We find a very small estimate
of κ that is not statistically different from zero. We also do not see a significant change in the fit

67

of our model, suggesting that assuming that κ = 0 in our baseline model does not bias our main
estimates.

K.7

Robustness to Measures of Firm Productivity

As we discuss in Appendix C, our main measure of firm productivity is based on industry-level cost
shares. For robustness, we also obtain measures of productivity following Ackerberg et al. (2015,
ACF). Column 7 of Table A.7 reports the results of a structural estimation that replaces two of our
baseline data moments (average TFP below and above the notch) with their counterparts based
on this alternative measure of productivity. Panel A shows that we obtain very similar estimates
of our structural parameters using this alternative measure of firm productivity.
Panel B reports simulated moments and shows that this model continues to fit all of the other
moments quite well. Because this model does not target the TFP moments reported in column
1, we now evaluate the fit of these moments. The ACF measure of productivity yields an average
TFP below the notch of -2.9% (c.f., -1.5% in our baseline) and of 2.3% (c.f., 2.7% in our baseline)
above the notch. The simulated moments for these moments are -2.3% and 2.4%, which is quite
a good fit given that the model also matches 11 other moments.

K.8

Validating Model Estimates Using ITT Estimates as Out-of-Sample
Predictions

As an out-of-sample validation of our model, we consider additional moments based on the treatment effects of the program. Appendix F discusses the estimation of these moments, mIT T (Ω),
which include the treatment effects on the administrative expense ratio and on TFP growth. These
moments are useful since the ITT estimates do not depend on a particular structure.
Let ω = {φ1 , b, c} denote a firm with random draws of its fundamentals—i.e., productivity,
adjustment cost, and fixed cost. We construct moments that match the empirical and simulated
counterparts of the ITT estimates:56
Z
IT T
\
m (Ω) =
E[Y (ω; Notch) − Y (ω; No Notch)]dFω (Ω) − IT
TY ,
dNo Notch (ω)∈(d∗− ,d∗+ )

\
where IT
T Y is an estimate from Section F.
The ITT estimate on measured TFP growth is related to ε. Note, however, that this estimate
combines three mechanisms: the returns to R&D, selection into the treatment, and the potential
for relabeling. In practice, we find that the relabeling margin plays an important role in influencing
56

Note that the simulated ITT restricts the support of ω = {φ1 , b, c} to firms in the excluded region.

68

these ITT moments. For this reason, the ITT estimate on the administrative expense ratio is also
related to both η and ε.
Table A.8 shows that our model implies ITT effects on productivity and administrative costs
that are similar to those measured in the data.

L

Welfare Analysis

This appendix provides details on the analysis in Section 6.3.

L.1

Setup: Firm Optimization

Firms produce a composite good with a CES technology Qt =

hP

θ−1
θ

i qi,t

θ
i θ−1

. The residual demand

for firm i’s variety implies that this firm sets pi,t to solve


wt
1−θ
−θ
max (1 − t) pi,t −
p
Bt ,
pi,t
exp{φi,t } i,t


θ−1
θ
1
where wt = 1, Bt = It Pt , which implies pi,t = θ−1 exp{φi,t } and taxable profits of πi,t =
1−θ

(θ−1)θ−1
1
Bt .
θ
exp{φi,t }
θ
Industry prices are given by:
Pt1−θ

=

X

p1−θ
i,t

i

where Φtθ−1 =

P

i

θ 1−θ X
)
=(
θ−1
i



1
exp{φi,t }

1−θ


=

θ
θ−1

1−θ

1
Φ1−θ
t

exp{φi,t }θ−1 .

Overall profits are given by:
Πt =

X
i

πi,t =

X (θ − 1)θ−1 
θθ

i

1
exp{φi,t }

1−θ
Bt

(θ − 1)θ−1 −(1−θ)
Φt
Bt
θθ
1
=
It .
θ

=

That is, overall industry profits are proportional to It . Note, however, that even though
industry profits are constant, each individual firm still has an incentive to invest in R&D and to
participate in the InnoCom program, since:
It
π(φit ) =
θ



exp{φi,t }
Φt

θ−1
.

We can further write the expected profit (conditional on R&D decision Di1 ) as


I
(θ − 1)σ 2
ρ(θ−1) (θ−1)ε
exp{φi1 }
Di1
exp
.
2
θΦθ−1
2
69

(L.1)

Given the fact that Φ2 is an equilibrium object, we take it into account when solving the R&D
choice of individual firms. In other words, the marginal benefit of R&D is decreasing in Φ2 . For
this reason, we find the equilibrium that is consistent with firms’ beliefs on Φ2 and their optimal
decisions.

L.2

Case 1: No R&D

We consider a representative household that has labor endowment L and owns all the production
units. There is an outside sector that pins down worker wages such that wt = 1. Firms operate
in a monopolistic competitive environment such that household budget It ≡ L + Πt = θΠt . The
total operating profit of firms is

1
L
θ−1

and It =

θ
L.
θ−1

The consumer values two goods, a composite good C and a public good G with utility
Ut = Ct1−γ Gγt . For simplicity, we assume that the government/public sector simply purchases
the composite good and transforms it into public good with a linear technology. In other words,
the total demand for the composite good is Qt = Ct + Gt .
The government finances Gt with a tax t on profits Πt . Based on the firm optimization problem
above, the price of the composite good is Pt =
Therefore:
Gt = t

θ
Φ−1 ,
θ−1 t

and the aggregate profit is Πt =

It
.
θ

Πt
L
= t Φt
Pt
θ

Consumption is then:
Ct =

L + (1 − t) Iθt
L
L + (1 − t)Πt
= (θ − t)Φt
=
−1
θ
Pt
θ
Φ
θ−1 t

The government sets t to maximize:
LΦt
[θ − t]1−γ [t]γ
θ
Taking the FOC:


LΦt
1−γ γ
1−γ γ
[θ − t] [t] × −
+
=0
θ
θ−t
t
implies:

γ
t
t
=
=⇒ γ = .
1−γ
θ−t
θ
Assuming t = 0.25, θ = 5 implies γ = 0.05.

L.3

Case 2: R&D Investment without InnoCom Program

As in Section 4, we consider a two-period model. Since the firm only invests in R&D in the first
period, the consumption bundles in period 2 correspond to those in case 1. The slight difference
for the consumption bundles in the first period is that the total net firm profit of period 1 is
70

Π1 − D1 , where D1 =

P

i

(Di,1 + gi (Di,1 )). From the representative household perspective, it is

important to note that its budget becomes I1 ≡ L + (Π1 − D1 ) = θΠ1 . As a result, Π1 =
I1 =

θ
(L
θ−1

L−D1
,
θ−1

− D1 ). The consumption bundles in the first period follow by substituting L with

L − D1 in case 1.
Utility is then:


LΦ2
(L − D1 )Φ1
LΦ2
(L − D1 )Φ1
1−γ γ
1−γ γ
[θ − t] [t] + β
[θ − t] [t] =
+β
× [θ − t]1−γ [t]γ .
θ
θ
θ
θ
Since t does not affect the choice of D1 , the optimal tax rate in the two-period case is the same
as in the one-period case.

L.4

Case 3: R&D Investment with the InnoCom Program

Let I(InnoComi ) denote the event that firm i is part of the InnoCom program and redefine:
X
D1 =
(Di,1 + gi (Di,1 ) + I(InnoComi )ci ) .
i

Note that, in contrast to the linear tax case, Di,1 + gi (Di,1 ) are affected for those firms that
participate in the program. Aggregate relabeling costs are given by:
X
H1 =
I(InnoComi )h(D̃i,1 ).
i

The value of the tax credit for the InnoCom program is given by:
X
T C = (tLT − tHT )
I(InnoComi )πi,2 ,
i

where tLT is the standard rate and tHT is the preferential rate for high-tech firms in the InnoCom
program.
Income in the first period decreases by the relabeling penalty H1 , so that I1 =
This also implies that G1 = t L−Dθ1 −H1 Φ1 and that C1 =

L−D1 −H1
(θ−t)Φ1 .
θ

θ
(L−D1 −H1 ).
θ−1

Utility in the first period

is then:

(L − D1 − H1 )Φ1
[θ − t]1−γ [t]γ .
θ
In the second period, G decreases by the tax credit, which also increases after-tax profits.

I2 = L + Π2 =

θ
L
θ−1

so Π2 =

L
.
θ−1

This implies that:

L
t θ−1
− TC
tΠ2 − T C
=
=
G2 =
θ
P2
Φ−1
θ−1 2



L
θ−1
t − TC
Φ2 .
θ
θ

Consumption is then:
L
L + (1 − t) θ−1
+ TC
L + (1 − t)Π2 + T C
C2 =
=
=
−1
θ
P2
Φ
θ−1 2

71



L
θ−1
(θ − t) + T C
θ
θ


Φ2 .

Utility in the second period is:
1−γ 
γ

θ−1
L
θ−1
L
(θ − t) + T C
t − TC
Φ2
θ
θ
θ
θ
and overall utility is now:
Φ1
βΦ2
(L − D1 − H1 )(θ − t)1−γ tγ +
(L(θ − t) + T C(θ − 1))1−γ (tL − T C(θ − 1))γ .
θ
θ
To further simplify this expression, let τ denote the InnoCom tax credits as a fraction of overall
profits in the second period, and note that τ =

TC
Π2

=

T C(θ−1)
.
L

We then have:

Φ1
βΦ2
(L − D1 − H1 )(θ − t)1−γ tγ +
L(θ − t + τ )1−γ (t − τ )γ ,
θ
θ
which is Equation 6 in the text.

L.5

Implementation and Spillovers

We now discuss how we implement this framework to account for knowledge spillovers. To do so,
we take into account the empirical fact that not all firms engage in R&D. We therefore assume
that N R&D firms engage in R&D. For R&D-performing firms, we expand the baseline model by
assuming that:
φi,t = ρφi,t−1 + ε ln(Di,t−1 ) + ζSt−1 + uit ,
where St−1 =

1
N R&D

P

ln(Di,t−1 ) is the R&D spillover pool. Log productivity for non-R&D

i∈N R&D

firms evolves as follows:
φi,t = ρφi,t−1 + ζSt−1 + uit .
Note that, because firms do not internalize their individual R&D impact on the spillover pool,
they take St−1 as given.
We now show that St−1 does not impact R&D investment decisions. Let φ̃i,t = φi,t − ζSt−1 and
Φ̃t = Φt × exp{−ζSt−1 } denote firm and aggregate productivity measures net of spillover effects.
Because

exp{φi,t }
Φt

=

exp{φ̃i,t }
,
Φ̃t

it follows that firm profits in Equation L.1 are maximized by the same

R&D investment decision regardless of the value of St−1 .
While spillovers do not affect the R&D investment decisions of individual firms, positive
spillovers raise aggregate productivity in the second period through Φ2 = Φ̃2 × exp{ζS1 }. Therefore, we can use Equation 6 to evaluate welfare in both the case with and the case without spillover
effects.
To implement Equation 6, we need to compute Φ2 as an equilibrium object. This is because
the overall level of R&D in the economy lowers Φ2 as well as expected profits. Our implementation
of Equation 6 requires that the resulting equilibrium be consistent with firms’ belief on Φ2 and
therefore with their optimal investment decisions.
72

To compute such an equilibrium, it helps to write:
Φθ−1
= (ΦR&D
)θ−1 + (ΦNon-R&D
)θ−1 ,
t
t
t
where (ΦR&D
)θ−1 =
t

P

exp{φi,t }θ−1 and similarly for ΦNon-R&D
. Further, the sales share of
t

i∈N R&D

R&D-performing firms is equal to
our model output. We then pick

(ΦR&D
)θ−1
t
. In a given
Φθ−1
t
so that the
ΦNon-R&D
2

simulation, we can compute ΦR&D
from
2
sales share of R&D firms in the second

period equals 35%. Note that, in the case with spillovers, we adjust ΦNon-R&D
to account for the
2
effect of spillovers.

73

Appendix Graphs

500

600

Figure A.1: Bunching at 5% R&D Intensity (2005–2007)

0

100

Frequency
200
300
400

5%

1%

5%

R&D Intensity

10%

15%

Notes: This figure plots the R&D intensity distribution of manufacturing firms conducting R&D during
the period of 2005 to 2007. We include the firms with R&D intensity between 1% and 15%. There is a
significant bunching of firms at the 5% threshold. Source: Annual Survey of Manufacturers. See Section
3.1 for details.

74

.2

R&D to Admin Expense Ratio
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7

Figure A.2: Alternative Empirical Evidence of Relabeling

.02

.03

Small (6%)

.04
.05
R&D Intensity

.06

Medium (4%)

.07

.08

Large (3%)

Notes: This figure summarizes the ratio of R&D to administrative expenses for small, medium, and
large firms in our sample. The figure shows that this ratio jumps discontinuously across the thresholds of
R&D intensity prescribed by the InnoCom program. This suggests that firms manipulate their reported
R&D intensity by relabeling non-R&D administrative expenses as R&D. See Table A.4 for estimates of
the structural break.

0

Sales Expense to Sales Ratio
.02
.04
.06
.08
.1

.12

Figure A.3: Lack of Manipulation of Sales Expenses

.02

.03

Small (6%)

.04
.05
R&D Intensity
Medium (4%)

.06

.07

.08

Large (3%)

Notes: This figure shows the binned plot of the sales expense-to-sales ratio for each firm size category.
Table A.5 shows that we do not find a detectable drop in this ratio at the notches.

75

0

Share of Total R&D By Firm Group
20
40
60
80
100

Figure A.4: Aggregate Implications

2008

2009

Year

Small

Medium

2010

2011
Large

Notes: This figure summarizes the share of total R&D accounted for by the small, medium, and large
firms in our sample. As the figure illustrates, the large firms account for more than 80% of total R&D
and thus are the most important group for the aggregate implications of the policy.

76

Figure A.5: Robustness of Bunching Estimates
B. Large Firms in 2011 (No Extensive Margin)
∆d = 0.242(0.031)***
P-value (M=B) = 0.8038
Frictions: a = 0.464(0.046)***

0

0

∆d = -.026(.0029)***
P-value (M=B) = 0.8691
Frictions: a = 1.494(.1171)***

Density
.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

Density
.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

A. Placebo Test: Large Foreign Firms before 2008

.01

.02

.03

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

.07

.08

.09

.01

.02

f0(D): Density With Linear Tax
f1(D): Density With Notch

.03

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

.07

.08

.09

f0(D): Density With Linear Tax
f1(D): Density With Notch

77
Density
0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

C. Large Firms in 2011 using Large Foreign Firms to Inform Counterfactual
∆d = 0.269(0.011)***
P-value (M=B) = 0.8750
Frictions: a = 0.797(0.023)***

.01

.02

.03

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

f0(D):
f1(D):
f0(D):
f1(D):

Density
Density
Density
Density

.07

.08

.09

Linear Tax (Main)
Notch
Linear Tax (W/Foreign)
Notch (Foreign)

Notes: This figure reports robustness checks of our bunching estimator in panel C of Figure 4. Panel A reports a placebo test where we use
the data from large foreign firms before 2008. Panel B implements our bunching estimator for large firms that had engaged in R&D in previous
years. Panel C uses large foreign firm’s R&D intensity before 2008 to inform the counterfactual distribution. See Appendix E for details.

Figure A.6: Robustness of Bunching Estimates to Dropping Groups of Firms
B. Dropping Low-Profitability Firms
∆d = 0.247(0.034)***
P-value (M=B) = 0.8489
Frictions: a = 0.472(0.062)***

0

0

∆d = 0.248(0.032)***
P-value (M=B) = 0.7390
Frictions: a = 0.478(0.064)***

Density
.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

Density
.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

A. Dropping SOEs

.01

.02

.03

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

.07

.08

.09

.01

.02

.03

f0(D): Density With Linear Tax
f1(D): Density With Notch

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

.07

.08

.09

f0(D): Density With Linear Tax
f1(D): Density With Notch

78
Density
.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

C. Dropping Low-Tech Firms

0

∆d = 0.232(0.024)***
P-value (M=B) = 0.7173
Frictions: a = 0.487(0.041)***

.01

.02

.03

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

.07

.08

.09

f0(D): Density With Linear Tax
f1(D): Density With Notch

Notes: This figure presents robustness checks of the benchmark bunching analysis for large firms in 2011. In panel A, we drop state-owned
enterprises. In panel B, we drop the bottom 20% of firms in terms of profitability. In panel C, we drop all firms not classified in the high-tech
industries defined by the Chinese government. These graphs show that our benchmark results are robust across these subsamples. See Appendix
E for details.

Figure A.7: Robustness of Bunching Estimates to Specification of Counterfactual Density
B. Second-Best Choice of Specification (p=4)
∆d = 0.246(0.044)***
P-value (M=B) = 0.7743
Frictions: a = 0.537(0.092)***

0

0

∆d = 0.245(0.041)***
P-value (M=B) = 0.8750
Frictions: a = 0.499(0.076)***

Density
.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

Density
.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

A. Second-Best Choice of Specification (p=3)

.01

.02

.03

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

.07

.08

.09

.01

.02

.03

f0(D): Density With Linear Tax
f1(D): Density With Notch

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

.07

.08

.09

f0(D): Density With Linear Tax
f1(D): Density With Notch

Density
.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08

∆d = 0.247(0.017)***
P-value (M=B) = 0.2623
Frictions: a = 0.533(0.106)***

0

79

C. Estimate Using Observations above d∗+

.01

.02

.03

.04
.05
.06
R&D Intensity: D

.07

f0(D): Density With Linear Tax
f1(D): Density With Notch

.08

.09

Notes: This figure conducts robustness checks of the benchmark bunching analysis for large firms in 2011. As discussed in Appendix D, we
select (p, d∗− , d∗+ ) via cross-validation. In panel A, we use the second-best choice for the specification of (p, d∗− , d∗+ ). As in our benchmark
case, p = 3. In panel B, we further restrict p = 4, and we select (d∗− , d∗+ ) via cross-validation. In panel C, we use the same value of d∗+
as in our benchmark case, and we only use data above this value when estimating the counterfactual density. These graphs show that our
benchmark results are robust to how we specify (p, d∗− , d∗+ ).

Figure A.8: Estimated Values of E[Y |d] for the ITT Analysis
B. Log Administrative Cost-to-Sales Ratio in 2009

7

-3.5

8

-3

E[Y|D]

E[Y|D]
9

-2.5

10

-2

11

A. Log R&D Intensity in 2009

.01

.02

.03
.04
R&D Intensity: D

.05

E[Y0|D]: Estimated (No Notch)

.06

.07

.01

E[Y1|D]: Data (Notch)

.02

.03
.04
R&D Intensity: D

E[Y0|D]: Estimated (No Notch)

.06

.07

E[Y1|D]: Data (Notch)

D. Log TFP in 2011

-.1

-.2

0

E[Y|D]

E[Y|D]
-.1

.1

0

.1

.2

C. Log User Cost in 2009

.05

.01

.02

.03
.04
R&D Intensity: D

.05

E[Y0|D]: Estimated (No Notch)

.06

.07

.01

E[Y1|D]: Data (Notch)

.02

.03
.04
R&D Intensity: D

E[Y0|D]: Estimated (No Notch)

.05

.06

.07

E[Y1|D]: Data (Notch)

-1

-.5

E[Y|D]

0

.5

E. Log Taxes Paid in 2011

.01

.02

.03
.04
R&D Intensity: D

E[Y0|D]: Estimated (No Notch)

.05

.06

.07

E[Y1|D]: Data (Notch)

Notes: This figure reports the polynomial regression of binned outcome variables on R&D intensity. The
size of each circle indicates the weights based on the number of observations accounted for by each bin.
We leave out all the observations in the manipulated region. Overall, these graphs show a good fit of the
data outside of the exclusion region. The fit in the exclusion region cannot be evaluated since the data
patterns may be due to selection. See Appendix F.1 for more details.

80

Figure A.9: Observed TFP and Predicted TFP under a Log-Normal vs.
Distribution

Pareto

Notes: This figure reports the predicted TFP from imposing a log-normal CDF, a Pareto CDF, and
the 45 degree linear line. For both cases, we trim the observed TFP data at 1% and 99%. The figure
shows that the predicted TFP from imposing the log-normal CDF tracks observed TFP quite well. It thus
provides strong evidence that log-normal is a reasonable parametric assumption for the TFP distribution.

81

Figure A.10: Sensitivity Analysis
A. Sensitivity Analysis for ε
Sensitivity of

% Not Bunching

Delta d

Bunch Point d *

Adm. Cost Brk.

TFP ab. Notch

TFP bel. Notch

Mean RD [3,5]

RD [7.6,9]

RD [6.3, 7.6]

RD [5,6.3]

RD [2.1,3]

RD [1.2,2.1]

RD [0.3,1.2]

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

Lambda: Change in Parameter for Change in Moment

B. Sensitivity Analysis for η
Sensitivity of

% Not Bunching

Delta d

Bunch Point d *

Adm. Cost Brk.

TFP ab. Notch

TFP bel. Notch

Mean RD [3,5]

RD [7.6,9]

RD [6.3, 7.6]

RD [5,6.3]

RD [2.1,3]

RD [1.2,2.1]

RD [0.3,1.2]

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

Lambda: Change in Parameter for Change in Moment

Notes: This figure reports the results of a sensitivity analysis based on Andrews et al. (2017). We report
estimates of the sensitivity matrix Λ, which captures how a local change in each moment affects the
parameter estimates.

82

Appendix Tables

83

Table A.1: Estimates of Treatment Effects
A. Estimates of Intent-to-Treat (ITT) Effects
Bootstrap
5th Perc. 95th Perc.

ITT

SE

T-Stat

2009
Admin Costs

-0.096

0.025

-3.822

-0.136

-0.054

Admin Costs (level)

-0.003

0.001

-3.686

-0.005

-0.002

R&D

0.146

0.065

2.245

0.037

0.251

R&D (real)

0.090

0.044

2.074

0.022

0.165

User Cost

-0.071

0.037

-1.929

-0.130

-0.009

2011
Tax

-0.128

0.018

-7.293

-0.159

-0.101

TFP

0.012

0.006

1.953

0.001

0.022

B. Estimates of User-Cost-of-Capital Elasticities
Bootstrap
Estimate 5th Perc. 95th Perc.
Reported R&D to User Cost (2009)

-2.052

-7.919

-0.016

Real R&D to User Cost (2009)

-1.272

-4.900

-0.010

Tax to Reported R&D (2011)

-0.879

-2.730

-0.458

Notes: This table reports estimates of ITT effects of the notch on various outcomes.
Panel B reports ratios of the estimates in panel A. Standard errors computed via
bootstrap. See Section 3.1 for details on data sources and Appendix F for details on
the estimation. Source: Administrative Tax Return Database.

IT T =

1
N Excluded

X

Z

D∗+

Yi −
D∗−

i∈(D∗− ,D∗+ )

84

\
fˆ0 (r)E[Y |rd,
No Notch]dr

Table A.2: Manipulation of the Administrative Expense-to-Sales Ratio

Structural Break
Observations

(1)
Small

(2)
Medium

(3)
Large

-0.014∗∗
(0.007)
5,016

-0.013∗∗∗
(0.004)
8,336

-0.008∗∗∗
(0.003)
8,794

Notes: This table reports estimates of the structural break at the
notches in Figure 5. The table shows that the ratio of administrative expenses to sales drops across the notches of the InnoCom
program, which suggests that firms qualify for the InnoCom program by relabeling non-R&D expenses as R&D. See Section 3.1
for details on data sources and Section 3.3 for details on the estimation. Standard errors in parentheses. Source: Administrative
Tax Return Database.
∗
p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01

Table A.3: Lack of Sales Manipulation at R&D Intensity Thresholds

Structural Break
Observations

(1)
Small

(2)
Medium

(3)
Large

0.108
(0.103)
1,096

-0.021
(0.067)
1,952

0.055
(0.114)
1,665

Notes: This table reports estimates of the structural break at
the notches of panel A in Figure 6. The table shows that firms do
not manipulate their sales to qualify for the InnoCom program.
See Section 3.1 for details on data sources and Section 3.3 for
details on the estimation. Standard errors in parentheses. Source:
Administrative Tax Return Database.
∗
p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01

Table A.4: Alternative Estimates of Manipulation of Administrative Expenses

Structural Break
Observations

(1)
Small

(2)
Medium

(3)
Large

0.053∗∗
(0.026)
3,544

0.056∗∗∗
(0.020)
5,710

0.054∗∗
(0.022)
5,597

Notes: This table reports estimates of the structural break at the
notches in Figure A.2. The table shows that the ratio of administrative expenses to R&D jump across the notches of the InnoCom
program, which suggests that firms qualify for the InnoCom program by relabeling non-R&D expenses as R&D. See Section 3.1
for details on data sources and Section 3.3 for details on the estimation. Standard errors in parentheses. Source: Administrative
Tax Return Database.
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

85

Table A.5: Lack of Manipulation of Sales Expenses at R&D Intensity Thresholds

Structural Break
Observations

(1)
Small

(2)
Medium

(3)
Large

-0.002
(0.006)
4,774

-0.000
(0.004)
8,064

-0.001
(0.004)
8,600

Notes: This table reports estimates of the structural break at
the notches in Figure A.3. The table shows that firms do not
manipulate sales expenses to qualify for the InnoCom program.
See Section 3.1 for details on data sources and Appendix G for
details on the estimation. Standard errors in parentheses. Source:
Administrative Tax Return Database.
∗
p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01

86

Table A.6: Structural Estimates with Heterogeneous ε
A. Point Estimates
Model A (αε = βε )
Distribution of
Relabeling Adjustment
TFP Elasticity of R&D
Cost
Cost
αε
ε̄
η
µb
Estimate 1.001
SE
0.058

0.145
0.003

7.711
0.809

7.666
0.065

Model B (ε̄ = 1/(θ − 1))
Distribution of
Relabeling Adjustment
TFP Elasticity of R&D
Cost
Cost
αε
βε
η
µb
Estimate 2.616
3.766
7.147
8.271
SE
0.101
0.177
0.366
0.061

Distribution of
Fixed Costs
µc
0.482
0.024

Distribution of
Fixed Costs
µc
0.741
0.039

Notes: This table reports estimates of structural parameters of the model in Appendix K. Estimates
based on calibrated values of θ = 5, ρ = 0.725, and σ = 0.385.

B. Simulated vs. Data Moments
Data
R&D Distribution Moments: mD (Ω)
Below the notch (%): [0.3, 1.2]
0.373
[1.2, 2.1]
0.113
[2.1, 3]
0.067
Above manipulated region (%): [5, 6.3]
0.056
[6.3, 7.6] 0.026
[7.6, 9]
0.012
Mean R&D intensity [3%, 5%]
0.037
Average TFP below notch
-0.015
Average TFP above notch
0.027
Admin cost ratio break at notch
-0.009
Bunching Moments: mB (Ω)
Bunching Point d−∗
0.009
Increase in Reported R&D: ∆d
0.157
Fraction of firms not bunching
0.641

Model A

Model B

0.396
0.163
0.056
0.053
0.024
0.011
0.035
-0.028
0.009
-0.005

0.371
0.193
0.057
0.046
0.030
0.020
0.034
-0.034
0.004
-0.007

0.012
0.138
0.611

0.011
0.142
0.642

Notes: This table compares the moments generated by our simulations with those from
the data. The simulation is based on 30, 000 firms. Appendix K discusses details of each
of these robustness checks.

87

Table A.7: Robustness of Structural Estimates
Data

Baseline

A. Parameter Estimates
TFP Elasticity of R&D ε
Adjustment Cost (Mean) µb
Adjustment Cost (Dispersion) σb
Fixed Costs µc
Relabeling Cost η

0.091
0.002
8.011
0.075
2.014
0.073
0.532
0.012
6.755
0.449

Adjustment Cost (Scale) ν

Alternative Alternative
Adjustment Relabeling
Cost
Cost

88

0.091
0.002
8.018
0.096
2.011
0.077
0.532
0.027
6.754
0.491
0.001
0.004

0.104
0.003
8.545
0.114
2.366
0.113
0.652
0.032
2.713
0.160

Real Admin TFP-Fixed Alternative
Cost
Cost
TFP
Response
Correlation
Measure
0.090
0.002
8.064
0.084
2.012
0.072
0.513
0.020
7.655
0.446

TFP-Fixed Cost Correlation κ
B. Simulated vs. Data Moments
R&D Distribution Moments: mD (Ω)
Below the notch (%): [0.3, 1.2]
0.373
Below the notch (%): [1.2, 2.1]
0.113
Below the notch (%): [2.1, 3]
0.067
Above manipulated region (%): [5, 6.3]
0.056
Above manipulated region (%): [6.3, 7.6] 0.026
Above manipulated region (%): [7.6, 9]
0.012
Mean R&D intensity [3%, 5%]
0.037
Average TFP below notch
-0.015
Average TFP above notch
0.027
Admin cost ratio break at notch
-0.009
−∗
Bunching Point d
0.009
Increase in Reported R&D: ∆d
0.157
Fraction of firms not bunching
0.641
ITT TFP
0.012

0.091
0.002
8.014
0.097
2.016
0.075
0.532
0.024
6.759
0.452

0.092
0.002
7.914
0.076
2.035
0.078
0.532
0.013
6.114
0.348

-0.001
0.029

0.379
0.146
0.069
0.057
0.038
0.027
0.035
-0.020
0.025
-0.007
0.010
0.150
0.665

0.379
0.146
0.069
0.057
0.038
0.026
0.035
-0.020
0.025
-0.007
0.010
0.150
0.665

0.414
0.133
0.059
0.057
0.041
0.030
0.035
-0.025
0.033
-0.007
0.010
0.149
0.655

0.395
0.150
0.067
0.055
0.036
0.025
0.035
-0.018
0.024
-0.007
0.010
0.145
0.658

0.380
0.146
0.069
0.057
0.038
0.026
0.035
-0.020
0.025
-0.007
0.010
0.150
0.665
0.009

0.359
0.141
0.069
0.060
0.042
0.029
0.035
-0.023
0.024
-0.008
0.009
0.157
0.670

Notes: This table compares the moments generated by our simulations with those from the data. The simulation is based on 30, 000 firms. Appendix
K discusses the details of each of these robustness checks.

Table A.8: Structural Estimates and ITT Moments as Over-Identifying Moments
Simulated vs. Data Moments
Data

Simulated
Excl. Bunching

All

(0.007)
(-0.20)

(0.009)
(-0.22%)

ITT Moments: mIT T (Ω)
ITT TFP
ITT administrative cost ratio

0.012
-0.33%

Notes: This table compares the moments generated by our simulations with those from the data. The simulation is
based on 30, 000 firms. The table shows that our model matches these moments that are not targeted in the estimation.

89

