NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CENTERS OF GRAVITY:
THE EFFECT OF STABLE SHARED LEADERSHIP
IN TOP MANAGEMENT TEAMS ON
FIRM GROWTH AND INDUSTRY EVOLUTION

Rajshree Agarwal
Serguey Braguinsky
Atsushi Ohyama
Working Paper 24742
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24742

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018

This research was supported by the NSF grant No.1632833 and JSPS KAKENHI Grant No.
15KK0078. We thank Tetsuji Okazaki and Takenobu Yuki for helpful advice and data sharing;
Gakushikai (the Association of University Graduates) for permission to use their restricted-use
alumni lists; and Hiroko Ohga, Tomohiro Hara, Kohei Yamagata, Jun Sakamoto, and Takao
Takasago for able research assistance. The manuscript has benefited from comments from two
anonymous reviewers, editor Nicolai Foss, and seminars given at Erasmus, HEC Paris, Maryland,
Queens University and UT Austin. Braguinsky thanks Osaka University Institute of Social and
Economic Research and Ohyama thanks the University of Maryland Robert H. Smith of Business
for their hospitality when conducting research on this project. All interpretations and errors are
ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Rajshree Agarwal, Serguey Braguinsky, and Atsushi Ohyama. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Centers of Gravity: The Effect of Stable Shared Leadership in Top Management Teams on
Firm Growth and Industry Evolution
Rajshree Agarwal, Serguey Braguinsky, and Atsushi Ohyama
NBER Working Paper No. 24742
June 2018
JEL No. L2,L25,L26,M12,M13,N85
ABSTRACT
We study the processes of firm growth in the evolution of the Japanese cotton spinning industry during
1883-1914 by integrating strategy and historical approaches and utilizing rich quantitative firm-level
data and detailed business histories. The resultant conceptual model highlights growth outcomes of
path dependencies as firms evolve across periods of single vs. shared leadership, establish stability in
shared leadership, or experience repeated discord-induced TMT leader departures. While most firms
do not experience smooth transitions to stable shared TMT leadership, a focus on value creation, in
conjunction with talent recruitment and promotion, enabled some firms to achieve stable shared
leadership in spite of discord-induced departures, engage in long term expansion, and emerge as
“centers of gravity” for output and talent in the industry.

Rajshree Agarwal
University of Maryland
School of Business
4512 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
rajshree@rhsmith.umd.edu

Atsushi Ohyama
Hitotsubashi University
Instituite of Innovation Research
Naka 2-1
Kunitachi, Tokyo 186-8603
Japan
ohyama@iir.hit-u.ac.jp

Serguey Braguinsky
University of Maryland
Robert H. Smith School of Business and
Department of Economics
4558 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
sbraguinsky@rhsmith.umd.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24742

Dominance of a few firms in an industry often results as industries evolve from early stages
of entrepreneurial entry through shakeouts and consolidation of market shares (Gort and Klepper,
1982; Klepper, 1996; Jovanovic and MacDonald, 1994). In explaining firm growth and dominance,
evolutionary scholars have largely focused on firm characteristics such as first mover advantage and
pre-entry experience (Bayus and Agarwal, 2007; Klepper and Simons, 2000), and scale economies
and returns to innovation (Klepper, 2002). While employee entrepreneurship/mobility have been
recognized, they are nonetheless discussed at the firm level (e.g. spinouts) leading Felin, Foss and
Ployhart (2015) to note: “evolutionary arguments in strategy…are fundamentally silent about
individuals” (p. 581). Meanwhile, separate literature streams reviewed below examine the creation
and evolution of entrepreneurial teams and the critical role of top management teams (TMT) in
growth and strategic renewal, even as they manage internal conflict arising from strategic or
interpersonal differences.
Our study examines the microfoundation of firm’s managerial talent by addressing the
questions: What characteristics of top management team determine which firms are likely to grow
and dominate in an industry? How do these characteristics impact the strategies undertaken by the
firm, as they leverage opportunities or confront impediments to growth?
We answer the above questions by conducting a study at the intersection of history and
economics/strategy that permits an examination of TMT, firm and industry evolution in the
historical context of the early Japanese cotton spinning industry, the first mechanized modern
industry to emerge outside of Western Europe and the United States. This industry is ideal for two
reasons: One, the industry exhibits the classic patterns documented in industry evolution studies,
and represents a context where some firms rose among seemingly identical others to become
“centers of gravity,” a term we use to denote those firms who represented the industry’s leading
share for talent and output, and thus dominance in an industry. Two, rich firm and industry
historical accounts documented at the time of occurrence enable triangulation of both qualitative and
quantitative data over entire firm and industry lifecycles, and also uncover the underlying TMT
transitions and evolution through entry and exit of key managerial personnel. In undertaking such a
triangulation, we depart from the typical hypothesis-testing used in strategic management studies,
and also from the typical narrative approach used in historical research. Instead, we integrate both
approaches, consistent with studies combining deep dives into phenomena over long periods with
rigorous empirical methods (Braguinsky and Hounshell, 2016; Ingram, Rao, and Silverman, 2012).
We utilize rich qualitative and historical information to inform the quantitative panel data analysis
2

and adjudicate across plausible relationships among key variables of interest. In turn, the sustained
and consistent patterns observed in the quantitative analysis across different empirical specifications
and over different historical periods serve as guiding lights for the historical narrative, and enable
separating the wheat from the chaff. Together, these inform the path dependencies through which
TMT characteristics manifest into growth implications, and uncover the mechanisms at play.
The quantitative analysis reveals an association of firm growth with stable shared TMT
leadership. Shared leadership is defined as the presence of two or more active TMT leaders at the
helm. We leverage historical data to discern actual leaders within the TMT rather than simply rely on
titular designations. Stability in TMT is defined as the lack of discord-induced departures (when one
of the leaders is ousted or resigns due to a conflict within shared leadership teams). We find reduced
growth rates during periods of single leadership. Moreover, growth is impaired after, rather than
before discord-induced departure events, suggesting that firms incur disruption or adjustment costs,
rather than disagreement costs. Importantly, firms with stable shared leadership accumulate more
resources, most notably, they recruit and accumulate better engineering talent, and this eventually
leads them to become “centers of gravity” in the industry. In contrast, neither size and diversity of
the TMT, nor their external ties systematically predict firm growth.
The quantitative findings set the stage for an in-depth examination of business histories. A
comparison of seemingly similar firms (early movers with similar size) reveals salient pathways of
TMT evolution for growth consequences. Becoming a center of gravity through smooth transition
to stable shared leadership (Path 1) was the exception rather than the norm. Similarly, only one later
entrant with single leadership became a center of gravity; firms with single leadership all through
their history experienced limited growth and exit (Path 4). The business histories of the majority of
the firms reveal transitions to shared leadership were not always stable, as each experienced at least
one discord-induced departure of a TMT leader. Regardless of whether the underlying reasons for
the departure related to strategic, interpersonal or ethical discords; these firms followed one of two
distinct pathways. Firms in Path 2 were able to establish stable shared leadership because they
focused on value-creation in their resolution of these discords, and were willing to break from
tradition to promote talent to their TMT based on merit for human capital complementarities. In
turn, stable shared leadership permitted these firms to become centers of gravity through long term
expansion strategies such as superior product choice, expansion of scale (including acquisition of
less well managed firms), and downstream integration. In contrast, firms in Path 3 showed
consistent lack of stable shared leadership; their business histories revealed either multiple discord3

induced departures stemming from politics and power struggles, or single leadership. These firms,
hampered in their ability to pursue growth strategies, experienced limited growth to ultimately exit
the industry.
Our findings provide contributions to several literature streams noted above (and briefly
reviewed below). To industry evolution studies we contribute by uncovering managerial talent as the
underpinnings of factors important for firm and industry evolution. To scholarly work at the
intersection of entrepreneurship and strategy, we highlight the growth of entrepreneurial firms as
intricately related to their ability to create stable shared leadership. Our contribution to the TMT
literature is in examining TMT composition/turnover and their performance effects over the entire
firm lifecycle and over an industry census of firms.
THE EVOLUTION OF THE JAPANESE COTTON SPINNING INDUSTRY
The Industrial revolution started with the mechanization of cotton spinning, which was also
key to Japan’s status as the only industrialized nation in the East during much of the 20th century
(Saxonhouse, 1974). Emerging from feudalism and autarky in the 1860s, Japan’s opening of the
economy introduced imports which obsolesced its pre-industrial cotton spinning manufacturing
(Bernhofen and Brown, 2004), but subsequently enabled the creation of an entirely new, mechanized
cotton-spinning industry (Ohyama, Braguinsky and Murphy, 2004). Figures 1 and 2 represent the
industry’s evolution between inception in the early 1880s to the start of World War I in 1914,
divided into seven periods of roughly equal length corresponding to major industry evolution
events. 2 The first period is characterized by heavy government involvement, although the firm
producing almost half of the industry output was an entirely independent, private organization with
no government support (Braguinsky and Hounshell, 2016). The second period represents “firm
take-off,” when the government withdrew industry support, and there was a first wave of
entrepreneurial entrants. Periods 3 through 5 represent the growth, shakeout and onset of the
maturity stages of the industry, while periods 6 and 7 represent increased consolidation and
subsequent stabilization.
Figure 1 depicts the now classic patterns in the evolution of the number of firms, along with
the shares of the top firm and of the seven leading firms in industry output. 3 While the first two
See Appendix A for source information and data compilation. We focus on the first complete observation of the
industry life cycle. As is characteristic of industries observed over a century (e.g. computers (Malerba, Nelson, Orsenigo
and Winter, 1999)), the Japanese cotton spinning industry went through additional periods of punctuated evolution
(subsequent periods of renewed entry and consolidation); these periods are outside the current study scope.
3 These seven firms are (in the order of their 1914 size): Kanegafuchi Spinning (Kanebo), Mie Spinning (Mie), Settsu
2

4

periods show high output shares for the top and leading firms, they are at a time of very limited
domestic production in a market dominated by imports; the few Japanese firms were still at a very
small scale of production. Domestic production exceeded imports for the first time in the middle of
period 2 (1890), and imports became negligible towards the end of period 3 (Braguinsky and
Hounshell, 2015). Post period 3, the shares of the seven leading firms increased significantly, even as
the number of firms remained relatively large and the Herfindahl index was low. 4 A similar pattern is
observed for product scope (the number of product varieties): post period 3, the leading firms have
significantly higher and growing average number of product varieties, relative to the average varieties
of all other firms in the industry (data on product varieties become available only starting in period
3).
In Figure 2, history affords us a rare window of opportunity to examine human capital
evolution within an industry, given the concurrence of the Japanese cotton spinning industry’s
evolution with the development of its modern education system. The first cohort of domesticallyeducated mechanical engineers graduated from what later became the Department of Engineering of
the Imperial (Tokyo) University in 1879, and there were a grand total of 57 graduates in the whole
country in 1892, the end of period 2 depicted in Figures 1 and 2. Most graduates were employed by
the government and public companies, only seven of them worked in the cotton spinning industry.
The situation changed dramatically in the next two decades with openings of more universities and
technical schools (such as the future Tokyo Institute of Technology). The bars in Figure 2 show the
dramatic growth in both university educated and technical school educated engineers employed in
the cotton spinning industry in periods 3-7. More importantly, Figure 2 also shows the seven leading
firms’ share of these engineers: their share of university educated engineers grew from approximately
45% to more than 75%, and their share of technical school educated engineers grew from
approximately a third to almost 70% of the total talent pool in the industry.
[Figures 1 and 2 about here]
Taken together, Figures 1 and 2 provide trends of product scale and scope, and of
underlying talent. The increased concentration of educated engineers in the leading firms post period
3 exceeds in magnitude the patterns of output concentration, even as the total pool of educated
Spinning (Settsu), Amagasaki Spinning (Amabo), Osaka Godo Spinning (Godo), Fuji Gasu Spinning (Fujibo), and Osaka
Spinning (Osaka). We describe and analyze their business histories in the qualitative analysis section below. Appendix F
contains a brief account of their evolution after the end of our sample period.
4 The Herfindahl index is well below the 0.15 lower bound threshold used to define “moderately concentrated” industry
(see https://www.justice.gov/atr/herfindahl-hirschman-index)

5

engineers employed in the industry grew exponentially. Hence, despite their overall rapidly growing
numbers, educated engineers were increasingly “sucked into” the seven leading firms as if those
were some “black holes” or “centers of gravity.” Figures 1 and 2 motivate our study, which at its
core is interested in understanding the following fundamental question: At the early stages of the
industry, how could someone have predicted which ones of the seemingly identical startups would
grow and develop into “centers of gravity” and which would fizzle?
LITERATURE REVIEW, RESEARCH QUESTIONS, AND DESIGN
Brief Literature Review
Industry evolution scholars seeking to explain well established patterns similar to Figure 1
across industries have modeled (pre-entry) technical and market experience, first mover advantage,
economies of scale, and returns to innovation as critical factors in explaining dominance in
industries characterized by shakeouts and oligopolistic market structures (Bayus and Agarwal, 2007;
Klepper, 1996; 2002; Klepper and Simons, 2000). Majority of these studies focus on either firm or
environmental characteristics as determinants of industry evolution (Malerba et al., 1999; Klepper,
1996; Winter, 1994), and firm performance (Agarwal, Sarkar and Echambadi, 2002; Suarez and
Lanzolla, 2007; Teece, 1986), while the role individuals may play in firm and industry evolution is
largely missing (Felin et al., 2015). Even scholars who have examined individuals typically transform
them to firm level constructs: firm level capabilities such as technological/marketing knowledge and
complementary resources through individuals’ creation of new ventures or mobility (cf. review in
Agarwal and Shah, 2014; Klepper, 2016); firm routines representing managerial knowledge (Zollo
and Winter, 2002); or firm inertia due to managerial cognition (Tripsas and Gavetti, 2000;
Christensen, 1997).
In part, the missing focus on individuals—particularly top management teams—as potential
drivers of firm and industry evolution may be due to a lack of micro-level data. In part, it may be
due to literature stream silos; the lack of integration or linkages of insights from related work on
entrepreneurial founding teams and firm performance (e.g. Delmar and Shane, 2006; Ruef, Aldrich
and Carter, 2003; Stinchcombe, 1965); dynamic managerial capabilities (e.g. Adner and Helfat, 2003;
Helfat and Martin, 2015); and top management teams (TMT) literature (e.g. Boeker and Karichalil,
2002; Beckman and Burton, 2008; Bourgeois and Eisenhardt, 1988; Eisenhardt and Bourgeois, 1988;
Hambrick, 2007). And in part, it may be due to the reliance of most industry evolutionary scholars
on quantitative analysis using secondary data on measurable capabilities without a concomitant

6

attention to business histories and the role of the “human element” in developing organizational
capabilities (Chandler, 1977; 1990).
It is important to note here that such lack of attention on the individual is not observed in
the classics underpinning the above literature streams. Schumpeter’s (1949 [1911]) almost poetic
description makes it clear the only way in which an entrepreneur can put new combinations to work
is by directly assembling, assigning and commanding the necessary resources. For Penrose (1959),
the limits to a firm’s growth are not bound by a production function but by its (entrepreneurial)
managerial talent and experience. Crucially, experience relates not only to each manager’s individual
knowledge, but also to the “working unit” of the TMT, such that the knowledge embodied in a
TMT is intrinsically linked to the individuals comprising a particular TMT and “cannot be separated
from them.” (Penrose, 1959, p. 53). Similarly, Chandler’s emphasis on the “visible hand” for
determining scale and scope underscores that “coordination…demanded the constant attention of a
managerial team or hierarchy…and actual economies of scale and scope…depend on [their]
knowledge, skills, experience and teamwork” (Chandler, 1992; p 81).
Research Questions and Design
Our fundamental research questions deal with characteristics of top management teams
(TMT) that determine which firms are likely to grow and dominate in an evolving industry, and how
these characteristics impact the strategies undertaken by the firm. We note that studies of firm
growth, particularly with a focus on managerial diseconomies and span of control (Penrose, 1959;
Lucas, 1978) are not typically conducted within an industry evolution perspective. While Penrose
explicitly and unapologetically stated her interest only in firms that do grow (Penrose, 1959, p. 33),
there may be additional insights regarding which characteristics are most salient for firm and
industry evolution through an inclusion of firms that do not grow into the analysis.
To examine the role of TMT and to explore the underlying mechanisms at play, we create
and utilize, for the first time, unusually rich quantitative and qualitative data at multiple levels—
individuals, teams and firms—within the historical evolution of the Japanese cotton spinning
industry. Our research design integrates the standard econometric analysis employed in strategic
management studies with the historical approach which leverages rich information on events,
strategies, and processes that transpire over time. Such an integration has numerous advantages.
Combining quantitative analysis with the historical method enriches our understanding of strategy
through the examination of long-term outcomes, rather than mere snapshots of relationships at
some particular point in time. The historical approach is perhaps the only way to combine rich
7

qualitative information with large n “census”-like data. Rather than employing either qualitative case
studies where a researcher cannot ascertain consistency across a census of firms for the observed
processes, or panel data studies where an econometrician doesn’t “see” any individual firm and the
strategies/processes they employ, the use of historical data and methodology accomplishes a
triangulation across both qualitative and quantitative methods in a comprehensive manner. Such
triangulation enables a deeper understanding of both why and how the critical variables of interest
influence outcomes such as firm performance, through interim effects on strategies and firm
attributes. The quantitative analysis helps identify which of the correlations and associations among
the variables are most salient, and the qualitative analyses of business histories help rule out
alternative explanations and “identify” mechanisms at play.
Specifically in this study, we first report on our quantitative analysis to examine potential
relationships between TMT characteristics and firm growth, as well as interim effects that TMTs
may have on resource acquisition (e.g. engineering talent). This analysis is consistent with most
firm/industry evolution studies. However in our study, these patterns are not intended to establish
causal relationships, even though we conduct tests to assess what plausible relationships may be
ruled out, and which ones are deserving of more in-depth examination. Instead, the quantitative
analysis guides the historical deep-dive into potential cause and effect relationships where we seek to
uncover the importance of the human element: the strategic decisions that were made by TMT
leaders at key junctures, and the contextual explanations for how these transformed into critical firm
level outcomes. Such a qualitative analysis of firms that were seemingly identical to others at the
onset, but evolved and emerged as centers of gravity provide both texture to the quantitative
analysis, and enhance causal inferences regarding TMT characteristics salient to firm growth and
dominance.
DATA DESCRIPTION AND QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS
To conduct the study for the Japanese cotton spinning industry data for 1883-1914, we use a
unique database compiled through careful matching of information from various archival sources.
(See Appendix A for detailed information on data sources and the construction of key variables.)
For industry, firms and TMT, information was obtained from the monthly and semi-annual bulletins
of the All-Japan Cotton Spinners Association (Geppo and Sankosho), containing firm-level inputoutput, product varieties and financial information; from the seven-volume history of the industry
with a chapter dedicated to each and every firm (Kinugawa, 1964); from semi-annual firm reports to
shareholders; and from company histories (Toyo Boseki, 1986; Kanebo, 1988; Unitika, 1989; Fuji
8

Boseki, 1998). Additional biographical data on human capital—executives and engineers—was
obtained from annual registries, including the “Zenkoku Shogaisha Yakuinroku” (“All-Japan
Registry of Firms Executives,” hereafter “Yakuinroku”), the “Nihon Zenkoku Shoko Jinmeiroku”
(“All-Japan Registry of Traders and Craftsmen”), and university/technical schools’ alumni lists.
These data were cross-checked across multiple sources (e.g. comparing of information across work
affiliations in alumni lists and white-collar workers in “Yakuinroku,” company reports, and
Kinugawa (1964)).
Together, these sources helped create a comprehensive, almost census panel on TMTs,
engineers, and firms operating in the industry over all evolutionary stages. The unbalanced panel
contains 1,350 observations on 125 firms from 1883-1914, all those operating in the industry during
those years for at least one year. Twenty eight firms either entered right before the end of our
sample or exited almost immediately upon entry; the lack of observations for at least three years
precludes their meaningful analysis. We also lack systematic data on TMTs of seven small privately
held firms, which are also excluded. The final dataset used for the quantitative analysis includes 90
firms (77 of them chartered corporations) and 1,192 firm-year observations, with a firm on average
observed for 13.2 years. Eighty one firms (90%) were startups and nine were diversifying entrants,
reflecting the early stage of industrialization in Japan. Of the 81 (nine) startups (diversifying
entrants), 74 (three) were greenfield entrants that constructed their own plants, while seven (six)
utilized production facilities of failed predecessors. The vast majority of entering firms thus built
their own production facilities, bought their own machines, and recruited their own personnel.
TMT Characteristics and Growth of Firms
In undertaking our quantitative exploration regarding TMT characteristics and firm growth
outcomes, we are guided by the received literature in our choice of variables. These include founding
team/TMT size and diversity, the centralization of power, and stability/lack of discord. Table 1
summarizes the variable definitions and their empirical operationalization. Several variables, such as
output growth, TMT size, functional diversity, firm size, number of employees (including technical,
marketing and financial personnel), have definitions and empirical operationalizations that are
standard in the literature. 5 Here, we briefly describe how our focal TMT characteristics draw upon

There was no variance in demographic characteristics of TMT members as all were male and ethnically Japanese. Also,
as cotton spinning was the first modern industry in Japan, with the exception of a few later entrants, founders had no
pre-entry industry experience. We also note that our regression specification includes firm fixed effects, and these absorb
all time invariant (founding) characteristics, including timing of entry, pre-entry experience and initial scale at entry.
5

9

received literature, and are constructed from the data (a detailed description is in Appendix A).
[Table 1 about here]
Single vs. Shared Leadership: Consistent with the literature (Carson, Tesluk and Marrone, 2007;
Eisenhardt and Bourgeois, 1988; Gibb, 1954; Katz and Kahn, 1978), we define the distinction
between single vs. shared leadership based on whether the authority for strategic decision making
within TMT rests with one person, or is distributed across two or more members. For each firm in
each given year, we capture whether the strategic leadership rests with a single person (Single
Leadership Dummy = 1) or is shared by two or more key individuals (Shared Leadership Dummy = 1).
Rich qualitative data included in company reports and histories, along with biographical information,
enable us to ascertain the roles and responsibilities for each TMT member, beyond what is provided
in the titles they hold (see Appendix A for details). Sixty-six firms had shared leadership in at least
one year, representing 512 firm-year observations. Conditional on being among the 66 firms with
shared leadership episodes, an average firm had shared leadership in about 55% of observations.
Stability in TMT Shared Leadership (Lack of Discord-induced departure): Shared leadership increases the
odds of discord (Amason, 1996; Eisenhardt and Bourgeois, 1988), and we define stable shared
leadership as the absence of discord-induced departures in that year through resignation or ousting
of a TMT leader, for reasons other than death, illness or personal circumstances. 6 We identify most
such instances through shareholder reports of companies which record all TMT changes and their
ratification at shareholder meetings, and through documents of company histories when such
shareholder reports are not available. Chapters dedicated to each firm in Kinugawa (1964) provide
us with more information about TMT leaders’ departures 7. Accordingly, we code departures due to
discord (Discord-induced departure Dummy = 1), and define TMT stability as the lack of this event in
that year. Further, we also create a dummy for the three year period preceding the year of discordinduced departure (Discord Period = 1), and a dummy for three year periods preceding years when no
such discord was observed (No Discord Period = 1). To distinguish between shared leadership firms
experiencing single and multiple discord related departures within a three year period, we create
We note our interest here is on departure associated with discord, not discord per se. There is a rich literature examining
performance effects of conflict in teams (e.g. review in De Dreu and Weingert, 2003). Within top management teams
specifically, prior research has noted that discord could be productive or unproductive (Amason, 1996; Eisenhardt and
Burgeois 1988; Eisenhardt, Kahwajy and Bourgeois, 1997). These studies note productive discord—when managers
challenge each other to develop a cognitively richer understanding of choices and make more effective decisions—has
been associated with higher performance. Our variable here aims to capture unproductive discord heightened to the
level that it induces the departure of a TMT leader. In later analysis, we probe deeper into pre-and post-departure
periods, the qualitative reasons for the discord, and the post-discord-induced departure governance changes.
7 The underlying reasons for discord-induced departures are expanded upon in detail in the qualitative section below.
6

10

dummies (Shared Leadership with Single Discord-induced departure in Period = 1; Shared Leadership with
Multiple Discord-induced departures in Period = 1). Finally, we interact Discord-induced departure with shared
leadership dummies to distinguish among shared leadership firms that experienced or didn’t
experience these events (e.g. Shared Leadership*Discord-induced departure = 1; Shared Leadership*No
Discord-induced departure = 1).
Other TMT Turnover Variables: We also code TMT turnover not related to discord through two
additional variables. Using information from shareholder meetings and company histories, we
identify departure of a TMT leader for exogenous reasons such as death, retirement, or personal
circumstances unrelated to the firm; e.g. illness or family commitments (Exogenous Departure Dummy
= 1), as well as additions to the TMT leadership (Expansion of TMT Dummy = 1).
Results of Analysis
We regress 3- and 5- year moving average firm growth rates on TMT characteristics using a
firm fixed effect specification 8 with robust standard errors and various time-varying controls for
firm, industry and years. While firm fixed effects absorb all time-invariant characteristics (first-mover
advantage; founding team characteristics, including pre-entry experience; and the initial scale), we
control for relevant time-variant characteristics by including firm age, current output levels, the
numbers of university-educated engineers and technical school graduates, as well as variables
capturing market, and financial ties. All regressions include year dummies to control for various
time-varying economy- and industry-wide conditions and shocks (including but not limited to
business cycle fluctuations, number of firms in the industry, demand and technology shocks, etc.).
Our estimation results are conditional on survival, but to the extent that exit is correlated with lack of
growth, this should render conservative estimates of the effects. Note that our specifications are
designed to mitigate the potential reverse causality problem because we estimate effects of TMT size
at time t on future output growth rates over the next 3-year span or 5-year span.
Table 2 provides the effects of TMT characteristics on growth. In Specification I, the
coefficient of Shared Leadership is 0.058 for 3-year growth rates and 0.087 for 5-year growth rates, and
the 90-percent confidence interval is [-0.015, 0.131] and [0.017, 0.156], respectively. This implies that

Our choice of firm fixed-effects is premised on the research purpose of examining the effect of stable and shared
leadership for within-firm growth. That is, we are interested in investigating how a change in the TMT within a firm
affects the growth of that firm, rather than how differences in TMT across firms influences their growth rates. Table A3
in Appendix C provides robustness to random-effect and Arellano-Bond-type estimations: both estimations provide
qualitatively similar results, though higher standard errors for some of the coefficients render them less statistically
significant at conventional levels.
8

11

firms with shared leadership achieve 5.8% (8.7%) higher growth rates over a three-year (five-year)
span respectively, relative to firms with a single leader. Given these high magnitudes, shared
leadership alone is associated with about 20% output gap over the 10-year span, and 45% over the
20-year span. In Specification II, we replace TMT team size with number of TMT leaders. The
coefficient on the shared leadership becomes larger, indicating a stronger relationship between
growth rates and shared leadership. Firm age is economically and statistically positively associated
with growth rates in all specifications, suggesting that firms who entered earlier and/or had longer
tenure had higher growth. Scale (logged current output) is negatively associated with future growth
rates, which is a common finding in growth literature. Table 2 also includes the numbers of
engineers, and TMT members with market and financial ties; while engineers contribute positively to
output growth, the latter two have no discernable impact. Doubling the number of educated
engineers in a given year raises future 3-year growth rates of output by 19.3% and 5-year growth
rates by about 16.5%.
[Table 2 about here]
Though Table 2 provides evidence that a firm grows faster when it has shared leadership
than when it has a single leader, firms with shared leadership are also at risk of developing conflicts,
due to either strategic disagreements or power struggles. Table 3A provides the number of times
such discords resulted in a TMT leader’s departure, and Table 3B tabulates frequencies of firm-year
observations with single or shared leadership, and the periods of time shared leadership firms
experienced discord-induced departures. Seventy seven percent of the firms with shared leadership
experienced at least one such event, suggesting stability in TMT is not easily achieved, and may be
critical for firm growth. At the firm-year level, TMT leaders departures due to discord constitute
about 25% of the observations of firms with shared leadership.
[Table 3 about here]
We next explore the effects of single and shared leadership and TMT changes on growth
rates. In Specification I of Table 4, the analysis focuses on discord-induced departures; the baseline
growth rate is for single leadership firms and the main variables of interest are the interaction terms
Shared Leadership*Discord-induced departure and Shared Leadership*No Discord-induced departure. Relative to
single leadership firms, when firms with shared leadership experience a discord-induced departure,
they have 3-year growth rates lower by 5.7% and 5-year growth rates lower by 4.2%, with the 90%
confidence intervals of [-0.149, 0.035] and [-0.132, 0.048], respectively; in contrast, the 3-year growth
rates for firms with shared leadership that experience no discord-induced departure are higher by
12

4.6% while 5-year growth rates are higher by 10.3%, with the 90 percent confidence interval [-0.029,
0.120] and [0.032, 0.174], respectively. The null hypothesis of no significant difference between the
coefficients of shared leadership with discord and shared leadership without discord is rejected at a
p-value of 0.07 and 0.01, for 3-year and 5-year growth rates, respectively. Once again, educated
engineers have an independent and large positive contribution to output growth but there is no
discernible impact of market and financial ties.
[Table 4 about here]
In Specifications (II) and (III) of Table 4, we examine exogenous departures of a TMT
leader, and expansions respectively; this permits comparisons of growth rates due to different
changes, and the examination of potential endogeneity concerns stemming from joint determinants
of growth prospects and TMT leadership departures. In contrast to Specification (I), the coefficients
on the interaction terms of Shared Leadership*Exogenous Departure and Shared Leadership*No Exogenous
Departure are very similar in Column (II), and we cannot reject the null hypothesis that these
coefficients are the same. In Specification III, the analysis examines the effect of TMT expansions
(with interaction terms of Shared Leadership*TMT Expansion and Shared Leadership*No TMT
Expansion). Again, there seems to be little difference in the growth rates of shared leadership firms
due to expansion as the null hypotheses of no difference cannot be rejected. Overall, our regression
results suggest future growth rates of firms that maintain stable TMT with no departures exceed
those of both single-leader firms and firms that have shared leadership but are unable to keep it
stable. Given statistical insignificance of the coefficient on TMT functional diversity in Tables 2 and
4, the results indicate that it is not so much TMT functional diversity, but shared leadership and
stability that matter for firm growth. Also, the comparisons across specifications in Table 4 suggest
disruptions of the TMT structure through discord among its members are most costly and result in
biggest differences in future firm growth.
We probe deeper into effects of discord-related departures by examining one-time versus
repeated TMT leader departures. Repeated discords are indicative of more systemic leadership
problems, and pose greater disruptions to the firm than one-off departures and subsequent quick
stabilization (we will expand on this further below, in the qualitative section). Indeed, this bears out
in the estimates reported in Table 5; the coefficient on Shared Leadership with Single Discord-induced
departure in Period exhibits no statistically significant difference from the coefficient on Shared
Leadership with No TMT departure (p-value for test 1 is 0.80 and 0.63 for 3- and 5-year growth rates,
respectively). On the other hand, relative to the baseline of single leader firms, firms with Shared
13

Leadership with Multiple Discord-induced departures in Period have 16.7 % and 22.6% lower growth rates,
with 90th confidence intervals of [-0.308, -0.026] and [-0.393, -0.059] for 3-for 5-year spans,
respectively. The null hypotheses of no significant differences between these firms, and firms with
shared leadership and no departure is rejected at p values of 0.002 and 0.001, respectively.
[Table 5 about here]
Preliminary Examination of Possible Mechanisms
The advantages of historical data replete with qualitative information captured at the time of
occurrence is the ability to directly examine the mechanisms underlying the observed quantitative
relationships, rather than having to rely on indirect inferences. We do so in the next section, and
report here additional analysis as preliminary examinations of the underlying mechanisms by pushing
the quantitative data a little bit further.
Disagreement or Adjustment Costs?
Discord related departures can impact growth rates due to disagreement costs (incurred prior
to the departure), or due to adjustment costs (incurred after the departure as the firm deals with the
disruptions and adjusts to the loss of a prior leader). This issue is important because conflicts and
disagreements among TMT members might hinder firm growth even before they trigger departures
by taking important resources (e.g., time) away from productive uses. We examine this possibility
through the effect of Discord Period on firm growth rates in Table 6, Column 1, relative to the effect
of No Discord Period. 9 When shared leadership firms undergo a period of discord, the growth rates are
8.9% higher than single leadership firms, with the 90th percentile confidence interval [-0.013, 0.192],
while shared leadership firms with No Discord Period have growth rates of 16% higher than single
leadership firms, with the 90th percentile confidence interval [0.075, 0.246]; however, the null
hypothesis of no significant difference in the two coefficients cannot be rejected (p value = 0.231).
The results are thus not quite conclusive. On the one hand, shared leadership firms who are not at
risk of imminent departures of leaders experience robustly stronger 3-year future growth rates than
the baseline (single-leader firms). On the other hand, firms experiencing discord leading to key
departures from TMTs in the near future seem to locate between single-leader firms and sharedleadership firms with no discord, with imprecisely estimated effects. Thus, there seem to be limits to
what can be inferred from the quantitative analysis, and we revisit this issue in the qualitative section.

When a firm experiences a TMT departure in year t, periods of discord are from year t-1 to t-3. We exclude 3-year
growth rates measured at t-1 and t-2 from the analysis because it includes some periods after a TMT member departure.

9

14

In Column 2 of Table 6, we distinguish between Discord Periods with Single Departures, and Discord
Periods with Multiple Departures. Interestingly, and in contrast to results in Table 5, there is no
significant difference in growth rates in periods preceding single vs. multiple departures—if at all,
the growth rates in periods prior to multiple departures are higher than in periods prior to single
departures and similar to periods which did not precede any discords. This is what one would expect
if events that triggered multiple departures and shared leadership unraveling happened suddenly and
unexpectedly (we elaborate on this in the qualitative section). Together, the results across Table 5
and 6 suggest disagreement costs (in terms of distractions/conflict prior to departure) are not as
important as the adjustment costs post departure, especially for repeated departures.
[Table 6 about here]
Resource Accumulation and Firm Growth
To further probe mechanisms, we examine the impact on accumulation of productive
resources, particularly human capital, which is essential for a firm to become a center of gravity.
Table 7 has 5-year growth rates of labor force (factory floor workers), educated engineers, and
capital as the dependent variables (results are similar for 3-year growth rates). The results reveal
significantly lower growth rates of labor force for firms with shared leadership and discord related
departure (negative 11.8%) relative to both single leader firms, and shared leadership firms with no
discord related departure (positive 5.6%); the null hypothesis of no significant difference with the
latter can be rejected at a p-value of 0.004. Second, university-educated engineering workforce grows
at much faster rates when a firm has shared leadership without discord related departures, relative to
both single leadership (8.9% higher) and shared leadership with discord (8.9%-(-1.2%)=10.1%). The
same is not true for technical school educated engineers, though this is perhaps not surprising as it
was university-educated engineers who were most coveted and sought after scarce human-capital
resources in the industry; and as a result were able to easily switch firms if dissatisfied with the TMT
or firm performance. Given the significance of educated engineering workforce in firm growth (see
Tables 2, 4, and 5), we can infer the university-educated engineering workforce was a particularly
important driver of firm growth. In the next section, we elaborate through examples how TMT
discords led to firms losing their top-notch engineers and suffering adverse consequences. Results
for physical capital are similar: firms with shared leadership and no discord and single leadership
firms have higher physical capital growth rates than firms with shared leadership and discord.
Finally, the results for financial capital are similar to those of technical school educated workforce—
there seem to be no discernable difference across the three types of firms in financial capital growth
15

rates. In sum, our estimation results suggest TMT stability and shared leadership are indeed
important forces associated with accumulation especially of top talent and physical capital.
[Table 7 about here]
Diversification and Firm Growth
In accordance with Penrose’s theory of firm growth (Penrose, 1959), diversification did
accompany Japanese firms’ growth. Such diversification consisted of expanding the number of
product varieties 10 and integrating downstream into garments production by adding weaving
divisions. Not all firms employed these strategies but the centers of gravity firms were at the
forefront. In the qualitative section below, we describe how stable shared leadership (including that
in the centers of gravity) enabled these strategies. As a precursor to that description, we tabulate in
Table 8 the fraction of diversified firms and downstream integrated firms by single or shared
leadership, and, for shared leadership, also by TMT stability (observations with no discord-induced
departures, with single discord-induced departure, and with repeated discord-induced departures).
Diversified firms are defined as those whose total output was comprised of the number of product
varieties above the industry-year median. The downstream diversification is a zero-one dummy.
Table 8 shows that both shared leadership and stable shared leadership are robustly associated with
higher fractions of these diversification strategies.
[Table 8 about here]
Ownership Structure and TMT Characteristics
While our study’s primary focus is on TMT characteristics, it is plausible that the underlying
factor impacting firm growth could be ownership structure or corporate governance. In terms of
ownership, as mentioned, the vast majority of cotton spinning firms from their inception were joint
stock, limited liability corporations whose shares were frequently bought and sold, including but not
limited to stock exchanges, and they had diffused and fluid ownership. Indeed, there were very few
family-owned or privately held firms in this industry. As for corporate governance, in Table 9, we
provide summary statistics for firms with single vs. shared, and stable, shared leadership on the total
number of shareholders, the fraction of total shares owned by the top 5 shareholders, and the
fraction of shares owned by board members (executives and auditors). Single leadership is not
associated with high degree of ownership concentration. Relative to shared leadership, firms with

Even though cotton yarn may seem to be a relatively homogenous product, it is produced in many varieties,
distinguished by thickness (“count”) and also by the degree of processing (“doubling,” “gassing,” and so on).

10

16

single leadership seem to have fewer total number of shareholders and slightly higher fractions of
shares owned by the top 5 shareholders and board members than shared leadership. Nonetheless,
even single leadership firms on average had 449 shareholders, and the fractions of shares owned by
the top 5 of them and by board members were below 30%. Firms with stable shared leadership also
had on average more shareholders than firms without stable shared leadership, while at the same
time having a slightly higher concentration of ownership in the top 5 and board members. However,
the differences across the last 3 columns of Table 9 are small and statistically not significant in the
last two rows, so any association between corporate governance and the stability of shared
leadership is quite weak.
[Table 9 about here]
QUALITATIVE ANALYSES OF FIRM BUSINESS HISTORIES
The quantitative analyses of all firms in the industry produced three important results about the
connection between TMT characteristics and firm growth. One, shared leadership generally enabled
higher growth than single leadership. Two, the advantages of shared leadership tended to dissipate in
periods following discord related departure, and even became strongly negative in case of repeated
such departures. Three, accumulation of human capital (engineering) resources was facilitated by
stable shared leadership and, in its turn, had an independent contribution to firm growth. Armed
with these insights, we turn to a deeper examination of the factors underlying firms who experienced
such extreme high growth that they emerged as “centers of gravity” in the Japanese cotton spinning
industry. Specifically, we address the motivational question: At the early stages of the industry, how
could one have predicted which of the seemingly similar startups would grow and develop into
“centers of gravity?”
We begin by revisiting the output trends in Figure 1: The average output of the seven
ultimate “centers of gravity” grew by 13.1% per year, compared to 8% per year for all other
(surviving) firms during 1893-1914. This resulted in almost tripling of the size gap between the two
groups by 1914 (from 3.57 in 1893 to 9.13 in 1914). Figure 3, starting from period 2 (after the end of
the government support measures), shows the dynamics of shared leadership and discord-induced
TMT departures for the seven “centers of gravity” compared to other firms. Five of those had
entered by Period 2 (in the order of size achieved by 1914 these are: Kanebo, Mie, Settsu, Amabo,
and Osaka). The remaining two (Fujibo and Godo) were later entrants. Centers of gravity firms had
shared leadership in 74% of observations in period 2, compared to just over 20% for other firms in
the same period. The number of firm-year observations with shared leadership for these firms
17

increases on average to almost 90% in the next period and stays high, while other firms on average
never cross the 50% threshold. The dynamics of discord-induced TMT departures in the total
number of years under shared leadership (represented by bars in Figure 3) show that while there is
not much difference between centers of gravity and other firms in the earliest period (both have
discord–induced departures on average once every five years), TMTs in centers of gravity become
more stable over time.
[Figures 3 and 4 around here]
Figure 4 provides the evolution of TMT composition in the centers of gravity versus other
firms in three types of human capital: university-educated TMT leaders (including but not limited to
university-educated engineers), “traders” (cotton yarn and garments merchants, both incorporated
and large individual merchants), and “bankers” (bank executives). An important historical fact is that
having recently emerged from feudalism, Japan still had a “glass ceiling” against ascension for
anyone not from a reputable merchant family, or without financial wealth. Promoting a universityeducated engineer or manager (who were generally not rich investors) to the TMT thus required
breaking with strong cultural/traditional norms. In this light, the most striking aspect of Figure 4 is
the big divergence, starting in period 3, between centers of gravity and other firms in terms of the
fraction of TMT leaders with university education. In contrast, while a much higher fraction of
centers of gravity than other firms had at least one TMT leader with bank ties initially (enabling
them to enter with a larger size than other firms), the importance of bankers on TMTs sharply
declined with time and they are largely absent as TMT leaders by the mid-1900s (Figure 4). This is
also indicative of centers of gravity having accumulated resources, including internal finance, so they
had less need for external ties to banks. Consistent with the above regression results, there is thus
little association between ties to banks and firm growth on average as the industry evolved. Centers
of gravity were also more likely to have at least one trader as a TMT leader at time of founding
compared to other firms, although the gap was smaller than with respect to university-educated
engineers or bankers. Also, both centers of gravity and other firms show increases in the number of
traders as TMT leaders throughout the sample. The trends are almost parallel (Figure 4), which may
be why the regression analysis did not pick the importance of market ties.
Lastly, Table 10 relates shared leadership and discord induced TMT departures in center of
gravity firms (the large serial acquirers), their acquisition target firms, and all other acquiring firms.
Relating Braguinsky et al.’s (2015) findings of acquisition of higher-productivity fixed assets by
better managed firms, centers of gravity had shared leadership twice as often as the firms they
18

acquired. In contrast, discord induced TMT departures were 2.5 times more likely to occur in the
future acquired firms than center of gravity firms. Strikingly, as the last row of Table 10 shows, other
acquiring firms were not different from the target firms in these two dimensions, and almost half of
them ended up eventually being acquired themselves.
Figures 3 and 4 thus conform with the results of the quantitative analyses in the previous
section. We see how stable shared leadership not only was a key determinant of higher growth rates,
but was also salient for the emergence of the centers of gravity, who additionally broke with
tradition by promoting educated talent, and were serial acquirers of other firms for physical assets.
However, the question remains on how and why this is the case, which we turn to next.
Qualitative Comparison of Seemingly Similar Startups
To delve more deeply into how factors identified in the quantitative analysis played into the
emergence of the “centers of gravity,” we undertake an in-depth examination of business histories.
While we draw upon information on all firms as is relevant, to ensure an appropriate comparison set
of initially similar startups, we focus our attention on early entrants (prior to 1892; the year of firm
take-off in the industry), who achieved the minimum efficient scale of at least 10,000 spindles either
at or shortly after entry (and prior to 1892), and had survived in the industry for at least 10 years.
Sixteen of 35 firms that entered the industry prior to 1892 meet these criteria—in addition to the
five centers of gravity firms mentioned above (Kanebo, Mie, Settsu, Amabo, and Osaka), the other
11 firms are: Tenma Spinning (Tenma), Naniwa Spinning (Naniwa), Hirano Spinning (Hirano),
Senshu Spinning (Sensu), Miike Spinning (Miike), Nagoya Spinning (Nagoya), Okayama Spinning
(Okayama), Owari Spinning (Owari), Kanakin (Calico) Spinning and Weaving (Calico), Tamashima
Spininng (Tamashima), and Tokyo Spinning (Tokyo). 11
The insights from our qualitative comparisons, and their connection to the explanatory
variables highlighted from the quantitative analysis above, are summarized in Table 11 and Figure 5,
and discussed in greater detail in the subsequent sub-sections. In Table 11, we group the 16 startups
in our comparison set by explanatory variables used in the quantitative analysis: (i) shared leadership
at founding, (ii) the stability of shared leadership, and (iii) presence of a university-educated engineer
at founding. 12 The table depicts differences in outcomes as a function of each of the explanatory
11 We excluded post-period 3 entrants, because they could leverage technology refinements from the early 1890s upon
entry; this created significant differences in starting conditions. Of the 35 “candidate” firms with pre-period 3 entry, we
excluded 13 smaller former government-promoted mills and six newer private startups who could not muster enough
resources to enter at the minimum efficient scale of 10,000 spindles.
12 Criteria (i) and (iii) are zero-one, while in criterion (ii) we separate the sample based on being above or below the

19

variables (i)-(iii). In Figure 5, we provide a depiction of the evolutionary paths of the 16 firms from
the initial starting conditions through their ultimate fate by 1914; while all five firms who became
centers of gravity experienced high growth, the other 11 had all exited by 1914 (six during the first
shakeout in period 4). The boxes in Figure 5 elaborate on the explanatory variables identified in the
quantitative analysis (single vs. shared leadership; stability vs. discord-induced departure), and
additionally illustrate the post-discord governance changes, and their implications for growth
outcomes. Importantly, the qualitative comparisons reveal that the business histories of the 16 firms
can be grouped into four distinct evolutionary paths.
[Table 11 and Figure 5 around here]
Initial Single vs. Shared Leadership
As detailed in Appendix A, the Commercial Code in Japan at the time required commitment
by multiple investors to begin the process of chartering a limited liability corporation. Since this was
how an overwhelming majority of firms in the industry originated, it created the potential for shared
leadership from the onset. All 16 startups in Table 11 were incorporated at founding, or (in cases of
Mie, Okayama, Nagoya, and Tamashima who had small former government-promoted mills as their
precursors) re-born through this process during period 2 (in these 4 cases, we consider the
incorporation year to be the entry year).
For all 16 startups, many founders-investors had other primary businesses, and did not
dedicate themselves full-time to governing cotton spinning firms. Such founders refrained from
active management, although they may have remained board members or auditors to exercise
control. Recall that we empirically identify single or shared leadership by individuals who were
actually in charge of strategic decision making or/and managing the firm; therefore, individuals who
held TMT positions in title only are not included in TMT leadership. Table 11 shows that among the
16 startups, nine (56%) had shared leadership at entry. Also, having shared leadership at entry seems
to be positively associated with the likelihood of becoming a center of gravity. However, by itself,
shared leadership was not associated either with higher growth rates, or increases in employment of
educated engineers in the first ten years. The lack of a clear-cut relationship between shared
leadership and firm growth in Table 11 is in large part due to shared leadership being not stable.
Once TMT stability is taken into account, the difference becomes very clear. The second row in
median of the TMT stability over 10 years, measured as the ratio of the number of discord related departures, divided by
the number of years under shared leadership during that 10-year period. The two firms that were under single leadership
throughout are dropped from this sample and discussed separately below.

20

Table 11 shows the eight firms with shared leadership with above median TMT stability grew twice
as fast as the six other firms. They also increased their employment of educated engineers by 43%
over the first ten years, in contrast to firms with unstable shared leadership who lost a third of their
initial educated engineers.
Smooth TMT Transition to Stable Shared Leadership
Smooth transition to stable shared leadership (Path 1 in Figure 5) enabled pursuit of growth
strategies by leveraging complementarities in human capital of the TMT leaders, to eventually
become a center of gravity. Among the 16 startups, only one firm, Mie, was able to follow Path 1, so
it is the exception rather than the rule, and an exemplar showcasing the advantages of stable shared
leadership.
Mie was founded in 1882, and “re-born” when it was chartered in 1886 in the city of
Yokkaichi in the Mie prefecture in Central Japan; among the three board members, two were mere
investors and the firm had a single leader, founder Denshichi Ito. 13 In the year of incorporation, Ito
recruited Tsunezo Saito, a university-educated engineer, and enabled his travel to England to acquire
technical and operational skills. As the third row in Table 11 demonstrates, all future centers of
gravity employed a university educated engineer at founding, which is associated with robustly
higher growth in the first 10 years. For Mie, Saito’s hiring proved to be critical. In 1891, he was
elected to replace a board member who left due to personal circumstances. Saito’s promotion to
TMT was the first case where an engineer became a TMT leader.
The smooth transition from single to shared leadership between Ito (with entrepreneurial
vision and managerial talent) and Saito (with engineering skills) was stable throughout our sample
period. Not only did the two of them complement each other’s knowledge, they also exhibited
complementarities, i.e. they were best-in-class talent within their expertise domains. 14 As with other
center of gravity firms discussed later, Mie’s stable shared leadership served as the “planetary core”
around which the center of gravity forms. Mie exemplifies how the “human element” of TMT
leadership enabled the pursuit of growth strategies: talent acquisition, scale acquisition, product
The firm’s origins trace to a small 2,000-spindle government-promoted mill, located in a remote mountainous area. As
all government-promoted mills in that era (Braguinsky, 2015), it suffered from small scale, bad location (dictated by use
of hydro power instead of steam engine), and lack of managerial, engineering, and skilled labor resources. Upon
government withdrawal of subsidies, Ito sought advice from Eiichi Shibusawa, founder of Osaka Spinning, who helped
Ito raise capital to build the 10,000+-spindle mill in Yokkaichi.
14 Company history describes their complementarity: “Once the new Yokkaichi mill started operating … Ito moved into
a newly built dorm on the factory premises, and lived there with the staff in charge of sales and administration.
Technology-related staff, meanwhile, moved into Saito’s home and lived there while working and learning technology
together with Saito.” (Toyo Boseki, 1986. p. 171).
13

21

expansion and downstream integration.
As mentioned above, educated engineers and managerial cadres were a very scarce resource,
especially until about 1907. Mie, as the only center of gravity located away from the bustling central
cities of Osaka and Tokyo, suffered a location disadvantage in recruiting talent. Nevertheless, Saito
leveraged his (alumni) network, and Mie was a leading recruiter of educated personnel, especially
engineers, even among centers of gravity, and the number of educated engineers it employed over
the years was second only to Kanebo. As the firm grew larger, Mie expanded its stable shared
leadership through promotion of professional managers and engineers (such as Shunichi Hattori
mentioned below), in supporting roles.
Mie also added scale through acquisitions. Table 10 shows the five center of gravity firms
were the largest serial acquiring firms, and Mie, under Ito and Saito’s stable shared leadership, was
the most prolific among them with nine acquisitions, seven of which were in the surrounding Seo
region. Of note here is Nagoya and Owari could have been arguably stronger candidates to lead the
Seo region consolidation, but neither had Mie’s stable shared leadership.
Mie’s stable shared leadership also enabled downstream integration into garment production.
Cotton garment producers—the primary consumers of cotton yarn—still remained largely nonmechanized until the early 20th century. Diversifying downstream, while a lucrative opportunity, was
not easy, as it required exploring and implementing different technologies and marketing channels.
For example, an important technology choice related to power looms vs. automatic (Northrop)
looms. When Mie embarked on garment production in 1896, it first equipped its weaving division
with the then standard power looms. Automatic looms were invented and first marketed in the U.S.
in 1894, and in 1900, Saito engaged in an extensive, long term overseas travel, first to the U.S., and
then also to Europe, so he could learn about the newest technology. Ito’s management of mills at
the home-front was critical in Saito’s absence. As a result, Mie was the first Japanese firm to
implement automatic looms (Toyo Boseki, 1986, p. 175-76). By 1906, almost 40% of Mie’s cotton
yarn was being consumed in-house.
Product diversification in Mie was coupled with garment production for export. In contrast
to Amabo and Kanebo described below, Mie did not venture into high-end products until much
later. That said, by the 1910s, it produced 20 different product varieties, compared to the industry
average of eight. Here too, the complementarities in shared leadership are evident. Early on, Ito
invested significant effort in demand development, traveling to Shanghai to learn about market
conditions there, while Saito remained in charge at the mills. Later, as Mie’s garment exports became
22

integral to its growth, Ito undertook a comprehensive study of the Chinese market, and gauged
potential demand in Manchuria and Korea.
Together, these growth strategies enabled by Ito and Saito’s stable shared leadership resulted
in Mie emerging, in spite of initial disadvantages of inferior technologies and location, as a key
center of gravity accounting for 13% of industry output alone by 1914, the end of our sample
period.
Single Leadership in TMT
Single leadership throughout a firm’s history represented another pathway for the 16 startups
in our comparison set, one which led to limited growth and ultimate exit (Path 4). Only two firms,
Okayama and Tokyo, followed Path 4, and their histories serve as contrasts to Mie above. Okayama
in Western Japan also started as a 2,000-spindle government-promoted mill in 1881, and was
chartered sometime before 1890 (the year of the first surviving shareholders report). It remained
under single leadership of the company president, Tastsumi Tanigawa from 1887 through its exit 20
years later. Tokyo was chartered in 1887 in Tokyo by a group of cotton merchants, and was under
single leadership of its founder and president, Rishichi Tamura, until 1910. Although it transitioned
to shared leadership then, this occurred very late in its history and just prior to its exit through a
hostile acquisition in 1914. We consider it a Path 4 firm because this timeline did not permit any
benefits of shared leadership on strategies or performance outcomes.
The single leaders of both Okayama and Tokyo were competent, but nonetheless, each firm
grew at a much more constrained rate than Mie. The limits to their growth can be traced to an
inability to aggressively pursue above mentioned strategies. In terms of talent recruitment, neither
firm had an educated engineer at the helm, and while they made several efforts to recruit, they were
unable to retain engineers, university educated or technical school graduates. For example, both
university-educated engineers recruited by Okayama (in 1896 and 1898 respectively), and the
technical school graduates recruited by Tokyo (in 1891-1900) had left each firm by 1901. Given high
demand for their services within and outside cotton spinning, these personnel were able to pursue
better career opportunities than offered by slow-growing, one man-led firms. Similarly, both firms
lagged in scale expansion and acquisitions. While Mie’s capacity was already over 16,000 spindles
around 1890, Okayama and Tokyo each had only about 10,000 spindles. By 1906, (the year prior to
Okayama’s exit), Mie had expanded to 187,656 spindles (more than a ten-fold increase in scale)
while both of these firms, remarkably, were stuck at a similar size of 36,500 spindles. While Mie had
acquired six other firms by 1906, Okayama had acquired only one and Tokyo had made no
23

acquisitions. In terms of product diversification, while Mie was producing 14 different product
varieties in 1906, Okayama was able to produce only eight different product varieties, though Tokyo
came close with 12 different product varieties. Similarly, in stark contrast to Mie’s spectacularly
successful downstream integration through leverage of stable shared leadership above, Okayama’s
efforts at downstream integration resulted in the fraction of in-house yarn consumption at only
13.5% in 1906, and Tokyo had not even attempted downstream integration.
Indeed, Tokyo’s late experience is also illuminating. In 1908, still under Tamura’s single
leadership, the firm began new plant construction, expanding its total capacity to over 100,000
spindles by 1910. The number of its product varieties increased to 24, and it also embarked on
downstream integration. The firm also finally added a new TMT leader, Seijiro Miyajima, who was
Tamura’s son-in-law and a recent graduate of the prestigious law department of the Imperial
University. But this transition to shared leadership came too late and, notably, did not precede the
expansion strategy (as in Mie above) but followed up on it. The new management structure was not
able to fully leverage its new state-of-the-art production facilities and it succumbed to a hostile
acquisition bid from Amabo in 1914.
Firms in Path 4 thus represent able, but not shared leadership, and experienced managerial
diseconomies of scale. A notable exception to this rule is Godo (a later spinout entrant and not in
our comparison set), the only center of gravity firm spearheaded by a single leader, Fusazo
Taniguchi, from inception through the sample period end. Taniguchi’s ability to lead Godo single
handedly may be due to employee entrepreneurship: Hailing from a yarn-trading background,
Taniguchi acquired industry experience by serving on two cotton spinning firms’ boards, and had
attempted a new venture creation prior to Godo. These experiences provided Taniguchi a “withinperson” integration of market and operational knowledge, a substitute for shared leadership. He
leveraged this knowledge successfully by following an expansion through acquisition strategy: rather
than relying on engineering talent necessary to create new in-house production facilities, Taniguchi
grew Godo through superior management of acquired, under-performing mills.
Shared Leadership with Discord-induced Departures
Thirteen of the 16 startups in our comparison set, and thus the majority of the firms, either
started or transitioned to shared leadership and experienced at least one discord-induced departure.
Accordingly, they represent both Path 2 (eventual establishment of stable shared leadership) and
Path 3 (lack of stable shared leadership) in Figure 5. Their business histories (see Appendix E for the
timeline of each firm) provide rich detail regarding the underlying reasons for the discord-induced
24

departure. We categorize these reasons in three types: strategic, interpersonal, and ethical.
Strategic Discord-induced Departures
Discord-induced departures stemming from strategic disagreements between TMT leaders
and/or board members are observed in many business histories. In Amabo (1893), an early discordinduced departure occurred due to a disagreement between company president Chubei Kihara and
actively engaged board member Motonosuke Fukumoto who (with the help from chief engineer
Kyozo Kikuchi), proposed a pioneering plan for new plant construction for entry into the high-end
42s count doubled yarn. Fukumoto called a shareholders meeting to garner support, which resulted
in Kihara’s resignation and Fukumoto becoming the president. Similar disagreements over
expansion plans within TMT leadership and among shareholders also led to discord-induced
departures in Tamashima (1898-99) and Naniwa (1895-96).
Kanebo experienced several discord-induced departures (in 1891-93; 1900 and 1907). Shortly
after the firm was launched, and as a result of several miscalculations by the shared TMT leadership,
Kanebo found itself on the verge of bankruptcy, leading to the general manager’s forced resignation
in 1891. The leadership then sought financial help from Mitsui (a prominent financial group) and
had to surrender the controlling block of shares. Mitsui then implemented two more TMT
leadership changes (1892 and 1893) to replace holdover TMT leaders with university-educated
managers, Hikojiro Nakamigawa and Eiji Asabuki. Later on, Kanebo experienced another discordinduced departure in 1900 in their second tier of expanded TMT shared leadership: Toyoji Wada
(the general manager) and Sanji Muto (who managed the newly established Hyogo mill in the Osaka
area) held conflicting views about how to technologically upgrade the older Tokyo mill. After failing
to resolve their conflict, the senior leadership in 1900 decided to remove Wada and give Muto
authority over both firm branches. A final strategic discord-induced departure occurred in 1907.
Muto and a stock market speculator, Hisagoro Suzuki, who obtained a controlling block of shares in
the previous year, sharply disagreed about the company’s strategy going forward, and this led to the
resignations by both Muto and Asabuki (Nakamigawa had passed away a few years earlier). Similar
to Kanebo, Tenma (1895) experienced mismanagement early on, and a strategic discord-induced
departure followed on the heels of a labor strike that deteriorated into violence (still a very rare
occasion in Japan at that time), prompting government inquiry into the firm’s management practices.
Tenma experienced 2 more discord-induced TMT departures in 1899-1900 that were directly related
to the 1894-95 shakeup.
Strategic disagreements in shared leadership resulted in spinouts too: both Osaka (1894) and
25

Calico (1899) lost a TMT leader to employee entrepreneurship. In Osaka’s case, Rihei Kawamura, a
highly touted professional manager and TMT leader in charge of marketing and sales, left to found
his own venture. In Calico’s case, another professional manager and TMT leader, Masahiro Tamura,
left to join the TMT of newly founded Fujibo (a later entrant center of gravity not in our
comparison set, described briefly below).
Interpersonal Discord-induced Departures
While often morphed with strategic differences (Amason, 1996; Eisenhardt and Bourgeios,
1988), we describe below five discord-induced departures primarily driven by interpersonal
differences. Interpersonal differences in attitudes towards engineers were at the root of Hirano
(1893) and Osaka (1898). While the discord-induced departure in Amabo (1893) above was mostly
about strategy, Hirano (1893) serves as a great foil, if only because the same individual, Kyozo
Kikuchi, was involved. Hirano (who entered two years prior to Amabo) was the first to recruit
Kikuchi right after his graduation from Imperial University, and had sponsored his trip to England
to acquire state-of-the-art technological knowledge, in the same year as Mie sent Saito. When Settsu
and Amabo entered the industry, they negotiated his joint appointment as the chief engineer of their
firms, alongside his primary job at Hirano. 15 Kikuchi aspired to rise to leadership ranks, and in 1893,
he seemed to have some support from the just-installed shared TMT leadership in Hirano.
However, the company president vetoed Kikuchi’s promotion because of his engineering
background. The discord led to the departure of the other TMT leaders, and shelving of Kikuchi’s
promotion. Similarly, Osaka’s (1898) interpersonal discord-induced departure occurred three years
after Kawamura’s departure above. The company had restored shared leadership by promoting its
educated chief engineer, Takeo Yamanobe to a TMT leader, but the lack of Kawamura’s superior
marketing knowledge was hampering firm growth. “New” and “old school” differences resulted in
“blame-games” and interpersonal rifts between Yamanobe and the company’s president Jutaro
Matsumoto. In 1897, Matsumoto wanted to remove Yamanobe from TMT, but firm founder Eiichi
Shibusawa supported Yamanobe (whom he had personally recruited), and Matsumoto himself had
to resign instead in the ensuing shareholders meeting.
In Nagoya’s (1893) case, interpersonal discord occurred when Jubei Sofue, a major
shareholder, financier and wholesale trader, pushed through the election of a new TMT leader with
government ties. This leader, in his turn, hired mid-level managerial personnel from the prefectural
15

Such sharing of scarce engineering talent was common in the early Japanese cotton spinning industry.

26

government. Their arrogant behavior, when coupled with little industry knowledge, disrupted
Nagoya’s management. Unable to work with the new team, the incumbent TMT leader and longserving company president resigned. Similar discords erupted in the case of Owari in 1891 (see
below for details). In Senshu’s case, interpersonal fighting for firm control between competing
investor/directors groups led to repeated discord-induced departures (and comebacks by previously
ousted leaders) over 1893-95, as we also describe in some detail below.
Ethical Discord-induced Departures
Ethical discord-induced departures is a final category, consisting of financial fraud or
misappropriation. Two firms, Settsu and Naniwa developed very similar ethical discords in 1889,
shortly after their founding. The company president (in Naniwa’s case) and a founding board
member (in Settsu’s case) misappropriated shareholders money for their own private businesses and
were dismissed. The ethical discord-induced departure in Tamashima in 1897 was also following
misappropriation of company money for private use by the firm’s general manager. In two
additional cases—Senshu, 1900, and Miike, 1901 (re-named Kyushu following acquisitions of two
other firms in 1899)—mid-level managers who were protégés of shared TMT leadership members
gambled with company money and lost. These events led to the resignations of the TMT leaders
responsible for the mid-managers’ supervision.
Post Discord-induced Departure Transition to Stable Shared Leadership
Regardless of reasons underlying discord-induced departure, some firms transitioned into
stable shared leadership (Path 2). The extent to which their history demonstrates sustained periods
of stable shared leadership is directly related to their pursuit of growth strategies. Among the 13
firms who experienced at least one discord-induced departure, four firms followed this pathway to
eventually become a center of gravity; our examination of their business histories revealed these
firms (in contrast to the other nine) focused on different underlying principles when undertaking
governance changes after the discord-induced departure.
Strategic Alignment on Value Creation (for strategic and interpersonal discords)
In Amabo, the only instance of discord-induced departure in 1893 was resolved based on the
potential for value creation in Fukumoto’s long term expansion strategy. Once elected, Fukumoto
immediately proposed promoting the company’s university-educated chief engineer, Kyozo Kikuchi,
to a TMT leader position. Similar to Hirano above, this was initially met with opposition from more
conservative, traditionalist board members and shareholders given glass ceilings against engineers.
However, in contrast to Hirano, Fukumoto prevailed against them and this discord did not lead to
27

another TMT departure. The role of strategic alignment here is brought home by the fact that the
shareholders had already approved Fukumoto’s ambitious and potentially risky expansion plan. The
necessary capital was to be raised through issue of new shares, allocated to incumbent shareholders
in proportion to the existing shareholdings (a practice consistently employed by firms when raising
new capital for large-scale expansions, including for acquisitions). The commitment ensured the
shareholders’ subsequent agreement with Fukumoto, who noted to them that Kikuchi’s professional
knowledge and talent were more important for the company success than money. As the firm
history proudly notes, this paved the way for the modernization of management and amounted to “a
progressive, enlightened decision for that time.” (Unitika, 1989, p. 12). Thus, notwithstanding a
short-term cost to growth from Kihara’s discord-induced departure (as Figure A2 in Appendix D
shows, robust growth in 1891-92 was followed by two years of almost no growth in 1893-94),
Amabo experienced spectacularly high long term growth from a long period of stable shared
leadership in the aftermath.
In Kanebo too, the post-discord departure resolution in each case was swift and made in
consideration of long term value-creation. This started with the early leadership’s willingness to
surrender controlling block of shares to Mitsui (a financial group), putting the company’s long-term
survival and prosperity ahead of short-term self-interest, given that all of them were eventually
replaced by Mitsui. 16 In turn, new TMT leaders, Nakamigawa and Asabuki, who originated within
Mitsui with a finance background realized they lacked the specialized management resources for an
industrial firm. In 1894, they expanded to a second tier of management by hiring two young
university graduates with U.S. based education, Toyoji Wada and Sanji Muto. As noted above, the
second round of discord-induced departure in 1900 between Wada and Muto was resolved with a
focus on modernization under Muto’s leadership. The final discord-induced departure of Muto and
Asabuki in 1907, precipitated by strategic disagreement with Suzuki, who in 1906 acquired the
controlling interest (though less than 50% of Kanebo’s shares), was contained in the very same
shareholder meeting which ratified the resignations. Other shareholders, concerned about the
company’s future, created a strategic coalition that ensured Suzuki was not elected to the board, and
instead helped elect a new, independent TMT leadership, including Heizaemon Hibiya (a respected
Although this may seem like an obvious thing to do, things, of course, can easily get sidetracked. An example is
provided by Enshu Spinning (not in the comparison set because it never grew). The firm, an early chartered corporation
on the basis of a small government-promoted mill, suffered from the same problems as Mie did but in 1889 had an
opportunity to raise capital and construct a new 10,000+-spindles mill much in the same way as Mie did. Afraid of losing
control because of inflow of new investors, incumbent shareholders killed the plan. The firm exited three years later.

16

28

investor with company turnaround experience) and Narazo Takatsuji, a university-educated
engineer, with prior industry experience. The new TMT leadership kept Muto in an advisory role.
Later that year, a stock market crash led to seizure of Susuki’s Kanebo shares by a creditor bank, and
in January 1908, Muto triumphantly returned to (re-)join the shared TMT leadership as the new
executive director. Appendix D Figure A6 shows that the immediate post-disruption years were
characterized by slower growth, but robust growth resumed shortly thereafter. 17
Finally, Osaka was able to restore shared leadership swiftly after the first discord-induced
departure in 1894, and followed Path 2. As noted above, it promoted its educated chief engineer
Yamanobe to a TMT leader position; however, the stability lasted only a few years till 1898. As we
discuss below, Osaka was in Path 3 until shared leadership was restored through the acquisition of
Calico in 1906, when Calico’s university-educated manager (a non-engineer) was retained to
complement Yamanobe.
Honorable Resolution of Ethical Conflict
Among the five ethical discord-induced departure cases in Figure 5, only Settsu’s (1890) case
was resolved honorably and with long term value creation in mind. The TMT leadership elected to
take both personal and financial responsibility for the malfeasance by one of its own. A special
shareholders meeting was called and approved their proposal to issue new shares to cover half the
misappropriated amount, to be purchased entirely by the remaining founding TMT members. The
rest was construed as a long-term loan to Tanaka (the embezzler), which he subsequently repaid
gradually. A new TMT leadership was also elected, with Heibei Hirano and Chuemon Takeo at the
helm. The shared leadership in Settsu continued after Hirano passed away in 1896, when chief
engineer, Kyozo Kikuchi, was promoted to replace him. This smooth transition ensured Settsu
maintained Path 2 to become a center of gravity.

A worthwhile mention here is Fujibo (a late entrant not part of our comparison set), another center of gravity. Similar
to Kanebo, Fujibo also started on a large scale and found itself on the verge of bankruptcy, in this case because the
single leader at the helm in the first three years, Tetsunosuke Tomita, lacked professional knowledge in cotton spinning
(Fuji Boseki, 1998, p. 32). In 1899, the shareholders recruited Masahiro Tamura, who had been successful in shared
leadership at Calico. However, Tamura did not fit in and had to resign after just 10 months in office (Fuji Boseki, 1998,
p. 33-34). The shareholders then elected Heizaemon Hibiya (already mentioned above in his role in the post-discord
resolution at Kanebo in 1907) to the board of directors in late 1900. Hibiya instantly assumed a leadership role despite
not having an executive title and proposed a new senior executive director, Toyoji Wada, a university-educated manager
who had just been let go by Kanebo. The shared leadership of Hibiya, Wada, and Fujibo’s new executive chairman
Kichiemon Hamaguchi (who replaced Tomita) finally stabilized the firm and led it to steady growth (on average by 20%
per year from 1902-1914, see Figure A7 in Appendix D) and on the path to becoming a center of gravity.
17

29

Growth Strategies Enabled by Value-Creating Post-Discord Resolution and Transition to Stable Shared Leadership
While Path 2, followed by four of the five center of gravity firms, was not as smooth as Path
1 above for Mie, these cases reinforce what was depicted in Figure 4; while discord-induced
departures were more frequent in the early years of these firms, their (often) swift resolution in favor
of value creation both reduced the potential for follow-on departures, and ensured longer periods of
stable shared leadership. In turn, similar to Mie, all four firms were able to pursue one or more
growth strategies when under stable shared leadership.
Figure 2 already depicts the disproportionate acquisition of talented university educated
engineers by the center of gravity firms. In all cases, the presence of educated (engineer) managers in
the stable shared leadership (Kikuchi in Amabo and Settsu; Yamanobe in Osaka, Muto—the only
non-engineer––in Kanebo) was critical to their ability to attract talent. Similar to Saito in Mie, each
of these TMT leaders not only recruited through their alumni network, but also served as beacons of
future potential to the engineering graduates. These graduates were also able to realize more
successful careers in center of gravity firms, through their growth from scale expansion (and
acquisitions), downstream integration and product diversification.
Indeed, complementarity in TMT human capital within all four firms enabled them to grow
through both acquisition of later entering firms with superior physical assets but under-performing
management (see Table 10), and through new plant construction. In addition to Mie above, a
striking example of how stable shared leadership enabled acquisitions is Kanebo, which
consummated eight acquisitions over the period from 1898-1911 (second to Mie in terms of
numbers, but greater in terms of added scale). Muto recalled the benefits of complementarity in
shared leadership, noting his ability to focus on consummating acquisitions and managing the
production process complexities across multiple plants was predicated on his reliance on Asabuki’s
able management of company finances (Kanebo, 1988). Upon Muto’s return to TMT leadership in
1907, the later shared leadership team embarked on an even more ambitious expansion plan,
involving a new big plant construction in Tokyo to produce state-of-the-art high end profitable yarn
(e.g. 42s doubled yarn, and even higher end gassed yarn of 60s-100s counts). The successful
execution over the next 5 years, doubled the firm total capacity (Appendix D Figure A6). Combined
with a tripling of engineering talent, this enabled Kanebo’s rise by 1914 as the largest center of
gravity.
Scale expansion enabled product diversification in Amabo and Settsu, (with Kikuchi as part
of the stable shared leadership in both firms), and later downstream integration in Amabo.
30

Implementing Amabo’s product diversification strategy required not just Fukumoto’s
entrepreneurial vision and Kikuchi’s engineering talent but also a marketing champion. Fukumoto
and Kikuchi jointly searched for and recruited Juemon Tashiro as a TMT leader for sales; the three
of them then established an effective division of labor (Unitika, 1989), very similar to the division of
labor between Ito and Saito in Mie. As Kikuchi developed the right technologies, traveling also longterm to the U.S. and England, Fukumoto tended to business operations, and Tashiro went door to
door with product samples to persuade Japanese merchants to switch from the trusted British
suppliers (who also paid generous commissions). By 1899, these dedicated efforts had borne fruit:
the domestic output of 42s count doubled yarn exceeded imports for the first time, with Amabo
producing 70 % of this lucrative segment and establishing dominance for years to come. 18 The
value-creating strategic alignment was so strong that when Fukumoto had to resign as company
president in 1901 due to personal circumstances, Kikuchi seamlessly replaced him (thus becoming
the first non-investor president of a major spinning company), while Tashiro became the senior
executive director. Amabo became the most profitable firm in the industry; its profits kept
increasing even during the shakeout when profits of other firms (even those of other centers of
gravity) nose-dived (Figure A3 in Appendix D). When other firms (especially Kanebo as above)
started to catch up in the higher-end market, Kikuchi and Tashiro (together with Fukumoto who
rejoined the firm as a director in 1912) steered Amabo towards more product diversification and
downstream integration, adding scale by new construction and the above-mentioned acquisition of
Tokyo in 1914. Similarly, within Settsu, Kikuchi shared TMT leadership with Takeo (also a founder
and president of a large import-export firm). They leveraged their complementary human capital to
implement a growth strategy focused on scale expansion through acquisitions, and targeting product
varieties for exports.
Osaka represents a unique case among the center of gravity firms, inasmuch as its business
history reveals both Path 2 and Path 3. Osaka was the industry pioneer, created through Shibusawa’s
entrepreneurial energy and with shared leadership which included Osaka business community

18 Amabo’s success stands in contrast with two firms, Heian and Meiji (both later entrants and not in our comparison
set) who also sought a foothold in this highly profitable niche at around the same time. Heian entered with single
leadership in 1896, and its transition to shared leadership in 1899 was pockmarked by power struggles, leading to two
discord induced TMT turnovers in 1900 and 1902. Its share of industry-wide 42s count doubled yarn production peaked
at 13% in 1897 and declined steadily thereafter till the firm went bankrupt in 1903. Meiji, under single leadership
throughout, was able to peak its production of 42s count doubled yarn in 1899 at about 20% of total industry
production, but also went out of business in 1902. Notable in these failures was their inability to recruit a universityeducated engineer, and lack of a true sales champion.

31

leaders Denzaburo Fujita and Matsumoto, as well as Rihei Kawamura for procurement/sales, and
Yamanobe for technology. The initial stable shared leadership enabled Osaka to expand its scale 6fold in the first seven years and to engage in many pioneering experiments. For example, Kawamura
was key to initiating cotton imports from India, while Yamanobe integrated it into the production
technology. Together, they reconfigured Osaka’s capabilities, enabling increased efficiency and
expansion into higher-grade product varieties and propelling not just Osaka, but the entire industry
to high growth. While it languished with lackluster growth after the 1898 discord-induced departure
under single leadership through 1905 (discussed below), Osaka regained stable shared leadership
after acquiring Calico in 1906. This enabled Osaka to acquire another firm in 1907 and invest in big
expansion of both acquired facilities to triple its overall capacity by 1914.
Lack of Stable Shared Leadership
Firms that followed Path 3 to limited growth and eventual exit are diverse in their
circumstances, but a unifying theme across these is their lack of transition to stable shared
leadership. In four instances, this was due to focus on (broadly defined) value appropriation, while in
the remaining (including Osaka, a center of gravity firm), the reversion to single leadership limited
growth due to managerial diseconomies.
Politics and Power Struggles Leading to Firm Exit
Lack of strategic alignment over expansion proposals similar to that of Amabo (1893) within
TMT leaders and among the shareholders caused discord-induced departures in Tamashima (189899) and Naniwa (1895-96). In Tamashima’s case, two of three TMT leaders wanted to double the
firm’s capacity in 1897, in spite of strong opposition from the third. Rather than creating alignment
and ensuring shareholder buy-in, the two TMT leaders pursued the highly risky strategy of financing
the expansion through new capital raised through corporate bonds and bank borrowing. In the
midst of financial uncertainty, both sides focused on their own interests, rather than on long-term
growth and survival, causing the firm to become insolvent. When creditors sued Tamashima, all
three TMT leaders resigned and replaced themselves with dummy figures in an attempt to avoid
legal responsibility. Tamashima’s path to self-destruction was additionally marked by the ethical
breach discussed above, and it exited less than three years from the first discord. In Naniwa, the
ethical discord-induced departure due to financial misappropriation was handled in stark contrast to
Settsu. The newly elected president, Masatoshi Murakami, chose to skip the shareholders meeting
called to discuss the issue altogether, and things quickly went from bad to worse, with another
embezzlement surfacing in the following year. Rather than being dismissed, the culprit (a political
32

appointee from the Sumitomo financial group) was instead promoted to the board of directors in
1893. The TMT then proposed an expansion plan similar to Tamashima, and also resorted to bank
borrowing and issuing corporate bonds when the TMT could not garner shareholders’ commitment
to pay in new capital. The firm underwent six TMT changes and went bankrupt after just ten years
in business.
Politics and power struggles also plagued Senshu, where TMT leaders pursued their
individual interests and positions in quests for power. The firm went through four discord-induced
TMT departures as a result of this political infighting in the first ten years of its existence. In the
process, Senshu lost the university-educated engineer it employed at founding. The lack of TMT
stability also led to an ethical breach, as mentioned above, which triggered even more TMT
departures, and the firm exited in late 1902. Tenma’s case following labor unrest-related TMT
shakeup noted above was similar, and also created an exodus of engineering talent, causing the firm
to become bankrupt in 1900.
Reversion to Single Leadership Leading to Limited Growth
We being with Osaka’s post-1898 reversion to single leadership for eight years, because it
illustrates that even centers of gravity were not immune from managerial diseconomies problems
when they transitioned to single leadership, similar to firms in Path 4. Yamanobe, the new company
president had both engineering talent and high professional skills, and deserves credit for leading
Osaka singlehandedly through 1905, which largely overlapped with the difficult (shakeout) years in
the industry. However, while other centers of gravity, especially Mie and Kanebo, took full
advantage of industry shakeout through acquisition-related expansion, Osaka was unable to make a
single acquisition, and stagnated with the average growth rate of output of less than 1% per annum,
and also lost part of its engineering talent during this period (Appendix D Figure A4). While it
regained growth momentum post 1906 in Path 2 under stable shared leadership after acquiring
Calico, its extended Path 3 experience was damaging to its eventual position. Starting as the
pioneering industry leader who accounted for almost 50% of all industry output in the 1880s, Osaka
was barely able to retain its center of gravity position as the smallest of the seven in 1914, with just
over 6% of industry output.
Calico history post-1899 and before it was acquired in 1906 also illuminates the
diseconomies of scale from single leadership. Upon losing TMT leader, Masahiro Tamura, to Fujibo
in 1899, Calico could have promoted its university-educated chief engineer, Narazo Takatsuji. This
was not done; and Takatsuji also left the firm. That he could have been a suitable person is proven
33

by his subsequent rise to TMT leadership in the much larger Kanebo. Calico’s transition to single
leadership resulted in stagnation over the next five years, in contrast to the tripling of capacity during
the earlier 1890-1899 period. As Tamura returned in December 1904, Calico added new capacity
through acquisition in the next year. But, similar to Tokyo in Path 4, this was too little too late, and
the firm was acquired by Osaka in 1906, as noted above.
Owari represents another stark example of the limits to growth when a firm with shared
leadership reverts to single leadership. With almost the same size as Mie in 1890, it initially had
shared leadership comprised of Tomoemon Kondo, an experienced trader in charge of sales,
Nobutaka Okada, a manager with prior experience at a government “model” mill, and a top-notch,
university-educated chief engineer, Shunichi Hattori (who had very similar background to Saito in
Mie). However, interpersonal discord with shareholders led to Kondo’s and Okada’s departure in
1890, leaving Hattori as the sole de facto leader from 1891. Though he was subsequently promoted
to the board of directors to formalize his role (so the glass ceiling was not an issue), the Owari
shareholders focused on value appropriation through dividends, refused to appoint additional TMT
leaders to complement Hattori’s engineering talent, and even voted to reduce his salary by 20% and
prohibit performance bonuses. By his own admission, Hattori didn’t care much about money, so he
stayed with the firm, but the lack of a complementary marketing and management leaders
constrained Owari’s growth. The firm could not implement either product diversification or
downstream integration strategies. In terms of scale, by 1904, while Mie’s capacity had more than
quintupled in size, Owari’s was merely doubled. Owari was subsequently acquired by Mie in 1905. 19
Shared leadership was short-lived also in Nagoya, Miike and Hirano. As mentioned, in the
Nagoya (1893) case, the incumbent TMT leader quit within a year after the promotion of a former
prefectural government bureaucrat into shared leadership position. Even though the history is silent
on the motive behind this promotion, we conjecture that it had something to do with the
sponsoring major shareholder (Sofue)’s outside business interests. The institutional environment in
which the industry itself operated, however, was unforgiving; any possible benefits Sofue derived
from his government connections did not and could not benefit Nagoya. The firm exited in 1905
after years of subpar performance, with no ability to grow through either downstream integration or
product diversification. At Miike, coordination problems in an expanded leadership team due to two

When Mie acquired Owari in 1905, Hattori was offered a position on the board. He declined, feeling responsibility for
failing his previous firm. Instead, he reset his career by joining Mie as a rank-and-file engineer. He was subsequently
elected to Mie’s shared TMT leadership in 1912.

19

34

acquisitions in 1899 were exacerbated by transition costs of a non-discord departure, during which
time the ethical breach not only had financial ramifications, but also resulted in resignations of
several leaders. The firm reverted to single leadership in 1901 and was later acquired by Kanebo. In
Hirano, following the unwillingness to promote Kikuchi and the falling apart of the shared TMT
leadership in 1893, Jinsaku Kanazawa, (the company president’s brother-in-law) who had started his
career in the firm as Kikuchi’s subordinate, emerged as the single TMT leader. Kikuchi first
retreated to an advisory role, and then cut ties completely in 1898. Subsequently, Hirano had
difficulty retaining its other engineers (high technical school graduates) . An attempt to gain scale by
acquiring another firm in 1898 backfired, given single leadership and instability in the engineering
pool. In the irony not lost on Kikuchi, it was Settsu that acquired Hirano’s mills in 1902, putting him
in charge of his former employer, after all.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The fact that industries tend to become dominated by just a handful of leading firms as they
mature has long fascinated industry evolution scholars. We dug deep into micro- (“nano-”)
foundations of firm and industry evolution in the historical context of Japan’s cotton spinning
industry, and carefully triangulated across quantitative and qualitative data through the integration of
history and economics/strategy
Our study has produced the following stylized findings. First, industry leaders or “centers of
gravity” in terms of scale and scope rose to dominance first and foremost through their
accumulation of superior talent, and acquisition of underperforming tangible assets. Second, firms
who became centers of gravity had at their core, top management teams who exhibited stable shared
leadership. Harking back to Penrose, firms with single leadership (either throughout their business
history or during episodic periods) often had able leaders. All but one (Godo) were nonetheless
constrained because they “simply don’t have the necessary number of men of the required caliber
around” (Penrose, 1959, p. 63). Complementarities in managerial talent across expertise domains
through stable shared leadership at the helm enabled firms to grow by pursuing talent and scale
acquisition, product expansion and downstream integration. Third, smooth transition to long-term
stability of shared leadership was the exception, not the rule. Only one firm (Mie) among over a
hundred that entered cotton spinning during out time frame was able to do so. Rather, for the
overwhelming majority of firms, TMTs under shared leadership evolved through distinct alternative
paths resulting from discord-induced departures. Thus, maintaining stable shared leadership was a
difficult endeavor.
35

Contrasts among initial peers reveal the following principles were used more consistently by
center of gravity firms, for disproportionately greater periods of stable shared leadership. Their TMT
leadership and shareholders strategically aligned themselves on long-term development of their firms
through a) joint buy-in of new growth strategies while accepting inevitable short-term costs, b)
adoption of merit-based promotion system in defiance of prevalent cultural norms, c) sharing of
power within TMT leadership to enable efficient division of labor among them, and d) honorable
resolution of conflicts and ethical breaches. These factors enabled firms to both grow in periods of
stability because of increased managerial span of control, division of labor, and successful talent
recruitment and retention, and recover more quickly from discord induced departures, through the
foundation of value-based focus on human capital strategies.
It is perhaps not surprising that few firms had TMT leaderships that could do most or all of
the above. In the majority of cases, TMT leadership and/or major shareholders engaged in politics
and power struggles, prioritizing short-term value appropriation over long-term value creation.
These firms had repeated discords and discord-induced departures, putting them on path for the
worst growth records and early exit. Other firms reverted to single leadership, limiting growth and
precluding development into centers of gravity.
Our study has several limitations; in addition to generalizability concerns from a single
industry study, others relate to historical, archival nature of the data. In particular, we lack systematic
evidence about discords that did not result in TMT leaders’ departures (although we can infer from
company histories that such episodes definitely took place), nor could we conduct interviews with
the individuals involved to gain deeper insights into their thinking and systems of values. We hope,
however, that future research finds the regularities we uncovered useful for qualitative studies
dealing with more contemporaneous data. Also, although we have the universe of all firms in the
industry, our quantitative examination was still constrained by relatively few observations because of
one industry over a limited period of time. This did not allow us, in particular, to garner enough
statistical power to examine econometrically how different types of discord-induced departures and
post-discord resolutions affected firm growth. That said, given that only a few firms grow to become
centers of gravity, and we uncover the critical importance of the human element as the factor of this
growth, our study also strikes a note of caution about interpreting results obtained from large-scale
panel data analyses which look at an “average” firm. Finally, our focus on the first complete industry
life-cycle precludes follow on evolution through subsequent life cycles in the 1920s and 1930s, and
then again after World War II. These new cycles not only resulted in mergers between centers of
36

gravity examined here (see the online Appendix F), and their diversification in other industries, but
also the emergence of new firms. An examination of such growth opportunities, and the manner in
which the firms evolved their internal organizational structure, is a task we leave for future research.
Our study contributes to the literature motivated in the introduction, and importantly, harks
back to the classics’ focus on entrepreneurial/managerial embodiment of firm capabilities and
resources (Schumpeter, 1949[1911]; Penrose, 1959; Lucas, 1978). The history of the Japanese cotton
spinning industry shows the capacity of the TMT and its growth are indeed the key factors behind
accumulation of talent and physical capital accumulation, and thus the growth of the firm. The
ability to keep high-quality TMTs together as a Penrosian “working unit” is by itself a scarce
resource capable of generating Marshallian quasi-rents. Schumpeter (1987 [1943]) emphasized how
such quasi-rents induce entry and lead to industry growth. We emphasize here another important
aspect of this phenomenon: quasi-rents generated by successful entrepreneurial firms attract talented
people into these firms, but only if the firm was aligned on value creation. When the Meiji era
ushered in open markets, enterprising individuals created new ventures. Among these, those whose
focus was on talent and value creation became the best incumbent firms: the “centers of gravity”
that attracted more and more talent (and other complementary resources) into their orbit, in a
process that can be likened to that of planet formation (with industry organization being similar to
the organization of a planetary system). Their leadership represented (and recruited) the “best in
class” talent, with a focus on enterprise and experience rather than political connections and
inherited riches, and had willingness to break with tradition in the face of opposition.
While industry evolution scholars have studied the role of strategic disagreements and
knowledge spillovers in existing firms as spurring entrepreneurial entry, the growth effects of
cohesion and internal capitalization of opportunities have been understudied. Stable and shared
leadership, and the resultant accumulation of talent and physical capital created a virtuous cycle: by
recruiting and expanding the overall pool of talent available to them, firms overcame the limitations
of managerial span of control and grew the Lucas x factor even more effectively. Not just
Schumpeterian entrepreneurial entry, but also Penrosian managerial entrepreneurship are critical to
firm and industry evolution, and thus economic growth. Most of all, this study presents an
opportunity to showcase the human element in the forefront of firm growth and industry evolution
studies, as the underlying factor enabling other, more conventional ones, such as first-mover
advantage, experience, general resource accumulation and economies of scale.

37

REFERENCES
Adner R, Helfat CE. 2003. Corporate effects and dynamic managerial capabilities. Strategic
Management Journal 24(10): 1011-1025.
Agarwal R, Sarkar MB, Echambadi R. 2002. The conditioning effect of time on firm survival: an
industry life cycle approach. Academy of Management Journal 45(5): 971-994.
Agarwal R, Shah SK. 2014. Knowledge sources of entrepreneurship: firm formation by academic,
user and employee innovators. Research Policy 43(7): 1109-1133.
Amason AC. 1996. Distinguishing the effects of functional and dysfunctional conflict on strategic
decision making: Resolving a paradox for top management teams. Academy of management
journal, 39(1): 123-148.
Bayus B, Agarwal R. 2007. The role of pre-entry experience, entry timing, and product technology
strategies in explaining firm survival. Management Science 53(12): 1887-1902.
Beckman CM, Burton MD. 2008. Founding the future: path dependence in the evolution of top
management teams from founding to IPO. Organization Science 19(1): 3-24.
Bernhofen DM, Brown JC. 2004. A direct test of the theory of comparative advantage: the case of
Japan. Journal of Political Economy 112(1): 48-67.
Boeker W. 1992. Power and managerial dismissal: scapegoating at the top. Administrative Science
Quarterly 37(3): 400-421.
Boeker W, Karichalil R. 2002. Entrepreneurial transitions: factors influencing founder departure.
Academy of Management Journal, 45(4): 818-826.
Bourgeois LJ, Eisenhardt KM. 1988. Strategic decision processes in high velocity environments:
Four cases in the microcomputer industry. Management Science 34(7): 816-835.
Braguinsky S. 2015. Knowledge diffusion and industry growth: the case of Japan’s early cotton
spinning industry. Industrial and Corporate Change 24(4): 769-790.
Braguinsky S, Ohyama A, Okazaki T, Syverson C. 2015. Acquisitions, productivity, and profitability:
evidence from the Japanese cotton spinning industry. The American Economic Review 105(7):
2086-2119.
Braguinsky S, Hounshell DA. 2015. Spinning tales about Japanese cotton spinning: Saxonhouse
(1974) and lessons from new data. The Journal of Economic History 75(2): 364-404.
Braguinsky S, Hounshell DA. 2016. History and nanoeconomics in strategy and industry evolution
research: Lessons from the Meiji-Era Japanese cotton spinning industry. Strategic Management Journal
37(1): 45-65.
Carson JB, Tesluk PE, Marrone JA. 2007. Shared leadership in teams: An investigation of antecedent
conditions and performance. Academy of management Journal, 50(5): 1217-1234.
Chandler AD. 1977. The Visible Hand. Harvard University Press.
Chandler AD. 1990. Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of the Industrial Enterprise. MIT press.
Chandler AD. 1992. Organizational capabilities and the economic history of the industrial
enterprise. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 6(3): 79-100.
Christensen C. 1997. The Innovator's Dilemma: How New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail. Harvard
Business School Press: Cambridge, MA.
Delmar F, Shane S. 2006. Does experience matter: the effect of founding team experience on the
survival and sales of newly founded ventures. Strategic Organization 4(3): 215-247.
De Dreu, C. K., & Weingart, L. R. (2003). Task versus relationship conflict, team performance, and
team member satisfaction: a meta-analysis. Journal of applied Psychology, 88(4), 741.
Eisenhardt KM, Bourgeois LJ. 1988. Politics of strategic decision making in high-velocity
environments: toward a midrange theory. Academy of Management Journal 31(4): 737-770.
Eisenhardt KM, Kahwajy JL, Bourgeois L. 1997. How management teams can have a good fight.
Harvard Business Review 75: 77-86.
38

Felin T, Foss NJ, Ployhart RE. 2015. The microfoundations movement in strategy and organization
theory. Academy of Management Annals 9(1): 575-632.
Fuji Boseki. 1998. Fuji Boseki Hyakunenshi (100 years of Fuji Boseki), Fuji Boseki Kabushiki Gaisha,
Tokyo.
Geppo (Monthly Bulletin of the Japanese Cotton Spinners’ Association) (in Japanese). 1889–1920.
Dainihon Boseki Rengokai: Osaka, Japan.
Gibb CA. 1954. Leadership. In G. Lindzey (Ed.), Handbook of social psychology, vol. 2: 877–917.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Gort M, Klepper S. 1982. Time paths in the diffusion of product innovations. The Economic Journal
92(367): 630-654.
Hambrick DC. 2007. Upper echelons theory: an update. Academy of Management Review 32(2): 334-343.
Hambrick DC, Mason PA. 1984. Upper echelons: The organization as a reflection of its top
managers. Academy of Management Review 9(2): 193-206.
Helfat CE, Martin JA. 2015. Dynamic managerial capabilities: review and assessment of managerial
impact on strategic change. Journal of Management 41(5): 1281-1312.
Ingram P, Rao H, Silverman BS. 2012. History in strategy research: what, why, and how? In History
and Strategy (Advances in Strategic Management, Volume 29), Steven J. Kahl, Brian S. Silverman, Michael
A. Cusumano (eds.). Emerald Group Publishing Limited: 241-273.
Jinmeiroku, 1892, 1898, 1907. Nihon Zenkoku Shoko Jinmeiroku (All-Japan Registry of Traders and
Craftsmen, in Japanese). 1892, 1898, 1907. Available at
http://dl.ndl.go.jp/search/searchResult?featureCode=all&searchWord=日本全国商工人名録
&viewRestricted=0.
Jovanovic B, MacDonald GM. 1994. The life cycle of a competitive industry. Journal of Political
Economy 102(2): 322-347.
Kanebo. 1988. Kanebo Hakunen-shi [100 Years of Kanebo in Japanese]. Kanebo Kabushiki Gaisha, Osaka.
Katz D, Kahn RL. 1978. The social psychology of organizations (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley.
Kinugawa T. 1964. Hompo Menshi Boseki Shi (History of the Japanese Cotton Spinning Industry) in 7
volumes. Tokyo: Hara Shobo .
Klepper S. 1996. Entry, exit, growth, and innovation over the product life cycle. The American
Economic Review 85(3): 562-583.
Klepper S. 2002. Firm survival and the evolution of oligopoly. Rand Journal of Economic 33(1): 37-61.
Klepper S. 2016. Experimental Capitalism: The Nanoeconomics of American High-Tech Industries. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Klepper S, Simons KL. 2000. Dominance by birthright: entry of prior radio producers and
competitive ramifications in the U.S. television receiver industry. Strategic Management Journal 21:
997-1016.
Kōkajō (Company reports) (1883-1914), Osaka University Library: Osaka, Japan, in Japanese.
Lucas RE. 1978. On the size distribution of business firms. The Bell Journal of Economics: 508-523.
Malerba F, Nelson R, Orsenigo L, Winter S. 1999. 'History-friendly' models of industry evolution:
the computer industry. Industrial and Corporate Change 8(1): 3-40.
Ohyama A, Braguinsky S, Murphy K.M. 2004. Entrepreneurial ability and market selection in an
infant industry: Evidence from the Japanese cotton spining industry. Review of Ecnomic Dynamics
7(2): 354-381.
Penrose E. 1959. The Theory of the Growth of the Firm. Blackwell: Oxford, U.K.
Ruef M, Aldrich HE, Carter NM. 2003. The structure of founding teams: homophily, strong ties,
and isolation among US entrepreneurs. American Sociological Review 68(2): 195-222.

39

Sankosho, 1903-1920. Menshi Boseki Jijo Sankosho (Reference Materials on the State of the Spinning Industry)
(in Japanese). Dainihon Boseki Rengokai: Osaka, Japan.
Saxonhouse GR. 1974. A tale of Japanese technological diffusion in the Meiji period. The Journal of
Economic History 34(1): 149-165.
Shah S, Agarwal R, Echambadi R. 2018. Jewels in the crown: motivations and team building
processes of employee entrepreneurs. In Academy of Management Proceedings. Academy of
Management.
Schumpeter JA. 1949 (first published in 1911). Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry Into Profits,
Capital, Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Schumpeter JA. 1987 (first published in 1943). Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. Counterpoint, New
York.
Stinchcombe A. 1965. Social structure and organizations. In Handbook of Organizations, March JG
(eds.), Rand-McNally: Chicago.
Suarez FF, Lanzolla G. 2007. The role of environmental dynamics in building a first mover
advantage theory. Academy of Management Review 32(2): 377-392.
Teece DJ. 1986. Profiting from technological innovation: implications for integration, collaboration,
licensing and public policy. Research Policy 15(6): 285-305.
Toyo Boseki. 1986. Toyoboseki Hyakunenshi (One Hundred Years of Toyo Boseki), Toyobo (in
Japanese): Osaka, Japan.
Tripsas M, Gavetti G. 2000. Capabilities, cognition, and inertia: evidence from digital imaging.
Strategic Management Journal 21: 1147-1161.
Unitika. 1989. Unitika Hyakunenshi (100 years of Unitika, in Japanese). Available at
http://www.unitika.co.jp/company/archive/history/
Williams C, Chen PL, Agarwal R. 2017. Rookies and seasoned recruits: how experience in different
levels, firms, and industries shapes strategic renewal in top management. Strategic Management Journal
38(7): 1391-1415.
Winter SG. 1994. Organizing for continuous improvement: evolutionary theory meets. In
Evolutionary Dynamics of Organizations, Baum JAC, Singh JV (eds.), Oxford University Press.
Yakuinroku, 1893-1914. Zenkoku Shogaisha Yakuinroku (All-Japan Registry of Firms Executives, in
Japanese). Available at http://dl.ndl.go.jp/search/searchResult?featureCode=all&searchWord=日
本全国諸会社役員録&viewRestricted=0.
Zollo M, Winter SG. 2002. Deliberate learning and the evolution of dynamic capabilities.
Organization Science 13(3): 339-351.

40

Table 1: Research Variables
A. Main dependent variable
Output Growth Rates
B. TMT Characteristics Variables
Singe Leadership dummy
Shared Leadership dummy
Number of TMT members
Number of TMT leaders
Functional diversity of TMT
C. TMT Turnover Variables
Discord-induced departure Dummy
Shared Leadership with Single
Discord-induced departure in Period
Shared Leadership with Multiple
Discord-induced departures in Period
Discord period
Single Discord Period
Multiple Discord Period
No Discord Period
Exogenous Departure Dummy
Expansion of TMT Dummy
D. Firm Characteristics
Firm age
Number of workers
Number of Engineers
Market knowledge
Financial knowledge

Definitions
The growth rate of cotton yarns produced in physical units, measured as the difference
between logged output at time t+1 and that at time t. Weight units adjusted by thread count
weights to account for varying thickness of different product varieties.
Equals 1 if a firm was led by a single TMT leader (defined as a TMT member who actually
runs the firm and made strategic decisions (not nominal heads) , 0 otherwise
Equals 1 if a firm was led by two or more TMT leaders, 0 otherwise
The number of TMT members by title, including but not limited to TMT leaders
The number of TMT leaders
Each TMT member is classified as a cotton yarn trader, a banker, ex-politician/bureaucrat, or
entrepreneur in other business area. The share of each class filled by TMT members is
calculated. The variable is 1 minus the sum of squared shares of these classes.
Equals 1 if a TMT member resigned or was ousted from the firm for reasons other than death,
illness or personal circumstances unrelated to the firm, 0 otherwise
Equals 1 if a discord-induced departure occurred only once in three consecutive years, 0
otherwise
Equals 1 if a discord-induced departure occurred more than once in three consecutive years, 0
otherwise
Equals 1 in the three year period preceding the year of a discord-induced departure, 0
otherwise
Equals 1 in the three year period preceding a single discord-induced departure, 0 otherwise
Equals 1 in the three year period preceding consecutive three years with multiple discordinduced departures, 0 otherwise
Equals 1 if there is no discord in the next three years, 0 otherwise
Equals 1 if a TMT member departed for exogenous reasons, such as death, illness, or personal
circumstances, 0 otherwise
Equals 1 if a new TMT member is added while no member was removed, 0 otherwise
The age of the firm since it was founded
Logged value of the number of floor workers employed
Logged value of 1 plus the number of university educated and technical school educated
engineers
Logged value of the number of trading company executives and auditors or cotton traders
who were also cotton spinning firms’ board members in a given year
Logged value of the number of bankers

41

Table 2: Relationship between the Size of TMT and Firm Growth

VARIABLES
Shared leadership dummy
Number of TMT Leaders
Number of TMT members
Functional diversity of TMT
Firm age
Number of engineers
Market knowledge index
Financial knowledge index
Current output
Constant

3 year
0.058
(0.044)

I

0.030
(0.027)
0.023
(0.056)
0.075
(0.023)
0.193
(0.032)
-0.039
(0.048)
-0.003
(0.053)
-0.707
(0.033)
5.972
(0.373)
831
0.819

DV: Output Growth Rates
5 year
0.087
(0.042)

3 year
0.105
(0.049)
-0.022
(0.026)

0.038
(0.024)
0.039
(0.057)
0.076
(0.022)
0.165
(0.037)
0.006
(0.047)
0.005
(0.053)
-0.706
(0.034)
7.527
(0.381)
679
0.881

II

0.028
(0.056)
0.070
(0.024)
0.193
(0.032)
-0.042
(0.048)
-0.033
(0.048)
-0.837
(0.031)
6.010
(0.378)
831
0.818

Observations
R-squared
Note: (i) The omitted category is Single Leadership. (ii) Robust standard errors in parentheses.

5 year
0.125
(0.066)
-0.010
(0.049)
0.042
(0.058)
0.077
(0.023)
0.164
(0.036)
0.006
(0.047)
-0.023
(0.061)
-0.836
(0.031)
7.597
(0.389)
679
0.880

Table 3A: Frequency of TMT Discord-Related Departure (Firm level observations)
Number of TMT discord-related departures

Frequency
0
1
2
3
4
5
6

Total

15
23
15
4
6
1
2
66

Percent
22.73
34.85
22.73
6.06
9.09
1.52
3.03

Table 3B: Frequency of TMT Discord-Related Departure (Firm-Year level observations)
Single Leadership
Shared Leadership

TMT discord-related departure
NA
106

No TMT departure
765
425

42

Table 4: Relationship between TMT Departures and Growth Rates
DV: Output growth rates
I. Discord-induced departure
II. Exogenous Departure
III. TMT Expansion
VARIABLES
3 year
5 year
3 year
5 year
3 year
5 year
Shared leadership with TMT
-0.057
-0.042
0.062
0.044
0.065
0.015
(0.056)
(0.054)
(0.066)
(0.064)
(0.065)
(0.071)
change
Shared leadership without
0.046
0.103
0.070
0.069
0.071
0.070
(0.045)
(0.043)
(0.039)
(0.039)
(0.039)
(0.038)
TMT change
Number of TMT members
0.044
0.044
0.031
0.048
0.031
0.054
(0.026)
(0.023)
(0.026)
(0.023)
(0.027)
(0.023)
Functional diversity of TMT
0.035
0.053
0.028
0.035
0.029
0.040
(0.057)
(0.057)
(0.056)
(0.058)
(0.056)
(0.058)
Number of engineers
0.188
0.162
0.195
0.167
0.196
0.169
(0.032)
(0.037)
(0.032)
(0.037)
(0.032)
(0.037)
Market knowledge index
-0.043
-0.010
-0.039
0.005
-0.039
0.002
(0.048)
(0.048)
(0.048)
(0.047)
(0.048)
(0.047)
Financial knowledge index
-0.001
-0.037
-0.004
-0.033
-0.005
-0.038
(0.052)
(0.060)
(0.053)
(0.061)
(0.053)
(0.062)
Firm age
0.078
0.080
0.077
0.082
0.077
0.078
(0.022)
(0.026)
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.022)
Logged current output
-0.709
-0.840
-0.706
-0.836
-0.706
-0.835
(0.034)
(0.031)
(0.033)
(0.031)
(0.033)
(0.031)
Constant
5.968
7.546
5.945
7.507
5.942
7.478
(0.369)
(0.378)
(0.377)
(0.384)
(0.378)
(0.384)
P-value for test 1
0.068
0.010
0.893
0.660
0.915
0.403
Observations
831
679
831
679
831
679
R-squared
0.820
0.882
0.819
0.881
0.819
0.881
Note: (i) The omitted category is Single Leadership. (ii) Robust standard errors in parentheses. (iii) Test 1 tests the null
hypothesis that Shared Leadership with TMT change = Shared Leadership without TMT change.

Table 5: Single Discord-induced departures vs. Multiple Discord-induced departures
DV: Output growth rates
3 year
5 year
0.083
0.106
(0.063)
(0.058)
Shared Leadership with Multiple Discord-induced departures
-0.167
-0.226
(0.086)
(0.101)
Shared leadership without Discord-induced departures
0.098
0.134
(0.048)
(0.047)
Number of TMT members
0.035
0.040
(0.027)
(0.023)
Logged number of engineers
0.172
0.133
(0.032)
(0.036)
P-value for test 1
0.803
0.629
P-value for test 2
0.002
0.001
Observations
799
653
R-squared
0.808
0.878
Note: (i) The omitted category is Single Leadership. (ii) Robust standard errors in parentheses. (iii) Test 1 tests the null
hypothesis that Shared leadership with single discord-induced departure = Shared leadership without Discord-induced
departures. (iv) Test 2 tests the null hypothesis that Shared leadership with multiple discord-induced departures = Shared
leadership without Discord-induced departures. (iv) Functional diversity of TMT, Market knowledge index, Financial
knowledge index, Firm age, Logged current output, and the constant term are included but coefficients not reported. See
Table A4 in Appendix C for full results.
VARIABLES
Shared Leadership with Single Discord-induced departure

43

Table 6: Firm Growth in Discord Periods (Periods Preceding Discord-induced departures)
VARIABLES
Discord period

DV: 3-year output growth rates
0.089
(0.062)
Single Discord period
0.070
(0.079)
Multiple Discord Period
0.120
(0.092)
No Discord Period
0.160
0.160
(0.052)
(0.052)
Number of TMT members
0.017
0.017
(0.030)
(0.030)
Constant
5.839
5.864
(0.379)
(0.379)
P-value for test 1
0.231
0.245
P-value for test 2
0.655
Observations
738
738
R-squared
0.838
0.838
Notes: (i) The omitted category is Single Leadership. (ii) Robust standard errors in parentheses. (iii) Test 1 tests the null
hypothesis that (Single) Discord period= No Discord Period. (iv) Test 2 tests the null hypothesis that Multiple Discord
Period = No Discord Period. (v) Functional diversity of TMT, Market knowledge index, Financial knowledge index,
Firm age, Logged current output, and the constant term are included but coefficients not reported. See Table A5 in
Appendix C for full results.

Table 7: Discord-induced departures and Resource Accumulation
DV: 5-year growth rates of:
I. Workers

II. Engineers
III. Capital
VARIABLES
University
Technical school
Physical
Financial
-0.118
-0.012
0.038
-0.129
0.001
Shared Leadership with
Discord-induced departure
(0.057)
(0.038)
(0.069)
(0.064)
(0.043)
Shared Leadership without
0.056
0.089
0.062
0.039
0.046
Discord-induced departure
(0.044)
(0.031)
(0.064)
(0.052)
(0.034)
0.012
-0.036
-0.052
0.019
-0.017
Number of TMT members
(0.023)
(0.025)
(0.039)
(0.024)
(0.017)
P-value for test 1
0.004
0.016
0.723
0.0031
0.2442
Observations
672
693
693
672
451
R-squared
0.792
0.774
0.696
0.855
0.803
Notes: (i) The omitted category is Single Leadership. (ii) Robust standard errors in parentheses. (iii) Test 1 tests the null
hypothesis Shared Leadership with Discord-induced departure = Shared Leadership without Discord-induced
departure . (iv) functional diversity of TMT, market and financial knowledge, firm age, logged current level of dependent
variable, and the constant term are included but coefficients not reported. See Table A6 for full results.

44

Table 8: TMT Leadership and Diversification
Single
Leadership

Shared
Leadership

Mean

0.518

0.664

0.674

0.613

0.622

St.Err.

0.021

0.022

0.024

0.055

0.081

Mean

0.082

0.281

0.300

0.191

0.116

VARIABLES
Fractions of:
Diversified firms
Downstream
integrated firms

Shared leadership of which:

No discord
departure

Discord-induced
departure

Repeated discordinduced departures

St.Err.
0.010
0.020
0.022
0.042
0.049
Notes: Diversified firms have number of product varieties above the industry-year median. Export and downstream
integrated firms have non-zero exports and in-house consumption of cotton yarn in a given year, respectively.

Table 9: Ownership and Governance Structure and TMT Leadership
Single
Leadership

Shared
Leadership

Shared leadership of which:

No discord
VARIABLES
departure
Total # of
Mean
449
708
727
shareholders
St.Err.
28
54
59
Fraction of shares
Mean
0.290
0.248
0.249
of top 5
St.Err.
0.012
0.007
0.007
h
h
ld
Fraction of shares
Mean
0.232
0.202
0.204
of board members
St.Err.
0.012
0.008
0.008
Note: data on incorporated companies, based on shareholders reports.

Discord-induced
departure
592
121
0.241
0.024
0.187
0.027

Table 10 Shared Leadership and Acquisitions
Serial acquirers (from Braguinsky et al,
2015; Centers of Gravity in Table 11)
Firms acquired by serial acquirers

Repeated discordinduced departures
505
137
0.230
0.034
0.198
0.043

Shared Leadership
(a)

Discord Induced TMT Departures
(b)

Ratio:
(b)/(a)

0.852

0.049

0.058

0.424

0.062

0.146

Other acquiring firms
0.380
0.055
Source: Braguinsky et al. (2015), matched with our data, described in the text and in Appendix A.

0.144

Table 11: Comparisons across similar-sized 16 early startups

# in
Initial size
10-year
# to become 10-year change
each
(# of
capacity
Centers of
in # of educated
Explanatory variables
category spindles)
growth rate Gravity
engineers
Shared leadership at entry
Yes
9
15,702
163%
4
13%
No
7
11,371
191%
1
50%
TMT stability at or above
Yes
8
15,276
206%
5
43%
median
No
6
13,811
103%
0
-33%
University-educated engineer at
Yes
10
15,426
183%
5
10%
entry
No
6
11,622
139%
0
Centers of Gravity: Kanebo, Mie, Settsu, Amabo, Osaka. Other startups: Tenma, Naniwa, Hirano, Senshu, Miike,
Nagoya, Okayama, Owari, Calico, Tokyo, Tamashima. Source: our data described in the main text and Appendix A.

45

Figure 1.
Number of Firms and Output Concentration in the Japanese Cotton Spinning Industry 1883-1914
"Centers of gravity" av. # of prod. varieties*5 (right scale)
HHI
"Centers of gravity" share in ind. output

Other firms av. # of prod. Varieties*5 (right scale)
Top firm share in industry output
Number of firms (right scale)

100

0.70

90

0.60

80
0.50

70
60

0.40

50
0.30

40
30

0.20

20
0.10
0.00

10
Period 1 (1883- Period 2 (1888- Period 3 (1893- Period 4 (1898- Period 5 (1903- Period 6 (1907- Period 7 (191187)
92)
97)
1902)
06)
10)
14)

0

Source: our data, described in the text and in Appendix A. The number of product varieties has been multiplied by 5 to
fit the right scale.

Figure 2. “Ultimate Centers of Gravity” Shares in Engineering Talent, 1883-1914
1.00

industry # of univ.-educated engineers

industry # of techn.college-educated engineers

"Centers of gravity" share in univ.-educated engineers

"Centers of gravity" share in techn.college-educated engineers

0.90

1400
1200

0.80

1000

0.70
0.60

800

0.50
600

0.40
0.30

400

0.20

200

0.10
0.00

Period 1 (1883- Period 2 (1888- Period 3 (1893- Period 4 (1898- Period 5 (1903- Period 6 (1907- Period 7 (191187)
92)
97)
1902)
06)
10)
14)

0

Source: our data, described in the text and in Appendix A.

46

Figure 3. TMT composition dynamics: eventual “centers of gravity” and other firms
1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

Period 2 (1888-92)

Period 3 (1893-97)

Period 4 (1898-02)

University-educated TMT member: Future "centers of gravity"
Trader TMT member: Future "centers of gravity"
Banker TMT member: Future "centers of gravity"

Period 5 (1903-06)

Period 6 (1907-10)

Period 7 (1911-14)

University-educated TMT member: All other firms
Trader TMT member: All other firms
Banker TMT member: All other firms

Source: our data, described in the text and in Appendix A.
0.30

Figure 4. Shared leadership and TMT discords: eventual “centers of gravity” and other firms
1.00
0.90

0.25

0.80
0.70

0.20

0.60
0.15

0.50
0.40

0.10

0.30
0.20

0.05

0.10
0.00

Period 2 (1888-92)

Period 3 (1893-97)

Period 4 (1898-02)

Discord-rel. TMT changes (left scale): Future "centers of gravity"
Shared leadership (right scale): Future "centers of gravity"

Period 5 (1903-06)

Period 6 (1907-10)

Period 7 (1911-14)

0.00

Discord-rel. TMT changes (left scale): All other firms
Shared leadership (right scale): All other firms

Source: our data, described in the text and in Appendix A.

47

Figure 5. Evolutionary paths of 16 startups from entry to 1914
TMT at entry

TMT leadership events and transitions over firm’s histories

Single
Leadership

Transition to Stable,
Shared Leadership

Path 1

Mie*

Path 2

Amabo*,
Kanebo*,
Settsu*, Osaka,*
Tamashima,
Senshu, Miike,
Owari, Calico

Single
Leadership

Path 1

Mie* (91)

Shared
Leadership

Path 2

Hirano, Nagoya,
Naniwa, Tenma
Path 3

Transition
to Shared
Leadership
Hirano (93),
Nagoya (93),
Naniwa (91),
Tenma (95)

Path 2

Path 3

Single
Leadership
Tokyo,
Okayama

• Ethical Discord

Settsu*(89), Naniwa
(89), Tamashima (97),
Senshu (00), Miike
(01)
Path 4

• Honorable Resolution of
Ethical Discord

Path 2

Settsu*(90, stable shared
leadership after 96)

• Interpersonal Discord
Osaka*(98), Owari
(91), Hirano (93),
Senshu (93-95),
Nagoya (93)

Kanebo*(93-06, 0814), Osaka* (83-93,
95-97, 06-14), Settsu*

Amabo*(93),
Kanebo*(91-93, 00, 07),
Osaka* (95-97; 06-14)

Amabo*(93),
Kanebo*(91-93, 00,
07), Tamashima (9899), Osaka* (94),
Calico (99) Naniwa
(95-96), Tenma (95,
99-00)

Path 2

High Growth (Centers
of Gravity)
Path 1: Mie* (post 91)
Path 2: Amabo* (post 93),

Stable, Shared Leadership
• Strategic Alignment
around value creation

Discord-Induced
Departures
• Strategic Discord

Path 3

Outcomessssssssss

Path 3

Lack of Stable Shared
Leadership
• Politics/Power Struggles

Growth Strategies
Talent Acquisition
Scale Acquisition
Downstream
Integration
•
Product
Diversification

• Single Leadership

Limited Growth and/or
Exit
Path 3: Naniwa, Senshu,

•
•
•

Naniwa (89, 91, 93, 9596), Senshu (93-95, 00),
Tenma (95, 99-00),
Tamashima (97, 98-99)

Owari (91), Hirano (93),
Nagoya (93), Osaka* (98)
Calico (99), Miike (01)

Path 3

Tenma, Tamashima
Owari, Hirano,
Osaka* (98-06),
Calico (99-04),
Nagoya
Path 4: Okayama, Tokyo

Note: Firms marked with asterisks are centers of gravity

48

