                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         WHAT HAPPENED: FINANCIAL FACTORS IN THE GREAT RECESSION

                                          Mark Gertler
                                         Simon Gilchrist

                                       Working Paper 24746
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24746


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2018




Prepared for the Journal of Economic Perspectives. Thanks to Ben Bernanke and Oscar Jorda for
helpful comments and to Sneha Agrawal and James Graham for excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Mark Gertler and Simon Gilchrist. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
What Happened: Financial Factors in the Great Recession
Mark Gertler and Simon Gilchrist
NBER Working Paper No. 24746
June 2018
JEL No. E32,E44

                                         ABSTRACT

Since the onset of the Great Recession, an explosion of both theoretical and empirical research
has investigated how the financial crisis emerged and how it was transmitted to the real sector.
The goal of this paper is to describe what we have learned from this new research and how it can
be used to understand what happened during the Great Recession. In the process, we also present
some new evidence on the role of the household balance sheet channel versus the disruption of
banking. We examine a panel of quarterly state level data on house prices, mortgage debt and
employment along with a measure of banking distress. Then exploiting both panel data and time
series methods, we analyze the contribution of the house price decline versus the banking distress
indicator to the overall decline in employment during the Great Recession. We confirm a
common finding in the literature that the household balance sheet channel is important for
regional variation in employment. However, we also find that the disruption in banking was
central to the overall employment contraction


Mark Gertler
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
mark.gertler@nyu.edu

Simon Gilchrist
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street.
New York, NY, 10003
and NBER
sg40@nyu.edu
    At least since the Great Depression, major economic calamities have altered the
course of research in macroeconomics. The recent global financial crisis is no exception.
At the onset of the crisis, the workhorse macroeconomic models assumed frictionless
financial markets. These frameworks were thus not able to anticipate the crisis, nor
analyze how the disruption of credit markets changed what initially appeared like a mild
downturn into the Great Recession. Since that time, an explosion of both theoretical and
empirical research has investigated how the financial crisis emerged and how it was
transmitted to the real sector. The goal of this paper is to describe what we have learned
from this new research and how it can be used to understand what happened during the
Great Recession. In the process, we also present some new empirical work.

    This paper is organized into three main parts. We begin with an informal description
of the basic theory and concepts, including new developments. This work emphasizes the
role of borrower balance sheets in constraining access to credit when capital markets are
imperfect. Much of the pre-crisis research focused on constraints facing non-financial
firms. The events of the Great Recession, however, necessitated shifting more attention to
balance sheet constraints facing households and banks. In addition, the crisis brought into
sharp relief the need to capture the nonlinear dimension of the financial collapse,
prompting a new wave of research.

    The next section describes the main events of the financial crisis through the lens of
the theory. To tell the story we also make use of the new wave of empirical research that
has sharpened our insights into how the crisis unfolded. In this regard, the literature has
been somewhat balkanized with some work focusing on household balance sheets and
others emphasizing banks. We argue that a complete description of the Great Recession
must take account of the financial distress facing both households and banks and, as the
crisis unfolded, non-financial firms as well.

     We then present some new evidence on the role of the household balance sheet
channel versus the disruption of banking. We examine a panel of quarterly state level
data on house prices, mortgage debt and employment along with a measure of banking
distress. Then exploiting both panel data and time series methods, we analyze the
contribution of the house price decline versus the banking distress indicator to the overall
decline in employment during the Great Recession. We confirm a common finding in the
literature that the household balance sheet channel is important for regional variation in
employment. However, we also find that the disruption in banking was central to the
overall employment contraction.

Background Theory and Basic Concepts

    In this section, we describe how contemporary macroeconomic models capture the
interaction between the financial and real sectors (for recent surveys, see Gertler and
                                                 2	  
	  
Kiyotaki 2011; Brunnermeier, Eisenbach and Sannikov 2013). Though the models differ
in detail, they share several key features: The strength of a borrower’s balance sheet,
measured by the value of assets net of debt (or “net worth"), affects access to credit and
thus the ability to spend. In turn, financial crises are periods where borrower balance
sheets contract sharply, leading to a significant disruption of credit flows. Significant
declines in spending and economic activity then follow.

    Much of the early literature focused on the effect of balance sheet constraints on non-
financial firms. However, as Bernanke and Gertler (1995) note, the theory applies equally
well to households and banks. Indeed, financial distress arose in all three sectors in the
recent crisis, as we will elaborate.

The External Finance Premium

   The connection between balance sheet strength and credit access arises when frictions
impede borrowing and lending. Absent such frictions, a borrower’s financial strength is
irrelevant to the real investment decision (in an application of the Miller/Modigliani
theorem). As a result, with perfect markets the cost of raising funds externally equals the
opportunity cost of lending out internal funds.1

    A common way to make financial market frictions endogenous is to introduce an
agency problem between borrowers and lenders. There are two basic approaches: either
postulating some type of informational asymmetry that leads creditors to be more
informed than borrowers, or assuming that it is costly for creditors to enforce certain
contractual commitments made by borrowers. In either scenario, borrowers potentially
can gain at the expense of lenders by acting dishonestly. Accordingly, rational lenders in
this setting will impose constraints on the terms of lending, like credit limits, collateral
requirements, and bankruptcy contingencies. Overall, the agency problem makes raising
funds externally more expensive than using internal funds, which Bernanke and Gertler
(1989) call the “external finance” premium. Indeed, we will argue that an elevated
external finance premium is a common feature of financial crises.

    Measurement of the external finance premium depends on the details of the agency
problem. In many instances, it can be measured as an explicit wedge between borrowing
and lending rates due to factors such as costs of evaluating and monitoring borrowers or a
“lemons” premium arising when borrowers are likely better informed about their credit-
worthiness than are lenders. In other cases, where there is non-price rationing due to
some form of credit limit, covenant restriction, or collateral requirement, the external
finance premium is measured as the difference between the “shadow” borrowing rate and
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1
         	  By external funds we refer to imperfectly collateralized borrowing. Perfectly collateralized
borrowing is effectively the same as using internal funds.
	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3	  
	  
the lending rate. The shadow borrowing rate is the borrower’s marginal return to
investing. In either case, the external finance premium adds to the cost of capital.2

        Key to the behavior of the external finance premium is the behavior of the
borrower’s balance sheet. In a situation with agency problems, a stronger balance sheet
enables the borrower either to self-finance a greater fraction of an investment or to
provide more collateral to guarantee the debt. This basic prediction—that credit access
improves with the strength of the balance sheet—is characteristic of many real-world
financial arrangements, including restrictions that borrowers post down payments, post
collateral and meet certain financial ratios. In any of these cases, a borrower who is able
to take a larger stake in the outcome of the investment will have a reduced level of
agency conflict with the lender. The external finance premium declines as a consequence.



  The Financial Accelerator/Credit Cycle Mechanism and Crises

    The link between borrower balance sheets and the external finance premium leads to
mutual feedback between the financial sector and real activity. A weakening of balance
sheets raises the external finance premium, reducing borrowing, spending and real
activity. The decline in real activity reduces cash flows and asset prices, which weakens
borrower balance sheets, and so on. This kind of adverse feedback loop was captured
originally by the financial accelerator model of Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and
Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999) and the credit cycle model of Kiyotaki and Moore
(1997).3 Many contemporary models of financial crises have evolved from this approach.

    With a sufficient deterioration of balance sheets, a full-blown financial crisis emerges
as external finance premia rise to the point where borrowers are induced to curtail
spending sharply. In fact, this combination of weak balance sheets and high external
finance premia is characteristic of major financial crises. A rough proxy for the external
finance premium is the interest rate spread between the return on a private debt
instrument, such as a corporate bond, a mortgage, or commercial paper, and a similar
maturity government bond. These spreads tend to widen across the board during crises
and did so dramatically during the recent crisis.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2
      	  It might seem that an alternative approach is to examine the behavior of credit aggregates and then
consider the forecasting power of these aggregates for real activity. However, this approach cannot
disentangle whether demand or supply is driving the movement in these quantities. Loan demand is likely
to vary positively with real activity, leading to a positive correlation between credit quantities and output.
Thus, procyclical variation in credit aggregates can arise even when financial market frictions are absent.
We do not mean to suggest that the behavior of credit aggregates is uninformative about financial
conditions. They can reveal the risk exposure of different sectors, as measured by the degree of leverage.
But a measure of the quantity of credit alone does not tell us is how tight or loose financial constraints are.
3
      	  Providing motivation for this direction was Bernanke’s (1983) classic analysis of the role of financial
factors in the Great Depression.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4	  
	  
    This earlier literature focused largely on constraints faced by non-financial firms. In
the recent crisis, however, it was mainly highly leveraged households and highly
leveraged banks that were initially vulnerable to financial distress. Thus, motivated by the
seminal empirical work of Mian and Sufi (2014) and Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013), studies
like Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti (2015), and
Guerreri and Lorenzoni (2017) incorporated balance sheet constraints on households. The
distress in financial markets induced others like Gertler and Kiyotaki (2011), He and
Krishnamurthy (2013), and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) to incorporate balance
sheet constraints on banks. The financial accelerator mechanism remains operative, but
the transmission of the crisis through the different sectors of the economy is much closer
to what actually occurred. 4



The Role of Leverage

        The exposure of the economy to a financial crisis is closely related to the degree
to which borrowers rely on debt. The higher the fraction of financing that is debt, as
opposed to equity, the more sensitive the balance sheet becomes to fluctuations in asset
prices. For example, consider a borrower that self-finances an asset versus one who self-
finances ten percent and issues debt to finance the rest. A ten percent decline in the asset
values will leave the former with a ten percent reduction in net worth, while the latter will
be completely wiped out.

        The lead-up to the Great Recession saw an unprecedented rise in leverage in both
the household and banking sectors. Household leverage was largely in the form of
mortgage debt, occurring in the context of a dramatic boom in housing prices (Jorda,
Schularick and Taylor (2017)). Both investment banks and commercial banks financed
the increase in mortgage holdings by mostly short-term debt of their own. That the bank
debt was mostly short term also made the system vulnerable to runs, as we discuss
shortly. By 2006, the financial positions of both households and banks were highly
vulnerable to the decline in house prices that would soon follow.



	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                               4
                                          Readers interested in some additional examples of macro modelling of financial crises might also
look at Geanakoplos (2009), Jerman and Quadrini (2012), Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2014), and
Arellano, Bai and Kehoe (2016).,For an early attempt to capture the effects of house prices, see Iacoviello
(2005). Also, while the modern literature has formalized this theory of financial crises, some of the ideas
have an earlier pedigree. For example, Irving Fisher’s (1933) debt-deflation theory of the Great Depression
held that the weakening of borrower balance sheets stemming from the sharp price deflation during the
early 1930s was a significant factor driving the depth and duration of the Depression. The deflation
weakened balance sheets because most debts were in nominal terms.

	  
                                                                                                                                             5	  
	  
Nonlinear Effects of Financial Crises

    Financial crises are highly nonlinear events. (See, e.g., Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and
Orlov 2014). The crises features sharp increases in credit spreads and sharp contractions
in asset prices and output. However, booms do not experience any symmetric
countermovement of these variables. Further, the sharp contraction of the economy
during a financial crisis often occurs in without any immediate large non-financial shock
to the economy, as was the case for the US economy in the last few months of 2008.

    The earlier generation of financial accelerator models (Bernanke, Gertler, and
Gilchrist, 1999) considered loglinear approximations around a deterministic steady state
and thus could not capture nonlinear dynamics. Recent literature has addressed the issue
in a variety of ways. For example, Mendoza (2010) and He and Krishnamurthy (2015)
introduce nonlinearity by allowing balance sheet constraints that bind only during
recessions, not booms. To put it another way, the economy during a boom behaves to a
large extent as if it had frictionless financial markets. However, a negative disturbance
can move the economy into a region where the constraints are binding, amplifying the
effect of the shock on the downturn. In a related approach, Brunnermeier and Sannikov
(2014) develop a framework where for precautionary reasons, borrowers reduce spending
by more in response to a contraction in the balance sheet than they increase it in response
to a strengthening of similar magnitude. These kind of asymmetries can help account for
why, during the recent recession, household consumption responded more strongly to
contractions in house prices that weakened household balance sheets than to the earlier
run-up in housing prices.

      More recently, Gertler, Kiyotaki, and Prestipino (2017) develop a framework with
bank runs as the key source of nonlinearity. The key element here is whether financial
institutions like investment banks are able to roll over their short-term loans. Within this
model, in normal times where banks have healthy balance sheets, lenders are confident
that even if other creditors do not rollover, the bank has the resources to honor its debt.
However, in downturns where bank balance sheets have weakened, lenders can no longer
be certain their deposits are safe if other creditors were to withdraw. As a consequence, a
self-fulfilling roll-over panic becomes possible, which generates a highly nonlinear rise in
credit spreads and contraction in asset prices and output.



Interdependence of Household, Firm, and Bank Balance Sheets

    In analyzing the dynamics of a financial crisis, it is critical to account for the
interdependence of balance sheets across sectors. Figure 1 illustrates the interconnection
between household, firm and bank balance sheets. (We simplify for expositional
purposes). For households, assets consist of housing and financial assets. Liabilities are
                                                 6	  
	  
loans from banks and net worth. Bank assets are loans to households and loans to firms.
Bank liabilities are deposits and equity. In turn, loans along with equity are on the
liability side of firm balance sheets, while assets consist of capital.

    Clearly, the balance sheet position of one sector of the economy will also affect
others. Household debt—and mortgage debt in particular—typically surges prior to a
financial crisis (for example, Mian, Sufi, and Verner 2017; Schularick and Taylor 2012).
The origins of the Great Recession similarly involved a surge in mortgage lending and a
boom in house prices and housing construction. As the house price boom began to
reverse, household balance sheets weakened and consumption growth fell.

    But mortgages also appear on the asset side of bank balance sheets. Indeed, the lion’s
share of the growth in mortgages since the late 1990s was created by securitized
mortgage loans, which were absorbed by a huge expansion of the thinly capitalized and
lighted regulated shadow banking sector. When banks (broadly defined) are subject to
financial distress, the flow of credit is impeded to the broad spectrum of non-financial
borrowers, including firms as well as households.

The Relevance of Constraints on Monetary Policy

    The severity of a financial crisis depends critically on the behavior of monetary
policy. When monetary policy is free to respond, a central bank can (at least partially)
offset the effect of the crisis on the cost of credit by reducing interest rates. Conversely,
when the hands of monetary policy are tied, the crisis is much more likely to spin out of
control. The evidence is consistent with this insight. For example, for emerging market
economies in the post-World War II period, full-blown financial crises were more likely
to occur in countries operating under fixed exchange rates, where monetary policy was
not free to adjust, as opposed to countries operating under flexible rates (Kaminsky and
Reinhart 1999). Similarly, Eichengreen (1992) and others have shown that during the
Great Depression era, countries that freed up their monetary policy by abandoning the
gold standard early in the crisis experienced much milder downturns than those that
delayed.

    For the recent financial crisis, the relevant constraint on monetary policy was the zero
lower bound on the nominal interest rate. As financial conditions deteriorated and the
economy began contracting in fall 2008, the Federal Reserve quickly reduced short term
interest rates, reaching effectively zero by December 2008. From that point on, the Fed’s
conventional tool was no longer available. The zero lower bound also constrained the
other major central banks, including the European Central Bank and the Bank of
England. Of course, the Bank of Japan. had a much longer experience with the zero lower
bound going back to the 1990s.

                                                 7	  
	  
    All of these central banks, led by the Federal Reserve, introduced a variety of
unconventional monetary policies to circumvent the constraints of the zero lower bound.
The most visible of these policies was large scale asset purchases (“quantitative easing”)
which the Fed introduced after the peak of the crisis in early 2009. This paper is not the
place to go into detail on these policies: for a formal analysis of how unconventional
monetary policy affects the economy, see Gertler and Karadi (2011) and Curdia and
Woodford (2011). However, these unconventional monetary policy interventions are
widely credited for helping mitigate the severity of the financial crisis.



The Financial Crisis through the Lens of the Theory

In this section, we use the theory outlined in the previous section as an organizing
framework to identify the role of financial factors in the unfolding of the Great
Recession. In particular, we identify how and when balance sheet constraints in each of
the three sectors—households, banks and firms—become relevant. For much of the
background material, we rely on Bernanke (2010, 2015), Gorton (2010), Adrian and Shin
(2010) and Gertler, Kiyotaki and Prestipino (2016).



Buildup of Vulnerabilities

        The prelude to the financial crisis was an extraordinary housing boom, featuring a
dramatic run up in house prices, residential construction and mortgage debt. A variety of
factors triggered the boom, including a secular decline in long-term interest rates, a
relaxation of lending standards, and widespread optimism about future increases in house
prices. In addition, increased securitization of mortgages permitted greater separation of
the origination function of mortgage lending from the funding role. Lightly regulated
shadow banks began to displace commercial banks as the primary funders of mortgage-
related securities. One example is the rise of asset-backed commercial paper conduits
which held securitized assets such as mortgages and car loans and funded these assets by
issuing short term (for example, 30-day) commercial paper. The cost of mortgage finance
declined, because these shadow banks did not face the same capital requirements or
regulatory oversight as commercial banks.

    The housing boom made both households and banks financially vulnerable. Figure 2
provides information on the household balance sheet over the ten-year period from 2004
through 2014. The shaded area is the time from peak to trough of the Great Recession
and the vertical line marks the Lehmann Brothers bankruptcy, which is generally
considered the epicenter of the financial collapse. The figure portrays two measures of
household leverage: the ratio of household debt to income (the solid line) and the ratio of
household debt to assets (the dashed line), where the latter includes the market values of
                                                8	  
	  
housing and financial wealth. From 2004:Q1 to the start of the recession, household debt
to income increased roughly 25 percent, fueled mainly by the rapid increase in mortgage
debt. Household asset values increased at roughly the same pace as the increase in
mortgage debt mainly due to the rapid increase in house prices. The net effect is that the
debt-to-assets ratio rose comparatively little until the start of the Great Recession.

    By the end of 2007, households were vulnerable to the sharp decline in asset values
that would follow. Housing prices peaked at the end of 2006 and then declined more than
25 percent. As a result, the aggregate household leverage ratio—measured by the ratio of
debt to annual income—increased roughly 25 percent from early 2007 to the business
cycle trough. Later in the recession toward the end of 2008, the decline in stock prices
also contributed further to the rise in household leverage ratio. Of course, certain states
like California and Florida experienced much sharper declines in house prices and
increases in household leverage than the national average.

    The deterioration of household balance sheets provided a channel through which
declining house prices affected household spending and in turn economic activity. The
weakening of the household balance sheet reduces access to credit, like home equity
loans.5 A substantial literature initiated by the seminal work of Mian, Rao and Sufi
(2013) and Mian and Sufi (2014) has examined the role of the household balance sheet
channel during the Great Recession. To identify the strength of this channel, this work
exploits the regional variation in house prices and household balance sheets that we
alluded to earlier. We return to this issue of estimating effects using regional variation
later.

    As vulnerabilities in household balance sheets materialized, corresponding
vulnerabilities in bank balance sheets emerged as well. Shadow banks grew from
intermediating less than 15 percent of credit in the early 1980s to roughly 40 percent on
the eve of the Great Recession, an amount on par with commercial banks (for discussion,
Gertler, Prestipino, and Kiyotaki 2017). Figure 3 provides information about the balance
sheet behavior of publicly traded investment banks, a major component of the shadow
banking sector. As the solid line shows, from 2004 to the start of the Great Recession
these institutions increased their real debt levels by more than 50 percent, mostly as a
consequence of financing the rapid expansion in securitized assets by borrowing in short
term credit markets. Because these firms did not face the regulatory capital requirements
of traditional banks and because they generally received high marks from the credit
ratings agencies like Standard & Poor’s, Moody’s and Fitch, on the mortgage related
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5
      	   The argument in the text requires
                                      imperfect financial markets. With perfect financial
markets and the ability to borrow freely based on lifetime income, a drop in house prices
does not induce a wealth effect on household spending, because the decline in house
prices is offset by the decline in the cost of housing (assuming that the household
continues to reside in the same neighborhood where house prices have declined). 	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9	  
	  
securities that they held, the investment banks tended to operate with much higher
leverage ratios than did the commercial banks. Prior to the Lehmann Brothers collapse in
September 2008, investment banks operated at ratios of debt-to-equity of between 20 and
25, roughly three times the level of commercial banks. Other types of shadow banks,
including asset-backed commercial paper issuers and finance companies, similarly
operated with high leverage.

    The increase in the quantity of mortgage debt was accompanied by a decline in the
quality. As Bernanke (2015) notes, the riskiest mortgages were issued in 2005 and 2006,
at the height of the house price boom. Mortgages that were clearly labeled as risky from
the start included both “sub-prime” (issued primarily to low-income borrowers) and also
“Alt A” (issued to speculators and/or households taking out second mortgages). In 2005
and 2006, the share of newly issued mortgages that could be classified a priori as risky
rose to roughly 40 percent, up from 10 percent in 2002. A general relaxation of lending
standards helped to fuel the increase. Also complicating matters is that roughly 30
percent of newly issued mortgages were issued at variable interest rates rate at a time
when the Federal Reserve was in the midst of a tightening cycle, adding to their overall
risk.



The Unraveling

    A combination of declining house prices and increasing short-term interest rates led
to an uptick in mortgage defaults in 2007, particularly on low-grade variable rate
mortgages issued in 2005 and 2006. In July 2007, the investment bank Bear Stearns
defaulted on two of its mutual funds that were exposed to mortgage risk. In August 2007,
in the event largely considered to mark the beginning of the crisis, the investment bank
BNP Paribas suspended withdrawals from funds that also had mortgage exposure risk.

    Concern spread quickly about other financial institutions with mortgage risk
exposure, particularly those relying heavily on short term funding. The asset-backed
commercial paper market was an early target (as discussed in Kacperczyk and Schnabl
2010; Covitz, Liang and Suarez 2013). Again, intermediaries in this market funded
securitized assets, including pools of mortgages, auto loans and credit card debt, and so
on. They funded these assets by issuing short term commercial paper, using the assets as
collateral. Concern about the quality of these assets, however, especially those with
mortgage exposure, led suppliers of commercial paper (like money market funds) to
either tighten the terms of credit or withdraw from the market completely. The value of
asset-backed commercial paper outstanding fell from a peak of $1.2 trillion in June 2007
to $800 billion by the following December.



                                               10	  
	  
    The way in which the contraction of the asset-backed commercial paper market
transmitted to the real economy can be described in terms of the theory presented in the
previous section. The reduction in the perceived collateral value of the securities held by
asset-backed commercial paper issuers weakened their balance sheets and raised the cost
of access to the commercial paper market. Interest rates on asset-backed commercial
paper increased relative to similar maturity Treasury Bill rates. Other terms of lending,
such as collateral requirements, tightened as well. The increase in funding costs faced by
issuers of asset-backed commercial paper in turn raised the cost of credit for mortgages,
auto loans, and other types of borrowing that made use of securitized lending.

    The collapse of the asset-backed commercial paper market led to the first significant
spillover of financial distress to the real sector, contributing to the slowdown in
residential investment, automobile demand and other types of spending that relied on this
funding. Benmelech, Meisenzahl and Ramacharan (2017), for example, present evidence
that tightening of credit conditions in this market alone accounted for roughly one-third
of the overall decline in automobile spending during the crisis.

    At the same time, the decline in house prices was weakening household balance
sheets, placing downward pressure on consumer spending. In addition, the end of the
housing boom meant a sharp drop in residential investment. These factors, along with the
disruption of short-term credit markets like asset-backed commercial paper, were
sufficient to move the US economy into recession at the end of 2007.

    The Federal Reserve responded aggressively to the onset of the recession. It reduced
the federal funds interest rate, and also undertook a variety of new measures designed to
improve the availability of short-term credit. These measures included making it easier
for commercial banks to obtain discount window credit and also making this credit
available to investment banks (which had previously been unable to borrow in this way).
The Federal Reserve also exchanged government bonds for highly rated private securities
to boost the supply of (perfectly) safe assets that could be used to collateralize-short term
borrowing. The most dramatic intervention involved the steps taken in the spring of 2008
to prevent solvency problems with Bear Stearns from further disrupting credit markets:
The central bank provided funding for JP Morgan’s acquisition of Bear Stearns using
some of the latter’s assets as collateral.



Collapse of the Financial and Real Sectors

        Through the summer of 2008, the US economy continued to slow. However, the
common perception at the time was that it would experience a downturn similar to the
relatively moderate recession of 1990 - 1991, which also featured a banking crisis,

                                                 11	  
	  
though one that involved commercial real estate and commercial banks rather than
residential real estate and shadow banks.

    In September 2008, however, the second and larger wave of financial distress hit.
Lehmann Brothers, a much larger investment bank than Bear Stearns, was similarly
exposed to mortgage related risk. A significant decline in the value of its securities
holdings weakened its balance sheet and raised the risk to its short-term creditors, from
whom it was obtaining virtually all its funding. The Reserve Primary Fund, a large
money market mutual fund that held commercial paper issued by Lehmann, experienced
a run that forced it into liquidation. Runs on other money market funds were only averted
when the Federal Reserve extended deposit insurance to these institutions.

    The distress then spread to Lehmann’s main source of short-term funding, the repo
market in which borrowers obtained overnight loans using securities as collateral. The
uncertainty about the value of these securities, particularly if there was a hint of mortgage
risk exposure, made creditors less willing to accept them as collateral, leading many to
pull out of the repo market (for discussion, see Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov 2014).
What emerged were bank runs in the spirit of Diamond and Dybvig (1983), though in
markets for wholesale funding (interbank) as opposed to retail funding. In addition,
weakening of their balance sheets exposed these institutions to runs which took the form
of a collective failure of creditors to roll over their loans (as in Gertler and Kiyotaki 2015;
Gertler, Kiyotaki and Prestipino 2017).

    The Federal Reserve was unable to act as a “lender of last resort” to Lehmann,
because the bank could not offer sufficient collateral. The lack of short-term credit forced
Lehmann into default. Fearing similar vulnerability, the other major investment banks
quickly merged with commercial banks in order to get the regulatory protection afforded
to the latter. The contraction in investment banking impeded credit flows, placing further
downward pressure on economic activity.

    The financial crisis spread like a cancer from the shadow banking sector, which
funded mainly securitized assets, to the commercial banking sector. When commercial
banks merged with investment banks, they also absorbed a share of the assets funded by
the investment banks. But commercial banks were limited in the amount they could
absorb by their equity capital in conjunction with capital requirements that limited their
leverage ratios well below the level at which the investment banks had operated. An
additional source of pressure on commercial banks was losses on securitized assets that
they had initiated and sold. Even though the banks were no longer directly holding these
assets, they had an implicit commitment to absorb the losses. The losses on mortgage-
related assets in turn weakened the balance sheets of commercial banks, disrupting the
flow of credit through these institutions. Now bank-dependent borrowers, including
many non-financial firms and households, also faced increasing credit costs.
                                                  12	  
	  
    The major disruption of financial intermediation following these events in September
2008 led to a sharp across-the-board contraction in economic activity. Figure 4 illustrates.
The top panel portrays the behavior of three key credit spreads: the 90-day asset-backed
commercial paper spread; the Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) excess bond premium for
non-financial companies; and the excess bond premium for financial companies. In each
case, the spread measures the difference between the return on the security and the return
on a similar maturity government bond.6 The spread for asset-backed commercial paper
increases roughly 150 basis points from early 2007 to the end of that year, reflecting the
problems in that market that developed prior to the onset of the recession. After a slight
dip, the asset-backed commercial paper spread increased another 100 basis points in
response to the turmoil in the commercial paper market following the Lehmann collapse
in September 2008. As the turbulence spread to both investment banks and commercial
banks, the excess bond premium for financial companies increased to more than 150
basis points in the wake of the Lehmann collapse. Finally, the contraction of the shadow
banking sector along with the subsequent disruption of commercial banking steadily
pushed up credit costs faced by non-financial borrowers. As an example, the excess bond
premium increased from roughly zero in early 2007 to 275 basis points at the time of the
Lehmann default.7

    The bottom panel in Figure 4 shows the accompanying behavior of the real sector,
including GDP and four key components: residential investment, consumer durables,
producer durables and nondurable consumption. (All variables are in logs.) The growth
rate of GDP moves slightly negative in the early stages of the recession starting in late
2007. Contributing to the initial slowdown is a sharp decline in residential investment as
pessimism about future housing prices begins to grow. Financial factors also play a role.
Problems in the asset-backed commercial paper market led to upward pressure on the
cost of mortgage credit. In addition, as Gilchrist, Siemer, and Zakrasjek (2017)
emphasize, the disruption of credit markets also increased borrowing costs for
construction companies that were building homes on speculation.

    Also contributing to the initial slowdown was a drop in consumer durable demand at
the beginning of the recession, largely due to a sharp decline in automobile demand.
Here, forces working through both household and bank balance sheets were operative.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6
      	  The excess bond premium is the difference between the yield on an index of non-financial corporate
bonds and a similar maturity government bond, where the latter is adjusted to eliminate default risk. The
idea is to have a pure measure of the excess return that is not confounded by expectations of default. The
excess bond premium in the financial sector is constructed in an analogous manner for publicly-traded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  	  
companies in the financial sector.
	  
7
      	  As emphasized by Adrian, Colla and Shin (2012) and Becker and Ivashina (2014) the deterioration in
commercial banks’ financial health induced many non-financial borrowers to switch from bank to public
debt markets to obtain credit, placing upward pressure on the EBP. For an early theoretical description of
this bank loan supply effect on corporate bond rates, see Kashyap, Stein and Wilcox (1993).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13	  
	  
Using cross-regional evidence, Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013) show that the weakening of
household balance sheets due to the decline in house prices induced a significant drop in
automobile demand. On the other side of the ledger, as we mentioned earlier, Benmelech,
Meisenzahl and Ramacharan (2017) showed that the disruption of the asset-backed
commercial paper market had a significant negative effect on the demand for cars.

    The recession turns from mild to major following the Lehmann bankruptcy at the end
of the third quarter of 2008. GDP begins a sharp contraction that lasts until the spring of
2009. As credit costs rise across the board, demand fell for both consumer and producer
durable goods. Consumer durables dropped roughly 15 percent while producer durables
dropped a whopping 35 percent.

   Financial factors also contributed significantly to the contraction in producer
durables. Entering the recession, non-financial firms were not directly financially
vulnerable to the fall in home prices in the same way that households and (shadow) banks
were. They did not (on average) run up their leverage ratios, nor were they directly
exposed to house price risk. On the other hand, as the crisis unfolded, equity values
dropped significantly, weakening firm balance sheets. Also, the increased strain on
commercial banks made access to credit more difficult for non-financial firms, as just
mentioned.

   Figure 5 illustrates how financial distress hit the non-financial business sector. The
top panel plots the behavior of the debt/equity ratio of the non-financial corporate
business sector alongside a measure of the external finance premium, specifically the
Gilchrist/Zakrasjek excess bond premium we used in Figure 4. Consistent with the theory
we described earlier, a higher credit spread is associated with a high leverage ratio.

    The bottom panel of Figure 5 shows how distress in banking may have affected the
flow of credit to the nonfinancial business sector. It plots the excess bond premium for
financial companies against the results of a survey of senior loan officers about lending
terms. The former provides a measure of the distress facing financial institutions, while
the latter is an indicator of the tightness of bank credit. As the figure shows, they are
closely correlated. Note also that during the Great Recession, the unusually high degree
of tightening shown in the survey data is also correlated with the increase in the non-
financial excess bond premium plotted in the top panel, suggesting the latter was also
likely a contributing factor to the former.

    Formal panel data studies also identify a role for financial factors influencing non-
financial firm behavior. For example, Giroud and Mueller (2015) show that firms that
had built up their leverage prior to the Great Recession accounted mainly for the
subsequent contraction in employment across regions. As noted earlier, Chodorow-Reich
(2015) and Chodorow-Reich and Falato (2017) document that bank health affected the
                                                14	  
	  
flow of credit to non-financial firms. Finally, Gilchrist, Schoenle, Sim and Zakrajsek
(2017) show that liquidity constraints induced a fraction of firms to raise their price
markups in order to generate increased cash flow over the near term (at the likely cost of
reducing future market share).

    The financial and economic contraction following the Lehmann bankruptcy in
September 2008 induced a massive policy response, including steps aimed at addressing
the problems of financial sector intermediation and bank balance sheets. The Federal
Reserve quickly reduced the short-term interest rate to zero, but it also pursued a variety
of other interventions. Among the most visible was massive purchases of agency
mortgage-backed securities financed mainly by issuing interest bearing reserves. The
logic for the policy was to reduce mortgage costs by expanding central bank
intermediation to offset the contraction in private intermediation. Upon announcement of
the program, interest rates on mortgage-backed securities fell 50 basis points and dropped
another 100 as the program was phased in the following spring.

    Perhaps the most dramatic intervention was the injection of equity into the
commercial banking system under the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), a
Treasury action coordinated with the Federal Reserve in October 2008. Under the TARP,
the government purchased $250 billion of preferred equity in the nine largest commercial
banks. This intervention (along with temporary public guarantees on the debt of these
institutions) helped replenish and stabilize the balance sheets of these institutions. In
spring 2009, the Federal Reserve conducted a stress test on the commercial banks. It
deemed the system as having an adequate level of capital relative to assets, marking the
end of the financial crisis. The trough of the recession occurred shortly thereafter, in June
2009.

     As is well known, the recovery following the trough was quite slow. Exactly why is
still a matter of debate, and we do not dig into the potential reasons in this paper.
However, it is worth noting the behavior of nondurable consumption which, unlike other
post-World War II recessions, actually declines after the Lehmann collapse. As Figure 4
shows, it then remains stagnant for a long period after the trough. A number of
researchers have suggested that the process of household deleveraging can help account
for the slow rebound in consumption (for example, Midrigan, Jones and Phillipon 2017).




Digging Deeper: Evidence from State Data

    There has been a surge in empirical work on the issues of household balance sheets
and financial frictions and the Great Recession, often making use of cross-sectional
variation. The pioneers in this area, Mian and Sufi (2014). have used regional variation to
                                                 15	  
	  
identify how the weakening of household balance sheets precipitated by the house price
decline contributed to the downturn. 8 Others have focused on banks. For example,
Chodorow-Reich (2014) exploits variation in bank financial health to identify the effects
of the disruption in banking on employment. Finally, there is work showing how the
deterioration of non-financial firms’ balance sheets reduced employment (for example
Giroud and Mueller 2017), again exploiting cross-sectional variation to attain
identification.

   In thinking about the roles of the household balance sheet channel and the disruption
of financial intermediation, a natural question is whether one of these played a
substantially larger role than the other in the Great Recession. Disentangling the
contribution of the household balance sheet channel versus general financial market
conditions on employment presents a nontrivial challenge. To date, the two phenomena
have been studied separately. As we have noted, the literature on the household balance
sheet channel mainly analyzes cross-sectional behavior. Conversely, work that examines
the macro effects of disruptions in financial conditions (for example, Gilchrist and
Zakrajsek, 2012) mainly employs time series methods.

    In this section, we present some evidence on this issue by examining a panel of state
level data. Following Mian and Sufi (2015) and others, we exploit the cross-sectional
variation in the data to identify the effect of house prices on the regional variation in
employment. We then use this information to disentangle the relative contributions of
house prices versus a measure of disruption of intermediation to the aggregate decline in
employment.


Some Patterns of Cross-Sectional and Time Series Variation

    We begin with an illustration of the data before turning to our econometric
framework. The panels in Figure 6 portray both the cross-sectional and time series
variation of four variables: house prices, the mortgage-to-income ratio, employment and
non-construction employment. The data is quarterly and covers the period from 2004 to
2015. For each variable, we group states into three categories based on the severity of the
house price contraction from 2006 to 2010. We then construct an aggregate of the
variable for each of the three categories (the house price and the mortgage/income ratio
are population-weighted, while the employment measures are simple aggregates). The
first category experienced the largest house price drop. It includes the four “sand”
states—Arizona, California, Florida and Nevada—and accounts for 20 percent of the
population. Our middle group contains 30 percent of the population and the bottom group
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
8
      	  A few prominent examples of other papers in this vein are Kaplan, Mitman and Violante (2017),
Midrigan, Jones and Phillippon (2017), and Berger, Guerrieri, Lorenzoni and Vavra (forthcoming).
	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16	  
	  
the remaining 50 percent. Note that our middle group has the property that it closely
mirrors aggregate behavior for each variable, shown by the solid lines.

    The cross-sectional patterns in the data are consistent with the evidence of the
household balance sheet channel in Mian and Sufi (2014). The states experiencing the
largest boom and bust in house prices also had the largest run up in mortgage debt, as the
top two panels show. In turn, across the panels there is a strong correlation between the
severity of the house price decline and the corresponding employment contraction, as the
bottom left panel illustrates.9

    As will become clear, it is important to take into account that some of the above-
average employment contraction in the sand states was the product of a collapse in
residential investment as opposed to a household balance sheet channel. Construction
employment fell by 40 percent in these regions. Accordingly, in the bottom right panel of
Figure 6 we remove construction from the overall employment measure. The general
cross-sectional relation between house prices and total employment also holds for non-
construction employment, though with two differences. First, the cumulative drop in non-
construction employment is roughly 7.5 percentage points, implying that construction
accounts for about 2.5 percentage points of the overall employment drop. Second, and
more significant for our purposes, from early 2007 through 2008:Q1, the second quarter
of the recession, there is little difference in the behavior of non-construction employment
across regions despite considerable heterogeneity in house price dynamics. The regional
differences emerge later as the recession unfolds.

    In addition to a clear cross-sectional pattern, our quarterly data suggests some
important temporal co-movements in employment across regions. First, as we just noted,
entering the business cycle peak in 2007:Q4 there is a common slowdown in non-
construction employment growth across regions that cannot be easily explained by the
pattern of house price declines. As Figure 6 makes clear, the prerecession slowdown in
total employment in the sand states was largely a product of the construction decline.
This slowdown, however, lines up well with the unraveling of the asset-backed
commercial paper market described earlier and the behavior of the various measures of
financial distress plotted in Figures 4 and 5. Second, and more dramatic, around the time
of the Lehmann Brothers collapse, there is a rapid acceleration in the employment decline
across regions. The timing of this across the board employment contraction mirrors the
indicators of financial distress in Figure 4, which reach a peak at this point. Thus,

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
9
      	  As Mian and Sufi (2014) emphasize, the household balance sheet channel should affect directly non-
tradable employment, which depends on local demand conditions. Though we do not present the results
here, we find that retail employment (their main measure of non-tradable employment) exhibits the
same cross-sectional correlation with house prices as total employment. In contrast, although aggregate
manufacturing employment (which may be thought of as tradable goods employment) declines by 18
percent from the recession’s peak to trough, there is virtually no difference in the decline across the
categories of states.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17	  
	  
although there are important differences across states that suggest a link between
employment and house prices, there is also a considerable aggregate component to
employment dynamics that is tied to economy wide indices of financial distress.


Separating the Effects of Household Balance Sheet Stress and Financial Sector
Disruption

    In this section, we describe a straightforward reduced-form method to separate                 the
effects of household balance sheets stress and financial sector disruption. In effect,             we
want to combine evidence from both cross-section and time-series data. Here,                       we
summarize the approach and the results. Details on data sources are presented in                   the
appendix.

       As our starting point, we use a panel-data vector autoregression to identify
“shocks” to state-level house prices and to our indicator of aggregate financial conditions.
By shocks, we mean surprise movements or “innovations” in these variables that are
orthogonal to movements in employment and to each other.

         For our measure of financial stress, we use the financial excess bond premium at
any given time. Again, this is the spread between return on an index of financial company
corporate bonds and a similar maturity government bond (after controlling for default
risk). It is accordingly a measure of the external finance premium faced by financial
institutions and thus a reasonable proxy for the degree of disruption of credit
intermediation. As we showed in Figure 4, this premium jumps during the asset-backed
commercial paper crisis and even more dramatically during the Lehmann fallout.

    To identify shocks to the spread, we use conventional time series methods: We
regress the financial excess bond premium st during each time period on four lags of
itself, along with current and four lags of quarterly aggregate house price growth Δ log Pt
and quarterly aggregate employment growth Δ log Et :

                      !                    !                           !

             𝑠!   =         𝛼!! 𝑠!!!   +         𝛾!! 𝛥𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃!!!      +         𝜔!! 𝛥  𝑙𝑜𝑔𝐸!!! + 𝜀!
                      !!!                  !!!                         !!!


The residual in this regression ε t provides our measure of the shock to the financial
excess bond premium that cannot be explained by housing prices or employment. An
example might be the jump in the spread due to the financial panic that led to the
Lehmann bankruptcy.


                                                          18	  
	  
   When we carry out this regression, we find that we cannot reject the hypothesis that
the residuals are serially uncorrelated implying that the estimated shocks are true
surprises. This approach also makes use of timing restrictions to identify the exogenous
shock ε t in the excess bond premium equation. In this case, given that financial markets
react quickly to news, we assume that the financial excess bond premium responds
immediately to current house prices and current employment growth: hence the presence
of current values for those variables in the regression. However, we assume that
movements in the spread affect employment and house prices only with a lag of at least
one quarter, given sluggishness in response of real sector variables to shocks. This kind
of timing restriction is standard in the literature on identified vector autoregressions, but
our results are robust to alternative timing assumptions.

   Similarly, to obtain the shock in state-level house prices we regress the quarterly
change in house prices for each state on four lags of itself, four lags of the financial bond
premium and the current and four lagged values of that state’s growth in employment.
Let Δ log Pj ,t and Δ log E j,t denote house price and employment growth in state j . We
estimate
                         !                    !                          !

          𝛥 log 𝑃!,! =         𝛼!! 𝑠!!!   +         𝛾!! 𝛥𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃!,!!!   +         𝜔!! 𝛥  𝑙𝑜𝑔𝐸!,!!! + 𝜇!,!
                         !!!                  !!!                        !!!


       The residual in this equation µ j ,t provides our measure of shocks to house prices in a
given state. An example of what could underlie this kind of shock is a spontaneous burst
of optimism or pessimism about future house price appreciation (as in Kaplan, Mitman
and Violante, 2017). This specification imposes common coefficients across states and
over time, but our aggregate decomposition is insensitive to this assumption. The
additional timing assumption we make in this instance is that current employment can
influence housing prices, but the latter can affect the former only with a lag.

    With these measures of the shocks to housing prices and financial stress in hand, our
next step is to estimate the effects of these shocks on the dynamic behavior of both state-
level and aggregate employment. In doing so, we interact our measures of state level
house price shocks with a state-level measure of household indebtedness. We do so in a
way that permits isolating the household balance sheet channel from other ways that
house prices could affect employment (for example, via the impact on residential
construction). To measure the balance sheet channel, we look at the mortgage-to-income
ratio in each state.

    We are interested in estimating the effect of shocks to housing prices and financial
intermediation over different time horizons that then allow us to provide a historical
decomposition over the crisis period. Thus, we estimate a series of regressions with

                                                            19	  
	  
different time horizons, using state level employment growth from one quarter up to 10
quarters ahead as the dependent variable.

        We include three explanatory variables. The first variable is the shock to housing
prices at the state level, taken from the earlier calculation. The second variable starts with
the mortgage-to-income ratio in a given state at the end of the house price boom,
2006:Q4, which gives a sense of the vulnerability of households in that state to a decline
in housing prices, and combine this with an indicator variable that takes on a value of 1
over the crisis period where house prices were declining, 2007:Q1-2009:Q4, and zero
otherwise. This term is then multiplied by the housing price shock at the state level.
Interacting the housing price shock with the mortgage-to-income ratio provides a way to
identify the balance sheet channel (analogous to Mian and Sufi 2014). Restricting the
interactive effect to be operative only during the crisis captures the idea that balance sheet
constraints were likely most relevant during this period.10 The third explanatory variable
is the shock to financial stress, taken from the earlier calculation. For the h quarter ahead
growth in employment growth rate of employment the regression also includes a horizon-
specific state fixed effect 𝜖!,!   and an error term 𝜖!,!,! is specified as	  	  

                                                                                                                                                                              𝑀!
    𝑙𝑜𝑔𝐸!,!!! − log 𝐸!,! = 𝛽!,! 𝜇!,! + 𝛽!,! 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠 = 1                                                                                                                           𝜇 + 𝛽!,! 𝜀! + 𝜖!,! + 𝜖!,!,!.
                                                                                                                                                                              𝑌! !,!

        Because our identified shocks to housing prices and financial conditions were
obtained by conditioning on current and lagged values of state level employment and
other variables they are orthogonal to other information that may predict future
employment growth. Consequently, ordinary least squares gives consistent estimates of
the coefficients. Following Jorda (2005), we can then use estimates of our equation over
different horizons to construct measures of the response of employment to our identified
shocks.

   Table 1 reports estimates of the effects of the identified shocks on employment
growth across horizons that span 1 to 10 quarters. The estimation period is 1992:Q2 to
2015. The first column of Table 1 reports for each horizon h the linear response
coefficient β p , h to a house price shock µ j ,t that does not operate through a balance sheet
channel. These coefficients imply a statistically significant effect at all horizons. It is
though economically modest compared to the effect of a leverage adjusted house price
shock. Interpreted causally, these estimates imply that a one percent surprise decrease in
house prices leads to a 0.3 percent decrease in aggregate employment at the two-year
horizon.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10
            As Berger, Guerrieri, Lorenzoni and Vavra (forthcoming) argue, consumption was likely not that
sensitive to house price movements during the boom phase as leverage constraints were likely not close
to binding.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20	  
	  
    The second row of Table 1 reports the estimated employment effect of the leverage
adjusted house price shock during the crisis period, which we have argued captures the
balance sheet channel. The leverage measure M j / Y j is normalized by the median value
across states. It then ranges from 0.5 on the low end to 2.0 on the upper end of the
distribution. For the median state this balance sheet effect implies a 0.72 percent drop in
employment at the two-year horizon in response to a 1 percent drop in house prices. This
household balance sheet effect is more than twice as large as the estimated effect of
house price shocks on employment during normal times. In addition, consistent with
Mian and Sufi (2014), these coefficients imply substantially variation across states in the
employment response to house price shocks. For states in the upper quartile of the
mortgage to income distribution, this balance sheet response is four times larger than the
implied response for states in the lower quartile of the mortgage to income distribution.
Interestingly, the balance sheet effect does not become economically significant until five
quarters after a shock and then builds from there. This is consistent with the observation
that differences in non-construction employment across states occur with a significant
delay following the decline in house prices.

    The last row of Table 1 reports the estimated response to a shock to the financial
excess bond premium. These are statistically significant and economically large. A one
percent surprise increase in the excess financial bond premium implies a 3.6 percent drop
in aggregate employment at the two-year horizon. These estimates are comparable to
those obtained by Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) using a standard VAR methodology to
compute impulse responses.

       Given the estimates from Table 1 we can now provide a measure of the relative
contributions of each of the shocks to the behavior of aggregate employment over the
Great Recession. We first construct measures of the aggregate house price shock µt as a
population-weighted average of the individual state price shocks µ j ,t . We then construct
a measure of the aggregate leverage adjusted house price shock, µ b,t as a population
weighted average of the state level leverage adjusted shocks ( M j / Y j ) µ j ,t . We can then
decompose the movements in aggregate employment over the crisis period into the
distinct contributions of the three aggregate shocks, µt, µ bt and the financial shock ε t .

   To do the decomposition, we exploit the fact that house price shocks and financial
shocks are serially uncorrelated. Let logEˆ be the component of employment due to
                                              p ,t

house price shocks independent of balance sheet effects; logEˆ b ,t the part due to house
price shocks operating through balance sheets; and logEˆ s ,t the part due to shocks to
financial conditions. To obtain these components we construct the cumulative response to
previous house price and financial shocks, as follows:
                                                     21	  
	  
                                            logEˆ p ,t = ∑ β p , h µt − h ; Eˆb,t = ∑ βb, h µb,t − h ; log Eˆ s ,t = ∑ β s , hε t − h
                                                                            h                                                               h                                                                            h



    Figure 7 displays the cumulative contribution of each of these shocks to aggregate
employment over the period 2007:Q1 to 2010:Q1 along with the realized path of
aggregate employment (measured as a deviation from a linear trend). Aggregate
employment fell by 9 percentage points relative to trend over this time period. The linear
effect of house price shocks on aggregate employment is modest and implies a 1.7
percent decline in employment over this time period. In contrast, the household balance
sheet effect estimated during the crisis is sizeable and implies a 4.1 percent decline in
aggregate employment. The shock to the financial bond premium provides the largest
effect however and explains a 5.7 percent decline in employment during this period.
Notably, the shock to the financial bond premium that occurred during the 2008:Q3
Lehman collapse accounts for 3.5 percent of the overall employment contraction. In
contrast, the Lehman collapse explains none of the decline in employment associated
with house prices or household balance sheets. Thus although the direct effect of house
prices on household balance sheets is an important component of the decline in aggregate
output, our estimates imply that the recession would have been far milder in the absence
of the financial turmoil that ensued.11

    We conclude with two qualifications for this exercise. First, it is important to
emphasize the reduced form nature of our exercise. It is easy to suggest other propagation
mechanisms for a financial crisis. For example, the weakening of the economy in
response to either a household balance sheet or financial market shock can give rise to
tightening of financial constraints on non-financial firms. Indeed, in the previous section
we presented some descriptive evidence suggesting that non-financial firms faced
financial distress as the crisis wore on. The response of monetary policy will matter to
the cumulative effect, and so on. What all this suggests is that a full accounting of how
the financial crisis played out will require structural modeling.

    Second, we identify orthogonal shocks to house prices and credit spreads by using a
linear vector autoregression in conjunction with restrictions on their contemporaneous
interaction. However, the financial excess bond premium plotted in Figures 4 and 5
shows large jumps, which likely reflect complex interactions with housing prices and
their impact on the mortgage market. These may not be well-captured in a linear
regression. We believe that the approach described here is a reasonable starting point,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
11
                We note that our estimate of the effect of the financial shock on employment is conservative in the
sense that we do not allow the shock to the financial excess bond premium to affect current house prices
but do let the former affect the latter. Under the alternative extreme, where the bond premium shock
affects current house prices but not the reverse, the financial shock explains a 6.4 percent employment
decline while the leveraged adjusted house price shock accounts for 3.7 percent.
	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         22	  
	  
and that the household balance sheet shocks capture the main source of nonlinearity so
that our identified credit spread shock reasonably identifies the effects of financial
conditions on employment. Nonetheless incorporating nonlinearities explicitly in the
estimation would be desirable. Again, this would likely involve a more structural
approach.

Conclusion

        Gaining a deeper understanding of the Great Recession is important, because the
lessons that arise from that event will shape our perceptions of how the macroeconomy
works, and sometimes doesn’t work, for years to come. We have argued on theoretical
and empirical grounds that financial distress in each of the three main sectors –
households, financial intermediaries and non-financial firms – played a meaningful role
in the evolution of the Great Recession. Our empirical exercise suggests that while the
household balance sheet channel and the disruption of financial intermediation
contributed significantly to the overall employment contraction, the recent recession
would have been relatively mild without the disruption of financial intermediation.

        Of course, understanding the Great Recession ultimately requires more than
looking at the downturn. We also need a better understanding of the run up to the crisis
and the slow recovery afterward. For example, purely fundamentals-based models have
difficulty accounting for the boom and then subsequent bust in house prices. This opens
up the possibility for a behavioral approach to explain how a wave of optimism turned to
pessimism in housing markets, though a widely accepted approach along these lines has
yet to materialize. For the slow recovery, we know from Reinhart and Rogoﬀ (2009) that
recoveries from financial crises are often much longer than normal. Although broad
measures of financial stress suggest that financial markets normalized to a considerable
extent by in 2009, there is some evidence that tightness in credit markets persisted for
both households (Midrigan, Jones and Phillipon 2017) and small businesses (Chen,
Hanson and Stein 2017). Accounting for the slow recovery, including the role of financial
factors, is an important topic for future research.




                                               23	  
	  
Acknowledgements

Thanks to Ben Bernanke and Oscar Jorda for helpful comments and to Sneha Agrawal
and James Graham for excellent research assistance.




                                            24	  
	  
   References


[1] Adrian, Tobias, Paolo Colla and Hyun Shin, 2013, “Which Financial Frictions: Parsing
    the Evidence from the Financial Crisis of 2007 to 2009,” in Daron Acemoglu, Jonathan
    Parker and Michael Woodford (eds), NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 27, 159-214.
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[2] Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Shin, 2010, “The Changing Nature of Financial Intermediation
    and Financial Crisis of 2007-2009”, Annual Review of Economics, 603-618.

[3] Arellano, Cristina, Yan Bai and Patrick Kehoe, 2016, “Financial Frictions and
    Fluctuations in Volatility”, NBER Working Paper 22990.

[4] Becker, Bo and Victoria Ivashina, 2014, “Cyclicality of credit supply: Firm level
    evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics 62: 76-93.

[5] Benmelech, Efraim, Ralf Meisenzahl and Rodney Ramacharan, 2017, “The Real Effects
    of Liquidity During the Financial Crisis: Evidence from Automobiles”, Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 132(1): 317-365.

[6] Berger, David, Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni and Joseph Vavra, 2017, “House
    Prices and Consumer Spending”, Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

[7] Bernanke, Ben, 1983, “Non Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation
    of the Great Depression, American Economic Review 73(1): 257-276.

[8] Bernanke, Ben, 2010, “Causes of the Recent Financial and Economic Crisis”. Statement
    before the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, Washington, September 2.

[9] Bernanke, Ben, 2015, The Courage to Act: A Memoir of a Crisis and Its Aftermath. New
    York: Norton.

[10] Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, 1989, “Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business
    Fluctuations”, American Economic Review 79(1): 14-31.

[11]      Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, 1995, “Inside the Black Box: The Credit
    Channel of Monetary Policy Transmission”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(4): 27-
    48.



                                                   25	  
   	  
 [12]       Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler and Simon Gilchrist, 1999, “The Financial
     Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework”, Chap. 21 in Handbook of
     Macroeconomics, vol. 1, Ben Friedman and Michael Woodford editors. Elsevier.

[13] Brunnermeier, M. K., T. Eisenbach and Y. Sannikov, 2013, “Macroeconomics with
     Financial Frictions: A Survey”. In D. Acemoglu, M. Arellano and E. Dekel (Eds.)
     Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Tenth World Congress of the Econometric
     Society. Vol. 2: 3-94. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[14] Brunnermeier, Markus and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, “A Macroeconomic Model with a
     Financial Sector”, American Economic Review 104(2): 379-421.

[15] Chen, Brian, Samuel Hanson and Jeremy Stein, “The Decline of Big Bank Lending to
     Small Businesses: Impacts on Local Credit and Labor Markets”, NBER Working Paper
     No. 23843.

[16] Chodordrow-Reich, Gabriel and Antonio Falato, 2017, “The Loan Covenant Channel:
     How Bank Health Transmits to the Economy”, NBER Working Paper No. 23879.

[17] Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, 2014, “The Employment Effects of Credit Market
     Disruptions”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1):1-59.

[18] Christiano, Lawrence, Roberto Motto and Massimo Rostagno, 2014, “Risk Shocks”,
     American Economic Review 104(1): 27-65.

[19] Covitz, Daniel, Nellie Liang and Gustavo Suarez, 2013, “Evolution of a Financial Crisis:
     Collapse of the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Market”, Journal of Finance, 68(3):
     815-848.

[20] Curdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford, 2011, “The Central-Bank Balance Sheet as an
     Instrument of Monetary Policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics 58(1): 54-79.

[21] Diamond, Douglas, and Philip H. Dybvig, 1983, “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
     Liquidity”, Journal of Political Economy 91(3): 401-419.

[22] Eichengreen, Barry, 1992, Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression,
     1919-1939. New York: Oxford University Press.

[23] Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Paul Krugman, 2012, “Debt, Deleveraging, and Liquidity Trap:
     A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach.”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3): 1469-1513.



                                                    26	  
    	  
[24] Fisher, Irving, 1933, “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions”, Econometrica ,
     1(4): 337-357.

[25] Geanakoplos, John, ``The Leverage Cycle”, in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume
     24(2010), Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff and Mark Woodford, editors.

[26] Gertler, Mark, and Karadi, Peter., 2011. “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy”,
     Journal of Monetary Economics 58(1): 17-34.

[27] Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2011, “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy
     in Business Cycle Analysis”. In Friedman, B., and Woodford, M. (Eds.), Handbook of
     Monetary Economics. Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

[28] Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2015, “Banking, Liquidity and Bank Runs in an
     Infinite Horizon Economy”, American Economic Review 105(7): 2011-43.

[29] Gertler, Mark, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki and Andrea Prestipino, 2016, “Wholesale Banking and
     Bank Runs in Macroeconomic Modeling of Financial Crises”, Handbook of
     Macroeconomics, John Taylor and Harald Uhlig editors.

[30] Gertler, Mark, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki and Andrea Prestipino, 2017, “A Macroeconomic
     Model with Financial Panics”, NBER Working Paper 24126.

[31] Gilchrist, Simon, Raphael Schoenle, Jae Sim, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2017, “Inflation
     Dynamics During the Financial Crisis”, American Economic Review 197(3): 785-823.

[32] Gilchrist Simon, Michael Siemer and Egon Zakrajsek, 2017, “The Real Effects of Credit
     Booms and Busts: A County Level Analysis”, mimeo

[33] Gilchrist, Simon and Egon Zakrajsek, 2012, Credit Spreads and Business Cycle
     Fluctuations, American Economic Review 102(4): 1692-1720.

[34] Giroud, Xavier and Holger Mueller, 2017, “Firm Leverage, Consumer Demand, and
     Employment Losses During the Great Recession”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132,
     p.271-316.

[35] Gorton, Gary, 2010. Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007. Oxford
     University Press.

[36] Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni, 2017, “Credit Crises, Precautionary Saving
     and the Liquidity Trap”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(3): 1427-1467.


                                                   27	  
    	  
[37] He, Zhiguo and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013. Intermediary Asset Pricing, American
     Economic Review 103(2): 732-770.

[38] He, Zhiguo and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2014, “A Macroeconomic Framework for
     Quantifying Systemic Risk”. NBER Working Paper 19885.

[39] Iacoviello, Matteo, 2005, “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints and Monetary Policy in
     the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review 95(3): 739-764.

[40] Jermann, Urban and Vincenzo Quadrini, 2012, “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial
     Shocks”, American Economic Review 102(1): 238-271.

[41] Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti, 2010, “Investment
     Shocks and Business Cycles”, Journal of Monetary Economics 57(2): 132-145.

[42] Jorda, Oscar, 2005, “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local
     Projections”, American Economic Review 95(1): 161-182.

[43] Jorda, Oscar, Moritz Schularick and Alan Taylor, 2017, “Macrofinancial History and the
     New Business Cycle Facts, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, edited by Martin
     Eichenbaum and Jonathan Parker. University of Chicago Press.

[44] Kacperczyk, Marcin and Philipp Schnabl. 2010, “When Safe Proved Risky: Commercial
     Paper during the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
     24(1), 29-50.

[45] Kaminsky, Graciela and Carmen Reinhart, 1999, “The Twin Crises: The Causes of
     Banking and Balance of Payments Problems”, American Economic Review 89(3): 473-
     500.

[46] Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman and Gianluca Violante, 2017, “The Housing Boom and Bust:
     Model Meets Evidence”, NBER Working Paper 23694.

[47] Kashyap, Anil, Jeremy Stein and David Wilcox, 1993, “Monetary Policy and Credit
     Conditions: Evidence from the Composition of External Finance,” American Economic
     Review 83(1): 78-98.

[48] Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles”, Journal of Political
     Economy 105(2): 211-248.

[49] Krishnamurthy, Arvind, Stefan Nagel and Dimitri Orlov. 2014, “Sizing Up Repo”,
     Journal of Finance 69(6): 2381-2417.
                                                   28	  
    	  
[50] Mendoza, Enrique, 2010, “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage”, American
     Economic Review 100(5): 1941-1966.

[51] Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao and Amir Sufi, 2013, “Household Balance Sheets,
     Consumption and the Economic Slump”, Quarterly Journal of Economics.

[52] Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi and Emil Verner, 2017, “Household Debt and Business Cycles
     Worldwide”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1755-1817.

[53] Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2014, “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment”,
     Econometrica 82, 2197-2223.

[54] Midrigan, Virgiliu, Calum Jones and Thomas Phillipon, 2017, “Household Balance
     Sheets and The Recession”, mimeo.

[55] Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, 2009, This Time is Diﬀerent, Eight Centuries of
     Financial Folly, Princeton.

[56] Schularick, Moritz and Alan M. Taylor, 2012, “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary
     Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crisis, 1870-2008”, American Economic Review
     102(2): 1029-1069.




                                                 29	  
    	  
                                     Table	  1:	  Impulse	  Response	  from	  Local	  Projection	  

                                                                                      Horizon	  
       	  
                            1	           2	          3	            4	           5	            6	            7	           8	            9	          10	  

                          0.07	   0.11	   0.15	   0.17	   0.21	   0.23	   0.27	   0.30	   0.33	   0.39	  
              𝜇!" 	  
                         (0.04)	   (0.05)	   (0.06)	   (0.07)	   (0.08)	   (0.09)	   (0.10)	   (0.12)	   (0.13)	   (0.15)	  

       𝑀!        -­‐0.10	   -­‐0.08	   0.03	   0.18	   0.38	   0.55	   0.68	   0.72	   0.72	   0.70	  
          𝜇 	  
       𝑌! !" (0.09)	   (0.14)	   (0.18)	   (0.21)	   (0.24)	   (0.25)	   (0.27)	   (0.29)	   (0.29)	   (0.31)	  

                         -­‐0.54	   -­‐1.14	   -­‐1.86	   -­‐2.46	   -­‐2.98	   -­‐3.48	   -­‐3.48	   -­‐3.61	   -­‐3.57	   -­‐3.62	  
              𝜀!" 	  
                         (0.07)	   (0.01)	   (0.12)	   (0.14)	   (0.15)	   (0.17)	   (0.18)	   (0.19)	   (0.19)	   (0.19)	  

              𝑅𝑠𝑞         0.02	        0.04	      0.06	         0.08	         0.10	        0.12	         0.11	         0.10	        0.09	         0.09	  
Note:	  Table	  1	  reports	  estimates	  of	  the	  effect	  of	  the	  three	  explanatory	  variables	  on	  employment	  growth	  
that	   span	   1	   to	   10	   quarters.	   The	   estimation	   period	   is	   1992Q2	   to	   2015Q4.	   The	   first	   row	   reports	   the	  
estimated	   effect	   of	   a	   house	   price	   shock	   over	   the	   normal	   course	   of	   the	   business	   cycle.	   The	   second	   row	  
reports	  the	  estimated	  effect	  of	  a	  house	  price	  shock	  interacted	  with	  the	  mortgage-­‐to-­‐income	  ratio	  during	  
the	  crisis	  period.	  The	  third	  row	  reports	  the	  estimated	  effect	  of	  a	  shock	  to	  financial	  intermediation.	  (See	  
text	   for	   details.)	   For	   all	   three	   explanatory	   variables,	   we	   also	   report	   the	   standard	   deviation	   of	   these	  
estimates	   (in	   parentheses),	   along	   with	   the	   explanatory	   power	   of	   the	   regression,	   as	   measure	   by	   the	   R-­‐
squared	  at	  each	  horizon.	  
	  




                                                                                   30	  
	  
                                   	  
           Figure	  1:	  Sectoral	  Balance	  Sheets	  




       NNet
       Worth




                                 31	  
	  
                                   Figure	  2:	  Debt/Income	  and	  Debt/Assets:	  Households.	  

                                                                                              Debt-to-Assets
                         0.26                                                                 Debt-to-Income (RHS)


                                                                                                                     1.15
                         0.25



                         0.24
                                                                                                                     1.10




                                                                                                                            Debt-to-Income
        Debt-to-Assets




                         0.23



                         0.22                                                                                        1.05



                         0.21

                                                                                                                     1.00

                         0.20



                         0.19                                                                                        0.95


                            2004   2005      2006      2007      2008        2009    2010       2011       2012

       Note: Figure 2 portrays two measures of household leverage: the ratio of household debt-to-inocme (the
       solid line) and the ratio of household debt-to-assets (the dashed line) where the latter includes the market
       values of housing and financial wealth. The shaded area is the time from peak to trough of the Great
       Recession and the vertical line marks the Lehmann Brothers bankruptcy.




                                                                    32	  
	  
                                        Figure	  3:	  Debt/Income	  and	  Debt/Equity:	  Investment	  Banks.	  
                              25.0


                                                                                                                            5500
                              22.5



                              20.0                                                                                          5000




                                                                                                                                   Debt (Billions, 2009 Dollars)
                              17.5
        Debt-to-Book Equity




                                                                                                                            4500


                              15.0

                                                                                                                            4000

                              12.5


                                                                                                                            3500
                              10.0



                               7.5                                                                                          3000

                                          Debt-to-Book Equity
                                          Debt (RHS)
                               5.0
                                 2004        2005         2006     2007       2008      2009       2010       2011       2012

       Note: Figure 3 displays the real value of debt outstanding (the solid line) and the ratio of debt to the book
       value of equity for publicly traded investment banks. The shaded area is the time from peak to trough of
       the Great Recession and the vertical line marks the Lehmann Brothers bankruptcy.




                                                                             33	  
	  
	  

                           Figure	  4:	  Credit	  Spreads	  and	  Economic	  Activity.	  

         2.5
                   Financial EBP
                   Non Financial EBP
                   90-Day ABCP Spread
         2.0



         1.5



         1.0



         0.5



         0.0



         0.5



         1.0

           2006            2007            2008             2009            2010             2011        2012
                                                         Spreads
                                                                                                            0.2
         0.1




         0.0                                                                                                0.0




         0.1
                                                                                                                0.2




         0.2

                                                                                                                0.4

                   GDP
         0.3       Durable Consumption
                   Non-Durable
                   Consumption
                   Producer Durables                                                                            0.6
                   Residential
                   Investment (RHS)
         0.4
           2006            2007            2008             2009            2010             2011        2012
                                                       Real Sector

       Note: The top panel of Figure 4 portrays the behavior of three credit spreads: the 90-day asset-backed
       commercial paper (ABCP) spread,; the Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) excess bond premium (EBP) for
       non-financial companies; and the excess bond premium (EBP) for financial companies. In each case, the
       spread measures the annualized difference between the return on the security and the return on a
       government bond of similar maturity. The lower panel shows the accompanying behavior of the real
       sector, including GDP and four key components: residential investment, consumer durables, producer
       durables and nondurable consumption. (All variables in the lower panel are in logs and indexed to zero in
       2007). The shaded area is the time from peak to trough of the Great Recession and the vertical line marks
       the Lehmann Brothers bankruptcy.


                                                           34	  
	  
	  

                                            Figure	  5:	  Financial	  Sector	  Distress	  and	  Non-­‐Financial	  Firm	  Leverage.	  

                                            2.5
                                                                                                                     Non Financial EBP
                                                                                                                     Non Financial Corporations   75
                                                                                                                     Debt-to-Equity (RHS)
                                            2.0
                                                                                                                                                  70


                                            1.5                                                                                                   65
        Excess Bond Premium (%)




                                                                                                                                                       Debt/Equity (%)
                                            1.0                                                                                                   60



                                                                                                                                                  55
                                            0.5


                                                                                                                                                  50
                                            0.0

                                                                                                                                                  45

                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                  40


                                            1.0
                                              2006          2007            2008             2009           2010            2011              2012
                                                       Excess Bond Premium and Non-Financial Corporate Debt-Equity Ratio

                                                                                                                             Financial EBP
                                            2.0                                                                              Change in Lending    80
                                                                                                                             Standards (RHS)



                                            1.5                                                                                                   60
        Financial Excess Bond Premium (%)




                                            1.0




                                                                                                                                                                  Net Tightening (%)
                                                                                                                                                  40


                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                  20


                                            0.0

                                                                                                                                                  0

                                            0.5


                                                                                                                                                      20
                                            1.0

                                              2006          2007            2008             2009           2010            2011              2012
                                                     Financial Excess Bond Premium and Commercial Bank Lending Standards

       Note: The top panel of Figure 5 plots the debt/equity ratio of the nonfinancial corporate business sector
       alongside the Gilchrist/Zakrajsek excess bond premium for non-financial companies. The lower panel
       plots the excess bond premium for financial companies against the tightness of bank credit measured by
       the change in bank lending standards from the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey of Bank Lending
       Practices. The shaded area is the time from peak to trough of the Great Recession and the vertical line
       marks the Lehmann Brothers bankruptcy.
	  




                                                                                           35	  
	  
                  Figure	  6:	  State-­‐Level	  House	  Prices,	  Mortgage	  Debt,	  and	  Employment.	  
                                                                                                    1.1
         0.0
                                                                                                    1.0
         0.1
                                                                                                    0.9

         0.2
                                                                                                    0.8

         0.3                                                                                        0.7


         0.4                                                                                        0.6


                                                                                                    0.5
         0.5

                                                                                                    0.4
         0.6

           2004     2005   2006   2007    2008   2009     2010     2011    2012    2013               2004      2005   2006         2007   2008   2009   2010    2011   2012   2013
                                           House Prices                                                                               Mortgage-to-Income ratio



        0.00                                                                                       0.00



        0.02                                                                                       0.02



        0.04                                                                                       0.04



        0.06                                                                                       0.06



        0.08                                                                                       0.08



        0.10                                                                                       0.10
           2004     2005   2006   2007    2008   2009     2010     2011    2012    2013               2004      2005   2006         2007   2008   2009   2010    2011   2012   2013
                                         Total Employment                                                                           Non-Construction Employment

                                                                 Top 20%          Next 30%                Bottom 50%          All


       Note: Figure 6 portrays cross-sectional and time series variation of four variables: house prices, the
       mortgage-to-income ratio, employment and nonconstruction employment. The data is quarterly and
       covers the period from 2004-2014. House prices and the employment variables are plotted as percentage
       deviations from the peak. For each variable, we group states into three categories based on the severity of
       the house price contraction from 2006-2010. The first category experienced the largest house price drop
       and accounts for 20 percent of the population, the middle group accounts for 30 percent of the population,
       and the bottom group the remaining 50 percent. The solid line shows the aggregate behavior of each
       variable. The shaded area is the time from peak to trough of the Great Recession and the vertical line
       marks the Lehmann Brothers bankruptcy.
	  




                                                                                          36	  
	  
                     Figure	  7:	  Employment	  Decomposition	  by	  Type	  of	  Shock.	  


            0
            -.02
            -.04
            -.06
            -.08




                             Housing Price
                             Househould Balance Sheet
                             Financial Bond Premium
            -.1




                             Actual (detrended)

              2007q1                        2008q1                        2009q1                        2010q1


       Note: Figure 7 displays the cumulative contribution of each of the three shocks (housing price, household
       balance sheet, and the financial bond premium shocks) to aggregate employment over the period 2007Q1
       to 2010Q1 along with the realize path of aggregate employment (measured as a deviation from a linear
       trend).
	  




                                                          37	  
	  
Appendix

We summarize data sources and details of the estimation behind Table 1 and Figure 7 in
the text.
    Debt-to-book equity and the level of debt for the investment banking sector are
collected from Compustat. These are taken from all firms in the sub-industries that
comprise the broad NAICS code 523, “Securities, Commodity Contracts, and Other
Financial Investments and Related Activities”. Total liabilities (Compustat code: LTQ),
and total assets (Compustat code: ATQ) are summed across firms in the industry at each
point in time. Aggregate book equity is then computed as assets less liabilities.
    In terms of state-level data, house price data are a Purchase Only Index from the
Federal Housing Authority. Mortgage data are from the New York Federal Reserve
Bank/Equifax Consumer Credit Panel (note, this excludes HELOCs). Personal income
data are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Regional Accounts. Employment and
population data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Employment and Unemployment
reports. Employment data for the construction, retail, and manufacturing industries are
obtained from FRED.
    To construct cross-state averages displayed in Figure 6 we compute the house price
depreciation for each state between 2006:Q3 and 2009:Q3. Quantiles of the price
depreciation distribution are computed using population weights from 2009:Q3. For any
given state-level variable, we then compute the cross-state average for states between the
house price depreciation quantiles: 0-20 percent (largest depreciations, 20-50 percent
(moderate depreciations), and 50-100 percent (smallest depreciations).
    With the exception of state-level house prices and the excess financial bond premium
all data relevant for the empirical analysis is available over the period 1990-2016. Data
on state-level house prices begins in 1991:Q1. The excess financial bond premium is
available up until 2012:Q3. Allowing for four lags in quarterly data, we therefore
estimate the house price and financial excess bond premium equations using ordinary
least squares over the period 1992:Q2-2012:Q3. The state house price regression is
estimated as a pooled panel with state-level fixed eﬀects. Observations are weighted
using the state-level mean population over this period as weights. We construct shocks to
house prices and the financial bond premium over these 82 time periods. At each horizon,
we then estimate the local projection with a shifting sample of 82 time periods such that
we may include all available shocks as right hand side variables. Thus for h = 1 the
estimation period for the local projection is 1992:Q3-2012:Q4 whereas for h = 8 the
estimation period is 1994:Q3-2014:Q4. These state-level equations are also estimated as a
pooled least squares regression using the same population weights and allowing for state-
level fixed effects. For h > 1 our local projection uses overlapping data which induces

                                           38	  
	  
serial correlation. Reported standard errors in Table 1 are computed by clustering at the
state level and therefore are robust to arbitrary serial correlation over time. Finally, the
employment data plotted in Figure 7 are detrended over the period 1990:Q2-2014:Q4.
	  




                                            39	  
	  
