                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  A MACROECONOMIC MODEL WITH FINANCIALLY CONSTRAINED PRODUCERS
                      AND INTERMEDIARIES

                                         Vadim Elenev
                                        Tim Landvoigt
                                   Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh

                                     Working Paper 24757
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24757


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2018




We thank our discussants Aubhik Khan, Xiaoji Lin, Simon Gilchrist, Sebastian Di Tella, Michael
Reiter, Pablo Kurlat, Tyler Muir, and Motohiro Yogo, and seminar and conference participants at
the Econometric Society Summer Meeting, the New York Fed, UT Austin, the SED Meetings in
Toulouse, the CEPR Gerzensee Corporate Finance conference, the Swedish Riksbank Conference
on Interconnected Financial Systems, the LAEF conference at Carnegie Mellon University, the
University of Chicago, the University of Houston, the American Finance Association meetings in
Chicago, the Jackson Hole Finance Conference, Ohio State, the NYU macro lunch, Georgetown
University, the FRSB Conference on Macroeconomics, the University of Minnesota, the Federal
Reserve Board, the Macro-Finance Society, CEMFI, the NBER Summer Institute Asset Pricing
meeting, London Business School, the Bank of Canada's Financial Stability and Monetary Policy
conference, MIT Sloan, Boston College, the BI CAPR Conference for Production-based Asset
Pricing, and Catholic University of Leuven for useful comments. We thank Pierre Mabille for
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Vadim Elenev, Tim Landvoigt, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Macroeconomic Model with Financially Constrained Producers and Intermediaries
Vadim Elenev, Tim Landvoigt, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 24757
June 2018
JEL No. E02,E1,E20,E44,E6,G12,G18,G21

                                         ABSTRACT

How much capital should financial intermediaries hold? We propose a general equilibrium model
with a financial sector that makes risky long-term loans to firms, funded by deposits from savers.
Government guarantees create a role for bank capital regulation. The model captures the sharp
and persistent drop in macro-economic aggregates and credit provision as well as the sharp
change in credit spreads observed during the Great Recession. Policies requiring intermediaries to
hold more capital reduce financial fragility, reduce the size of the financial and non-financial
sectors, and locally increase macro-economic volatility. They redistribute wealth from savers to
the owners of banks and non-financial firms. Current capital requirements are close to optimal.


Vadim Elenev                                    Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Johns Hopkins University                        Stern School of Business
100 International Drive                         New York University
Suite 1329                                      44 W 4th Street, Suite 9-120
Baltimore, MD 21202                             New York, NY 10012
velenev@jhu.edu                                 and NBER
                                                svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu
Tim Landvoigt
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
timland@wharton.upenn.edu
1      Introduction

The financial crisis and Great Recession of 2007-09 underscored the importance of the financial
system for the broader economy. Borrower default rates, bank insolvencies, government bailouts
of financial institutions, and credit spreads all spiked while real interest rates were very low. The
disruptions in financial intermediation fed back on the real economy. Consumption, investment,
and output all fell substantially and persistently.

    These events have prompted a vigorous yet unresolved debate among policymakers and aca-
demics on whether the economy would be better off with stricter bank capital requirements.
The December 2017 Minneapolis Plan reflects the Federal Reserve’s view and proposes raising
bank capital requirements to 23.5% of risk-weighted assets, with further increases to 38% for
banks that remain systemically important. In their seminal book, Admati and Hellwig (2013)
propose raising capital requirements to 25% of assets. Larger equity capital buffers would re-
sult in less risk-taking, lower risk of bank failure and concomitant government bailouts, but
also in a smaller banking sector that lends less to the real economy, depressing investment and
output. Considering this trade-off, Admati and Hellwig argue that “for society, there are in
fact significant benefits and essentially no cost from much higher equity requirements.” The
authors of the Minneapolis Plan agree, writing that their plan “will have paid for itself many
times over if it avoids one financial crisis.” This argument is not without controversy in the
academy (Calomeris, 2013) and heavily contested by the industry.

    What is missing in this debate is a quantitative general equilibrium model that embeds a
financial sector in a model of the macro-economy, and that can capture infrequent but large
financial crises. Our paper proposes such a model. In the model, banks extend long-term
loans to firms who invest and are subject to aggregate and idiosyncratic productivity shocks.
Firm default results in losses for their lenders, which can trigger bank default. Even banks
that remain standing become fragile and cut lending to firms. A large and persistent decline
in credit depresses output persistently. The high leverage of banks, which far exceeds that of
firms, amplifies modest credit losses into financial disasters. The nonlinear behavior of credit
spreads reflects this financial distress. The government bails out the creditors of the banks that
fail by issuing government debt, gradually repaid through future taxation. Because financial
intermediaries are constrained in their ability to re-lever and raising new equity from their



                                                 1
shareholders is expensive, the banking sector shrinks substantially and persistently. Real inter-
est rates must fall to induce savers to accommodate the reduction in deposits. Banks’ reduced
ability to absorb aggregate risk in financial crises results in a deterioration of risk sharing and
higher macro-economic volatility. The intermediary-driven dynamics arise in equilibrium since
all aggregate shocks emerge from the real sector.

  The calibrated model matches many features of the data, both in terms of macro-economic
quantities and prices. It matches the average credit spread and its volatility. Faced with a
realistic corporate bond rate, firms choose the observed amount of leverage. The non-financial
leverage ratio is 37%, close to the U.S. data. The model delivers a 93% leverage ratio for financial
firms, a key moment not directly targeted by the calibration, which is close to the data. Debt
is attractive to banks for four reasons. First, debt enjoys a tax shield. Second, the government
guarantees the liabilities of the bank. This guarantee captures not only deposit insurance but
also broader too-big-to-fail guarantees to banks and the rest of the levered financial system.1
Third, banks face equity adjustment costs which increase the cost of equity relative to debt.
Fourth, banks provide a safe asset to patient households with a strong preference for holding
such risk-free assets. While the first motive for debt financing also applies to non-financial firms,
the other three do not. The large wedge between financial and non-financial sector leverage is a
key feature of many developed economies and crucial to understanding systemic risk in society.
The equilibrium fully takes into account that the cost of bank debt changes endogenously with
the safety of the financial sector.

  Our main exercise is to study macro-prudential policy in this environment. We study in-
creasing the minimum bank equity capital requirement from its pre-crisis level of 6% of assets.
Higher capital requirements reduce financial fragility but at the cost of shrinking the economy
and, in some cases, increasing macroeconomic volatility. They are successful at reducing finan-
cial leverage and the bank failure rate. Banks that hold more equity capital become effectively
more risk averse and stay away farther from their regulatory constraint. They also become
smaller, shrinking both assets and liabilities. The charter value of a bank shrinks because
banks with more onerous equity capital requirements have reduced ability to take advantage of
   1
     We use the labels intermediaries and banks interchangeably to mean the entire levered financial sector. That
sector also includes broker-dealers and insurance companies, which are subject to macro-prudential regulation
and enjoy explicit or implicit government guarantees on their liabilities. Appendix C.7 provides a detailed
definition of our intermediary sector.



                                                       2
the low cost of debt.

  Corporate debt also becomes safer and loss rates fall. Firms borrow less and reduce leverage.
Equilibrium credit spreads are higher despite a reduction in loss rates. In other words, the
price of credit increases strongly with bank capital requirements since intermediaries are forced
to move away from cheap deposit financing. Higher credit spreads are consistent with lower
non-financial leverage.

  The reduction in firm and bank bankruptcies is good news for the economy, as it frees up
resources otherwise spent on deadweight losses from bankruptcy. However, firms’ reduced
ability to borrow from smaller banks reduces investment, the capital stock, and output. The
reduced size of the economy is the first adverse effect from tighter macro-prudential policy.

  A second adverse effect is that macro-economic volatility rises, locally, with tighter bank
capital constraints. Two offsetting effects determine macro volatility. First, a reduction in
financial fragility lowers macro-economic volatility. Second, a reduction in risk sharing increases
macro-economic volatility. The latter effect dominates the former as minimum bank equity
increases from 6% to 15% of assets, and macro-economic volatility increases. Increasing bank
equity capital further gradually lowers volatility. Loosening capital requirements from 6%
downward also increases volatility as the fragility effect dominates.

  To rank economies that differ in capital requirement, we calculate welfare for the two types of
households in the model: patient savers who invest in risk-free assets and impatient borrowers
who are the equity holders of the non-financial and financial firms. Tighter capital requirements
redistribute wealth from savers to borrowers. A smaller banking sector reduces deposits and
thereby the wealth of the savers. Borrower-equity holders receive a larger fraction of aggregate
income as banks and firms shift their capital structure towards equity. Thus, perversely, the
owners of the banks gain from tighter regulation. Depending on the aggregation scheme, welfare
maximizing capital requirements are either slightly higher or slightly lower than the pre-crisis
level. A utilitarian social welfare function generates modest positive aggregate welfare gains
from tighter bank equity capital requirements, with gains reaching a maximum at a 9% eq-
uity capital-asset ratio. A tax-and-transfer scheme that induces Pareto improvements instead
suggests that slightly looser capital requirements, at 4%, would be optimal. Current capital
requirement levels are straddled by these two numbers. An alternative counter-cyclical capital
requirement policy that tightens capital requirements in good times and relaxes them in times


                                                3
of financial stress allows for a larger financial sector and for improved risk sharing. Out of the
policies we evaluate, it admits the largest Pareto improvement.

  Our work is at the intersection of macro-economics, asset pricing, corporate finance, and
banking. We contribute to the literature on the role of credit constraints in models of the
macro-economy. Building on early work that emphasized the importance of credit markets in
amplifying business cycle shocks, notably Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996) and Kiyotaki
and Moore (1997), a second generation of models has explored nonlinear dynamics, notably
Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) and He and Krishnamurthy (2013). A first modeling con-
tribution is to separate out the role of producers and banks, while the prior literature usually
combines their roles. Combining balance sheets implicitly assumes that financial intermediaries
hold equity claims in productive firms, while in reality, banks hold debt-like claims. These
debt contracts are subject to default risk of the borrowers.2 Intermediaries help to allocate risk
between borrowers and savers, and their risk-bearing capacity is a key state variable. The sep-
aration of producers and intermediaries not only allows us to generate the large wedge between
financial and non-financial leverage, it also activates a second financial accelerator in addition
to the traditional financial accelerator mechanism. Losses on corporate loans reduce intermedi-
ary net worth, reduce banks’ ability and willingness to extend loans to producers, which hurts
investment and output in the real economy.

  The second new model ingredient is to introduce the possibility of default for financial in-
termediaries, with the government guaranteeing bank debt for savers (deposit insurance). As
Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor (2014) make clear, financial in-
termediaries frequently become insolvent. When they do, their creditors (mostly depositors)
are typically bailed out by the government. The combination of limited liability and govern-
ment guarantees affects banks’ risk taking incentives and creates scope for regulation that limits
bank leverage.3 We model a Basel-style regulatory capital requirement that limits intermediary
   2
     It is well understood that debt-like contracts arise in order to reduce the cost of gathering information
and to mitigate principal-agent problems. See the costly state verification models in the tradition of Townsend
(1979) and Gale and Hellwig (1985), and the work on the information insensitivity of debt by Dang, Gorton,
and Holmstrom (2015). Our debt is non-state contingent which confers the advantage that loan defaults induce
losses for the intermediaries. Costly state verification models also justify the existence of financial intermediaries
who avoid the duplication of verification costs, as in Williamson (1987), Krasa and Villamil (1992), Diamond
(1984). Recent work by Klimenko, Pfeil, Rochet, and Nicolo (2016), Rampini and Viswanathan (2017), and
Gale and Gottardi (2017) also models intermediaries separately from producers. The setting is simpler since
their focus is theoretical; ours is quantitative.
   3
     See Kareken and Wallace (1978), Van den Heuvel (2008), Farhi and Tirole (2012), or Gomes, Grotteria, and



                                                          4
liabilities to a certain fraction of their assets. The minimum regulatory capital that banks must
hold is the key macro-prudential policy parameter. Banks optimally trade off the costs and
benefits of default for their shareholders. Our equilibrium features a counter-cyclical fraction
of banks defaulting, consistent with the data. In case of bank default, the government steps
in, liquidates the bank’s assets and makes whole their creditors. By allowing for the possibility
of bank insolvencies, our model helps explain how a corporate default wave triggers financial
fragility. Intermediaries perform the traditional role of maturity and risk transformation. Most
models in the intermediary literature feature no default on corporate loans.4 Those that do
feature default employ short-term debt, abstracting from a key source of risk associated with
financial intermediation. Long-term debt allows us to realistically model liquidity-based default
of non-financial firms.

  The third key model element is the inclusion of savers who do not participate in risky asset
markets and the endogenous determination of safe asset rates. The data reveal that a large
fraction of households indeed do not participate in risky asset markets. These savers are the
marginal agents in the market for safe debt. With risk averse savers and endogenous safe asset
rates, the dynamics of the model change substantially. In a crisis, intermediaries contract the
size of their balance sheet, reducing the supply of safe assets. This is only partially offset by
an increase in government debt due to counter-cyclical fiscal policy. To clear the market, the
equilibrium real interest rates must fall. The low cost of debt allows the intermediaries to
recapitalize more quickly, dampening the effect of the crisis. More generally, a key question
in the literature is how tighter bank capital regulation affects bank profitability. To answer
this question, one needs to understand how supply and demand in both major markets banks
operate in, the loan market and the market for safe debt, respond in general equilibrium. Our
model endogenously determines supply, demand, and risk in both markets. While the safe debt
issued by banks is guaranteed by the government and therefore risk-free for savers, it is not
risk-free to society due to the possibility of bank default.

  Our paper belongs to the literature on quantitative models of optimal bank regulation, includ-
Wachter (2018). Others justify the presence of bank leverage or net worth constraints by the ability of banks
to divert cash flows, as in Gertler, Kiyotaki, and Queralto (2012).
   4
     For example, Cúrdia and Woodford (2008), Goodfriend and McCallum (2007), Meh and Moran (2010),
and Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014). A few exceptions are Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), Angeloni and
Faia (2013), Hirakata, Sudo, and Ueda (2013), Clerc, Derviz, Mendicino, Moyen, Nikolov, Stracca, Suarez, and
Vardoulakis (2015), and Gete (2016).



                                                     5
ing Van den Heuvel (2008), Nguyen (2015), Begenau (2016), Begenau and Landvoigt (2017),
Corbae and D’Erasmo (2017), and Davydiuk (2017). Relative to the previous literature, we
study a general equilibrium model that features severe financial recessions arising due to the
nonlinear interaction of financial constraints in the production and intermediation sectors. This
allows us to quantify the benefit of preventing such financial crises using regulation. A different
branch of the normative literature instead studies the interactions between conventional and
unconventional monetary policy and financial intermediation.5

  Our work also contributes to the intermediary-based asset pricing literature.6 The model fea-
tures a market for long-term defaultable bonds and for short-term risk-free bonds. It generates
the unconditional credit spread, a puzzle in the asset pricing literature (Chen, 2010). It also
generates the volatility and counter-cyclicality of that spread, consistent with patterns docu-
mented by Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017). For the observed amount of credit risk, substantial
variation in intermediary wealth generates a high enough price of credit risk. The (shadow)
stochastic discount factor of the intermediaries, driven by the intermediary net worth dynamics,
is volatile and counter-cyclical.

  We also contribute to the literature on second-moment shocks to firm productivity, since a
key shock in our model is an increase in the cross-sectional dispersion of firm-level productivity
growth.7 In our setup, these shocks cause costly firm defaults and intermediary losses, which
in turn lead to lower credit supply and investment. This is a complementary mechanism to
the inaction effect of Bloom (2009), where increased uncertainty causes depressed investment
because of fixed costs. Alfaro, Bloom, and Lin (2016) study how financial frictions amplify the
effect of uncertainty shocks on investment and hiring.

  More broadly, our model creates room for macro-prudential regulation due to incomplete
   5
     See Gertler and Karadi (2011), Angeloni and Faia (2013), Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2017b, 2017a),
Cúrdia and Woodford (2016), Del Negro, Eggertsson, Ferrero, and Kiyotaki (2016), Elenev (2016), and De
Fiore, Hoerova, and Uhlig (2017).
   6
     In addition to the work cited above, notable contributions are He and Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013, 2014),
Gârleanu and Pedersen (2011), Adrian and Boyarchenko (2012), Maggiori (2013), and Moreira and Savov (2016).
On the empirical side, He, Kelly, and Manela (2017) develop a risk factor which captures the systematic risk
associated with declines in intermediary equity capital, and Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014) document that
intermediary leverage performs well in pricing the cross-section of stock returns.
   7
     The shock is calibrated from firm-level evidence in Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten, and Terry
(2012). Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014) introduce a similar “risk” shock and argue it is an important
driver of business cycle dynamics. Jermann and Quadrini (2012) study how financial shocks affect balance sheet
variables. One interpretation of our uncertainty shocks is as aggregate misallocation shocks, as in Hsieh and
Klenow (2009). Ai, Li, and Yang (2016) study the role of intermediaries in reducing capital misallocation.



                                                      6
markets and borrowing constraints.8 Our model is set up to study imperfect risk sharing
between borrower, saver, and intermediation sectors. The only purpose of heterogeneity within
the borrower sector and within the intermediary sector is to generate fractional default.

    Finally, our paper contributes in its solution technique. The model has two exogenous and
persistent sources of aggregate risk and five endogenous aggregate state variables, which capture
the wealth distribution. It features default and occasionally binding borrowing constraints in
both non-financial and financial sectors. To solve this problem, we provide a nonlinear global
solution method. The algorithm, detailed in computational appendix B, solves for a set of
nonlinear equations including the Euler, Kuhn-Tucker, and market clearing equations.

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the model setup. Section 3
presents the calibration. Section 4 contains the main results. Section 5 uses the model to study
various macro-prudential policies. Section 6 concludes. All model derivations, some details on
the calibration, and some additional quantitative results are relegated to the appendix.



2       The Model

2.1      Preferences, Technology, Timing

Preferences The model features two groups of households: borrower-entrepreneurs (de-
noted by superscript B) and savers (denoted by S). Savers are more patient than borrower-
entrepreneurs, implying for the discount factors that βB < βS . All agents have Epstein-Zin
preferences over utility streams {ujt }∞
                                       t=0 with intertemporal elasticity of substitution νj and risk

aversion σ j                                                                  1
                                                       j 1−σj  1−1/ν
                                                                       j
                                                                           1−1/ν
                                                                                 j
                                      j 1−1/νj
                   Utj
                                        
                         = (1 − βj ) ut        + βj Et (Ut+1 )     1−σj
                                                                                   ,                        (1)

for j = B, S. Agents derive utility from consumption of the economy’s sole good, such that
ujt = Ctj , for j = B, S.
    8
    Papers that have studied the qualitative role of these frictions in determining optimal policy are Lorenzoni
(2008), Mendoza (2010), Korinek (2012), Bianchi and Mendoza (2013), Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2015), and
Clerc et. al. (2015).




                                                       7
Technology Non-financial firms, or firms for short, operate the production technology, which
turns capital and labor into aggregate output:


                                       Yt = ZtA Kt1−α Lαt ,                                   (2)


where Kt is capital, Lt is labor, and ZtA is total factor productivity (TFP). Shocks to Z A are
the first source of aggregate risk in the model. In addition to the technology for producing
consumption goods, firms also have access to a technology that turns consumption into capital
goods subject to adjustment costs.

  Firms are funded by long-term corporate debt issued by intermediaries, and by equity pro-
vided by borrower-entrepreneurs. There are no frictions associated with changing the equity
capital of non-financial firms. This is equivalent to assuming that borrower-entrepreneurs hold
the firms’ capital stock directly.

  Financial intermediaries, or banks for short, are profit-maximizing firms that extend loans
to non-financial firms. They fund these loans through deposits that they issue to savers and
equity capital that they raise from borrower-entrepreneurs. Banks face equity issuance costs,
an important financial friction described in detail below.

  We assume that savers only hold risk-free assets to capture the reality of limited participation
in risky asset markets. The provision of safe assets to savers is an important function of the
intermediary sector. Borrower-entrepreneurs and savers are endowed with L̄B and L̄S units of
labor, respectively. Both types of households supply their labor endowment inelastically.

  As explained below, both firms and banks face idiosyncratic shocks. This within-type het-
erogeneity allows us to capture fractional default. Perfect within-type risk sharing implies
no further implications from within-type heterogeneity, and allows us to focus on incomplete
risk-sharing between types.

  Figure 1 illustrates the balance sheets of the model’s agents and their interactions. Each
agent’s problem depends on the wealth of others; the entire wealth distribution is a state
variable. Each agent must forecast how that state variable evolves, including the bankruptcy
decisions of borrowers and intermediaries.


Timing The timing of agents’ decisions at the beginning of period t is as follows:


                                                 8
                   Figure 1: Overview of Balance Sheets of Model Agents

                                                     Firms
                                                                                   Households
                                       Producers
              Production,
                                                                Borrower-entrepreneurs
              Investment                      Producer
                                               Equity
                                                                  Producer
                                  Capital
                                                                  Equity      Own Funds
                                  Stock
                                             Corporate
                                               Debt               I. Equity




                                        Intermediaries
                                              I. Equity
                                                                          Savers
                                 Corporate
                                   Debt      Deposits
                                                                 Deposits
            Government
                                                                              Own Funds
                    Bailouts                                     Gov. Debt
         NPV of
          Tax
        Revenues   Gov. Debt




  1. Aggregate and idiosyncratic productivity shocks for firms are realized. Production occurs.
     Idiosyncratic profit shocks for banks are realized.

  2. Firms with low idiosyncratic productivity realizations default. Banks assume ownership
     of bankrupt firms.

  3. Individual intermediaries decide whether to declare bankruptcy. The government liqui-
     dates bankrupt intermediaries. If intermediary assets are insufficient to cover the amount
     owed to depositors, the government provides the shortfall (deposit insurance).

  4. All agents solve their consumption and portfolio choice problems. Markets clear. House-
     holds consume.

  We now describe the saver, borrower-entrepreneur, and intermediary problems in more detail.
A full set of Bellman equations and first order conditions is relegated to appendix A.




                                                9
2.2    Savers

Savers can invest in one-period risk free bonds (deposits and government debt) that trade at
price qtf . They inelastically supply their unit of labor L̄S and earn wage wtS . Entering with
wealth WtS , the saver’s problem is to choose consumption CtS and short-term bonds BtS to
maximize life-time utility UtS in (1), subject to the budget constraint:


                   CtS + (qtf + τ D rtf )BtS ≤ WtS + (1 − τtS )wtS L̄S + GT,S
                                                                          t   + OtS ,         (3)


where saver wealth is simply given by the face value of last period’s bond purchases WtS = Bt−1
                                                                                            S
                                                                                                .
The budget constraint (3) shows that savers use beginning-of-period wealth, after-tax labor
income, transfer income from the government (GT,S
                                              t ), and transfer income from bankruptcy

proceedings (OtS ) to be defined below, to pay for consumption and purchases of short-term
bonds. Savers are taxed on interest rate income at the time they purchase the bonds at rate
τ D . The risk-free interest rate is the yield on risk free bonds, rtf = 1/qtf − 1.


2.3    Borrower-Entrepreneurs and Firms

There is a unit-mass of identical borrower-entrepreneurs indexed by i. The borrowers form a
collective (“family”) that provides insurance against idiosyncratic shocks.

  Each entrepreneur owns a technology, a firm, that creates consumption goods Yi,t from cap-
ital Ki,t and labor Li,t . At the beginning of the period, each firm receives an idiosyncratic
productivity shock ωi,t ∼ Fω,t . Output depends on aggregate productivity ZtA and idiosyn-
cratic productivity ωit :
                                                        1−α α
                                       Yi,t = ωi,t ZtA Ki,t Li,t .

The ωi,t -shocks are uncorrelated across firms and time. However, the cross-sectional dispersion
of the ω-shocks varies over time; specifically, σω,t follows a first-order Markov process. Produc-
tivity dispersion is the second exogenous source of aggregate risk in the model. We refer to
changes in σω,t as uncertainty shocks.

  While each individual entrepreneur manages her own firm’s production, the family manages
the allocation of production inputs and consumption and issues debt to intermediaries. Because
all firms are identical at the start of each period, they are given the same capital, labor, and

                                                   10
debt allocation. Corporate debt is long-term, modeled as perpetuity bonds. Bond coupon
payments decline geometrically, {1, δ, δ 2 , . . .}, where δ captures the duration of the bond. We
                                θ
define a “face value” F =      1−δ
                                     as a fixed fraction θ of all repayments for each bond issued. Per
                                                           1−θ
definition, interest payments are the remainder            1−δ
                                                               .

  At the beginning of the period, the family jointly holds KtB units of capital, and has AB
                                                                                          t

bonds outstanding. Producers jointly hire their own labor and the labor of savers, denoted by
Ljt , with j = B, S. During production, the labor inputs of the two types are combined into
aggregate labor:
                                             Lt = (LB
                                                    t )
                                                       1−γS
                                                            (LSt )γS .

Before idiosyncratic productivity shocks are realized, each producer is given the same amount
of capital and labor for production, such that Ki,t = KtB and Li,t = Lt . Further, each producer
is responsible for repaying the coupon on an equal share of the total debt, Ai,t = AB
                                                                                    t .

  The individual profit of producer i is therefore given by:

                                                                   X
                               πi,t = ωi,t ZtA (KtB )1−α Lαt −         wtj Ljt − AB
                                                                                  t .                         (4)
                                                                   j


After production, each producer who achieves a sufficiently high profit, πi,t ≥ π, returns this
profit to the family, where π is a parameter. Further, capital depreciates during production
by fraction δK , and individual members with profit above the threshold return the depreciated
capital after production. Producers with πi,t < π default on the share of debt they were
allocated. The debt is erased, and the intermediary takes ownership of the bankrupt firm,
including its share of the capital stock. The intermediary liquidates the bankrupt firms’ capital,
seizes their output, and pays their wage bill. The remaining funds are the intermediary’s
recovery value.9 In return for production, each family member receives the same amount of
consumption goods Ci,t = CtB .

  From (4), it immediately follows that there exists a cutoff productivity shock:
                                                      P       j j      B
                                                 π+    j=B,S wt Lt + At
                                       ωt∗   =                           ,                                    (5)
                                                  ZtA (KtB )1−α (Lt )α
  9
    Our model of liquidity default of firms fits the data much better than a model of strategic default for firms,
which we explored in an earlier version of this paper.




                                                          11
such that all entrepreneurs receiving productivity shocks below this cutoff default on their debt.

  Using the threshold level ωt∗ , we define ΩA (ωt∗ ) to be the fraction of debt repaid to lenders
and ΩK (ωt∗ ) to be the average productivity of the firms that do not default:


                                 ΩA (ωt∗ ) = Pr[ωi,t ≥ ωt∗ ],                                                            (6)

                                 ΩK (ωt∗ ) = Pr[ωi,t ≥ ωt∗ ] E[ωi,t | ωi,t ≥ ωt∗ ].                                      (7)


After making a coupon payment of 1 per unit of remaining outstanding debt, the amount of
outstanding debt declines to δΩA (ωt∗ ) AB
                                         t .

  The total profit of the producers’ business is subject to a corporate profit tax with rate τΠB .
The profit for tax purposes is defined as sales revenue net of labor expenses, capital depreciation,
and interest payments of non-bankrupt producers:10
                                                                                                                 !
                                                                   X
        ΠB,τ
         t     =   ΩK (ωt∗ )ZtA (KtB )1−α (Lt )α   −   ΩA (ωt∗ )       wtj Ljt   +   δK pt KtB   + (1 −   θ)AB
                                                                                                             t       .
                                                                   j


The fact that interest expenditure (1 − θ)AB
                                           t is deducted from taxable profit creates a “tax

shield” and hence a preference for debt funding.

  In addition to producing consumption goods, firms jointly create capital goods from con-
sumption goods. In order to create Xt new capital units, the required input of consumption
goods is Xt + Ψ(Xt /KtB )KtB , with adjustment cost function Ψ(·) which satisfies Ψ00 (·) > 0,
Ψ(δK ) = 0, and Ψ0 (δK ) = 0.

  Borrower-entrepreneurs further own all equity shares of the intermediary sector. Each period,
they receive an effective dividend DtI from intermediaries, to be defined below in equation (14).

  The borrower-entrepreneur family’s problem is to choose consumption CtB , capital for next
        B                                                     j
period Kt+1 , new debt AB
                        t+1 , investment Xt and labor inputs Lt to maximize life-time utility

  10
    Aggregate producer profit is the integral over the idiosyncratic profit (4) of non-defaulting producers, net
of capital depreciation expenses and adding back principal payments θAB  t which are not tax deductible.




                                                           12
UtB in (1), subject to the budget constraint:

                                                                                    X
   CtB +Xt + Ψ(Xt /KtB )KtB + ΩA (ωt∗ )AB        m         B          ∗
                                        t (1 + δqt ) + pt Kt+1 + ΩA (ωt )                  wtj Ljt + τΠB ΠB,τ
                                                                                                          t
                                                                                   j=B,S

        ≤ ΩK (ωt∗ )ZtA (KtB )1−α (Lt )α + (1 − τtB )wtB L̄B + pt (Xt + ΩA (ωt∗ )(1 − δK )KtB )
                               T,B
           + DtI + qtm AB
                        t+1 + Gt   + OtB ,                                                                      (8)


  The borrower household receives output, after-tax labor income, sales of old (KtB ) and newly
produced (Xt ) capital units, dividends from the intermediation sector (DtI ), new debt raised
(qtm AB             m
      t+1 ), where qt is the price of one bond in terms of the consumption good, transfer income

from the government (GT,B
                      t   ), and transfer income from bankruptcy proceedings (OtB ). These
resources are used to pay for consumption, investment including adjustment costs, debt service,
new capital purchases, wages, and corporate taxes.

  Costly defaults of individual borrowers who receive bad idiosyncratic shocks endogenously
limit the optimal leverage of the borrower family. Borrowers take into account that each
marginal unit of debt issued in t increases costly defaults in t + 1.11 Corporate leverage is
driven by the classic trade-off between costs of financial distress and benefits from the tax
shield.


2.4       Intermediaries

2.4.1     Setup

Intermediaries (“banks”) are financial firms that buy long-term risky corporate debt issued by
producers (AIt ) and use this debt as collateral to issue short-term debt to savers (BtI ). They
maximize the present discounted value of net dividend payments dIt to their shareholders, the
borrower-entrepreneurs. There are two important frictions in the banking sector:

   1. Moving equity into or out of banks is costly, i.e. paying a (positive or negative) dividend
        dIt is subject to a cost Σ(dIt ) that is convex in deviation of dIt from a target level. The
        total cost of paying out dividend dIt is dIt + Σ(dIt ) for the intermediary.
  11
     The full model in the appendix adds a hard borrowing constraint for firms. The model is calibrated so that
this constraint is rarely binding; the constraint plays a minor role for the results. See Appendix C.3.



                                                      13
   2. Limited liability. Intermediaries receive idiosyncratic profit shocks It , realized at the time
       of dividend payouts. The net dividend received by the shareholders is dIt − It . The profit
       shocks are i.i.d. across banks and time with E(It ) = 0 and c.d.f. F .12 Intermediaries
       optimally decide to default on their liabilities. Intermediary debt is guaranteed by the
       government (deposit insurance or TBTF guarantees) and therefore risk-free.

  The coupon payment on performing loans in the current period is AIt ΩA (ωt∗ ). For firms that
default and enter into foreclosure, banks repossess the firms, sell current period’s output, pay
current period’s wages, and sell off the assets. Payments on defaulted bonds are:

                                                                                            X j j
Mt = (1−ζ) (1 − ΩA (ωt∗ ))(1 − δK )pt KtB + (1 − ΩK (ωt∗ ))ZtA (KtB )1−α Lαt −(1−ΩA (ωt∗ ))
                                                                           
                                                                                             wt Lt ,
                                                                                                      j
                                                                                                           (9)
where ζ is the fraction of capital value and output lost in bankruptcy.

  At the beginning of the period, after aggregate and idiosyncratic productivity shocks are
realized and a fraction 1 − ΩA (ωt∗ ) of firms has defaulted, the wealth (net worth) of a bank is:


                                WtI = ΩA (ωt∗ )(1 + δqtm )AIt + Mt + Bt−1
                                                                      I
                                                                          .                               (10)


Each intermediary optimally decides on bankruptcy, conditional on the realization of WtI
and the idiosyncratic profit shock It . Bankrupt intermediaries are liquidated by the govern-
ment, which redeems deposits at par value. Immediately thereafter, shareholders (borrower-
entrepreneurs) replace all bankrupt intermediaries with new banks that receive initial equity
equal to that of the non-defaulting banks, WtI . This ensures that at the time of the dividend
payout and portfolio decisions, all banks have identical wealth and face identical decision prob-
lems. In appendix A.2.1, we show more formally that given our assumptions, the problem
reduces to that of a representative intermediary with wealth WtI .

  In addition to making loans, intermediaries can trade in short-term bonds with savers and the
government. They are allowed to take a short position in these bonds (issuing deposits), using
their loans to borrower-entrepreneurs as collateral. Intermediary debt is subject to a leverage
  12
    The idiosyncratic shocks to bank profitability capture unmodeled heterogeneity in bank portfolios, such as
that resulting from differences in credit quality across banks’ loan portfolios or from differences in consumer
lending. Technically, the assumption guarantees that there is always a fraction of banks which defaults. The
shocks only affect the dividend payout, but have no effect on bank net worth going forward.



                                                      14
constraint:
                                                       − qtf BtI ≤ ξqtm AIt+1 .                              (11)

A negative position in the short-term bond must be collateralized by banks’ loan portfolio.
The parameter ξ determines how much debt can be issued against a dollar of assets. The
constraint (11) is a Basel-style regulatory bank capital constraint. The parameter ξ is the key
macro-prudential policy parameter in the paper. We have chosen to have market prices on the
right-hand side of (11) because levered financial intermediaries face regulatory constraints that
depend on market prices.13

  Intermediaries are subject to corporate profit taxes at rate τΠI . Their profit for tax purposes
is defined as the net interest income on their loan business:


                                             ΠIt = (1 − θ)ΩA (ωt∗ )AIt + rtf BtI .


They need to pay a deposit insurance fee κ to the government that is proportional to the amount
of short-term bonds they issue. Banks’ leverage choice is affected by the same tax benefit and
cost of distress trade-off faced by firms. Additionally, banks enjoy deposit insurance, face costly
equity issuance, and provide safe assets to patient households.


2.4.2    Recursive Intermediary Problem

Denote by StI the vector of aggregate state variables exogenous to the problem of intermediaries.
After default decisions and recapitalizations have taken place, all intermediaries face the same
optimization problem (see appendix A.2.1 for details):


              VtI (WtI , StI ) =                     dIt + Et MB
                                                                        I   I     I        I
                                                                                                     
                                      max                      t,t+1 max V (Wt+1 , St+1 ) − t+1 , 0   ,     (12)
                                   dIt ,BtI ,AIt+1


subject to the budget constraint:


                        dIt + Σ(dIt ) + qtm AIt+1 + (qtf − I{BtI <0} κ)BtI + τΠI ΠIt ≤ WtI ,                 (13)
  13
    Insurance companies face such constraints as part of the Solvency II regime, broker-dealers face value-at-risk
constraints, and market prices affect bank regulation through their effect on risk weights. Further, note that
bank loans are marked-to-market each period in the model.




                                                                 15
the regulatory capital constraint (11), and the definition of wealth (10). The continuation
value in the objective function (12) reflects that the value of the bank in case of default is
zero. Intermediaries discount future payoffs by MB
                                                 t,t+1 , which is the stochastic discount factor

of borrowers, their equity holders.


2.4.3   Aggregation and Government Bailouts

The aggregate net dividend paid by the banking sector is:


                    DtI =      F (dI − I,− )            +           (1 − F,t )(dIt − WtI )
                               | ,t t{z t }                         |         {z         }
                            Dividend of non-defaulters       Dividend of defaulters net of initial equity

                        =dIt − F,t I,−
                                     t   − (1 − F,t )WtI ,                                                 (14)


where F,t is the mass of non-defaulting banks and I,−
                                                    t   = E ( |  ≤ V I (WtI , StI )), is the ex-
pected idiosyncratic loss conditional on not defaulting. The last term represents the cost to
shareholders of recapitalizing defaulted banks, from zero net worth post-bailout to the same
positive net worth of the non-defaulted banks.

  Defaulting intermediaries are liquidated by the government. During the bankruptcy process,
a fraction ζ of the asset value of a bank is lost. Hence the aggregate bailout payment of the
government is:

                                       h                                            i
                 bailoutt = (1 − F,t ) I,+
                                         t   − Wt
                                                 I
                                                   + ζ(ΩA (ω ∗
                                                             t )(1 + δqt
                                                                        m
                                                                          )AI
                                                                            t + Mt )  .                     (15)


The conditional expectation, I,+
                              t   = E ( |  ≥ V I (WtI , StI )), is the expected idiosyncratic loss of
defaulting intermediaries.


2.4.4   Aggregate Bankruptcy Costs

Default of producing firms and intermediaries causes bankruptcy losses. When firms default,
a fraction ζ of their capital value and output is lost to banks, see equation (9). Similarly,
when banks default, a fraction ζ of their asset value is lost to the government, see equation
(15). We assume that only a fraction η of this total loss from bankruptcy is a deadweight loss
to society while the remainder is rebated to the households in proportion to their population


                                                             16
shares. These are the Oti terms in the budget constraints (3) and (8):


      OtB + OtS = ζ(1 − η) (1 − ΩA (ωt∗ ))(1 − δK )pt KtB + (1 − ΩK (ωt∗ ))ZtA (KtB )1−α Lαt
                                                                                            

                            +ζ(1 − η)(1 − F,t ) ΩA (ωt∗ )(1 + δqtm )AIt + Mt .
                                                                              
                                                                                                 (16)


This can be interpreted as income payments to the actors involved in bankruptcy cases. We
avoid the strong assumption that all bankruptcy costs are deadweight losses to society.


2.5    Government

The actions of the government are determined via fiscal rules: taxation, spending, bailout, and
debt issuance policies. Government tax revenues, Tt , are labor income tax, non-financial and
financial profit tax, deposit income tax, and deposit insurance fee receipts:

                          X
                   Tt =           τtj wtj Ljt + τΠB ΠB    I I     D f S                I
                                                     t + τΠ Πt + τ rt Bt − I{BtI <0} κBt
                          j=B,S


Government expenditures, Gt are the sum of exogenous government spending, Got , transfer
spending GTt , and financial sector bailouts:


                                   Gt = Got + GT,B
                                               t   + GT,S
                                                      t   + bailoutt .


  The government issues one-period risk-free debt. Debt repayments and government expendi-
tures are financed by new debt issuance and tax revenues, resulting in the budget constraint:

                                           G
                                          Bt−1 + Gt ≤ qtf BtG + Tt                               (17)


We impose a transversality condition on government debt:

                                                         G
                                         lim Et MSt,t+u Bt+u
                                                            
                                                               =0
                                         u→∞


where MS is the SDF of the saver. Because of its unique ability to tax, the government can
spread out the cost of default waves and financial sector rescue operations over time.
                                                                          
  Government policy parameters are Θt = τti , τΠi , τ D , Got , GT,i
                                                                 t   , ξ, κ  . The capital requirement

                                                     17
ξ in equation (11) and the deposit insurance fee κ are macro-prudential policy tools.


2.6     Equilibrium

Given a sequence of aggregate productivity shocks {ZtA , σω,t }, idiosyncratic productivity shocks
{ωt,i }i∈B , and idiosyncratic intermediary profit shocks {t,i }i∈I , and given a government policy
                                                                           j
Θt , a competitive equilibrium is an allocation {CtB , Kt+1
                                                        B
                                                            , Xt , AB
                                                                    t+1 , Lt } for borrower-entrepreneurs,

{CtS , BtS } for savers, {dIt , AIt+1 , BtI } for intermediaries, and a price vector {pt , qtm , qtf , wtB , wtS },
such that given the prices, borrower-entrepreneurs and savers maximize life-time utility, in-
termediaries maximize shareholder value, the government satisfies its budget constraint, and
markets clear. The market clearing conditions are:


           Risk-free bonds: BtG = BtS + BtI                                                                   (18)

                      Loans: AB      I
                              t+1 = At+1                                                                      (19)
                              B
                    Capital: Kt+1 = (1 − δK )KtB + Xt                                                         (20)

                      Labor: Ljt = L̄j for all j = B, S                                                       (21)

             Consumption: Yt = CtB + CtS + Got + Xt + KtB Ψ(Xt /KtB ) + Σ(dIt ) + DW Lt                       (22)


The last equation is the economy’s resource constraint. It states that total output (GDP) equals
the sum of aggregate consumption, discretionary government spending, investment including
capital adjustment costs, bank equity adjustment costs, and aggregate resource losses from
                                                                                    η
corporate and intermediary bankruptcies. The DW Lt term equals                     1−η
                                                                                       (OtB   + OtS ), as defined
in (16).


2.7     Welfare

In order to compare economies that differ in the policy parameter vector Θt , we must take a
stance on how to weigh the two households, borrowers and savers. We propose two different
measures of aggregate welfare. First, we compute an ex-post utilitarian social welfare function
summing value functions of the agents:


                                          Wtpop (·; Θt ) = VtB + VtS ,


                                                        18
where the V j (·) functions are the value functions defined in the appendix. The value functions
already incorporate the mass of agents of each type (population shares `i ).

  Second, we compute an ex-ante measure of welfare based on compensating variation similar
to Alvarez and Jermann (2005). Consider the equilibrium of two different economies k = 0, 1,
characterized by policy vectors Θ0 and Θ1 , and denote expected lifetime utility at time 0 for
agent j in economy k by V̄ j,k = E0 [V1j (·; Θk )]. Denote the time-0 price of the consumption
stream of agent j in economy k by:
                                               "   ∞
                                                                   #
                                                   X
                                 P̄ j,k = E0             Mj,k    j,k
                                                          t,t+1 Ct+1 ,
                                                   t=0


where Mj,k
       t,t+1 is the SDF of agent j in economy k. The percentage welfare gain for agent j from

living in economy Θ1 relative to economy Θ0 , in expectation, is:

                                                     V̄ j,1
                                        ∆V̄ j =             − 1.
                                                     V̄ j,0

Since the value functions are expressed in consumption units, we can multiply these welfare
gains with the time-0 prices of consumption streams in the Θ0 economy and add up:


                                W cev = ∆V̄ B P̄ B,0 + ∆V̄ S P̄ S,0 .


This measure is the minimum one-time wealth transfer in the Θ0 economy (the benchmark)
required to make agents at least as well off as in the Θ1 economy (the alternative). If this
number is positive, a transfer scheme can be implemented to make the alternative economy a
Pareto improvement. If this number is negative, such a scheme cannot be implemented because
it would require a bigger transfer to one agent than the other is willing to give up.

  We solve the model using projection-based numerical methods and provide a detailed de-
scription of the globally nonlinear algorithm in appendix B.




                                                    19
3      Calibration

The model is calibrated at annual frequency. The parameters of the model and their targets
are summarized in Table 1. Appendix C.1 conducts a parameter sensitivity analysis of the
type suggested by Andrews, Gentzkow, and Shapiro (2017) that helps clarify what moments
structurally identify what parameters.


Aggregate Productivity Following the macro-economics literature, the TFP process ZtA
follows an AR(1) in logs with persistence parameter ρA and innovation volatility σ A . Because
TFP is persistent, it becomes a state variable. We discretize ZtA into a 5-state Markov chain
using the Rouwenhorst (1995) method. The procedure chooses the productivity grid points
and the transition probabilities between them to match the volatility and persistence of HP-
detrended GDP. GDP is endogenously determined but heavily influenced by TFP. Consistent
with the model, our measurement of GDP excludes net exports and government investment.
We define the GDP deflator correspondingly. Observed real per capita HP-detrended GDP has
a volatility of 2.53% and its persistence is 0.55. The model generates a volatility of 2.43% and
a persistence of 0.55.


Idiosyncratic Productivity We calibrate the firm-level productivity risk directly to the
micro evidence. We normalize the mean of idiosyncratic productivity at µω = 1. We let
the cross-sectional standard deviation of idiosyncratic productivity shocks σt,ω follow a 2-state
Markov chain, with four parameters. Fluctuations in σt,ω govern aggregate corporate credit
risk since high levels of σt,ω cause a larger left tail of low-productivity firms to default in
equilibrium. We refer to periods in the high σt,ω state as high uncertainty periods. We set
(σL,ω , σH,ω ) = (0.095, 0.175). The value for σL,ω targets the unconditional mean corporate
default rate. The model-implied average default rate of 2.2% is similar to the data.14 The
high value, σH,ω , is chosen to match the time-series standard deviation of the cross-sectional
interquartile range of firm productivity, which is 4.9% according to Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich,
  14
    We look at two sources of data: corporate loans and corporate bonds. From the Federal Reserve Board
of Governors, we obtain delinquency and charge-off rates on Commercial and Industrial loans and Commercial
Real Estate loans by U.S. Commercial Banks for the period 1991-2015. The average delinquency rate is 3.1%.
The second source of data is Standard & Poors’ default rates on publicly-rated corporate bonds for 1981-2014.
The average default rate is 1.5%; 0.1% on investment-grade bonds and 4.1% on high-yield bonds. The model is
in between these two values.


                                                     20
Saporta-Eksten, and Terry (2012) (their Table 6). The transition probabilities from the low to
the high uncertainty state of 9% and from the high to the low state of 20% are also taken directly
from Bloom et al. (2012).15 The model spends 31% of periods in the high uncertainty regime.
Like in Bloom et al., our uncertainty process is independent of the first-moment shocks. About
10% of periods feature both high uncertainty and low TFP realizations. We will refer to those
periods as financial recessions or financial crises, since those periods will feature (endogenous)
financial fragility in the equilibrium of the model. Using a long time series for the U.S., Reinhart
and Rogoff (2009) find the same 10% frequency of financial crises.


Production Adjustment costs are quadratic. We set the marginal adjustment cost parameter
ψ = 2 in order to match the observed volatility of the ratio of investment to GDP, X/Y , of
1.58%. The model generates a value of 1.56%. The adjustment costs on average amount to
0.04% of GDP. We set the parameter α in the Cobb-Douglas production function equal to 0.71,
which yields an overall labor income share of 65%, the standard value in the business cycle
literature. We choose an annual depreciation of capital δK of 8% to match the investment-to-
output ratio of 18% observed in the data.


Population and Labor Income Shares To pin down the population shares of our two dif-
ferent types of households we turn to the Survey of Consumer Finance (SCF). We use all survey
waves from 1995 until 2013 and average across them. We compute for each SCF household the
share of assets (excluding real estate) held in stocks or private business equity, considering both
direct and indirect holdings of stock. Using this definition of the risky share, we then calculate
the fraction of households whose risky share is less than one percent. This amounts to 69%
of SCF households. These are the savers in our model who hold only safe assets (`S ). The
remaining `B = 31% of households have a nontrivial risky asset share. The labor income share
of savers in the SCF is 60%. The income share of the borrower-entrepreneurs is the remaining
40%. The income shares determine the Cobb-Douglas parameters γB and γS .


Corporate Loans In the model, a corporate loan is a geometric bond. The issuer of one
unit of the bond at time t promises to pay 1 at time t + 1, δ at time t + 2, δ 2 at time t + 3, and
  15
    They estimate a two-state Markov chain for the cross-sectional standard deviation of establishment-level
productivity using annual data for 1972-2010 from the Census of Manufactures and Annual Survey of Manufac-
tures. We annualize their quarterly transition probability matrix.


                                                    21
                                        Table 1: Calibration

  Par       Description                             Value Target
                                                 Exogenous Shocks
    ρA      persistence TFP                            0.7 AC(1) HP-detr GDP 53-14 of 0.55
    σA      innov. vol. TFP                          2.0% Vol HP-detr GDP 53-14 of 2.56%
   σω,L     low uncertainty                         0.095 Avg. corporate default rate of 2%
   σω,H     high uncertainty                        0.175 Avg. IQR firm-level productivity (Bloom et al. (2012))
pω     ω
 LL , pHH   transition prob                  {0.91, 0.80} Bloom et al. (2012)
                                    Production, Population, Labor Income Shares
    ψ       marginal adjustment cost                     2 Vol. investment-to-GDP ratio 53-14 of 1.58%
    α       labor share in prod. fct.                 0.71 Labor share of output of 2/3
   δK       capital depreciation rate                  8% Investment-to-capital ratio, 53-14
    `i      pop. shares i ∈ {S, B}              {69,31}% Population shares SCF 95-13
   γi       inc. shares i ∈ {S, B}              {60,40}% Labor inc. shares SCF 95-13
                                        Corporate loans and Intermediation
   δ        average life loan pool                  0.937 Duration fcn. in App. C.2
   θ        principal fraction                      0.582 Duration fcn. in App. C.2
   ζ        Losses in bankruptcy                       0.6 Corporate loan and bond severities 81-15 of 44%
   η        % bankr. loss is DWL                       0.2 Bris, Welch, and Zhu (2006)
   Φ        maximum LTV ratio                         0.45 App. C.3
   π        profit default threshold                  0.04 FoF non-fin sector leverage 85-14 of 37%
                                     I
   σ       cross-sect. dispersion t               0.025 FDIC failure rate of deposit. inst. of 0.5%
   σI       marg. dividend payout cost                   5 avg. credit spread of 2.05%
                                                     Preferences
   βB       time discount factor B                  0.931 Capital-to-GDP ratio 53-14 of 2.24
   βS       time discount factor S                  0.982 Mean risk-free rate 76-14 of 2.2%
σ = σS
 B
            risk aversion B & S                          1 Log utility
νB = νS     IES B & S                                    1 Log utility
                                                 Government Policy
   Go       discr. spending                       17.17% BEA discr. spending to GDP 53-14 of 17.58%
   GT       transfer spending                      2.42% BEA transfer spending to GDP 53-14 of 3.18%
    τ       labor income tax rate                  29.5% BEA pers. tax rev. to GDP 53-14 of 17.30%
τΠB = τΠI   corporate tax rate                     20.0% BEA corp. tax rev. to GDP 53-14 of 3.41%
   τD       interest rate income tax rate          13.2% tax code; see text
    bo      cyclicality discr. spending               -2.5 slope log discr. sp./GDP on GDP growth
   bT       cyclicality transfer spending              -25 slope log transfer sp./GDP on GDP growth
    bτ      cyclicality lab. inc. tax                    2 slope log discr. sp./GDP on GDP growth
    κ       deposit insurance fee                  0.0084 Deposit insurance revenues/bank assets
     ξ      max. intermediary leverage                0.94 Basel II reg. capital charge for C&I loans & bonds




                                                  22
so on. Given that the present value of all payments (1/(1 − δ)) can be thought of as the sum
of a principal (share θ) and an interest component (share 1 − θ), we define the book value of
the debt as F = θ/(1 − δ). We set δ = 0.937 and θ = 0.582 (F = 9.238) to match the observed
duration of corporate bonds. Appendix C.2 contains the details. The model’s corporate loans
have a duration of 6.8 years on average.

  We set the bankruptcy cost parameter ζ = 0.6 to match the observed average severity rate
of 44% on corporate bonds rated by S&P and Moody’s rated during 1985-2004. The model
produces a similar unconditional loss-given-default rate of 43%. Combined with the average
default rate, this LGD number implies a loss rate on corporate loans of 1.0%. Our baseline
model generates a modest quantity of corporate default risk, consistent with the data.

  A fraction η of the cost of distress to intermediaries is a deadweight loss to the economy. The
remainder 1 − η is transfer income that enters in the budget constraint of the agents. We set
η = 0.2 based on evidence in Bris, Welch, and Zhu (2006) showing that firms loose on average
20% of assets between the beginning and end of a Chapter 7 procedure.

  We set the profit default threshold to π = 0.04 to target average non-financial leverage. The
higher this threshold, the more firms will default on average for a given level of firm debt.
Since defaults are costly to the borrower family, borrower leverage is decreasing in π. The
model generates a ratio of borrower book debt-to-assets of 36%. In the Flow of Funds data,
the average ratio of loans and debt securities of the nonfinancial corporate and non-financial
non-corporate businesses to their non-financial assets is 37%.


Intermediary Parameters The intermediary profit shocks are distributed Gaussian with
mean zero. The cross-sectional standard deviation σ = Var(It )0.5 governs the average inter-
mediary failure rate. The benchmark model with σ = .025 generates an average failure rate of
0.54%, which is exactly the asset-weighted failure rate of depository institutions in the FDIC
data.

  We adopt the following functional form for the dividend payout cost of intermediaries:

                                                 σI I ¯ 2
                                     Σ(dIt ) =     (d − d) ,
                                                 2 t

The marginal dividend payout cost for intermediaries is set to σI = 5 to match the average


                                                 23
credit spread. The higher σ I , the more costly it becomes for intermediaries to deviate from
                      ¯ We set the target to the dividend level in the deterministic steady
their dividend target d.
state of the model. A higher adjustment cost causes a higher risk premium in the corporate
loan market and thus increases the credit spread. We define the credit spread in the data
as a weighted average of the Moody’s Aaa and Baa yields and subtract the one-year constant
maturity Treasury rate. To determine the portfolio weights on the Aaa versus Baa grade bonds,
we use market values of the amounts outstanding from Barclays. The weights are 80% and 20%,
respectively. The mean spread over the 1953-2015 period is 2.08%, while the model generates
a mean spread of 2.05%.

  The intermediary borrowing constraint parameter ξ can be interpreted as a minimum reg-
ulatory equity capital requirement. Under Basel II and III, corporate loans have a 100% risk
weight and corporate bonds have a risk weight that depends on their credit rating. The risk
weight on corporate bonds under the standardized approach of Basel II ranges from 20% for
AAA to AA-, 50% for A+ to A-, to 100% for BBB+ to B-. A blended regulatory capital
requirement of 6% (8% times a blended risk weight of 75%) seems appropriate given the assets
of the levered financial sector.16 This implies that ξ = 0.94. This is the key parameter we vary
in or macro-prudential policy experiments.

  We set the deposit insurance fee parameter κ to 8.4 basis points. To compute this number,
we divide the total assessment revenue reported by the FDIC for 2016, $10 billion, by the
total short-term debt of U.S. chartered financial institutions from the Flow of Funds, $11,849
billion.17


Preference Parameters Preference parameters affect many equilibrium quantities and prices
simultaneously, and are harder to pin down directly by data. For simplicity, we assume that
both borrowers and savers have log utility: σB = νB = 1 and σS = νS = 1.18 The subjective
time discount factor of borrowers βB = 0.931 targets the capital-to-GDP ratio, as it governs
  16
     Corporate loans are $7.6 trillion and corporate bonds are $5.1 trillion as of 2016 year-end. Given the
observed 40%-40%-20% split of corporate bonds in the three ratings categories (reflecting the same 80-20 split
between investment grade and high yield bonds from Barclays), the risk weight for corporate bonds is 48%, and
the overall risk weight is 79%.
  17
     Banks pay 14.2 cents per $100 dollar of insured deposits but 8.4 cents per $100 of insured and uninsured
deposits. Since the model has only insured deposits, we use the latter number.
  18
     We have solved the model for Epstein-Zin preferences with a range of risk aversion and EIS parameter
choices. Results are qualitatively similar and available upon request.



                                                     24
borrowers’ desire to accumulate wealth. The capital-to-output ratio is 2.25 in the model, and
2.24 in the data. The time discount factor of the saver disproportionately affects the mean of
the short-term interest rate. We set βS = 0.982 to generate a low average real rate of interest
of 2.2%.


Government Parameters To add quantitative realism to the model, we match both the
unconditional average and cyclical properties of discretionary spending, transfer spending, labor
income tax revenue, and corporate income tax revenue.

  Discretionary and transfer spending as a fraction of GDP are modeled as follows: Git /Yt =
Gi exp {bi (gt − ḡ)} , i = o, T . The scalars Go and GT are set to match the observed average
discretionary spending to GDP of 17.58% and transfer spending to GDP of 3.18%, respectively,
in the 1953-2014 NIPA data.19 The model produces 17.56% and 3.19%. We set bo = −2.5 and
bT = −25 in order to match the slope in a regression of log discretionary/transfer spending-to-
GDP on GDP growth and a constant. We match these slopes: -0.75 and -7.26 in the model
versus -0.71 and -7.14 in the 1953-2014 data.

  Similarly, we model the labor income tax rate as τt = τ exp {bτ (gt − ḡ)}. We set the tax rate
τ = 29.5% in order to match observed average income tax revenue to GDP of 17.3%. Appendix
C.4 details how labor income tax revenue is computed in the data. The model generates an
average of 18.6%. We set the sensitivity of the tax rate to aggregate productivity growth bτ = 2
to match the observed sensitivity of log income tax revenue to GDP to GDP growth. The
regression slope of log income tax revenue to GDP on GDP growth and a constant produces
similar pro-cyclicality: 0.86 in the model and 0.70 in the data.

  Fourth, we set the corporate tax rate that both financial and non-financial corporations pay
to a constant τΠB = τΠI = 20% to match observed corporate tax revenues of 3.41% of GDP. The
model generates an average of 3.62%. The tax shield of debt and depreciation that firms and
banks enjoy in the model substantially reduces the effective tax rate corporations pay, both
in the model and in the data. We set the tax rate on financial income for savers (interest on
short-term debt) equal to τ D = 13.2%. Appendix C.5 contains the details of the calculation.

  Government debt to GDP averages 60% of GDP in a long simulation of the benchmark model.
  19
                   
   We divide by exp bi /2σg2 /(1 − ρ2g )(bi − 1) , a Jensen correction, to ensure that average spending means
match the targets.



                                                     25
While it fluctuates meaningfully over prolonged periods of time (standard deviation of 50%),
the government debt to GDP ratio remains stationary as explained in Appendix C.6.



4      Results

This section studies the behavior of key macro-economic and balance sheet variables. The model
captures important features of macro-economic quantities, corporate and bank balance sheets,
and asset prices in normal times and in crises. The benchmark model’s fit lends credibility to
the macro-prudential policy experiments in Section 5.


4.1      Macro Quantities

We report means and standard deviations from a long simulation of the model (10,000 years),
as well as averages conditional on being in a good state (high TFP, low uncertainty, i.e. σω,L ),
non-financial recession (low TFP, low uncertainty), and financial recession (low TFP, high
uncertainty σω,H ).

    Table 2 reports the standard deviation of aggregate quantities, their correlation with GDP,
and their autocorrelation. Moments in the data are computed from HP-detrended log series.
Moments in the model are by assumption stationary, and are also computed from log series.
The model matches the volatility of GDP and it autocorrelation. TFP shocks with 2% volatility
are amplified and lead to 2.43% GDP volatility. The model further matches the volatility of
the investment to GDP ratio and the investment rate. The latter series display modest pro-
cyclicality in both data and model. Investment rates are insufficiently persistent in the model.
The model somewhat overstates consumption volatility. Consumption in the model exhibits
the right cyclicality, but is slightly too persistent relative to the data. We return to the source
of the consumption volatility in the model below.

    We present impulse-response graphs to explore the behavior of macro-economic quantities
conditional on the state of the economy. We start off the model in year 0 in the average
TFP state (the middle of the five points on the TFP grid) and in the low uncertainty state
(σω,L ). The five endogenous state variables are at their ergodic averages. In period 1, the
model undergoes a change to a lower TFP grid point. In one case (red line), the recession is


                                                26
                     Table 2: Unconditional Macroeconomic Quantity Moments

                                         Data                            Model
                              stdev    output corr.     AC     stdev    output corr.     AC
                   GDP       2.53%             1.00    0.55   2.43%             1.00    0.55
                   CONS      1.75%             0.88    0.42   2.43%             0.87    0.60
                   X/Y       1.58%             0.73    0.57   1.56%             0.55    0.18
                   X/K       0.82%             0.63    0.72   0.81%             0.60    0.21


accompanied by a switch to the high uncertainty state (σω,H ); a financial recession. In the
second case, the economy remains in the low uncertainty state; a non-financial recession (blue
line). From period 2 onwards, the two exogenous state variables follow their stochastic laws of
motion. For comparison, we also show a series that does not undergo any shock in period 1 but
where the exogenous states stochastically mean revert from the low-uncertainty state in period
0 (black line). For each of the three scenarios, we simulate 10,000 sample paths of 25 years
and average across them. Figure 2 plots the macro-economic quantities. The top left panel is
for the productivity level Z A . By construction, it falls by the same amount in financial and
non-financial recessions; a 2% drop. Productivity then gradually mean reverts over the next
decade. The black line shows how productivity would have evolved absent a shock in period 1.

  The other three panels show impulse-responses for output, consumption, and investment. In
the initial period of the shock, the drop in output is the same when the economy is additionally
hit by an uncertainty shock (red line) and when it is not (blue line). This has to be the case
because capital is a state variable, labor is supplied inelastically, and productivity is identical.
In financial recessions, the economy suffers from a second period of decline in consumption,
despite the rebound in productivity. Output remains lower for longer in a financial recession.
The added persistence resembles the slow recovery that typically follows a financial crisis. The
bottom right panel shows a 28% drop in investment in financial recessions but only a mod-
est drop in non-financial recessions. Despite the bounce back in period 2, investment remains
depressed for a prolonged period of time. Aggregate consumption partially offsets the initial
decline in investment in a financial recession: the initial drop in consumption is smaller than in
a non-financial recession. The low rate of return on savings induces the saver to consume more
in a financial crisis.20 Consumption drops subsequently and remains below the non-financial
  20
    Since output in the first period is by construction identical for both types of recessions, the approximately
2.5% of output that are not reflected in consumption and investment in a financial recession are accounted for
by deadweight losses from firm and intermediary bankruptcies.



                                                       27
                      Figure 2: Financial vs. Non-financial Recessions: Macro Quantities

                                      TFP                                             Output
            0.5                                                   0.5


             0                                                     0


           -0.5                                                  -0.5


             -1                                                    -1


           -1.5                                                  -1.5


             -2                                                    -2


           -2.5                                                  -2.5
                  0        5     10         15   20    25               0    5       10      15      20      25




                               Consumption                                         Investment
         0.625                                                  0.19


                                                                0.18
          0.62
                                                                0.17


         0.615                                                  0.16


                                                                0.15
          0.61
                                                                0.14


         0.605                                                  0.13
                  0        5     10         15   20    25               0    5       10      15      20      25




The graphs show the average path of the economy through a recession episode which starts at time 1. In period
0, the economy is in the average TFP state. The recession is either accompanied by high uncertainty (high
σω ), a financial recession plotted in red, or low uncertainty (low σω ), a non-financial recession plotted in blue.
From period 2 onwards, the economy evolves according to its regular probability laws. The black line plots the
dynamics of the economy absent any shock in period 1. We obtain the three lines via a Monte Carlo simulation
of 10,000 paths of 25 periods, and averaging across these paths. Blue line: non-financial recession, Red line:
financial recession, Black line: no shocks.


recession level for the remaining periods, as the capital stock remains depressed. It is these pro-
tracted declines in consumption and investment in financial recessions that macro-prudential
policy aims to remedy. In appendix D.1, we include IRF graphs that compare a financial reces-
sion to a pure uncertainty shock, which is a switch to σω,H with TFP remaining constant. This
comparison demonstrates that the combination of both shocks leads to significant amplification,
i.e., the financial recession triggered by the combination is much larger than the sum of the
effects of each individual shock.21
  21
    This feature of our model is consistent with the empirical finding that uncertainty shocks alone have at
most moderate negative effects on output and investment, see for example Bachmann and Bayer (2013) or Vavra
(2014).




                                                        28
4.2     Balance Sheet Variables

Next, we turn to the key balance sheet variables in Table 3. The first two columns report
the unconditional mean and volatility. The last three columns report conditional averages in
expansions, non-financial recessions, and financial recessions, respectively.


Non-financial Corporate Sector The first panel focuses on firms. Rows 1 and 2 display
the market value of assets (pt KtB ) and the market value of liabilities (qtm AB
                                                                               t ), both scaled by

GDP. Their difference is the market value of firm equity scaled by GDP. Their ratio is the
market leverage ratio (row 4). Book leverage, defined as the book value of debt to the book
value of assets in row 5, is 35.2%, and matches the low observed corporate leverage ratio in
the data. Entrepreneurs own 64.8% of firms in the form of corporate equity. Total credit to
non-financial firms amounts to 79.1% of GDP (row 3).

  Firms default when their profits fall below the threshold π. This is more likely when un-
certainty σω is high, as the mass of firms with productivity shocks below the threshold ωt∗
increases. The model generates average corporate default and loss rates of 2.25% (row 6) and
0.96% points (row 8), respectively, implying an average loss-given-default rate of 43.1% (row
7). Default and loss rates are 6-7 times higher in financial recessions (5.50% and 2.31%) than in
non-financial recessions and expansions (about 0.9% and 0.4% in both). The model generates
the right amount of corporate credit risk on average (as discussed in the calibration section).
It also generates the strong cyclicality in the quantity of risk observed in the data.22

  Firms reduce their reliance on debt financing in financial recessions. They face a higher cost
of debt in these periods (rows 19 and 20), reflecting both a higher expected loss rate (row 8)
and a higher risk premium charged by banks. The latter reflects financial fragility, as discussed
below. Hence, financial sector fragility feeds back on the real economy and amplifies the initial
shock emanating from the real sector, a second financial accelerator. Firms do not pursue the
investment projects they would otherwise undertake. Relative to expansions, output falls by
4.5% and investment by 20% in financial recessions (row 9).
  22
     In the 1991 recession, the delinquency rate spiked at 8.2% and the charge-off rate at 2.2%. For the 2007-09
crisis, the respective numbers are 6.8% and 2.7%. These are far above the unconditional averages of 3.1% and
0.7% cited in footnote 14. Similarly, during the 2001 recession, the default rate on high-yield bonds was 9.9%,
far above the 1981-2014 average of 4.1%.




                                                      29
                            Table 3: Balance Sheet Variables and Prices

                                         Unconditional       Expansions Non-fin Rec.    Fin Rec.
                                         mean   stdev          mean        mean           mean
                                                                   Firms
 1.   Mkt val of capital / Y (in %)      225.0         4.3        226.5         227.3      219.9
 2.   Mkt val of corp debt / Y (in %)     80.6         4.7          81.6         80.4       78.0
 3.   Book val of corp debt / Y (in %)    79.1         4.5          79.2         80.2       78.8
 4.   Market corp leverage (in %)         35.8         1.9          36.0         35.4       35.5
 5.   Book corp leverage (in %)           35.2         1.8          35.3         34.9       34.9
 6.   Default rate (in %)                 2.25        2.07          0.85         0.91       5.50
 7.   Loss-given-default rate (in %)      43.1         3.2          44.0         42.6       41.7
 8.   Loss Rate (in %)                    0.96        0.89          0.38         0.39       2.31
 9.   Investment / Y (in %)               18.0        1.58          18.9         17.3       15.3
                                                                   Banks
 10.   Mkt fin leverage (in %)            93.3         3.2          93.2         93.6        92.9
 11.   Book fin leverage (in %)           97.1         4.5          98.4         97.7        92.2
 12.   % leverage constr binds            61.3        48.7          31.5         89.7        91.1
 13.   Bankruptcies (in %)                0.54        1.12          0.10         0.81        2.23
 14.   Dividends / Y (in %)               0.52        1.57          1.14         0.06       -1.26
                                                                   Savers
 15. Deposits / Y (in %)                  76.9         5.9          78.0         78.4       72.8
 16. Government Debt / Y (in %)           60.2        49.8          57.8         69.2       64.8
                                                                   Prices
 17.   Tobin’s q                          1.00    0.017             1.01         0.99        0.97
 18.   Risk-free rate (in %)              2.19     2.86             2.45         4.10        0.26
 19.   Corporate bond rate (in %)         4.24     0.20             4.13         4.40        4.55
 20.   Credit spread (in %)               2.05     2.94             1.68         0.30        4.28
 21.   Excess ret. corp. bonds (in %)     1.09     3.44             1.87        -0.15       -0.49


Financial Intermediaries The second panel of Table 3 focuses on banks. Intermediary
leverage is 93.3% on average in market values (row 10) and 93.3% in market values. The
average ratio of total intermediary book debt-to-assets in the 1953-2014 data is 91.5%, close to
the intermediaries in our model; see Appendix C.7 for the data calculations. Financial leverage
was not directly targeted in the calibration, yet is close to the data. Several model ingredients
contribute to the high financial leverage. Like the non-financial firms, they are owned by
impatient shareholders. They enjoy a tax shield. Unlike firms, they benefit from deposit
insurance and they produce safe assets for patient savers, both of which keep down their cost
of funding (2.19%, row 18). Finally, they face dividend adjustment costs, which makes debt
issuance relatively attractive. We explore the various drivers of leverage in Appendix D.2 and
find that the dominant force is the wedge between the time discount factor of borrowers and
savers.

                                                 30
  Banks suffer losses on their credit portfolio in financial recessions (row 21), reducing their
book value of assets. At the same time risk is high. Low prices (high yields, row 19) of corporate
loans reflect the higher default risk (row 9) and the higher credit risk premium (row 20). This
reduces the market value of intermediary assets, amplifying the decline in the book value of
assets. A lower value of bank assets in turn tightens the regulatory bank capital constraint.
The constraint binds in 91.1% of the financial crises compared to 61.3% unconditionally and
31.5% in expansions (row 12). When binding, intermediaries must reduce liabilities to meet
capital requirements, as measured by deposits to GDP in row 15, which explains the drop in
banks’ debt. The decline in debt exceeds the decline in book assets, so that bank book leverage
is pro-cyclical. Book leverage falls from 98.4% in expansions to 92.2% in financial recessions.
The decline in the price of loans, i.e., the larger fall in the market value of bank assets, results
in a-cyclical market leverage. This pattern is directionally consistent with the data. Adrian,
Boyarchenko, and Shin (2015) show that book leverage is pro-cyclical for commercial banks
and broker-dealers, while market leverage is counter-cyclical.

  While banks are roughly equally likely to be constrained in financial and non-financial reces-
sions, the reasons for the tightness of the bank capital constraint are fundamentally different.
In financial recessions, banks suffer large credit losses and are forced to shrink, delever, and
issue equity. Going forward, banks earn high risk yields on corporate debt (4.55%) and face low
borrowing costs (0.26%), making lending very profitable. They would like to expand lending,
but are up against their borrowing constraint which prevents raising new debt. They can and
do raise outside equity (negative dividends of 1.26% of GDP, line 14), but are held back by the
cost of raising equity.

  In contrast, in non-financial recessions, banking becomes much less profitable due to the
shrinking net interest margin (0.3%). These recessions resemble standard TFP-induced reces-
sions in real business cycle models: as productivity and labor income are temporarily low, savers
reduce their demand for safe assets in order to smooth consumption. In addition, the supply
of government debt goes up due to increased government spending and lower tax revenue (row
16). The risk free rate has to rise to 4.1% to clear the market for short-term debt. At the
same time, low productivity reduces corporate loan demand. In response to the drop in profits
which depletes equity, banks lower dividend payments to 0.06% of GDP. To avoid raising costly
equity, banks exhaust their borrowing constraint.


                                                31
  The size of the intermediary sector, relative to GDP, shrinks in financial recessions. Bank
assets shrink about 3-5% relative to their levels in expansions (rows 2 and 3). At the same time,
their liabilities shrink from 78% of GDP in expansions to 72% of GDP in financial recessions
(row 15). Since GDP itself falls, bank deposits fall by 11%.

  In the equilibrium of our model, 0.54% of banks are insolvent in a typical year (row 13).
Intermediary failures are concentrated in financial recessions (hence the name), when 2.23%
of banks are insolvent, 22 times as many as in expansions and 2.8 times as many as in non-
financial recessions. The model generates rare financial disasters when a non-trivial fraction of
the banking system is insolvent and needs to be bailed out. These banking crises result from
the balance of two forces. Bank equity owners try to avoid low intermediary net worth states
because they are risk averse and because of the cost of equity issuance. But when net worth is
sufficiently low they have an incentive to shift the risk onto the tax payer.

  An important quantitative success of the model is that it can generate the large observed
credit spread for the small observed amount of credit risk, a challenge in standard macro-
finance models; see Chen (2010). The model generates not only the average spread, but also
high volatility and counter-cyclicality. As Appendix D.3 explains in more detail, the credit
spread is high when intermediary net worth is low. Intermediaries’ marginal value of equity
capital (shadow SDF) is high in those states of the world. Like in Santos and Veronesi (2017),
our model generates a large credit spread in a model where all aggregate shocks emanate form
the real economy.

  Figure 3 show the impulse-response functions for assets and liabilities of both non-financial
firms and banks. Loan loss rates spike in financial recessions and take several more years to
return to normal. The high loan losses cause a spike in intermediary failures. Both the asset
and liability side of corporate and intermediary balance sheet shrinks. The credit spread also
spikes in the first period of a financial crisis. The increased cost of credit is consistent with a
reduced loan demand from firms. Credit declines persistently. In contrast, asset prices recover
quickly. This pattern is consistent with the data, where the credit spread normalizes fairly
quickly after the initial spike, but the quantity of credit takes a long time to recover. The
behavior of quantities and prices in financial crises is in sharp contrast to the much milder
changes in non-financial recessions (blue lines).




                                                32
                      Figure 3: Financial vs. Non-financial Recessions: Balance Sheet Variables

                             Loan loss rate                                 Bank failure rate                               Corporate assets
       0.025                                                0.04                                             2.22

                                                           0.035
                                                                                                             2.21
        0.02
                                                            0.03
                                                                                                              2.2
       0.015                                               0.025

                                                            0.02                                             2.19
        0.01                                               0.015
                                                                                                             2.18
                                                            0.01
       0.005
                                                                                                             2.17
                                                           0.005

          0                                                   0                                              2.16
               0        5       10     15      20     25           0   5        10      15         20   25          0   5      10     15       20   25




                   Corporate liabilities (=fin. assets)                    Financial liabilities                              Loan spread
        0.81                                                0.78                                              0.1

                                                            0.77
         0.8                                                                                                 0.08
                                                            0.76

        0.79                                                0.75                                             0.06
                                                            0.74
        0.78                                                0.73                                             0.04

                                                            0.72
        0.77                                                                                                 0.02
                                                            0.71

        0.76                                                 0.7                                               0
               0        5       10     15      20     25           0   5        10      15         20   25          0   5      10     15       20   25




                    Blue line: non-financial recession, Red line: financial recession, Black line: no shocks.


Savers Risk averse savers only hold safe debt, provided both by the intermediaries and the
government. On average, these two sources of safe assets account for 77% (row 15) and 60%
of GDP (row 16). In financial recessions, intermediaries have to delever due to their equity
losses. An increase in government debt due to counter-cyclical fiscal policy partially offsets
the reduction in the supply of safe assets from bank deleveraging. A drop in the interest rate
is required to induce the savers to reduce their demand for safe assets and consume instead.
On average the real interest rate is close to 2 percentage points lower in a financial recession
compared to the unconditional average (row 18).23 A substantial reduction in the real interest
rate is consistent with the experience in the Great Recession. This reduction in interest rates
benefits banks and helps them to rebuild their net worth. This in turn restores their ability to
lend to firms.
  23
    The magnitude of the drop in real rates depends on the EIS of the saver. For example, when νS = 50 >> 1,
the risk-free interest rate volatility approaches zero. Intermediaries no longer benefit from low, even negative
interest rates in crises. The absence of cheap funding in crises makes them more reluctant to take on leverage
ex-ante.




                                                                           33
4.3     Importance of Intermediary Frictions

Intermediary frictions are essential to generate financial crises. To see this, we successively
relax two key intermediary frictions. First, we turn off the equity adjustment cost by setting
σ I = 0. Then we turn off limited liability (deposit insurance) for intermediaries, so that they
cannot go bankrupt. Figure 4 compares financial recessions in these economies to those in the
benchmark (black line). The underlying shocks in all three economies are the same. Clearly,
the disruption in credit is not nearly as severe, and the credit spread does not increase nearly
as much. Macro-economic quantities are not nearly as adversely affected as in the benchmark
economy.

    Eliminating the equity adjustment cost (σ I = 0, blue line) means that shareholders can
quickly recapitalize intermediaries in crises, which results in less shrinkage of the financial
sector. However, limited liability still causes a suboptimally slow recapitalization when inter-
mediaries are closer to default, as they have incentives to take on debt and shift the risk onto
the taxpayer. Turning off limited liability in addition (red line) eliminates the option value
of bankruptcy and banks recapitalize more quickly. The end result is an economy that allows
for more corporate debt and intermediary leverage, and suffers fewer DWL from bankruptcies.
Consumption dynamics during financial recessions in this counterfactual economy look similar
to non-financial recessions.

    This special case without equity issuance frictions and deposit insurance approaches the
model of Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) where the balance sheets of firms and banks are
merged. The results show substantial amplification from the decoupling of the balance sheets.



5      Macro-prudential Policy

We use our calibrated model to investigate the effects of macro-prudential policy choices. Our
main experiment is a variation in the intermediaries’ leverage constraint. In the benchmark
model, intermediaries can borrow 94 cents against every dollar in assets; they must hold 6%
equity capital. We explore tighter constraints (ξ < .94), as well as looser constraints (ξ > .94).
We also study a time-varying capital requirement conditional on the uncertainty state. Our
third macro-prudential policy experiment is to charge intermediaries κ = 1.0% for deposit


                                               34
          Figure 4: The Role of Intermediary Frictions in Generating Financial Crises

                                Consumption                                      Investment                                          DWL/GDP
          0.625                                               0.19                                             0.035


                                                              0.18                                              0.03

           0.62
                                                                                                               0.025
                                                              0.17
                                                                                                                0.02
          0.615                                               0.16
                                                                                                               0.015
                                                              0.15
                                                                                                                0.01
           0.61
                                                              0.14                                             0.005

          0.605                                               0.13                                                0
                  0        5       10     15      20     25          0   5        10      15         20   25           0   5         10    15     20      25




                      Corporate liabilities (=fin. assets)                   Financial liabilities                                  Loan spread
           0.88                                               0.85                                              0.09

                                                                                                                0.08           bench
           0.86
                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                0.07                =0
           0.84                                                0.8                                                              I
                                                                                                                0.06                =0, no bank default
           0.82                                                                                                 0.05

                                                                                                                0.04
            0.8                                               0.75
                                                                                                                0.03
           0.78
                                                                                                                0.02

           0.76                                                0.7                                              0.01
                  0        5       10     15      20     25          0   5        10      15         20   25           0   5         10    15     20      25




Black line: responses of various outcome variables to a financial recession in the benchmark economy; blue
line: responses of same outcome variables to a financial recession in an economy that only differs from the
benchmark economy in its equity adjustment cost (σ I = 0); red line: responses of same outcome variables
to a financial recession in an economy that differs from the benchmark economy in its equity adjustment cost
(σ I = 0) and in the ability of intermediaries to default (no intermediary bankruptcy). The underlying shock
sequences are identical across experiments.


insurance, a much higher tax on leverage than in the benchmark (0.084%). Tables 4 and 5
show the results. Table 5 reports moments in percentage deviation from the benchmark.


5.1     Changing maximum intermediary leverage

Effect on lending and intermediation Rows 10 and 11 of Table 4 show that a policy that
constrains bank leverage is indeed successful at bringing down that leverage. Banks reduce the
size of their assets, both in book and market value terms (rows 2 and 3) and the size of their
liabilities (row 16). On net, intermediary equity capital increases sharply as ξ is lowered (row
14).

  With intermediaries better capitalized, financial fragility falls. Intermediary bankruptcies
(row 13) drop rapidly from 0.54% to 0.01% first (at ξ = .90) and are eradicated for even tighter


                                                                             35
capital requirements. Interestingly, with tighter regulation, intermediaries’ leverage constraints
bind less frequently (row 12). Intermediaries become more cautious when they are better
capitalized, since equity capital adjustments become effectively more costly (as explained below)
and the option to default (limited liability) is farther out-of-the-money. Tighter regulation leads
to a safer intermediary sector, but also to a smaller one.

  The increased safety of the financial sector as ξ falls is also reflected in lower corporate
default, loss-given-default, and loss rates on loans to non-financial firms (rows 6-8). Firms
choose to reduce leverage (rows 4-5). Firms’ reluctance to undertake more leverage despite the
safer environment may be understood from the higher interest rate they face on debt (row 19).
When intermediary capacity shrinks (with lower ξ), the reward for providing intermediation
services increases. The modest 25bps increase in the credit spread at ξ = 0.75 is the result
of large offsetting movements in the expected loss rate, which halves, and in the excess return
intermediaries earn on their asset holdings, which doubles (row 21).

  To understand the effect of tighter regulation on intermediary profitability, we compute the
franchise value of intermediation, defined as the market value of banks to shareholders per dollar
of equity capital V I /W I − 1 (row 15). If the value of banks were simply equal to the difference
between the market value of assets and liabilities, franchise value would be zero (V I = W I ).
The franchise value declines from 34% in the benchmark to 4% at ξ = .75. The drop can be
understood from the additional measures of bank profitability reported in rows 15a-c. First,
banks become less profitable for shareholders as measured by the return on bank equity (in an
accounting sense), reported in row 15a. We compute accounting ROE as


     AROE = Excess ret. on loans (row 21) × book value of loans (row 3) / W I (row 14).


Tighter regulation requires more bank equity (row 14) to operate a smaller banking sector (rows
3). This shrinkage effect dominates the rise in profitability per dollar of loans issued reflected
in the greater excess return (row 21), causing a decline in accounting ROE by 55% at ξ = 75%.

  As Admati, DeMarzo, Hellwig, and Pfleiderer (2013) point out, this calculation may not tell
the whole story. The required return on equity will decline as banks are forced to hold more
capital and shareholders are exposed to less risk. This force is also present in our model, and
we can compute the equilibrium market return on equity for bank shareholders to measure its


                                                36
magnitude. The cum-dividend market value of intermediary equity to borrower-entrepreneurs
is given by VtI = V I (WtI , StI ) as defined in (12). Using this market price, we can compute the
expected market return on equity as
                                             I               
                                       Et max Vt+1 − It+1 , 0
                               MROEt =                           .
                                             VtI − dIt

Indeed we find that the market return on equity declines as we tighten regulation and banks
become less risky (row 15b). However, we also compute the weighted average cost of capital
(WACC) for banks in row 15c, using the market ROE from row 15b as cost of equity. To compute
WACC, first calculate the effective cost of debt finance to banks as rtdebt = (qt + τΠ rtf − κ)−1 − 1.
The total firm value of the bank is Vtbank = VtI + qt × Depositst . Hence

                                      VtI           qt × Depositst debt
                         WACCt =       bank
                                            MROEt +               rt .
                                     Vt                 Vtbank

The decline in the cost of less-risky equity is not able to offset the large change in the composition
of funding, which shifts from deposits towards equity with lower ξ. As a result, WACC rises
by almost 50% relative to the benchmark at ξ = 75%. The reduced franchise value is a direct
result of this sharp rise in WACC and consistent with bankers’ argument that tighter regulation
destroys shareholder value. The main driver of this value in the benchmark economy is access
to cheap deposit funding from savers. As intermediaries are forced to fund each dollar of loans
with a greater proportion of equity, the value created for bank shareholders per dollar of capital
invested declines. Banks charge higher spreads in the loan market, but can only partially pass
through the higher funding cost to borrowers in general equilibrium.


Effect on production and macroeconomic volatility A first major adverse effect of
tighter macro-prudential policy is that the economy’s output shrinks (row 27 of Table 5).
The capital stock shrinks sizeably (row 28). The reduction in output arises because firms are
smaller and borrow less from a smaller intermediary sector, since debt finance became more
costly. Even though GDP shrinks, aggregate consumption increases slightly (row 29) thanks to
lower deadweight losses from firm and bank failures (row 26).

  A second adverse effect of tighter capital regulation is that it reduces the risk absorption ca-
pacity of the intermediary sector. Maintaining a larger equity buffer means that intermediaries


                                                 37
                                                         Table 4: Macroprudential Policy

                                       Bench (ξ = .94)      ξ = .75     ξ = .80   ξ = .85    ξ = .90    ξ = .97    ξ = {.93, .95}    κ = .01
                                                                               Borrowers
     1.   Mkt value capital / Y             225.0            216.1        217.4     219.1      221.5      229.8            222.0       218.3
     2.   Mkt value corp debt / Y           80.6              60.2         61.6      64.9       71.7       91.3             72.8        63.2
     3.   Book val corp debt / Y            79.1              61.6         62.6      65.5       71.6       86.3             72.5        64.0
     4.   Market corp leverage              35.8              27.9         28.3      29.6       32.4       39.7             32.8        28.9
     5.   Book corp leverage                35.2              28.5         28.8      29.9       32.4       37.5             32.7        29.3
     6.   Default rate                       2.3               1.6          1.6       1.7        1.9        2.6              2.0         1.7
     7.   Loss-given-default rate           43.1              30.3         30.9      33.3       38.1       47.3             38.7        32.0
     8.   Loss Rate                          1.0               0.4          0.5       0.5        0.7        1.2              0.8         0.5
     9.   Investment / Y                    18.0              17.3         17.4      17.5       17.7       18.4             17.8        17.5
                                                                                 Intermediaries
     10. Mkt fin leverage                   93.3               73.7        78.6      83.6       88.9        97.0           92.6          93.9
     11. Book fin leverage                  97.1               73.8        79.1      84.7       91.0       104.5           95.0          94.8




38
     12. % constraint binds                 61.3               31.2        40.6      41.6       60.4        95.4           29.1          92.2
     13. Bankruptcies                       0.54               0.00        0.00      0.00       0.01        7.81           0.10          1.55
     14. Wealth I / Y                        5.6               16.2        13.4        11        8.3         2.8            5.7           4.4
     15. Franchise Value                    33.9                3.6         7.7      18.3       33.8        73.7           65.6          27.8
       15a. Bank accounting ROE             15.35          -55.41%     -47.58%   -36.66%    -20.90%    +55.31%         +14.11%       -47.01%
       15b. Bank market ROE                 7.73            -3.65%      -2.63%    -2.55%     -1.53%     +7.94%          +7.63%        -1.62%
       15c. WACC for bank                   2.34          +49.15%     +36.04% +25.60% +15.64%           -16.88%         +2.52%      +37.11%
                                                                                     Savers
     16. Deposits / Y                        76.9              45.5        49.7      55.3       65.3       88.4             80.8        60.6
     17. Government debt / Y                 60.2              10.9        10.9      11.1       12.9      134.8            114.6        23.6
                                                                                      Prices
     18.   Risk-free rate                    2.19              2.36        2.29      2.26       2.25       2.19             2.25        2.18
     19.   Corporate bond rate               4.24              4.66        4.60      4.53       4.42       3.91             4.16        4.56
     20.   Credit spread                     2.05              2.30        2.31      2.27       2.16       1.72             1.91        2.37
     21.   Excess ret. corp. bonds           1.09              1.90        1.82      1.70       1.44       0.62             0.89        1.94
          All numbers are in percent, except for columns 2-8 of rows 15a-c, which are percentage changes relative to the benchmark.
need to incur larger deviations from the dividend target (in absolute value). At lower ξ, the
dividend adjustment cost makes reacting to economic fluctuations by varying dividends more
expensive, relative to the benchmark. Intermediaries adjust assets and debt instead of equity
(rows 32-34): lower ξ increases the volatility of asset and debt growth, but reduces the volatility
of dividend growth. When going from the benchmark to modestly tighter regulation, the re-
duced ability of intermediaries to absorb aggregate risk spills over to higher investment growth
volatility (35) and consumption growth volatility (rows 36-38). The reduced risk-sharing role of
the intermediary is reflected in a more volatile ratio of marginal utility of borrowers and savers,
a marker of increased market incompleteness (row 39).

  The overall effect on macroeconomic volatility is non-monotonic: tighter regulation makes
financial recessions less severe, but also diminishes the intermediary’s willingness to absorb
aggregate risk. Volatility of investment and consumption growth peak at ξ = .85. For capital
requirements higher than 15%, volatility starts to decline as the difference between financial
and non-financial recessions becomes smaller. At a capital requirement of 25% (ξ = .75),
volatilities are lower than in the benchmark. Interestingly, looser regulation than benchmark
also raises macroeconomic volatility. The economy with ξ = .97 experiences more severe
financial recessions as the indicated by the higher default rates of firms and banks. This
increased fragility raises macro-economic volatility. The subtle, hard-to-predict, pattern in
macro-economic volatility underscores the need for a rich structural model.

  In summary, tightening the capital requirement has two key effects: (1) it shrinks the economy
and lowers leverage of firms and banks, reducing macroeconomic volatility and bankruptcy-
related losses; and (2), it effectively makes banks more risk averse, reducing their willingness to
absorb aggregate risk and causing higher macroeconomic volatility. Figure 5 summarizes the
effects of macro-prudential policy on financial fragility (left panel) and the size of the economy
(right panel).


Welfare Population-weighted aggregate welfare W pop (row 24) is maximized at ξ = .90; a 4
percentage point higher equity capital requirement than in the benchmark. The policy change
leads to a modest aggregate welfare gain of 32 bps. Higher equity requirements than 10% reduce
the gains. Locally, they increase volatility and reduce risk sharing without additional benefits
from fewer defaults. At a 25% capital requirement, ex-post welfare is back to the benchmark


                                                39
                                    Table 5: Macroprudential Policy: Macro and Welfare

                                    Bench   ξ = .75   ξ = .80    ξ = .85 ξ = .90      ξ = .97   ξ = {.93, .95}   κ = .01
                                                                     Welfare
     22.   Aggr. welfare W pop      0.620    -0.01%   +0.15%    +0.25% +0.32%         -0.80%          -0.31%     +0.49%
     23.   Aggr. welfare W cev      0%      -75.08%   -62.00%   -50.25% -28.87%      -11.12%         17.92%      -20.87%
     24.   Value function, B        0.285   +6.31%    +5.73%    +5.05% +3.40%         -1.31%          -2.42%     +3.28%
     25.   Value function, S        0.336    -5.37%    -4.59%    -3.83%    -2.29%     -0.36%         +1.49%       -1.88%
     26.   DWL / Y                  0.008   -36.35%   -34.66%   -31.23% -20.89% +124.88%            +14.05%      -18.12%
                                                                  Size of the Economy
     27.   GDP                      0.978     -1.6%     -1.4%      -1.1%    -0.6%     +0.9%            +0.3%       -1.2%
     28.   Capital stock            2.199     -5.5%     -4.7%      -3.8%    -2.2%     +3.0%            +1.1%       -4.2%
     29.   Aggr. Consumption        0.621    +0.0%    +0.04%    +0.06% +0.06%         -1.39%           +0.0%       -0.1%




40
     30.   Consumption, B           0.291    +5.7%     +5.4%     +4.9%     +3.4%        -1.4%           -2.6%     +3.3%
     31.   Consumption, S           0.343     -4.8%     -4.5%      -4.1%    -2.7%       -1.4%          +2.2%       -2.9%
                                                                         Volatility
     32.   Mkt value corp debt gr   0.03    +15.2%    +59.6%    +68.7% +45.3%       +180.3%           -10.0%      +0.5%
     33.   Deposits gr              0.05     -23.8%   +69.6%    +86.7% +44.9%        +27.7%           -62.4%      -52.3%
     34.   Dividend gr              2.37     -53.1%    -49.7%    -31.6%    -26.9%     +6.1%           +1.9%       +3.0%
     35.   Investment gr            29.6     -68.0%     -6.9%   +35.2% +16.4%           -5.5%         -65.7%      -69.9%
     36.   Consumption gr           2.17     -11.6%   +23.4%    +27.7% +16.6%        +58.5%           -18.3%      -18.0%
     37.   Consumption gr, B        3.12     -22.2%    +0.9%    +10.7%     +2.2%     +18.0%            -9.7%      -22.1%
     38.   Consumption gr, S        4.08     -24.6%   +36.8%    +49.1% +24.2%        +28.0%           -49.8%      -36.6%
     39.   log (MU B / MU S)        0.052    -32.7%   +13.7%    +27.7% +12.1%        +13.2%           -34.2%      -41.4%
       Numbers in columns two to eight are percentage changes relative to the benchmark.
         Figure 5: Effect of tighter capital requirement on size and fragility of the economy


                        Financial Fragility                                         Size of the Economy
                                                                      Output                                 Deposits / GDP
  Loan Loss Rate                                 Bank Failures
                                                                      0.990                                            1
  1.2%                                                   10%
                                                                      0.985                                           0.8
  1.0%                                                   8%
  0.8%                                                                0.980
                                                         6%                                                           0.6
  0.6%                                                                0.975
                                                         4%                                                           0.4
  0.4%                                                                0.970

                                                         2%           0.965                                           0.2
  0.2%

  0.0%                                                   0%           0.960                                           0
         80%       85%            90%           95%                           80%   85%        90%           95%
                    Loss rate    Bankruptcies                                         GDP   Deposits / GDP



The left panel plots the loss rate on the loans held by banks and the failure rate of banks as a function of
the macro-prudential policy parameter ξ. The right panel plots output and the ratio of deposits to output
as a function of the macro-prudential policy parameter ξ. Each dot represents a different economy where all
parameters are the same as in te benchmark, except for ξ. The benchmark economy has ξ = .94.


value. The green line in the left panel of Figure 6 shows modest welfare gains for a large range
of tighter policies.

  The small aggregate gain masks large heterogeneity in gains and losses among borrowers
savers. Tighter regulation redistributes wealth from savers to borrowers. It both reduces the
supply of safe assets and makes it less reliable. As debt finance becomes more expensive,
borrowers rely more on equity finance and a larger share of firm earnings accrues to them. At
ξ = .90, borrower consumption is 3.4% higher than in the benchmark and saver consumption
is 2.7% lower (row 30 and 31), leading to welfare gains and losses of similar size (row 24
and 25); see also the right panel of Figure 6. Looser capital requirements have the opposite
distributional effect and increase saver wealth at the expense of borrowers. However, DWL
from firm and bank failures are so large at ξ = .97 that consumption of both agents is lower
than in the benchmark. The increased financial fragility makes both agents worse off. Maybe
surprisingly at first, forcing banks to hold more equity ends up benefiting their shareholders. In
sum, tighter capital requirements lead to small (population-weighted) aggregate welfare gains,
they increase consumption and wealth inequality. Policy makers have signaled concern about
redistributive implications of monetary policies adopted after the Great Financial Crisis. We
show that macro-prudential policy has similar implications.

  While none of the variations of ξ considered in Table 5 allow for a Pareto improving transfer

                                                                 41
scheme (row 23), the red line in the left panel of Figure 6 makes clear that there is a Pareto
improvement possible at ξ = .95 and ξ = .96. In those cases, the welfare gains to savers are
sufficient to compensate borrowers for their losses and still have about 12% of GDP left over.
Intuitively, borrowers are less patient than savers and require lower compensation for the same
permanent reduction in consumption. In the ξ = .96 economy, the policy maker could levy a tax
on savers that reduces their utility to the level of the benchmark. The present value of the tax
revenue stream would be 23% of benchmark GDP. The revenue could be used to pay a subsidy
to borrowers that makes them exactly as well of as in the benchmark; the present value of this
subsidy stream would be 11.2% of GDP. The remaining revenue has a present value of 11.8%
of GDP and measures the Pareto improvement. By the same logic, a 25% capital requirement
would require a massive transfer to the savers, much more than the impatient borrowers are
willing to give up.

  The two different ways of aggregating welfare lead to optimal capital requirements of 10%
and 4%, straddling the 6% in the benchmark. The results suggest that the status quo capital
requirements are close to optimal.

                 Figure 6: Welfare Across Macro-Prudential Policy Experiments




The left panel plots the ex-post population-weighted aggregate welfare function W pop in green and the ex-ante
consumption equivalent variation welfare function W cev in red as a function of the macro-prudential policy
parameter ξ. The right panel plots the value function of Borrower (black) and Saver (orange) as a function of
the macro-prudential policy parameter ξ. Each dot represents a different economy where all parameters are the
same as in te benchmark, except for ξ. The benchmark economy has ξ = .94.




                                                     42
5.2    Other Macro-prudential Policy Measures

Time-varying capital requirement The 7th column of tables 4 and 5 show an experiment
with a capital requirement that varies conditional on the uncertainty state σω,t . When uncer-
tainty is low, banks’ constraint is tightened (ξ = .93) compared to the benchmark, whereas it is
loosened (ξ = .95) when uncertainty is high. This counter-cyclical capital requirement causes
a moderate expansion in corporate and financial leverage, leading to slightly higher loan losses
(1.06% vs .96%) and substantially more frequent bank defaults (1.13% vs. .54%). However, the
higher DWL are offset by a greater capital stock (+1.1%) and higher GDP (+.3%), such that
aggregate consumption remains unchanged. Even though credit risk increases, the credit spread
shrinks due to a smaller credit risk premium (+.89% vs. 1.09%). Since intermediaries are less
constrained in financial crises now, they require less compensation for carrying aggregate risk
and macroeconomic volatility decreases. Risk sharing among borrowers and savers improves, as
indicated by the lower volatility of the MU ratio (row 41, -34.2%). The larger financial sector
distributes wealth from borrowers to savers: saver consumption increases by 2.2% and welfare
by 1.5%. Borrower welfare declines by 2.4%, implying an ex-post aggregate welfare loss of 31
bps. However, since the experiment makes the more patient savers significantly better off, it
allows for Pareto improving wealth transfers. The compensating variation wealth residual (row
23) is 17% of GDP.

  Appendix Figure 13 compares financial recessions in the world with counter-cyclical capital
requirements to financial recessions in the benchmark economy. The former feature much
smaller reductions in credit extension, in part due to a much smaller increase in the credit
spread, as well as a shallower recession in terms of consumption and investment.


Increasing cost of deposit insurance The last column of tables 4 and 5 shows the result
of an experiment that increases the cost of deposit insurance κ from 0.08% to 1% per unit of
deposit. While this is a direct tax on bank leverage, its incidence falls on non-financial firms
and savers in equilibrium. Firms bear most of the cost through a significantly higher credit risk
premium, paying a 2.39% credit spread (vs. 2.05%), despite a reduction in the loan loss rate
from 0.96% to 0.50%. As a result of the higher cost of debt, equilibrium firm leverage is much
lower. Contrary to the presumed intention of the policy, banks lever up due to the high credit
spread they earn and become more fragile (1.13% bank failures, twice the benchmark level).


                                               43
The capital stock shrinks by 4.2% and GDP by 1.2%. Since DWL from corporate defaults fall,
aggregate consumption is unaffected. Overall, the policy redistributes wealth from savers to
borrowers, as the overall supply of risk free debt shrinks. While there is an ex-post aggregate
welfare gain of .49%, the policy does not allow for Pareto improving transfers.



6      Robustness

Appendix D studies the robustness of the results. Section D.5 shows transition dynamics from
the benchmark economy to one with tighter capital requirements. Along the transition path,
there is a consumption boom as the economy gradually adjusts to a permanently lower capital
stock.

    Appendix D.6 studies a range of values for the equity issuance cost around the benchmark.
The effects of a greater adjustment cost are similar to those of tighter capital requirements.
Higher σ I limits banks’ ability to absorb aggregate risk and increases the cost of debt finance
to firms. In equilibrium, this leads to substantially lower corporate leverage and hence reduces
financial fragility for both producers and intermediaries. At the same time, it causes a smaller
capital stock and lower output. The exercise highlights the importance of the equity adjustment
cost for generating a large credit risk premium. When we raise σ I to 7 from a benchmark value of
5, the loss rate on corporate loans is cut in half, while the risk premium earned by intermediaries
doubles. This implies that the price of risk earned by intermediaries increases by factor 4.

    Appendix D.7 finds that the conclusions of our main macro-prudential policy experiment are
robust to changes in key model parameters. Neither the presence of the bankruptcy option,
nor the equity adjustment costs, nor the tax shield for banks are crucial for the qualitative
macro-pru implications of the model. In every case, borrowers gain from tighter policy and
savers loose. The trade-off between less financial fragility and a smaller economy is present in
every model variant.



7      Conclusion

We provide the first calibrated macro-economic model which features intermediaries who extend
long-term defaultable loans to firms producing output and raise deposits from risk averse savers,

                                                44
and in which both banks and firms can default. The model incorporates a rich set of fiscal policy
rules, including deposit insurance, and endogenizes the risk-free interest rate.

  Like in the standard accelerator model, shocks to the economy affect entrepreneurial net
worth. Since firm borrowing is constrained by net worth, macroeconomic shocks are potentially
amplified by tighter borrowing constraints. For realistic firm leverage ratios, this traditional
accelerator is not very powerful. A second, much more powerful financial accelerator arises from
explicitly modeling the financial intermediaries’ net worth dynamics. Intermediaries are subject
to regulatory capital constraints. Macroeconomic shocks that lead to binding intermediary
borrowing constraints amplify the shocks through their direct effect on intermediaries’ net
worth and the indirect effect on borrowers to whom the intermediaries lend.

  We find that tighter restrictions on bank leverage reduce financial fragility, but also shrinks
the size of the intermediation sector and its risk absorption capacity. The size of the econ-
omy shrinks and macro-economic volatility may increase. Counter-cyclical capital equity re-
quirements centered around the current level generate a Pareto improvement. Tighter macro-
prudential policy has sizeable effects on inequality; the incidence of policies designed to limit
the riskiness of the financial sector may fall on other sectors of the economy.

  Several extensions are fruitful directions for future research. One could study monetary
policy in a model that has endogenous labor supply and New-Keynesian ingredients. Modeling
heterogeneity within the financial sector would be interesting, splitting institutions into levered
and unlevered for example. One can add mortgage borrowers and study interactions between
stress in mortgage and corporate loans and their implications for the real economy. Finally,
our model assumed perfect alignment between management and shareholders. The presence of
management’s incentives to gamble arising from compensation structures may affect optimal
equity capital requirements.




References
Admati, A. R., P. M. DeMarzo, M. F. Hellwig, and P. Pfleiderer (2013): “Fallacies,
 Irrelevant Facts, and Myths in the Discussion of Capital Regulation: Why Bank Equity is Not
 Socially Expensive,” Working Paper Stanford GSB.

Admati, A. R., and M. Hellwig (2013): The Bankers’ New Clothes: What’s Wrong With Banking
 and What To Do About It. Princeton University Press.

                                                45
Adrian, T., and N. Boyarchenko (2012): “Intermediary leverage cycles and financial stability,”
 Working paper.

Adrian, T., N. Boyarchenko, and H. Shin (2015): “The Cyclicality of Leverage,” Federal Reserve
 Bank of New York Staff Reports No. 743.

Adrian, T., E. Etula, and T. Muir (2014): “Financial Intermediaries and the Cross-Section of
 Asset Returns,” The Journal of Finance, 69(6), 2557–2596.

Ai, H., K. Li, and F. Yang (2016): “Financial Intermediation and Capital Reallocation,” SSRN
  Working Paper 2877774.

Alfaro, I., N. Bloom, and X. Lin (2016): “The Finance-Uncertainty Multiplier,” Working Paper.

Alvarez, F., and U. Jermann (2005): “Using Asset Prices to Measure the Persistence of the
  Marginal Utility of Wealth,” Econometrica, 73(6), 1977 –2016.

Andrews, I., M. Gentzkow, and J. M. Shapiro (2017): “Measuring the Sensitivity of Parameter
 Estimates to Estimation Moments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4).

Angeloni, I., and E. Faia (2013): “Capital regulation and monetary policy with fragile banks,”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(3), 311–324.

Bachmann, R., and C. Bayer (2013): “’Wait-and-See’ business cycles?,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 60(6), 704 – 719.

Begenau, J. (2016): “Capital Requirements, Risk Choice, and Liquidity Provision in a Business
  Cycle Model,” Harvard Business School Working Paper, No. 15-072.

Begenau, J., and T. Landvoigt (2017): “Financial Regulation in a Quantitative Model of the
  Modern Banking System,” Working Paper Stanford GSB and Wharton School.

Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1996): “The Financial Accelerator and the
  Flight to Quality,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(1), 1–15.

Bianchi, J., and E. Mendoza (2013): “Optimal Time-consistent Macroprudential Policy,” NBER
  Working paper 19704.

Bloom, N. (2009): “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, 77(3), 623–685.

Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. J. Terry (2012):
  “Really uncertain business cycles,” NBER Working Paper No 18245.

Bris, A., I. Welch, and N. Zhu (2006): “The Costs of Bankruptcy: Chapter 7 Liquidation versus
  Chapter 11 Reorganization,” The Journal of Finance, 61(3), 1253–1303.

Brumm, J., D. Kryczka, and F. Kubler (2018): “Recursive Equilibria in Dynamic Economies
  With Stochastic Production,” Econometrica, 85(5), 1467–1499.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and Y. Sannikov (2014): “A macroeconomic model with a financial sector,”
  The American Economic Review, 104(2), 379–421.

Chen, H. (2010): “Macroeconomic Conditions and the Puzzles of Credit Spreads and Capital Struc-
 ture,” Journal of Finance, 65(6), 2171–2212.



                                              46
Christiano, L. J., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2014): “Risk Shocks,” American Economic
 Review, 104(1), 27–65.

Clerc, L., A. Derviz, C. Mendicino, S. Moyen, K. Nikolov, L. Stracca, J. Suarez, and
  A. P. Vardoulakis (2015): “Capital Regulation in a Macroeconomic Model with Three Layers of
  Default,” International Journal of Central Banking, 11(3), 9–63.

Corbae, D., and P. D’Erasmo (2017): “Capital Requirements in a Quantitative Model of Banking
 Industry Dynamics,” Working Paper.

Cúrdia, V., and M. Woodford (2008): “Credit frictions and optimal monetary policy,” Working
  Paper 146, National Bank of Belgium.

         (2016): “Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  84(C), 30–65.

Dang, T. V., G. Gorton, and B. Holmstrom (2015): “The Information Sensitivity of a Security,”
 Working Paper Yale SOM and MIT Sloan.

Davydiuk, T. (2017): “Dynamic Bank Capital Requirements,” Working Paper.

De Fiore, F., M. Hoerova, and H. Uhlig (2017): “The Macroeconomic Impact of Money Market
 Freezes,” Working Paper University of Chicago.

Del Negro, M., G. Eggertsson, A. Ferrero, and N. Kiyotaki (2016): “The Great Escape? A
 Quantitative Evaluation of the Feds Liquidity Facilities,” Working Paper New York Federal Reserve
 Bank.

Diamond, D. W. (1984): “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,” Review of Economic
  Studies, 51(3), 393–414.

Drechsler, I., A. Savov, and P. Schnabl (2017a): “The Deposits Channel of Monetary Policy,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics.

        (2017b): “A Model of Monetary Policy and Risk Premia,” Journal of Finance.

Elenev, V. (2016): “Mortgage Credit, Aggregate Demand, and Unconventional Monetary Policy,”
  Working Paper NYU Stern.

Farhi, E., and J. Tirole (2012): “Collective moral hazard, maturity mismatch, and systemic
  bailouts,” Americcan Economic Review, pp. 60–93.

Gale, D., and P. Gottardi (2017): “Equilibrium Theory of Banks Capital Structure,” Working
 Paper European University Institute.

Gale, D., and M. Hellwig (1985): “Incentive-Compatible Debt Contracts: The One-Period Prob-
 lem,” Review of Economic Studies, 52(4), 647–663.

Gârleanu, N., and L. H. Pedersen (2011): “Margin-based Asset Pricing and Deviations from the
  Law of One Price,” Review of Financial Studies.

Gertler, M., and P. Karadi (2011): “A model of unconventional monetary policy,” Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 58(1), 17–34.



                                               47
Gertler, M., and N. Kiyotaki (2010): “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Business
 Cycle Analysis,” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman, and M. Woodford,
 vol. 3 of Handbook of Monetary Economics, chap. 11, pp. 547–599. Elsevier.

Gertler, M., N. Kiyotaki, and A. Queralto (2012): “Financial crises, bank risk exposure and
 government financial policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(S), S17–S34.

Gete, P. (2016): “A Quantitative Model of International Lending of Last Resort,” Working Paper
 Georgetown University.

Gomes, J., M. Grotteria, and J. Wachter (2018): “Foreseen Risks,” Working Paper.

Goodfriend, M., and B. T. McCallum (2007): “Banking and interest rates in monetary policy
 analysis: a quantitative exploration,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(5), 1480–1507.

Guerrieri, L., and M. Iacoviello (2015): “Occbin: A Toolkit to Solve Models with Occasionally
 Binding Constraints Easily,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 70, 22–38.

Guerrieri, V., and G. Lorenzoni (2015): “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the Liquidity
 Trap,” Working Paper University of Chicago and Northwestern University.

He, Z., B. Kelly, and A. Manela (2017): “Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from many
 asset classes,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy (2012): “A Model of Capital and Crises,” The Review of Economic
 Studies, 79(2), 735–777.

He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy (2013): “Intermediary asset pricing,” American Economic Review,
 103 (2), 732–770.

        (2014): “A Macroeconomic Framework for Quantifying Systematic Risk,” Working Paper
  University of Chicago and Stanford University.

Hirakata, N., N. Sudo, and K. Ueda (2013): “Capital Injection, Monetary Policy, and Financial
  Accelerators,” International Journal of Central Banking, 9(2), 101–145.

Hsieh, C.-T., and P. J. Klenow (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
  India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1403–1448.

Jermann, U., and V. Quadrini (2012): “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks,” American
  Economic Review, 102, 238–71.

Jorda, O., M. Schularick, and A. Taylor (2014): “Betting the House,” NBER Working Paper
  No. 20771.

Judd, K. L. (1998): Numerical Methods in Economics. The MIT Press.

Judd, K. L., F. Kubler, and K. Schmedders (2002): “A solution method for incomplete asset
  markets with heterogeneous agents,” Working Paper, SSRN.

Kareken, J. H., and N. Wallace (1978): “Deposit Insurance and Bank Regulation: A Partial-
 Equilibrium Exposition,” The Journal of Business, 51(3), 413–438.

Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 211–48.



                                               48
Klimenko, N., S. Pfeil, J.-C. Rochet, and G. D. Nicolo (2016): “Aggregate Bank Capital and
 Credit Dynamics,” Working Paper.
Korinek, A. (2012): “Systemic Risk-Taking: Amplification Effects, Externalities, and Regulatory
 Responses,” Working paper University of Maryland.
Krasa, S., and A. P. Villamil (1992): “Monitoring the monitor: An incentive structure for a
 financial intermediary,” Journal of Economic Theory, 57(1), 197–221.
Krishnamurthy, A., and T. Muir (2017): “How credit cycles across a financial crisis,” NBER
 Working Paper.
Krishnamurthy, A., and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2015): “The Impact of Financial Supply on
 Financial Sector Lending and Stability,” Journal of Financial Economics, 118(2), 571–600.
Kubler, F., and K. Schmedders (2003): “Stationary Equilibria in Asset-Pricing Models with
 Incomplete Markets and Collateral,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1767–1793.
Lorenzoni, G. (2008): “Inefficient Credit Booms,” Review of Economic Studies, 75, 809–833.
Maggiori, M. (2013): “Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve currencies,”
 Working paper.
Meh, C. A., and K. Moran (2010): “The role of bank capital in the propagation of shocks,” Journal
 of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34(3), 555–576.
Mendoza, E. (2010): “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage,” American Economic Review,
 100, 1941–1966.
Moreira, A., and A. Savov (2016): “The macroeconomics of shadow banking,” The Journal of
 Finance.
Nguyen, T. T. (2015): “Bank Capital Requirements: A Quantitative Analysis,” Fisher College of
 Business Working Paper.
Rampini, A. A., and S. Viswanathan (2017): “Financial Intermediary Capital,” NBER Working
 Paper No. 23302.
Reinhart, C. M., and K. Rogoff (2009): This time is different: Eight centuries of financial folly.
  Princeton University Press.
Rouwenhorst, G. (1995): “Asset Pricing Implications of Equilibrium Business Cycle Models,” in
  Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, ed. by Cooley. Princeton University Press.
Santos, T., and P. Veronesi (2017): “Habits and Leverage,” NBER Working Paper No. 22905.
Townsend, R. (1979): “Optimal contracts and competitive markets with costly state verification,”
 Journal of Economic Theory, 21(2), 265–293.
Van den Heuvel, S. J. (2008): “The welfare cost of bank capital requirements,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 55(2), 298–320.
Vavra, J. (2014): “Inflation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an Ss Inter-
  pretation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 215–258.
Williamson, S. D. (1987): “Costly Monitoring, Loan Contracts, and Equilibrium Credit Rationing,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(1), 135–145.


                                                49
A       Model Appendix
A.1      Borrower-entrepreneur problem
A.1.1     Technology

The exogenous laws of motion for the TFP level ZtA is (lower case letters denote logs):

                      log ZtA = (1 − ρA )z A + ρA log Zt−1
                                                       A
                                                           + A
                                                              t                   A              A
                                                                                   t ∼ iid N (0, σ )

                            (σ A )2
                    zA +
                           2(1−ρ2 )
  Denote µZA = e                  A   .

  Idiosyncratic productivity of borrower-entrepreneur i at date t is denoted

                                          ωi,t ∼ iid Gamma(γ0,t , γ1,t ),

where the parameters γ0,t and γ1,t are chosen such that

                                                       E(ωi,t ) = 1,
                                                                   2
                                                     Var(ωi,t ) = σω,t .

  Individual output is
                                             Yi,t = ωi,t ZtA Kt1−α Lαt .

  Aggregate production is
                      Z                   Z
                 Yt =     Yi,t dF (ωi ) =   ωdF (ω)ZtA Kt1−α (Lt )α = ZtA Kt1−α (Lt )α .
                              Ω                  Ω

  Individual producer profit is                              X
                                          πi,t = Yi,t −             wj Lj − At .
                                                               j

Therefore, the default cutoff at πi,t = 0 is

                                                                   wtj Ljt + At
                                                           P
                                                      π+      j
                                           ωt∗   =                                .                    (23)
                                                                   Yt

A.1.2     Preliminaries

We start by defining some preliminaries.

Borrower Defaults

                                           ΩA (ωt∗ ) = 1 − Fω,t (ωt∗ )
                                                       Z ∞
                                                 ∗
                                           ΩK (ωt ) =       ωdFω,t (ω)
                                                              ωt∗

where Fω,t (·) is the CDF of ωi,t .

                                                             50
  It is useful to compute the derivatives of ΩK (·) and ΩA (·):
                                              Z ∞
                            ∂ΩK (ωt∗ )    ∂
                                       =           ωfω (ω)dω = −ωt∗ fω (ωt∗ ),
                              ∂ωt∗       ∂ωt∗ ωt∗
                                              Z ∞
                            ∂ΩA (ωt∗ )    ∂
                                       =           fω (ω)dω = −fω (ωt∗ ),
                               ∂ωt∗      ∂ωt∗ ωt∗

where fω (·) is the p.d.f. of ωi,t .


Capital Adjustment Cost Let
                                                                                  2
                                                          ψ             Xt
                                        Ψ(Xt , KtB )    =                   − δK        KtB .
                                                          2             KtB

Then partial derivatives are
                                                                   
                                                           Xt
                                       ΨX (Xt , KtB ) =ψ       − δK                                                      (24)
                                                           KtB
                                                                   2      !
                                                          ψ     X t
                                       ΨK (Xt , KtB ) = −                 2
                                                                       − δK                                              (25)
                                                          2     KtB


A.1.3     Optimization Problem

We consider the producers’s problem in the current period after aggregate TFP and idiosyncratic
productivity shocks have been realized.
  Let StB = ZtA , σω,t , WtI , WtS , Bt−1
                                      G
                                          
                                            represent state variables exogenous to the borrower-entrepreneur’s
decision.
  Then the borrower problem is
                                                                           n              1−1/ν
                  V B (KtB , AB    B
                              t , St ) =           max                      (1 − βB ) CtB        +
                                                  B ,X ,AB ,Lj }
                                           {CtB ,Kt+1 t  t+1 t
                                                                                                             )     1
                                                        h                                 1−σB    i 1−1/ν       1−1/ν
                                                                B     B                              1−σB
                                            + βB Et         V       (Kt+1 , AB      B
                                                                             t+1 , St+1 )


subject to

             CtB = (1 − τΠB )ΩK (ωt∗ )Yt + (1 − τtB )wtB L̄B + GT,B
                                                                t   + pt [Xt + ΩA (ωt∗ )(1 − δ̃K )KtB ]
                                      ∗
                    + qtm AB              B              B     m
                           t+1 − ΩA (ωt )At (1 − (1 − θ)τΠ + δqt )

                                                                                                wtj Ljt + DtI
                                                                                         X
                          B
                    − pt Kt+1 − Xt − Ψ(Xt , KtB ) − (1 − τΠB )ΩA (ωt∗ )                                                  (26)
                                                                                        j=B,S
                              ∗
              F AB                          B
                 t ≤ Φpt ΩA (ωt )(1 − δ̃K )Kt ,                                                                          (27)

where we have define after-tax depreciation δ̃K = (1 − τΠB )δK .




                                                                    51
  Denote the value function and the partial derivatives of the value function as:

                                                  VtB ≡ V (KtB , AB    B
                                                                  t , St ),

                                                  B       ∂V (KtB , AB     B
                                                                      t , St )
                                                 VA,t ≡                        ,
                                                                ∂AB t

                                                  B       ∂V (KtB , AB     B
                                                                      t , St )
                                                 VK,t   ≡                      .
                                                               ∂KtB



  Denote the certainty equivalent of future utility as:
                                                 h                                         1
                                                                                 1−σB i 1−σ
                                     CEtB = Et       V B (Kt+1
                                                           B
                                                               , AB      B
                                                                  t+1 , St+1 )
                                                                                             B
                                                                                                 .


Marginal Cost of Default Before deriving optimality conditions, it is useful to compute the
marginal consumption loss due to an increased default threshold ωt∗

 ∂CtB ∂ΩK (ωt∗ )
      =            (1 − τΠB )Yt
 ∂ωt∗     ∂ωt∗
                                                                                     
        ∂ΩA (ωt∗ )                                                           X j j
      +              (1 − δ̃K )pt KtB − AB              B     m           B
                                         t (1 − (1 − θ)τΠ + δqt ) − (1 − τΠ )   wt Lt 
          ∂ωt∗
                                                                              j
                                                                                                              

                                                                                                         wtj Ljt 
                                                                                                     X
        = − fω (ωt∗ ) (1 − τΠB )ωt∗ Yt + (1 − δ̃K )pt KtB − AB              B     m           B
                                                              t (1 − (1 − θ)τΠ + δqt ) − (1 − τΠ )
                                                                                                     j
                          "                                          #
                            (1 − δ̃K )pt KtB − AB    B     m
                                                t (θτΠ + δqt )
        = − fω (ωt∗ )Yt
                                             Yt
                          |                  {z                }
                                               =Ft
        =−   fω (ωt∗ )Yt Ft .

  The function Ft has an intuitive interpretation as the marginal loss, expressed in consumption units
per unit of aggregate output, to producers from an increase in the default threshold. The first term is
the loss of capital due to defaulting members. The second term represents gains due to debt erased
in foreclosure.


A.1.4     First-order conditions

Loans The FOC for loans AB
                         t+1 is:

                                    (uB
                                      t )
                                          1−1/ν
                              qtm               (1 − βB )(VtB )1/ν =
                                       CtB
                                                      B −σB B
                                     λB
                                      t F − βB Et [(Vt+1 ) VA,t+1 ](CEtB )σB −1/ν (VtB )1/ν                   (28)

where λB
       t is the Lagrange multiplier on the constraint in (27).




                                                               52
                                            B is:
Capital Similarly, the FOC for new capital Kt+1

                                    (1 − βB )(VtB )1/ν (uB
                                                         t )
                                                             1−1/ν
                               pt                                  =
                                                CtB
                                                B −σB B
                                      βB Et [(Vt+1 ) VK,t+1 ](CEtB )σB −1/ν (VtB )1/ν                                                   (29)


Investment The FOC for investment Xt is:
                                                               (1 − βB )(UtB )1−1/ν (VtB )1/ν
                           [1 + ΨX (XtB , KtB ) − pt ]                                        = 0,
                                                                           CtB

which simplifies to

                                                      1 + ΨX (XtB , KtB ) = pt .                                                        (30)


Labor Inputs Defining γB = 1 − γI − γS , aggregate labor input is

                                                                         (Ljt )γj .
                                                                 Y
                                                        Lt =
                                                               j=B,I,S

We further compute                                                                     !
                                                ∂ωt∗           wtj       MPLjt
                                                         =         − ωt∗                   ,
                                                ∂Ljt           Yt         Yt
defining the marginal product of labor of type j as
                                                                                    1−α
                                                                              KtB
                                                                          
                                                                    Lt
                                           MPLjt = αγj ZtA                                     .
                                                                    Ljt       Lt

The FOC for labor input Ljt is then
                                   "                                                         #
     (1 − βB )(uB
                t )
                   1−1/ν (V B )1/ν
                           t               B       ∗     j         B       ∗   j   ∂ωt∗ ∂CtB
                                     (1 − τΠ )ΩK (ωt )MPLt − (1 − τΠ )ΩA (ωt )wt +         ∗   = 0,
                 CtB                                                               ∂Ljt ∂ωt

which yields
                                                                                                                            
                (1 −   τΠB )ΩK (ωt∗ )MPLjt     = (1 −      τΠB )ΩA (ωt∗ )wtj    +     fω (ωt∗ )        wtj   −   ωt∗ MPLjt       Ft .   (31)


A.1.5    Marginal Values of State Variables and SDF

Loans Taking the derivative of the value function with respect to AB
                                                                   t gives:

                                                       ∂ωt∗ ∂CtB (1 − βB )(uB        1−1/ν (V B )1/ν
                                                                   
          B                      B      m       ∗                                t )         t
                                          
         VA,t   = − 1 − (1 − θ)τΠ + δqt ΩA (ωt ) +        B      ∗                   B
                                                      ∂At     ∂ω t                 Ct
                                                                               B
                                                                    (1 − βB )(ut ) 1−1/ν (VtB )1/ν
                = − 1 − (1 − θ)τΠB + δqtm ΩA (ωt∗ ) + fω (ωt∗ )Ft
                                                                
                                                                                                   ,                                    (32)
                                                                                CtB
                                    ∂ωt∗       1
where we used the fact that         ∂AB
                                           =   Yt .
                                      t




                                                                  53
Capital Taking the derivative of the value function with respect to KtB gives:
           "                                                                                                 −α
                                                                                                       KtB                                  ∂CtB ∂ωt∗
                                                                                                   
 B
               pt ΩA (ωt∗ )                τΠB )δK                τΠB )(1       α)ΩK (ωt∗ )ZtA                        − ΨK (XtB , KtB ) +
                                                     
VK,t   =                      1 − (1 −                   + (1 −             −
                                                                                                       Lt                                   ∂ωt∗ ∂KtB
                                                      ∗     ∗    (1 − βB )(uB   1−1/ν (V B )1/ν
                                                             
                                       ∗      B ∂ΩA (ωt ) ∂ωt               t )         t
       +   λ̃B
             t Φpt (1     − δ̃K ) ΩA (ωt ) + Kt                                                 ,
                                                  ∂ωt∗ ∂KtB                  CtB

where λ̃B                             B
        t is the original multiplier λt divided by the marginal value of wealth. Taking the derivative
                                                                                                 −α
                                                     ∂ωt∗    ω∗                            KtB
                                                                                       
                                                        B
                                                          = − t (1 − α)ZtA                              ,
                                                     ∂Kt     Yt                            Lt

we get
                (                                                                                                     −α
                                                                                                                KtB
                                                                                                          
   B
  VK,t     =        pt ΩA (ωt∗ )(1   − δ̃K ) 1 +     Φλ̃B
                                                        t       + (1 −   τΠB )(1   −   α)ΩK (ωt∗ )ZtA                       − ΨK (XtB , KtB )
                                                                                                                Lt
                                           "                   −α                                 #)
                                                         KtB                                            (1 − βB )(uB   1−1/ν (V B )1/ν
                                                     
                                                                                                                   t )
                +(1 −     α)fω (ωt∗ )ωt∗       ZtA                   Ft +   λ̃B
                                                                              t Φpt (1   − δ̃K )                               t
                                                                                                                                       . (33)
                                                         Lt                                                         CtB


SDF We can define the stochastic discount factor (SDF) from t to t + 1 of borrowers:
                                                                         !−1/νB                  !1/νB −σB
                                                                   B
                                                                  Ct+1                    B
                                                                                        Vt+1
                                           MB
                                            t,t+1 = βB                                                          .                               (34)
                                                                  CtB                   CEtB


A.1.6           Euler Equations
                           B
Loans Substituting in for VA,t+1 in (28) and using the SDF expression, we get the recursion:

                                                 ∗                                  ∗
                    qtm = λ̃B
                                     B                           B     m
                                                                                             
                            t F + Et Mt,t+1 ΩA (ωt+1 ) 1 − (1 − θ)τΠ + δqt+1 + fω (ωt+1 )Ft+1   .                                               (35)

                             B
Capital Substituting in for VK,t+1 and using the SDF expression, we get the recursion:
                "             (                                                                                                           !−α
                                                                                                                                     B
                                                                                                                                     Kt+1
                                        ∗                                                 ∗
 pt = Et MB
          t,t+1               pt+1 ΩA (ωt+1 )(1 − δ̃K ) 1 + Φλ̃B                                A
                                                               t+1 + (1 − τΠ )(1 − α)ΩK (ωt+1 )Zt+1
                                                                                                                                     Lt+1
                                                                                                 !−α                                     !)#
                                                                                          B
                                                                                        Kt+1
                 B      B                               ∗     ∗               A
           −ΨK (Xt+1 , Kt+1 )           + (1 −   α)fω (ωt+1 )ωt+1            Zt+1                       Ft+1 + (1 − δ̃K )Φλ̃B
                                                                                                                            t+1 pt+1             .
                                                                                        Lt+1
                                                                                                                                                (36)


A.2            Intermediaries
A.2.1           Aggregation

Here we show that three assumptions we make are sufficient to obtain aggregation to a representative
intermediary. These assumptions are (i) that the intermediary objective is linear in the idiosyncratic
profit shock t,i , (ii) that idiosyncratic shocks only affect the contemporaneous payout (but not net

                                                                            54
worth), and (iii) that defaulting intermediaries are replaced by new intermediaries with equity equal
to that of non-defaulting intermediaries.
               I the beginning-of-period wealth of intermediary i which did not default. Further
  Denote by wt,i
denote by StI = (ZtA , σω,t , KtB , AB    I    S    G
                                     t , Wt , Wt , Bt−1 ) all aggregate state variables exogenous to the indi-
vidual intermediary problem, where WtI is aggregate intermediary wealth.
  In this case, we can define the optimization problem of the non-defaulting intermediary with profit
shock realization t,i recursively as
                                                       h           n                              oi
    V̂NI D (wt,i
             I
                 , t,i , StI ) = max dIt,i − t,i + Et MB
                                                         t,t+1 max  V̂ I
                                                                      ND (w I
                                                                                 ,    , S
                                                                            t+1,i t+1,i t+1
                                                                                           I
                                                                                             ), 0    (37)
                            dIt,i ,Bt,i
                                    I ,AI
                                        t+1,i


subject to the budget constraint (13), the regulatory capital constraint (11), and the definition of
wealth (10). Since the objective function is linear (assumption (i)) in the profit shock t,i , we can
equivalently define a value function V I (wt,i
                                           I , S I ) = V̂ I (w I ,  , S I ) +  , and write the objective as
                                                t        ND   t,i t,i t         t,i


            V I (wt,i
                  I
                      , StI ) =                       dIt,i + Et MB
                                                                           I I         I
                                                                                                            
                                        max                       t,t+1 max V (wt+1,i , St+1 ) − t+1,i , 0     (38)
                                  dIt,i ,Bt,i
                                          I ,AI
                                              t+1,i


subject to the same set of constraints. Conditional on the same state variables (wt,i  I , S I ), the objective
                                                                                            t
functions in (37) and (38) imply the same optimal choices (dIt,i , Bt,i
                                                                    I , AI
                                                                         t+1,i ), independent of the realiza-
tion of the current profit shock t,i . Thus conjecturing that all non-defaulting banks start the period
with identical wealth wt,i = WtI , these banks will also have identical wealth at the beginning of the
                I , since idiosyncratic shocks do not affect next-period net worth directly (assumption
next period, Wt+1
(ii)). Hence absent default, all banks have identical wealth WtI .
  What about defaulting banks? By construction, the realization of the profit shock is irrelevant
for banks that defaulted and were reseeded with initial capital. Here we assume that equity holders
(borrower households) seed all newly started banks with identical capital WtDef . Therefore, all banks
newly started to replace defaulting banks are identical and solve the problem
                                                 h            n                                  oi
      V I (WtDef , StI ) =  max      dDef
                                      t   +  E t   MB
                                                    t,t+1 max  V I
                                                                   ( Ŵ Def
                                                                        t+1 , S I
                                                                               t+1 ) − t+1,i , 0   , (39)
                           dDef
                            t   ,BtDef ,ADef
                                         t+1


again subject to the same set of constraints, conformably rewritten for the different choice variables.
Clearly, if WtDef = WtI , which is assumption (iii), then the new banks will choose the same portfolio
(dDef
  t   , BtDef , ADef       I    I    I
                 t+1 ) = (dt , Bt , At+1 ) as the non-defaulting banks. This means that new banks replacing
defaulted banks will also have the same wealth at the beginning of next period, Wt+1     I . Together, this

means that all banks have the same beginning-of-period wealth WtI .


A.2.2     Statement of stationary problem

Wealth WtI is the wealth of all intermediaries after firm and intermediary bankruptcies and recapital-
ization of defaulting intermediaries by borrowers.
  At the end of each period, all intermediaries face the following optimization problem over dividend
payout and portfolio composition (see equation (12) in the main text):
                                            h                                            i
                                                                                      I,−
           V I (WtI , StI ) = max dIt + Et MB         F
                                                 t,t+1 ,t+1   V  I
                                                                 t+1 (W I
                                                                           , S
                                                                        t+1 t+1
                                                                               I
                                                                                 ) − t+1         (40)
                                  dIt ,BtI ,AIt+1




                                                                 55
subject to:

                       WtI ≥ dIt + Σ(dIt ) + qtm AIt+1 + (qtf + τ Π rtf − I{BtI <0} κ)BtI ,             (41)
                             h                                          i
                       I                         ∗      m
                      Wt+1 =     M̃t+1 + ΩA (ωt+1    )δqt+1   AIt+1 + BtI ,                             (42)

                       qtf BtI ≥ − ξqtm AIt+1 ,                                                         (43)
                       AIt+1    ≥ 0,                                                                    (44)
                         I
                       St+1     = h(StI ).                                                              (45)

   For the evolution of intermediary wealth in (42), we have defined the total after-tax payoff per unit
of the bond
                                                           ∗
                             M̃t+1 = (1 − (1 − θ)τΠI )ΩA (ωt+1 ) + Mt+1 /AB
                                                                          t+1 ,

where Mt+1 is the total recovery value of bankrupt borrower firms seized by intermediaries, as defined
in (9).
  Since the idiosyncratic bank profit shocks are independent of the aggregate state of the economy,
an individual bank’s probability of continuing (i.e. not defaulting) conditional on the aggregate state,
but before realization of the idiosyncratic shock is:

     Prob V I (Wt+1  I     I
                               ) − It+1 > 0 = Prob It+1 < V I (Wt+1
                                                                  I      I
                                                                             ) = F V I (Wt+1
                                                                                           I     I
                                                                                                    
                        , St+1                                        , St+1                  , St+1 ) .

By the law of large numbers, F V I (WtI , StI ) is also the aggregate survival rate of intermediaries, i.e.
                                                 

1 − F V I (WtI , StI ) is the intermediary default rate.
  Hence we can express the intermediary problem as:
                                     h                              I                      i
                                                                                         I,−
      VtI (WtI , StI ) = max dIt + Et MB t,t+1 F V I
                                                      (W I
                                                            , S
                                                         t+1 t+1
                                                                I
                                                                  )  V  (W I
                                                                              , S
                                                                           t+1 t+1
                                                                                  I
                                                                                    ) − t+1    .
                       dIt ,BtI ,AIt+1


The conditional expectation, I,−
                              t   = E ( |  ≤ V I (WtI , StI )), is the expected idiosyncratic loss condi-
tional on not defaulting.


A.2.3     First-order conditions

Dividend Adjustment Cost Let
                                                         σI I   ¯ 2.
                                             Σ(dIt ) =     (d − d)
                                                         2 t
The derivative is
                                             Σ0 (dIt ) = σ I (dIt − d).
                                                                    ¯


Dividend Payout To take the FOC for dividends dIt , eliminate BtI by substituting the budget
constraint into the transition law for wealth to get

                  I                    ∗     m                   WtI − dIt − Σ(dIt ) − qtm AIt+1
                 Wt+1 = (M̃t+1 + δΩA (ωt+1 )qt+1 )AIt+1 +                                          ,    (46)
                                                                          qtf + τΠI rtf − κ




                                                         56
and for the leverage constraint

                                              WtI − dIt − Σ(dIt ) − qtm AIt+1
                                          −                                              qtf ≤ ξqtm AIt+1 .                               (47)
                                                       qtf   +   τΠI rtf   −κ

  Now we can differentiate the objective function with respect to dIt
                                   "           (                                               )#
       1                 1            f I        B       ∂        
                                                                      I I      I        I,−
                                                                                            
                 = f                 qt λt + Et Mt,t+1       F,t+1 V (Wt+1 , St+1 ) − t+1       ,
   1 + Σ0 (dIt )  qt + τ Π rtf − κ                        I
                                                       ∂Wt+1

where λIt denotes the Lagrange multiplier on the leverage constraint.
  To compute the derivative in the expectation, rewrite the expression as
                                                                                                      Z   VtI (WtI ,StI )
                 F,t+1 V       I     I
                                    (Wt+1    I
                                          , St+1 )     −     I,−
                                                              t+1       =   F,t VtI (WtI , StI )   −                         dF ().
                                                                                                        −∞

Differentiating with respect to WtI gives (by application of Leibniz’ rule)

                                       VtI VW,t
                                            I           I
                                                f,t + VW,t F,t − VtI VW,t
                                                                        I           I
                                                                            f,t = VW,t F,t .

Substituting in this result, the FOC becomes
                           1                   1         h
                                                            f I        B      I
                                                                                          i
                                     =                    q  λ
                                                            t t + E t  M     V     F
                                                                        t,t+1 W,t+1 ,t+1   .
                       1 + Σ0 (dIt )   qtf + τ Π rtf − κ

Loans Using the same approach as for the dividend payout FOC, the FOC for loans AIt+1 is
         qtm           h                                   i
                           qtf λIt + Et MB      I
                                       
                                              V     F
                                         t,t+1 W,t+1 ,t+1
   qtf + τ Π rtf − κ
                                      1            h             n                   
                                                                                                      ∗
                                                                                                             oi
                       =                            ξqtm λIt + Et MB    V I
                                                                              F
                                                                   t,t+1 W,t+1 ,t+1   M̃ t+1 + δΩ (ω   )q
                                                                                                  A t+1 t+1
                                                                                                           m
                                                                                                                 .
                            qtf + τ Π rtf − κ

Noting that the LHS is equal to the RHS of the dividend FOC above, this can be written more
compactly as
         1                   1         h
                                            m I
                                                       n
                                                         B       I
                                                                             
                                                                                                ∗     m
                                                                                                          oi
                   =                     ξq t λt + E t  Mt,t+1 VW,t+1 F,t+1   M̃ t+1 + δΩ A (ωt+1 )q t+1     .
     1 + Σ0 (dIt )   qtf + τ Π rtf − κ

A.2.4     Marginal value of wealth and SDF

First take the envelope condition
                                                   1               h                                   i
                              I
                                                                       qtf λIt + Et MB      I
                                                                                   
                             VW,t =                                                       V     F
                                                                                     t,t+1 W,t+1 ,t+1   .
                                          qtf + τ Π rtf − κ

Combining this with the FOC for dividends above yields

                                                              I                 1
                                                             VW,t =                       .                                               (48)
                                                                            1 + Σ0 (dIt )


                                                                            57
  We can define a stochastic discount factor for intermediaries as
                                                                       1 + Σ0 (dIt )
                                             MIt,t+1 = MB
                                                        t,t+1                         F,t+1 .                                         (49)
                                                                      1 + Σ0 (dIt+1 )

A.2.5    Euler Equations

Using the definition of the SDF MIt,t+1 above, we can write the FOC for dividend payout and new
loans more compactly as:

                   qtf + τ Π rtf − κ =qtf λ̃It + Et MIt,t+1 ,
                                                          
                                                                                            (50)
                                                      h                              i
                                                                                 ∗
                                                                        m
                                 qtm =ξ λ̃It qtm + Et MIt,t+1 M̃t+1 + δqt+1 ΩA (ωt+1 ) ,    (51)

where λ̃It is the original multiplier λIt divided by the marginal value of wealth.


A.3      Savers
A.3.1    Statement of stationary problem

Let StS = ZtA , σω,t , KtB , AB    I    G
                                           
                              t , Wt , Bt−1 be the saver’s state vector capturing all exogenous state vari-
ables. The problem of the saver is:
                                         (                                                                                 )     1

                                                        S 1−1/ν
                                                                                  h                        1−σS i 1−1/ν
                                                                                                                   1−σS
                                                                                                                               1−1/ν

      V S (WtS , StS ) =                                                              V S (Wt+1
                                                                                            S      S
                                                        
                             max          (1 − βS ) Ct                  + βS Et                 , St+1 )
                           {CtS ,BtS }


subject to

                                         CtS = (1 − τtS )wtS L̄S + GT,S
                                                                    t   + WtS − qtf BtS                                                (52)
                                      S
                                    Wt+1  = BtS                                                                                        (53)
                                     BtS ≥ 0                                                                                           (54)
                                      S
                                     St+1 =h(StS )                                                                                     (55)

  As before, we will drop the arguments of the value function and denote the marginal value of wealth
as:

                                                    VtS ≡ VtS (WtS , StS ),
                                                    S           ∂VtS (WtS , StS )
                                                   VW,t ≡                         ,
                                                                     ∂WtS

Denote the certainty equivalent of future utility as:
                                                        h                                i     1
                                                                                 1−σS       1−σS
                                          CEtS   = Et       V   S
                                                                    (WtS , StS )                    .




                                                                      58
A.3.2    First-order conditions

The first-order condition for the short-term bond position is:

           qtf (CtS )−1/ν (1 − βS )(VtS )1/ν = λSt + βS Et [(Vt+1
                                                               S −σS S
                                                                  ) VW,t+1 ](CEtS )σS −1/ν (VtS )1/ν   (56)

where λSt is the Lagrange multiplier on the no-borrowing constraint (54).


A.3.3    Marginal Values of State Variables and SDF

The marginal value of saver wealth is:
                                     S
                                    VW,t = (CtS )−1/ν (1 − βS )(VtS )1/ν , .                           (57)

  Defining the SDF in the same fashion as we did for borrowers, we get:
                                                      !1/νS −σS           !−1/νS
                                                 S
                                               Vt+1                 S
                                                                   Ct+1
                              MSt,t+1   = βS                                       .
                                               CEtS                CtS


A.3.4    Euler Equations

Combining the first-order condition for short-term bonds (56) with the marginal value of wealth, and
the SDF, we get the Euler equation for the short-term bond:

                                        qtf = λ̃St + Et MSt,t+1
                                                               
                                                                                                (58)

where λ̃St is the original multiplier λSt divided by the marginal value of wealth.


A.4     Equilibrium
The optimality conditions describing the problem are (26), (30), (35), (36), and (31) for borrowers,
(41), (50), and (51) for intermediaries, and (52) and (58) for depositors. We add complementary
slackness conditions for the constraints (27) for borrowers, (43) and (44) for intermediaries, and (54)
for depositors. Together with the market clearing conditions (18), (19), (20), and (21) these equations
fully characterize the economy.




                                                       59
  B      Computational Method
  The equilibrium of dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models is usually characterized recursively.
  If a stationary Markov equilibrium exists, there is a minimal set of state variables that summarizes
  the economy at any given point in time. Equilibrium can then be characterized using two types of
  functions: transition functions map today’s state into probability distributions of tomorrow’s state,
  and policy functions determine agents’ decisions and prices given the current state. Brumm, Kryczka,
  and Kubler (2018) analyze theoretical existence properties in this class of models and discuss the
  literature. Perturbation-based solution methods find local approximations to these functions around
  the “deterministic steady-state”. For applications in finance, there are often two problems with local
  solution methods. First, portfolio restrictions such as leverage constraints may be occasionally binding
  in the true stochastic equilibrium. Generally, a local approximation around the steady state (with a
  binding or slack constraint) will therefore inaccurately capture nonlinear dynamics when constraints go
  from slack to binding. Guerrieri and Iacoviello (2015) propose a solution using local methods. Secondly,
  the portfolio allocation of agents across assets with different risk profiles is generally indeterminate
  at the non-stochastic steady state. This means that it is generally impossible to solve for equilibrium
  dynamics using local methods since the point around which to perturb the system is not known.
    Global projection methods (Judd (1998)) avoid these problems by not relying on the deterministic
  steady state. Rather, they directly approximate the transition and policy functions in the relevant
  area of the state space. Additional advantages of global nonlinear methods are greater flexibility in
  dealing with highly nonlinear functions within the model such as probability distributions or option-like
  payoffs.


  B.1     Solution Procedure
  The projection-based solution approach used in this paper has three main steps:

Step 1. Define approximating basis for the policy and transition functions. To approximate
        these unknown functions, we discretize the state space and use multivariate linear interpola-
        tion. Our general solution framework provides an object-oriented MATLAB library that allows
        approximation of arbitrary multivariate functions using linear interpolation, splines, or polyno-
        mials. For the model in this paper, splines or polynomials of various orders achieved inferior
        results due to their lack of global shape preservation.

Step 2. Iteratively solve for the unknown functions. Given an initial guess for policy and transi-
        tion functions, at each point in the discretized state space compute the current-period optimal
        policies. Using the solutions, compute the next iterate of the transition functions. Repeat until
        convergence. The system of nonlinear equations at each point in the state space is solved us-
        ing a standard nonlinear equation solver. Kuhn-Tucker conditions can be rewritten as equality
        constraints for this purpose. This step is completely parallelized across points in the state space
        within each iterate.

Step 3. Simulate the model for many periods using approximated functions. Verify that the
        simulated time path stays within the bounds of the state space for which policy and transition
        functions were computed. Calculate relative Euler equation errors to assess the computational
        accuracy of the solution. If the simulated time path leaves the state space boundaries or errors
        are too large, the solution procedure may have to be repeated with optimized grid bounds or
        positioning of grid points.


                                                     60
  We will now provide a more detailed description for each step.

Step 1 The state space consists of

    - two exogenous state variables [ZtA , σω,t ], and

    - five endogenous state variables [KtB , AB    I    S    G
                                              t , Wt , Wt , Bt ].

We first discretize ZtA into a N ZA -state Markov chain using the Rouwenhorst (1995) method. The
                                                       ZA
procedure chooses the productivity grid points {ZjA }N
                                                     j=1 and the N
                                                                    ZA ×N ZA Markov transition matrix

ΠZ A between them to match the volatility and persistence of HP-detrended GDP. The dispersion of
idiosyncratic productivity shocks σω,t can take on two realizations {σω,L , σω,H } as described in the
calibration section. The 2 x 2 Markov transition matrix between these states is given by Πσω . We
assume independence between both exogenous shocks. Denote the set of the N x = 2N ZA values the
                                                         ZA
exogenous state variables can take on as Sx = {ZjA }N  j=1 × {σω,L , σω,H }, and the associated Markov
transition matrix Πx = ΠZ A ⊗ Πσω .
  One endogenous state variable can be eliminated for computational purposes since its value is implied
by the agents’ budget constraints, conditional on any four other state variables. We eliminate saver
wealth WtS , which can be computed as

                             WtS = ΩA (ωt∗ )(1 + δqtm )AB          I    G
                                                        t + M t − Wt + Bt .

Our solution algorithm requires approximation of continuous functions of the endogenous state vari-
ables. Define the “true” endogenous state space of the model as follows: if each endogenous state
variable St ∈ {KtB , AB             I    G
                              t , Wt , Bt } can take on values in a continuous and convex subset of the re-
als, characterized by constant state boundaries, [S̄l , S̄u ], then the endogenous state space Sn =
[K̄lB , K̄uB ] × [ĀB     B         I    I        G     G
                    l , Āu ] × [W̄l , W̄u ] × [B̄l , B̄u ]. The total state space is the set S = Sx × Sn .
   To approximate any function f : S → R, we form an univariate grid of (not necessarily equidistant)
strictly increasing points for each endogenous state variables, i.e., we choose {KjB }N             B NA
                                                                                            j=1 , {Ak }k=1 ,
                                                                                             K


{Wm I }NW , and {B G }NG . These grid points are chosen to ensure that each grid covers the ergodic
       m=1          n n=1
distribution of the economy in its dimension, and to minimize computational errors, with more details
on the choice provided below. Denote the set of all endogenous-state grid points as Ŝn = {KjB }N    j=1 ×
                                                                                                       K

      NA        I NW        G NG
{ABk }k=1 ×{Wm }m=1 ×{Bn }n=1 , and the total discretized state space as Ŝ = Sx × Ŝn . This discretized
state space has N S = N x · N K · N A · N W · N G total points, where each point is a 5 x 1 vector as there
are 5 distinct state variables. We can now approximate the smooth function f if we know its values
       S
{fj }N
     j=1 at each point ŝ ∈ Ŝ, i.e. fj = f (ŝj ) by multivariate linear interpolation.
   Our solution method requires approximation of of three sets of functions defined on the domain
                                                                                   C
of the state variables. The first set of unknown functions CP : S → P ⊆ RN , with N C being the
number of policy variables, determines the values of endogenous objects specified in the equilibrium
definition at every point in the state space. These are the prices, agents’ choice variables, and the
Lagrange multipliers on the portfolio constraints. Specifically, the 12 policy functions are bond prices
q m (S), q(S), investment X(S), consumption cB (S), cS (S), the bank dividend dI (S), wages wB (S),
wS (S), the Lagrange multipliers for the bank leverage constraint λI (S) and no-shorting constraint
µI (S), the multiplier for borrowers’ leverage constraint λB (S), and finally the multiplier on the savers’
no-shorting constraint µS (S). There is an equal number of these unknown functions and nonlinear
functional equations, to be listed under step 2 below.
  The second set of functions CT : S × Sx → Sn determine the next-period endogenous state variable
realizations as a function of the state in the current period and the next-period realization of exogenous

                                                    61
shocks. There is one transition function for each endogenous state variable, corresponding to the
transition law for each state variable, also to be listed below in step 2.
                                                                                F
  The third set are forecasting functions CF : S → F ⊆ RN , where N F is the number of forecasting
variables. They map the state into the set of variables sufficient to compute expectations terms in the
nonlinear functional equations that characterize equilibrium. They partially coincide with the policy
functions, but include additional functions. In particular, the forecasting functions for our model are
the bond price q m (S), investment X(S), consumption cB (S), cS (S), the bank dividend dI (S), the
value functions of households V S (S), V B (S), and banks V I (S), the wage bill w(S) = wB (S) + wS (S),
and the Lagrange multiplier on the borrowers’ leverage constraint λB (S).


Step 2 Given an initial guess C 0 = {CP0 , CT0 , CF0 }, the algorithm to compute the equilibrium takes
the following steps.

  A. Initialize the algorithm by setting the current iterate C m = {CPm , CTm , CFm } = {CP0 , CT0 , CF0 }.

  B. Compute forecasting values. For each point in the discretized state space, sj ∈ Ŝ, j =
     1, . . . , N S , perform the steps:

         i. Evaluate the transition functions at sj combined with each possible realization of the
                                              0
            exogenous shocks xi ∈ Sx to get sj (xi ) = CTm (sj , xi ) for i = 1, . . . , N x , which are the values
            of the endogenous state variables given the current state sj and for each possible future
            realization of the exogenous state.
                                                                                                   0 =
        ii. Evaluate the forecasting functions at these future state variable realizations to get fi,j
                0          
            CFm sj (xi ), xi .

      The end result is a N x × N S matrix F m , with each entry being a vector
                                m       m B
                               fi,j = [qi,j , ci,j , cSi,j , dIi,j , Vi,j
                                                                       B      S
                                                                          , Vi,j     I
                                                                                 , Vi,j , Xi,j , wi,j , λB
                                                                                                         i,j ]   (F)

      of the next-period realization of the forecasting functions for current state sj and future exoge-
      nous state xi .

  C. Solve system of nonlinear equations. At each point in the discretized state space, sj ∈ Ŝ,
     j = 1, . . . , N S , solve the system of nonlinear equations that characterize equilibrium in the
     equally many “policy” variables, given the forecasting matrix F m from step B. This amounts
     to solving a system of 12 equations in 12 unknowns
                                                                  S ˆI
                                P̂j = [q̂jm , q̂j , X̂j , ĉB                B     S     I     I     B     S
                                                            j , ĉj , dj , ŵj , ŵj , λ̂j , µ̂j , λ̂j , µ̂j ]   (P)




                                                                62
at each sj . The equations are
                          n                                                        o
                                         ∗                                 ∗
 q̂jm = λ̂B                   B                                m
                                                                
          j F + Es0i,j |sj M̂i,j ΩA (ωi,j ) 1 − (1 − θ)τΠ + δqi,j + fω (ωi,j )Fi,j                                              (E1)
               "         (                                                                                                     !−α
                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                        Ki,j
                                  ∗                                                   ∗
 p̂j = Es0 |sj M̂B                                      B                                A
                                                           
                    i,j pi,j ΩA (ωi,j )(1 − δ̃K ) 1 + Φλi,j + (1 − τΠ )(1 − α)ΩK (ωi,j )Zi
            i,j                                                                                                         Li,j
                                                                        !−α                                       !)#
                                                                   B
                                                                 Ki,j
               B                             ∗     ∗
  −ΨK (Xi,j , Ki,j )         + (1 −   α)fω (ωi,j )ωi,j   ZiA                  Fi,j + (1 −       δ̃K )ΦλB
                                                                                                       i,j pi,j                 (E2)
                                                                 Li,j
                               ˆ B = (1 − τ B )ΩA (ω̂ ∗ )ŵB + fω (ω̂ ∗ ) ŵB − ω̂ ∗ MPL   B
                                                                                            
 (1 − τΠB )ΩK (ω̂j∗ )MPL          j         Π         j    j           j     j      j
                                                                                       ˆ   j   F̂j                              (E3)
                               ˆ S = (1 − τ B )ΩA (ω̂ ∗ )ŵS + fω (ω̂ ∗ ) ŵS − ω̂ ∗ MPL
                                                                                      ˆ S F̂j
                                                                                           
 (1 − τΠB )ΩK (ω̂j∗ )MPL          j        Π          j    j          j     j     j      j                                      (E4)
                                           h       i
    f            f             f
 q̂j + τ Π r̂j − κ = q̂j λ̂Ij + Es0 |sj M̂Ii,j                                                                                  (E5)
                                       i,j
                                   h                              i
                                                              ∗
 q̂jm = ξ λ̂Ij q̂jm + Es0 |sj M̂Ii,j M̃i,j + δqi,j   m
                                                        ΩA (ωi,j )                                                              (E6)
                             i,j
                              h      i
 q̂jf = µ̂Sj + Es0 |sj M̂Si,j                                                                                                   (E7)
                       i,j
                                            
                   ∗
     Φp̂j ΩA (ω̂j )(1 − δ̃K )KjB − F ÂB   j   λ̂B
                                                 j =0                                                                           (E8)
                           
     ξ q̂jm ÂIj + q̂jf B̂jI λ̂Ij = 0                                                                                           (E9)
 ÂIj µ̂Ij = 0                                                                                                                 (E10)
 B̂jS µ̂Sj = 0                                                                                                                 (E11)
 BjG   =   B̂jS   +   B̂jI                                                                                                     (E12)

(E1) and (E2) are the Euler equations for borrower-entrepreneurs from (35) and (36). (E3) and
(E4) are the intratemporal optimality conditions for labor demand by borrower-entrepreneurs
from (31). (E5) and (E6) are the Euler equations for banks from (50) and (51). (E7) is the
savers’ Euler equation (58). (E8) and (E9) are the leverage constraints ((27) and (43)) for
borrowers and banks, respectively. (E10) and (E11) are the no-shorting constraints ((44) and
(54)) for banks and savers, respectively. Finally, (E12) is the market clearing condition for
riskfree debt, (18).
Expectations are computed as weighted sums, with the weights being the probabilities of transi-
tioning to exogenous state xi , conditional on state sj . Hats (ˆ·) in (E1) – E(12) indicate variables
that are direct functions of the vector of unknowns (P). These are effectively the choice variables
for the nonlinear equation solver that finds the solution to the system (E1) – (E12) at each point
sj . All variables in the expectation terms with subscript i,j are direct functions of the forecasting
variables (F).
These values are fixed numbers when the system is solved, as they we pre-computed in step B.
For example, the stochastic discount factors M̂hi,j , h = B, I, S, depend on both the solution and
the forecasting vector, e.g. for savers
                                                                !1/νS −σS              !−1/νS
                                                           S
                                                         Vi,j                  cSi,j
                                       M̂Si,j = βS                                              ,
                                                         CEjS                  ĉSj

since they depend on future consumption and indirect utility, but also current consumption. To


                                                            63
compute the expectation of the right-hand side of equation (E7) at point sj , we first look up
the corresponding column j in the matrix containing the forecasting values that we computed
in step B, F m . This column contains the N x vectors, one for each possible realization of the
exogenous state, of the forecasting values defined in (F). From these vectors, we need saver
consumption cSi,j and the saver value function Vi,j
                                                 S . Further, we need current consumption ĉS ,
                                                                                              j
which is a policy variable chosen by the nonlinear equation solver. Denoting the probability of
moving from current exogenous state xj to state xi as πi,j , we compute the certainty equivalent
                                                                                     1
                                                                                     1−σS
                                                        X
                                      CEjS =                            S 1−σS 
                                                                 πi,j (Vi,j )                ,
                                                       xi | xj

and then complete expectation of the RHS of (E7)
                                                                             !1/νS −σS                   !−1/νS
                                 h       i   X                          S
                                                                      Vi,j                       cSi,j
                                     S
                    Es0      |sj
                                  M̂ i,j   =   πi,j βS                                                            .
                       i,j                                           CEjS                        ĉSj
                                             xi | xj


The mapping of solution and forecasting vectors (P) and (F) into the other expressions in
equations (E1) – E(12) follows the same principles and is based on the definitions in model
appendix A. For example, the borrower default threshold is a function of current wages and
state variables based on (23)

                                                 π + ŵjB LB + ŵjS LS + AB
                                                                          j
                                        ω̂j∗ =                                           ,
                                                          ZiA (KjB )1−α (L)α

and the capital price is a linear function of investment from the first-order condition (30)
                                                           !
                                                   X̂j
                                     p̂j = 1 + ψ       − δK .
                                                  KjB

The system (E1) – (E12) implicitly uses the budget constraints of all agents, and the market
clearing condition for corporate debt. First, one can solve for new debt issued by borrowers
from their budget constraint (26)
         1 h B 
ÂB
  j =       ĉ − (1 − τΠB )ΩK (ω̂j∗ )Ŷj + (1 − τ B )ŵjB L̄B + ĜT,B + p̂j [X̂j + ΩA (ω̂j∗ )(1 − δ̃K )KjB ]
        qjm j                                                     j

            − ΩA (ω̂j∗ )AB              B       m
                         j (1 − (1 − θ)τΠ + δ q̂j )
                                                                                                              

                                                                                            ŵjj L̂nt + D̂jI  .
                                                                                 X
            −p̂j K̂jB − X̂j − Ψ(X̂j , KjB ) − (1 − τΠB )ΩA (ω̂t∗ )
                                                                                n=B,S

All expressions on the right-hand side of the above equation are direct functions of the state or
policy variables. Market clearing for corporate debt implies ÂIj = ÂB
                                                                      j , and thus deposits issued
by banks follow from their budget constraint (46)
                                           1               h                                i
                          B̂jI =                            WjI − dˆIj + Σ(dˆIj ) + q̂jm ÂIj .
                                   q̂jf + τ Π r̂jf − κ



                                                            64
   Similarly, deposits bought by savers follow from their budget constraint (52)
                                      1 h S                          T,S
                                                                                i
                            B̂jS =        ĉj − (1 − τ S
                                                         )ŵ S S
                                                             j L̄ + Ĝj   + W S
                                                                              j    .
                                     q̂jf

   Note that we could exploit the linearity of the market clearing condition in (E12) to eliminate one
   more policy variable, ĉSj , from the system analytically. However, in our experience the algorithm
   is more robust when we explicitly include consumption of all agents as policy variables, and
   ensure that these variables stay strictly positive (as required with power utility) when solving
   the system. To solve the system in practice, we use a nonlinear equation solver that relies on a
   variant of Newton’s method, using policy functions CPm as initial guess. More on these issues in
   subsection B.2 below.
   The final output of this step is a N S × 12 matrix P m+1 , where each row is the solution vector
   P̂j that solves the system (E1) – E(12) at point sj .

D. Update forecasting, transition and policy functions. Given the policy matrix P m+1
   from step B, update the policy function directly to get CPm+1 . All forecasting functions with
   the exception of the value functions are also equivalent to policy functions. Value functions are
   updated based on the recursive definitions
                            (                                                                       )     1
                                        1−1/ν                              h            i 1−1/ν       1−1/ν
                                                                                    S 1−σS 1−σS
                   V̂jS =     (1 − βS ) ĉSj
                                                                                     
                                                + βS Es0                          Vi,j                           (V1)
                                                                   i,j |sj

                            (                                                                        )     1
                                            1−1/ν                            h            i 1−1/ν       1−1/ν
                                                                                     B 1−σB 1−σB
                   V̂jB =     (1 − βB ) ĉB
                                                                                     
                                          j        + βB Es0                       Vi,j                           (V2)
                                                                    i,j |sj
                                               h                           i
                                                                        I,−
                    V̂jI = dˆIj + Es0      |sj
                                                M̂ B
                                                      F
                                                   i,j ,i,j   V  I
                                                                 i,j − i,j    ,                                 (V3)
                                     i,j


   using the same notation as defined above under step C. Note that each value function combines
   current solutions from P m+1 (step C) for consumption and dividend with forecasting values
   from F m (step B). Using these updated value functions, we get CˆFm+1 .
   Finally, update transition functions for the endogenous state variables using the following laws
   of motion, for current state sj and future exogenous state xi as defined above:
                                    B
                                   Ki,j = (1 − δK )KjB + X̂j                                                     (T1)
                                  AB
                                   i,j = Âj
                                            B
                                                                                                                 (T2)
                                                                
                                    I              m        ∗
                                  Wi,j = M̃i,j + δqi,j ΩA (ωi,j ) ÂIj + B̂jI                                    (T3)
                                   G      1                
                                  Bi,j = f BjG + Ĝj − T̂j .                                                     (T4)
                                         q̂j

   (T1) is simply the law of motion for aggregate capital, and (T2) follows trivially from the direct
   mapping of policy into state variable for borrower debt. (T3) is the law of motion for bank
   net worth (42), which again combines inputs from old forecasting functions F m and new policy
   solutions P m+1 . (T4) is the government budget constraint (17). Updating according to (T1) –
   (T4) gives the next set of functions CˆTm+1 .

E. Check convergence. Compute distance measures ∆F = ||CFm+1 − CFm || and ∆T = ||CTm+1 −
   CT F m ||. If ∆F < TolF and ∆T < TolT , stop and use C m+1 as approximate solution. Otherwise

                                                          65
      reset policy functions to the next iterate i.e. P m → P m+1 and reset forecasting and transition
      functions to a convex combination of their previous and updated values i.e. C m → C m+1 =
      D × C m + (1 − D) × Cˆm+1 , where D is a dampening parameter set to a value between 0 and 1
      to reduce oscillation in function values in successive iterations. Next, go to step B.


Step 3 Using the numerical solution C ∗ = C m+1 from step 2, we simulate the economy for T̄ =
Tini +T period. Since the exogenous shocks follow a discrete-time Markov chain with transition matrix
Πx , we can simulate the chain given any initial state x0 using T̄ − 1 uniform random numbers based on
standard techniques (we fix the seed of the random number generator to preserve comparability across
experiments). Using the simulated path {xt }T̄t=1 , we can simulate the associated path of the endogenous
state variables given initial state s0 = [x0 , K0B , AB    I    S    G
                                                      0 , W0 , W0 , B0 ] by evaluating the transition functions

                                  B                                    ∗
                                [Kt+1 , AB      I      S      G
                                         t+1 , Wt+1 , Wt+1 , Bt+1 ] = CT (st , xt+1 ),

to obtain a complete simulated path of model state variables {st }T̄t=1 . To remove any effect of the
initial conditions, we discard the first Tini points. We then also evaluate the policy and forecasting
functions along the simulated sample path to obtain a complete sample path {st , Pt , ft }T̄t=1 .
   To assess the quality and accuracy of the solution, we perform two types of checks. First, we verify
that all state variable realizations along the simulated path are within the bounds of the state variable
grids defined in step 1. If the simulation exceeds the grid boundaries, we expand the grid bounds in
the violated dimensions, and restart the procedure at step 1. Secondly, we compute relative errors for
all equations of the system (E1) – E(12) and the transition functions (T1) – (T4) along the simulated
path. For equations involving expectations (such as (E1)), this requires evaluating the transition and
forecasting function as in step 2B at the current state st . For each equation, we divide both sides by
a sensibly chosen endogenous quantity to yield “relative” errors; e.g., for (E1) we compute
                  1  B                  n
                                             B
                                                        ∗                       m
                                                                                             ∗
                                                                                                         o
           1−        λ̂ j F + E  0
                                si,j |sj
                                          M̂ i,j  Ω A (ωi,j ) 1 − (1 − θ)τΠ + δqi,j   + fω (ω i,j )F i,j     ,
                q̂jm

using the same notation as in step 2B. These errors are small by construction when calculated at the
points of the discretized state grid Ŝ, since the algorithm under step 2 solved the system exactly at
those points. However, the simulated path will likely visit many points that are between grid points,
at which the functions C ∗ are approximated by interpolation. Therefore, the relative errors indicate
the quality of the approximation in the relevant area of the state space. We report average, median,
and tail errors for all equations. If errors are too large during simulation, we investigate in which part
of the state space these high errors occur. We then add additional points to the state variable grids
in those areas and repeat the procedure.


B.2      Implementation
Solving the system of equations. We solve system of nonlinear equations at each point in the
state space using a standard nonlinear equation solver (MATLAB’s fsolve). This nonlinear equation
solver uses a variant of Newton’s method to find a “zero” of the system. We employ several simple
modifications of the system (E1) – E(12) to avoid common pitfalls at this step of the solution procedure.
Nonlinear equation solver are notoriously bad at dealing with complementary slackness conditions
associated with constraint, such as (E8) – E(11). Judd, Kubler, and Schmedders (2002) discuss the
reasons for this and also show how Kuhn-Tucker conditions can be rewritten as additive equations for
this purpose. For example, consider the bank’s Euler Equation for risk-free bonds and the Kuhn-Tucker


                                                          66
condition for its leverage constraint:
                                                                          h       i
                                 q̂jf (1 − λ̂Ij ) + τ Π r̂jf − κ = Es0 |sj M̂Ii,j
                                                                     i,j
                                                           
                                            m I       f I      I
                                        ξ q̂j Âj + q̂j B̂j λ̂j = 0

Now define an auxiliary variable hj ∈ R and two functions of this variable, such that λ̂I,+
                                                                                        j   =
max{0, hj }3 and λ̂I,−
                   j   = max{0, −hj }3 . Clearly, if hj < 0, then λ̂I,+     j    = 0 and λ̂I,−
                                                                                           j   > 0, and vice
versa for hj > 0. Using these definitions, the two equations above can be transformed to:
                                                                      h        i
                              q̂jf (1 − λ̂I,+
                                          j   ) + τ Π f
                                                     r̂j − κ = E 0
                                                                s |sj
                                                                        M̂ I
                                                                           i,j                         (K1)
                                                                                  i,j

                                   ξ q̂jm ÂIj   +   q̂jf B̂jI   −   λ̂I,−
                                                                       j     =0                         (K2)

The solution variable for the nonlinear equation solver corresponding to the multiplier is hj . The
solver can choose positive hj to make the constraint binding (λ̂I,−
                                                                 j   = 0), in which case λ̂I,+
                                                                                           j   takes on
the value of the Lagrange multiplier. Or the solver can choose negative hj to make the constraint
non-binding (λ̂I,+
               j   = 0), in which case λ̂I,−
                                         j   can take on any value that makes (K2) hold.
   Similarly, certain solution variables are restricted to positive values due to the economic structure of
the problem. For example, with power utility consumption must be positive. To avoid that the solver
tries out negative consumption values (and thus utility becomes ill-defined), we use log(ĉnj ), n = B, S,
as solution variable for the solver. This means the solver can make consumption arbitrarily small, but
not negative.
   The nonlinear equation solver needs to compute the Jacobian of the system at each step. Numerical
central-difference (forward-difference) approximation of the Jacobian can be inaccurate and is compu-
tationally costly because it requires 2N +1 (N +1) evaluations of the system, with N being the number
of variables, whereas analytically computed Jacobians are exact and require only one evaluation. We
follow Elenev (2016) in “pre-computing” all forecasting functions in step 2B of the algorithm, so that
we can calculate the Jacobian of the system analytically. To do so, we employ the Symbolic Math
Toolbox in MATLAB, passing the analytic Jacobian to fsolve at the beginning of step 2C. This greatly
speeds up calculations.

Grid configuration. We choose to include borrower wealth WtB as state variable instead of bor-
rower debt AB
            t , defined as
                                                 WtB = pt KtB − qtm AB
                                                                     t ,

such that the total set of endogenous state variables is [KtB , WtB , WtI , WtS , BtG ]. Keeping track of bor-
rower wealth WtB instead of debt AB t turns out to have better properties for numerical approximation
and the same information content. The reason is that borrower wealth is much more stable in the
dynamics of the model than borrower debt, since borrower debt and capital are strongly correlated
reflecting borrowers’ optimal investment and leverage choices. Recall that one endogenous state vari-
able can be eliminated because of the adding-up property of budget constraints in combination with
market clearing. We choose to eliminate saver wealth W S . The grid points in each state dimension
are as follows

    • Z A : We discretize ZtA into a 5-state Markov chain using the Rouwenhorst (1995) method. The
      procedure chooses the productivity grid points {ZjA }5j=1 and the 5 × 5 Markov transition matrix
      ΠZ A between them to match the volatility and persistence of HP-detrended GDP. This yields
      the possible realizations: [0.957, 0.978, 1.000, 1.022, 1.045].

                                                                 67
    • σω : [0.095, 0.175] (see calibration)

    • K B : [1.84, 1.98, 2.05, 2.10, 2.26, 2.45, 2.70]

    • W B : [1.00, 1.16, 1.20, 1.23, 1.24, 1.285, 1.33, 1.35, 1.375, 1.41, 1.50, 1.60, 1.70]

    • W I:

         [−0.02, −0.01, 0, 0.005, 0.01, 0.015, 0.02, 0.025, 0.03, 0.035, 0.04, 0.045, 0.05, 0.055, 0.06, 0.065, . . .
                                                         . . . , 0.07, 0.075, 0.08, 0.10, 0.125, 0.15, 0.25, 0.3, 0.38]

    • B G : [−0.2000, −0.02, 0, 0.1833, 0.4667, 0.7500, 1.0333, 1.3167, 1.4000]

   The total state space grid has 204,750 points. As pointed out by several previous studies such
as Kubler and Schmedders (2003), portfolio constraints lead to additional computational challenges
since portfolio policies may not be smooth functions of state variables due to occasionally binding
constraints. Hence we cluster grid points in areas of the state space where constraints transition from
slack to binding. Our policy functions are particularly nonlinear in bank net worth WtI , since the status
of the bank leverage constraint (binding or not binding) depends predominantly on this state variable.
To achieve acceptable accuracy, we have to specify a very dense grid for W I , as can be seen above.
Also note that the lower end of the W I grid includes some negative values. Negative realizations of W I
can occur in severe financial crisis episodes. Recall that W I is the beginning-of-period net worth of all
banks. Depending on the realization of their idiosyncratic payout shock, banks decide whether or not
to default. Thus the model contains two reasons why banks may not default despite initial negative
net worth: (i) positive idiosyncratic shocks, and (ii) positive franchise value. The lower bound of W I
needs to be low enough such that bank net worth is not artificially truncated during crises, but it
must not be so low that, given such low initial net worth, banks cannot be recapitalized to get back to
positive net worth. Thus the “right” lower bound depends on the strength of the equity issuance cost
and other parameters. Finding the right value for the lower bound is a matter of experimentation.


Generating an initial guess and iteration scheme. To find a good initial guess for the policy,
forecasting, and transition functions, we solve the deterministic “steady-state” of the model under the
assumption that the bank leverage constraint is binding and government debt/GDP is 40%. We then
initialize all functions to their steady-state values, for all points in the state space. Note that the only
role of the steady-state calculation is to generate an initial guess that enables the nonlinear equation
solver to find solutions at (almost) all points during the first iteration of the solution algorithm. In
our experience, the steady state delivers a good enough initial guess.
  In case the solver cannot find solutions for some points during the initial iterations, we revisit such
points at the end of each iteration. We try to solve the system at these “failed” points using as initial
guess the solution of the closest neighboring point at which the solver was successful. This method
works well to speed up convergence and eventually find solutions at all points.
  To further speed up computation time, we run the initial 100 iterations with a coarser state space
grid (19,500 points total). After these iterations, the algorithm is usually close to convergence; however,
the accuracy during simulation would be too low. Therefore, we initialize the finer (final) solution
grid using the policy, forecasting, and transition function obtained after 100 coarse grid iterations. We
then run the algorithm for at most 40 more iterations on the fine grid.
  To determine convergence, we check absolute errors in the value functions of households and banks,
(V1) – V(3). Out of all functions we approximate during the solution procedure, these exhibit the


                                                          68
slowest convergence. We stop the solution algorithm when the maximum absolute difference between
two iterations, and for all three functions and all points in the state space, falls below 1e-3 and the
mean distance falls below 1e-4. For appropriately chosen grid boundaries, the algorithm will converge
within the final 40 iterations.
   In some cases, our grid boundaries are wider than necessary, in the sense that the simulated economy
never visits the areas near the boundary on its equilibrium path. Local convergence in those areas
is usually very slow, but not relevant for the equilibrium path of the economy. If the algorithm has
not achieved convergence after the 40 additional iterations on the fine grid, we nonetheless stop the
procedure and simulate the economy. If the resulting simulation produces low relative errors (see step
3 of the solution procedure), we accept the solution. After the 140 iterations described above, our
simulated model economies either achieve acceptable accuracy in relative errors, or if not, the cause is
a badly configured state grid. In the latter case, we need to improve the grid and restart the solution
procedure. Additional iterations, beyond 100 on the coarse and 40 on the fine grid, do not change any
statistics of the simulated equilibrium path for any of the simulations we report.
  We implement the algorithm in MATLAB and run the code on a high-performance computing
(HPC) cluster. As mentioned above, the nonlinear system of equations can be solved in parallel at
each point. We parallelize across 28 CPU cores of a single HPC node. From computing the initial
guess and analytic Jacobian to simulating the solved model, the total running time for the benchmark
calibration is about 2 hours and 40 minutes. Calibrations that exhibit more financial fragility and/or
macro volatility converge up to 15% slower.


Simulation. To obtain the quantitative results, we simulate the model for 10,000 periods after
a “burn-in” phase of 500 periods. The starting point of the simulation is the ergodic mean of the
state variables. As described in detail above, we verify that the simulated time path stays within
the bounds of the state space for which the policy functions were computed. We fix the seed of the
random number generator so that we use the same sequence of exogenous shock realizations for each
parameter combination.
   To produce impulse response function (IRF) graphs, we simulate 10,000 different paths of 25 periods
each. In the initial period, we set the endogenous state variables to several different values that
reflect the ergodic distribution of the states. We use a clustering algorithm to represent the ergodic
distribution non-parametrically. We fix the initial exogenous shock realization to mean productivity
(Z A = 1) and low uncertainty (σω,low ). The “impulse” in the second period is either only a bad
productivity shock (Z A = 0.978) for non-financial recessions, or both low Z A and a high uncertainty
shock (σω,hi ) for financial recessions. For the remaining 23 periods, the simulation evolves according
to the stochastic law of motion of the shocks. In the IRF graphs, we plot the median path across the
10,000 paths given the initial condition.


B.3     Evaluating the solution
Equation errors. Our main measure to assess the accuracy of the solution are relative equation
errors calculated as described in step 3 of the solution procedure. Table 6 reports the median error,
the 95th percentile of the error distribution, the 99th , and 100th percentiles during the 10,000 period
simulation of the model. Median and 75th percentile errors are small for all equations. Equations
(E5) – (E6) and (E9) have elevated maximum errors. These errors are caused by a bad approximation
of the bank’s Lagrange multiplier λI in rarely occurring states. It is possible to reduce these errors by
placing more grid points in those areas of the state space. In our experience, adding points to eliminate
the tail errors has little to no effect on any of the results we report. Since it increases computation

                                                   69
                                    Table 6: Computational Errors

                     Equation                             Percentile
                                        50th       75th       95th       99th       Max
                   E1     (35)        0.0004     0.0009     0.0019     0.0033     0.0316
                   E2     (36)        0.0003     0.0005     0.0011     0.0017     0.0051
                   E3     (31), B     0.0001     0.0002     0.0002     0.0003     0.0004
                   E4     (31), S     0.0001     0.0002     0.0002     0.0003     0.0004
                   E5     (50)        0.0038     0.0079     0.0140     0.0180     0.1302
                   E6     (51)        0.0042     0.0091     0.0185     0.0212     0.1389
                   E7     (58)        0.0007     0.0014     0.0026     0.0036     0.0119
                   E8     (27)        0.0041     0.0065     0.0137     0.0228     0.0581
                   E9     (43)        0.0005     0.0011     0.0027     0.0048     0.1069
                   E10    (44)        0.0002     0.0006     0.0010     0.0015     0.0079
                   E11    (54)        0.0055     0.0080     0.0181     0.0288     0.0783
                   E12    (18)        0.0005     0.0006     0.0007     0.0009     0.0369
                     The table reports median, 75th percentile, 95th percentile, 99th per-
                     centile, and maximum absolute value errors, evaluated at state space
                     points from a 10,000 period simulation of the benchmark model. Each
                     row contains errors for the respective equation of the nonlinear system
                     (E1) – (E12) listed in step 2 of the solution procedure. The table’s
                     second column contains corresponding equation numbers in the main
                     text and appendix A.


times nonetheless, we chose the current grid configuration.


Policy function plots. We further visually inspect policy functions to gauge whether the approx-
imated functions have the smoothness and monotonicity properties implied by our choices of utility
and adjustment cost functions. Such plots also allow us to see the effect of binding constraints on
prices and quantities. For example, figure 7 shows investment by firms and the Lagrange multiplier on
the bank’s leverage constraint. It is obvious from the graphs that a binding intermediary constraint
restricts investment. The intermediary constraint becomes binding for low values of intermediary net
worth. Further note the interaction with borrower-entrepreneur net worth: holding fixed intermediary
net worth, the constraint is more likely to become biding for low borrower wealth.


State space histogram plots. We also create histogram plots for the endogenous state variables,
overlaid with the placement of grid points. These types of plots allow us to check that the simulated
path of the economy does not violate the state grid boundaries. It further helps us to determine where
to place grid points. Histogram plots for the benchmark economy are in figure 8.




                                                     70
  Figure 7: Plot of optimal investment and Lagrange multiplier on bank leverage constraint

                                   Investment                                                              Multiplier


      0.2                                                                   1


      0.1
                                                                           0.5




                                                                       I
  X




        0


      -0.1                                                                  0

             0.3                                                                 0.3
                   0.2                                          1.6                    0.2                                               1.6
                                                          1.4                                                                      1.4
                             0.1            1.2                                                  0.1                    1.2
                         I         0   1                                                     I         0      1
                                                      B
                    W                             W                                     W                                     WB

The left panel plots investment by borrower-entrepreneurs as function of borrower-entrepreneur wealth W B and
bank net worth W I . The right panel plots the Lagrange multiplier on the bank leverage constraint for the same
state variables. Both plots are for the benchmark economy. The other state variables are fixed to the following
values: Z A = 1, σω = σ̄ω,L , K B = 2.3, B G = 0.5.


C        Calibration Appendix
C.1          Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
In a complex, non-linear structural general equilibrium model like ours, it is often difficult to see
precisely which features of the data drive the ultimate results. This appendix follows the approach
advocated by Andrews, Gentzkow, and Shapiro (2017) to report how key moments are affected by
changes in the model’s key parameters, in the hope of improving the transparency of the results.
Structural identification of parameters and sensitivity of results are two sides of the same coin.
    Consider a generic vector of moments m which depends on a generic parameter vector θ. Let ιi be
a selector vector of the same length as θ taking a value of 1 in the i’th position and zero elsewhere.
Denote the parameter choices in the benchmark calibration by a superscript b. For each parameter
θi , we solve the model once for θb ◦ eιi ε and once for θb ◦ e−ιi ε . We then report the symmetric finite
difference:
                                 log m(θb ◦ eιi ε ) − log m(θb ◦ eιi ε )
                                                                         

                                                     2ε
We set ε = .01, or 1% of the benchmark parameter value. The resulting quantities are elasticities of
moments to structural parameters.
   To avoid excessive reporting, we focus on 8 key parameters and 13 key moments. The parameters
are: (1) the equity adjustment cost parameter σI , (2) the cost of default parameter ζ, (3) the mortgage
duration parameter δ, (4) the capital adjustment cost parameter φ, (5) the idiosyncratic bank profit
risk σε , (6) the dispersion of TFP shocks in the normal state σω,L , and (7) the dispersion of TFP
shocks in the crisis state σω,H , and (8) the risk aversion coefficient (of both borrowers and savers,
σB = σS ). Each panel of Figure 9 lists the same 14 moments and shows the elasticity of the moments
to one of the eight parameters. As an aside, the movements in the excess bond return in response to


                                                                      71
                      Figure 8: Histogram plots of endogenous state variables

                                KB                                          WB
           1000                                         1500


                                                        1000
             500
                                                            500


               0                                              0
                1.5        2           2.5         3              1   1.2   1.4   1.6     1.8

                                WI                                          BG
           2000                                         3000

           1500
                                                        2000
           1000
                                                        1000
             500

               0                                              0
                       0         0.2         0.4              -0.5    0     0.5   1      1.5


The plots show histograms for capital and borrower-entrepreneur wealth in the top row, and intermediary net
worth and and government debt in the bottom row, for the 10,000 period simulation of the benchmark economy.
The vertical lines indicate the values of grid points.


multiple parameters appear to be large but they are only large relative to a fairly small baseline level
of excess returns of 30 basis points per year. For consistency, we report percentage changes, which are
unit-free, in every moment.
  A higher equity adjustment cost in the first panel, strongly increases the excess return on corporate
bonds, the moment chosen to pin down this parameter. It also strongly decreases bank bankruptcies.
Increasing σ I is akin to an increase in the risk aversion of banks, consistent with the discussion in
Section D.6 below. Higher risk aversion naturally results in a larger equilibrium compensation for
bearing credit risk and a tendency for banks to stay farther away from their borrowing constraint.
   A higher value for the bankruptcy cost parameter ζ naturally results in higher losses given default,
the moment chosen to pin down this parameter. While there is a modest decline in the default rate,
the overall loss rate still goes up. There are more bank bankruptcies and a higher excess return on
corporate bonds, given the increased quantity of credit risk. Corporate leverage declines in the wake
of costlier credit. With less corporate debt and unchanged financial sector leverage, the banking sector
shrinks (Deposits/Y). Lower corporate debt also results in a lower capital stock and a less volatile
economy, which improves risk sharing (MU vol goes down).
   An increase in the corporate debt maturity parameter δ most directly affects bond duration, the
elasticity of corporate bond prices to interest rates (not reported). An increase in bond duration
increases the excess return on bonds. With increased duration, firms become better duration-matched
since the duration of their capital assets is high. As a result, firm leverage slightly increases despite
the higher cost of debt.
   The fourth panel explores changes in the capital adjustment cost parameter ψ. Higher capital ad-
justment costs naturally reduce investment volatility. They raise consumption volatility. The increase
in capital adjustment costs increases the volatility in the price of capital (not reported), which causes
risk-averse firms to de-lever. Lower leverage reduces the quantity of default risk as well as the credit
spread unconditionally, but makes realized excess returns lower in crises, eroding bank capital and
increasing expected excess returns enough to increase them unconditionally as well. With more risk


                                                       72
                                  Figure 9: Parameter Sensitivity Analysis


                      1. Default rate
         2. Loss-given-default rate
            3. Market corp leverage
                     4. Bankruptcies
                 5. Mkt fin leverage
  6. Fraction leverage constr binds
                    7. Credit spread
   8. Excess return on corp. bonds
                      9. Deposits / Y
                   10. Capital Stock
               11. Consumption Vol
                 12. Investment Vol
                    13. MU ratio Vol
                                    -20   0   20   -5        0   5 -200   0   200 -2     0      2



                      1. Default rate
         2. Loss-given-default rate
            3. Market corp leverage
                     4. Bankruptcies
                 5. Mkt fin leverage
  6. Fraction leverage constr binds
                    7. Credit spread
   8. Excess return on corp. bonds
                      9. Deposits / Y
                   10. Capital Stock
               11. Consumption Vol
                 12. Investment Vol
                    13. MU ratio Vol
                                    -5    0    5   -2        0   2   -5   0    5 -0.05   0    0.05




in bad times, the banking sector shrinks (deposits/Y).
  Panel five increases the volatility of idiosyncratic bank profit shocks σ . That most directly affects
bank bankruptcies, which is how the parameter is calibrated. The banks’ leverage constraint binds
more frequently. It increases the credit spread and excess bond return. A riskier banking sector
shrinks.
   Panel six (seven) studies an increase in the idiosyncratic productivity dispersion in normal (crisis)
times. The elasticities tend to have an opposite pattern since the former change narrows the gap
between the low and the high state thereby reducing the aggregate risk in the economy, while the
latter change increases the gap. The reduction in aggregate risk is consistent with a reduction in
macroeconomic volatility and an improvement in risk sharing (a reduction in MU vol). Financial firms
respond to the safer macro-economic environment and the higher excess bond returns by increasing
their risk taking, which results in higher financial sector leverage and bankruptcies.
   Panel eight studies an increase in the risk aversion of both types of households in the economy,
from the benchmark value of one. The intertemporal elasticity of substitution stays unchanged at one.
The effect of this change is orders of magnitude smaller than the effect of other parameter changes.
Corporate leverage and defaults go down. The financial leverage constraint becomes binding more
frequently, as intermediating has become more profitable as witnessed by the increase in the excess


                                                        73
bond return.


C.2     Long-term Corporate Bonds
Our model’s corporate bonds are geometrically declining perpetuities, and as such have no principal.
The issuer of one unit of the bond at time t promises to pay the holder 1 at time t + 1, δ at time
t + 2, δ 2 at time t + 3, and so on. Issuers must hold enough capital to collateralize the face value of
                            θ
the bond, given by F = 1−δ    , a constant parameter that does not depend on any state variable of the
economy. Real life bonds have a finite maturity and a principal payment. They also have a vintage
(year of issuance), whereas our bonds combine all vintages in one variable. This appendix explains
how to map the geometric bonds in our model into real-world bonds by choosing values for δ and θ.
   Our model’s corporate loan/bond refers to the entire pool of all outstanding corporate loans/bonds.
To proxy for this pool, we use investment-grade and high-yield indices constructed by Bank of Amer-
ica Merill Lynch (BofAML) and Barclays Capital (BarCap). For the BofAML indices (Datastream
Codes LHYIELD and LHCCORP for investment grade and high-yield corporate bonds, respectively)
we obtain a time series of monthly market values, durations (the sensitivity of prices to interest rates),
weighted-average maturity (WAM), and weighted average coupons (WAC) for January 1997 until De-
cember 2015. For the BarCap indices (C0A0 and H0A0 for investment grade and high-yield corporate
bonds, respectively), we obtain a time series of option-adjusted spreads over the Treasury yield curve.
  First, we use market values of the BofAML investment grade and high-yield portfolios to create
an aggregate bond index and find its mean WAC c of 5.5% and WAM T of 10 years over our time
period. We also add the time series of OAS to the constant maturity treasury rate corresponding to
that period’s WAM to get a time series of bond yields rt . Next, we construct a plain vanilla corporate
bond with a semiannual coupon and maturity equal to the WAC and WAM of the aggregate bond
index, and compute the price for $1 par of this bond for each yield:

                                               2T
                                    c
                                               X          c/2             1
                                  P (rt ) =                         +
                                                       (1 + rt )i/2   (1 + rt )T
                                                i=1

  We can write the steady-state price of a geometric bond with parameter δ as
                                                        1 
                                        P G (rt ) =          1 + δP G (rt )
                                                                           
                                                      1 + rt

  Solving for P G (yt ), we get
                                                                  1
                                              P G (rt ) =
                                                              1 + rt − δ
  The calibration determines how many units X of the geometric bond with parameter δ one needs
to sell to hedge one unit of plain vanilla bond P c against parallel shifts in interest rates, across the
range of historical yields:

                                           2015.12
                                            X          c                     2
                                  min                  P (rt ) − XP G (rt ; δ)
                                   δ,X
                                          t=1997.1

  We estimate δ = 0.937 and X = 12.9, yielding an average pricing error of only 0.41%. This value
                                                    dP G
for δ implies a time series of durations Dt = − P1G drtt with a mean of 6.84.
                                                         t




                                                             74
  To establish a notion of principal for the geometric bond, we compare it to a duration-matched
zero-coupon bond i.e. borrowing some amount today (the principal) and repaying it Dt years from
now. The principal of this loan is just the price of the corresponding Dt maturity zero-coupon bond
   1
(1+rt )Dt
  We set the “principal” F of one unit of the geometric bond to be some fraction θ of the undiscounted
                           θ
sum of all its cash flows 1−δ , where

                                                 2015.12
                                             1    X             1
                                        θ=
                                             N              (1 + rt )Dt
                                                 t=1997.1


  We get θ = 0.582 and F = 9.18.


C.3         LTV constraint
The cost of bankruptcy induces banks to limit leverage. In the computation of the model solution, we
additionally impose a hard constraint on leverage. This is a standard leverage constraint:
                                                                   ∗
                               F AB                    B               B
                                  t+1 ≤ Φpt (1 − (1 − τΠ )δK )ΩA (ωt )Kt .                            (59)

The borrowing constraint in (59) caps the face value of debt at the end of the period, F AB      t+1 , to a
fraction of the market value of the available capital units after default and depreciation, pt (1 − (1 −
τΠB )δK )ΩA (ωt∗ )KtB , where Φ is the maximum leverage ratio. With such a constraint, declines in capital
prices (in bad times) tighten borrowing constraints, as in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). The constraint
(59) imposes a hard upper bound on borrower leverage.
  We set the maximum LTV ratio parameter Φ = 0.45. This value is just large enough so that
the LTV constraint never binds during expansions and non-financial recessions. In the simulation of
the benchmark model, the borrower’s LTV constraint binds in 3% of financial recessions. The LTV
constraint limits corporate borrowing as a fraction of the market value of capital. We set Φ to match
the volatility of corporate debt-to-GDP of the non-financial sector, which is 5.2% in the data and 4.3%
in the model.
   We have verified that relaxing this constraint to the extent that it is never binding does not signif-
icantly affect the results. For example, setting the maximum leverage ratio to Φ = .55 yields almost
identical results. We include the constraint for comparability with the existing literature that has
emphasized the financial accelerator operating through capital prices. In our setup the main force
limiting corporate leverage is a standard trade-off between the benefits and costs of debt finance.


C.4         Measuring Labor Income Tax Revenue
We define income tax revenue as current personal tax receipts (line 3) plus current taxes on production
and imports (line 4) minus the net subsidies to government sponsored enterprises (line 30 minus line
19) minus the net government spending to the rest of the world (line 25 + line 26 + line 29 - line 6 - line
9 - line 18). Our logic for adding the last three items to personal tax receipts is as follows. Taxes on
production and export mostly consist of federal excise and state and local sales taxes, which are mostly
paid by consumers. Net government spending on GSEs consists mostly of housing subsidies received
by households which can be treated equivalently as lowering the taxes that households pay. Finally,
in the data, some of the domestic GDP is sent abroad in the form of net government expenditures


                                                     75
to the rest of the world rather than being consumed domestically. Since the model has no foreigners,
we reduce personal taxes for this amount, essentially rebating this lost consumption back to domestic
agents.


C.5     Taxation of Savers’ Financial Income
Savers earn financial income from two sources. First, they earn interest on their private lending i.e.
deposits in the financial intermediaries. This income is ultimately a claim on the capital rents in the
economy and should be taxed at the same rate τK as borrowers’ and intermediaries’ net income.
  Second, they earn interest on their public lending i.e. government bonds. In the data, Treasury
coupons are taxed at the household’s marginal tax rate, τ in the model. However, the tax revenue
collected by the government from interest income on its own bonds is substantially lower than τ BtG
because (a) Treasury coupons are exempt from state and local taxes, and (b) more than half of
privately owned Treasury debt is held by foreigners, who also do not pay federal income taxes.
  In the model, there is one tax rate τD at which all of the saver’s interest income is taxed. We choose
τD to satisfy

                                                               τ̂ federal G
               τD (B̂ I + B̂ G ) = τ K (B̂ I − B̂pension
                                                 I
                                                         )+τ                      G
                                                                          (B̂ − B̂foreign     I
                                                                                          − B̂pension )
                                                                 τ̂ total
where hats denote quantities in the data. Specifically, the revenue from taxes collected at rate τD on
all private safe debt and government debt must equal the sum of tax revenues collected on taxable
private safe debt (private safe debt not held in tax-advantaged pension funds) at rate τK , and tax
revenues collected on taxable public debt (Treasury debt not held by foreigners, the Fed, or pension
                          federal
funds) taxed at rate τ τ̂τ̂ total .
   We measure all quantities at December 31, 2014. Private debt stocks are taken from the Financial
Accounts of the United States. Treasury debt stocks are taken from the Treasury Bulletin. Federal
and total personal tax revenues are taken from the BEA’s National Income and Product Accounts.
There is approximately $13 trillion each outstanding of private and public debt. Almost all private
debt is taxable, but only $4 trillion of public debt is. Federal taxes constitute approximately 80% of
all personal income tax revenue. Using the calibration for τK and τ , we get


                                        20% × $13T + 29.5% × 0.8 × $4T
                                 τD ≈
                                                 $13T + $13T
or τD = 13.4% precisely.


C.6     Stationarity of Government Debt
In our numerical work, we guarantee the stationarity of the ratio of government debt to GDP by
gradually decreasing personal tax rates τt when debt-to-GDP falls below bG = 0.1 –the profligacy
region– and by gradually increasing personal tax rates when debt-to-GDP exceed bG = 1.2 –the
austerity region. Specifically, taxes are gradually and smoothly lowered with a convex function until
they hit zero at debt to GDP of -0.1. Tax rates are gradually and convexly increased until they hit 60%
at a debt-to-GDP ratio of 150%. Our simulations never reach the -10% and +150% debt/GDP states.
The simulation spends 24% of the time in the profligacy and 15% of the time in the austerity region.
The fraction of time spent in these regions has no effect on the overall resources of the economy.

                                                       76
Achieving stationarity of government debt requires primary surpluses, since the government must
also service the debt. Generating primary surpluses requires slightly overshooting on personal and
corporate tax revenue relative to the data, since the U.S. government has historically had an average
primary surplus of (just about) zero. Put differently, the actual U.S. fiscal path is unsustainable, i.e.,
incompatible with a stationary model.


C.7      Measuring Intermediary Sector Leverage
Our notion of the intermediary sector is the levered financial sector. We take book values of assets and
liabilities of these sectors from the Financial Accounts of the United States (formerly Flow of Funds).
We subtract holding and funding company equity investments in subsidiaries from those subsidiaries’
liabilities. Table 7 reports the assets, liabilities, and leverage of each sector as of 2014, as well as the
average leverage from 1953 to 2014. We find that the average leverage ratio of the levered financial
sector was 91.5%. This is our calibration target.
  Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2015) identify a similar group of financial institutions as net
suppliers of safe, liquid assets. Their financial sector includes money market mutual funds (who do not
perform maturity transformation) and equity REITS (who operate physical assets) but excludes life
insurance companies (which are highly levered). The financial sector definition of Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2015) suggests a similar ratio of 90.9%. As an aside, we note that Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2015) report lower total assets and liabilities than in our reconstruction of
their procedure because they net out positions within the financial sector by instrument while we do
not.




                                                    77
                        Table 7: Balance Sheet Variables and Prices

                                                                 Dec 2014               Avg 53-14
Table     Sector                                      Assets    Liabilities Leverage     Leverage
L.111     U.S.-Chartered Depository Institutions     $ 13,647      $ 12,161     0.891        0.921
L.112     Foreign Banking Offices in U.S.             $ 2,093       $ 2,086     0.996        1.065
L.113     Banks in U.S.-Affiliated Areas                 $ 92          $ 88     0.953        1.080
L.114     Credit Unions                               $ 1,066         $ 958     0.899        0.916
          Subtotal: Banks                            $ 16,898      $ 15,292     0.905        0.928

L.125     Government-Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs)     $ 6,400      $ 6,387      0.998        0.971
L.126     Agency- and GSE-Backed Mortgage Pools       $ 1,649      $ 1,649      1.000        1.000
L.127     Issuers of Asset-Backed Securities (ABS)    $ 1,424      $ 1,424      1.000        1.003
L.129.m   Mortgage Real Estate Investment Trusts        $ 568        $ 483      0.851        0.955
L.128     Finance Companies                           $ 1,501      $ 1,376      0.916        0.873
L.130     Security Brokers and Dealers                $ 3,255      $ 1,345      0.413        0.808
L.131     Holding Companies                           $ 4,391      $ 2,103      0.479        0.441
L.132     Funding Corporations                        $ 1,305      $ 1,305      1.000        1.000
          Subtotal: Other Liquidity Providers        $ 20,492     $ 16,070      0.784        0.872

L.116     Life Insurance Companies                    $ 6,520      $ 5,817      0.892        0.932

          Total                                      $ 43,910     $ 37,179      0.847       0.915

L.121     Money-Market Mutual Funds                   $ 2,725      $ 2,725      1.000        1.000
L.129.e   Equity Real Estate Investment Trusts          $ 157        $ 539      3.427        2.577
          Total (K-VJ Definition)                    $ 40,271     $ 33,549      0.833        0.909




                                              78
D      Results Appendix
D.1      Pure Uncertainty Shock
Figure 10 compares the dynamics of important macro-economic aggregates and balance sheet variables
in a financial recession (red lines) to the effect of a pure second-moment shock. The IRF plots are
generated as explained in the main text. The red line in the plots of figure 10 is identical to the red
lines in figures 2 and 3 in the main text, as both are caused by the same combination of a low TFP
realization and an increase in σω in period 1. The blue lines in figure 10 show dynamics after the
economy is hit only by the increase in σω , with stable TFP. The plots show that this pure uncertainty
shock has much smaller negative effects on output, consumption and investment than the combination
that causes a financial recession. This feature of our model is consistent with the empirical finding
that uncertainty shocks alone have at most moderate negative effects on output and investment, see
for example Bachmann and Bayer (2013) or Vavra (2014).
   A closer look at the balance sheet variables in the bottom panel reveals that the fundamental
difference between both types of shocks lies in the response of intermediaries. The losses suffered
on loans during a financial crisis are only marginally larger than those from the uncertainty shock.
However, the financial sector does not shrink after the uncertainty shock. Rather, firms raise more debt
(bottom left panel) despite a temporarily smaller capital stock (top right panel), effectively increasing
leverage. Banks reduce deposit funding only marginally (bottom middle). The spikes in bank failure
rate and credit spread are less than half of those experienced in a financial recession. We can conclude
that only the combination of TFP and uncertainty shock activates the intermediary-based financial
accelerator.
   Why are financial recessions so much worse despite similar losses from borrower defaults for banks?
Figure 11 shows that the dynamics of the corporate bond price (top right) are the key amplifying force.
This price drops sharply in financial recessions, causing large market value losses for intermediaries.
This large drop in price is driven by two main forces. First, the negative TFP shock reduces bank
demand for corporate bonds, as seen in Figure 3 in the main text. Second, the losses on corporate
bonds caused by the uncertainty shock reduce bank capital, and thus amplify the first effect of reduced
demand on prices. The stronger financial accelerator means that intermediary net worth falls only half
as much in an uncertainty shock episode compared to a financial recession (bottom right). As a result,
intermediaries are not forced to shrink as they are in a financial recession. Continuity in lending
to borrower-entrepreneurs prevents a sharp reduction in investment and the capital price (bottom
left) despite intermediary losses on loans. In the third period of a financial recession, intermediary
wealth overshoots as banks earn large spreads due to the sharp drop in the risk-free rate. Intermediaries
deplete this extra wealth to gradually expand lending again as the production sector recovers to normal
levels of capital. These dynamics are not present in an uncertainty shock episode, since lending never
contracted to begin with.


D.2      Drivers of Financial Leverage
This appendix explores what model ingredients contribute quantitatively to the high financial leverage
that the benchmark model is able to generate. Specifically, we turn off the three financial frictions, one
at the time: (1) the bankruptcy option for banks, (2) equity adjustment costs (σ I = 0), and (3) the
tax shield for financial firms. Table 8 contains the results. The main finding is that financial leverage
is affected very little by these financial frictions. In other words, the main driver of the high financial
leverage is the wedge between the subjective time discount rate of borrowers and savers. This wedge


                                                    79
Figure 10: Financial Recession vs. Uncertainty Shock: Macro Quantities and Balance Sheets

                                                                      TFP                                                               Output
                                             0.5                                                              0.5


                                              0                                                                 0


                                            -0.5                                                             -0.5


                                              -1                                                               -1


                                            -1.5                                                             -1.5


                                              -2                                                               -2


                                            -2.5                                                             -2.5
                                                   0    5        10         15           20        25               0          5    10       15        20     25




                                                             Consumption                                                           Investment
                                         0.625                                                               0.19


                                                                                                             0.18
                                            0.62
                                                                                                             0.17


                                         0.615                                                               0.16


                                                                                                             0.15
                                            0.61
                                                                                                             0.14


                                         0.605                                                               0.13
                                                   0    5        10         15           20        25               0          5    10       15        20     25




                                    Loan loss rate                                                 Bank failure rate                                        Corporate assets
              0.025                                                          0.04                                                           2.22

                                                                            0.035
                                                                                                                                            2.21
               0.02
                                                                             0.03
                                                                                                                                             2.2
              0.015                                                         0.025

                                                                             0.02                                                           2.19
               0.01                                                         0.015
                                                                                                                                            2.18
                                                                             0.01
              0.005
                                                                                                                                            2.17
                                                                            0.005

                 0                                                               0                                                          2.16
                      0         5      10          15   20       25                  0        5         10     15         20       25              0    5      10     15       20   25




                          Corporate liabilities (=fin. assets)                                    Financial liabilities                                       Loan spread
               0.82                                                          0.78                                                           0.09

                                                                             0.77                                                           0.08
               0.81
                                                                             0.76                                                           0.07
                0.8
                                                                             0.75                                                           0.06

               0.79                                                          0.74                                                           0.05

                                                                             0.73                                                           0.04
               0.78
                                                                             0.72                                                           0.03
               0.77
                                                                             0.71                                                           0.02

               0.76                                                           0.7                                                           0.01
                      0         5      10          15   20       25                  0        5         10     15         20       25              0    5      10     15       20   25




             Blue line: uncertainty shock, red line: financial recession, black line: no shock


creates a strong incentive to channel savings from depositors to non-financial firms, i.e., for financial
intermediation.

                                                                                                        80
                  Figure 11: Financial Recession vs. Uncertainty Shock: Prices

                                             Rf rate                                    Corp. bond price
                          0.03                                            9.5

                          0.02
                                                                          9.4
                          0.01

                             0                                            9.3
                          -0.01

                          -0.02                                           9.2

                          -0.03
                                                                          9.1
                          -0.04

                          -0.05                                            9
                                  0   5    10      15     20   25               0   5      10     15       20   25




                                          Capital price                                     I Wealth
                          1.01                                           0.12


                             1                                            0.1


                          0.99                                           0.08


                          0.98                                           0.06


                          0.97                                           0.04


                          0.96                                           0.02


                          0.95                                             0
                                  0   5    10      15     20   25               0   5      10     15       20   25




             Blue line: uncertainty shock, red line: financial recession, black line: no shock


   Furthermore, we see that when banks are not allowed to default, they stay away from their leverage
constraint more often. Without equity adjustment costs, it becomes much cheaper to recapitalize
banks for their shareholders. This acts like a reduction in risk aversion for bank shareholders and
their leverage constraint becomes binding all the time. The slightly higher financial leverage results
in significantly more bank bankruptcies. The effective reduction in risk aversion also lowers the
required compensation for risk banks receive, as shown in the lower credit spread and excess return
on corporate bonds, despite a slightly higher loss rate on corporate loans. The cheaper cost of debt
in turn incentivizes non-financial firms to increase leverage. In sum, a reduction in the cost of equity
finance for banks has a stronger effect on non-financial leverage than on financial leverage.
   The model without tax shield features higher credit spread and excess return and lower loss rates.
The banks manage to pass through the loss of their tax shield to their customers, the non-financial
firms. Their compensation per unit of risk increases, providing incentives to increase financial leverage
(modestly). The increased cost of credit coincides with lower corporate leverage.


D.3     Credit Spread and Risk Premium
One important quantitative success of the model is its ability to generate a high unconditional credit
spread while matching the observed amount of default risk. The credit spread is also highly volatile
(2.94% standard deviation) and more than twice as high in financial recessions than in expansions.
The rise in the credit spread in financial recessions to 4.28% reflects not only the increase in the
quantity default risk but also an increase in the price of credit risk. The model generates a high and
counter-cyclical price of credit risk, which itself comes from the high and counter-cyclical “shadow


                                                                    81
                           Table 8: Drivers of Financial Sector Leverage
                                             Bench    No bankruptcy         σI = 0     No tax shield
            Mkt fin leverage (in %)           93.3         93.3               94.0         93.9
            Book fin leverage (in %)          97.1         97.3               99.7         96.6
            % fin leverage constr binds       61.3         50.7              100.0         78.8
            Bankruptcies (in %)               0.54         0.00               1.71         1.21
            Credit spread (in %)              2.05         2.05               1.88         2.16
            Excess ret. corp. bonds (in %)    1.09         1.01               0.74         1.43
            Loss Rate (in %)                  0.96         1.05               1.17         0.79
            Market corp leverage (in %)       35.8         36.9               38.8         33.6
            Book corp leverage (in %)         35.2         36.2               37.2         33.3


SDF” for the intermediary sector.
  The intermediary SDF is given by:
                                                                      !−1
                                                                 ¯
                                                1 + σ I (dIt+1 − d)
                            MIt,t+1 = MB
                                       t,t+1                    ¯           F,t+1 ,
                                                 1 + σ I (dIt − d)

where MB     t,t+1 is the borrower SDF, F,t+1 is the probability of intermediary failure in t + 1, and
      1
           ¯ is the marginal value of wealth to intermediaries in t.
1+σ I (dI −d)
      t

  Figure 12 shows the histogram of the intermediary wealth share plotted against two different mea-
sures of credit risk compensation earned by intermediaries. The solid red line plots the credit spread,
the difference between            m
                     the yield rt on corporate bonds and the risk-free rate. We compute the bond
yield as rtm = log q1m + δ . This is a simple way of transforming the price of the long-term bond
                     t
into a yield; however, note that this definition assumes a default-free payment stream (1, δ, δ 2 , . . .)
occurring in the future. Consistent with the result in He and Krishnamurty (2013), the credit spread
is high when the financial intermediary’s wealth share is low. Since our model has defaultable debt,
the increase in the credit spread reflects both risk-neutral compensation for expected defaults and a
credit risk premium.
   To shed further light on the source of the high credit spread, we compute the expected excess
return (EER) on corporate loans earned by the intermediary. The EER consists both of the credit
risk premium, defined as the (negative) covariance of the intermediary’s stochastic discount factor
with the corporate bond’s excess return, and an additional component that reflects the tightness
of the intermediary’s leverage constraint. This component arises because the marginal agent in the
market for risk-free debt is the saver household, while corporate bonds are priced by the constrained
intermediary. The market risk free rate is lower than the “shadow” risk free rate implied by the
intermediary SDF. Given log preferences, most of the action in the EER comes from the constraint
tightness component. When intermediary wealth is relatively high, the leverage constraint is not
binding and the EER is approximately zero. Low levels of intermediary wealth result from credit
losses, and the lowest levels occur during financial crises. At these times, credit risk increases and the
intermediary becomes constrained. In the worst crisis episodes when intermediary wealth reaches zero
or drops below zero, the EER reaches 20 percent.




                                                     82
                      Figure 12: The Credit Spread and the Financial Intermediary Wealth Share

                                                    0.25                                                                               0.45

         Credit Spread and Expected Excess Return                                                                    Credit Spread
                                                                                                                     EER               0.4
                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                       0.35

                                                    0.15                                                                               0.3




                                                                                                                                              Frequency
                                                                                                                                       0.25
                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                                       0.2

                                                    0.05                                                                               0.15

                                                                                                                                       0.1
                                                       0
                                                                                                                                       0.05

                                                    -0.05                                                                               0
                                                        -0.02      0     0.02     0.04    0.06    0.08    0.1     0.12    0.14       0.16
                                                                                     Intermediary wealth
                                                                Solid line: credit spread; dashed line: expected excess return


D.4     Counter-cyclical Capital Requirements

D.5     Policy transitions
The tables above only compare the ergodic distributions of economies with different policy parameters.
How does an unanticipated policy change to a tighter or looser capital requirement affect output,
consumption, and the welfare of borrowers and savers in the short term? Figure 14 plots the evolution
of these variables after a policy change from the benchmark to either a higher (ξ = .90) or a lower
(ξ = .97) capital requirement. In the long run, output, consumption, and agent welfare converge to
their ergodic means in tables 4 and 5. In the short run, consumption “overshoots” in both cases.
Tightening the capital requirement by 4 p.p. leads a contraction in GDP as investment drops. But
lower investment also causes a consumption boom in the short run as the economy transitions to a
permanently lower capital stock.


D.6     Effect of Equity Adjustment Cost
Table 9 shows the effect of larger or smaller equity adjustment costs (σ I ) relative to the benchmark
economy. The overall take-away from this comparison is that larger equity frictions in the intermedia-
tion have a similar effect to tightening the intermediaries’ capital requirement. Higher marginal equity
adjustments costs (columns σ I = 6, σ I = 7) lead to a smaller non-financial sector, both in terms of
assets and liabilities. Corporate leverage declines, and as a result, fewer firms default, causing an
overall decline in loss rates on corporate loans.
  Even though intermediaries face less credit risk, they reduce their own leverage and their constraint
becomes binding much less frequently as σ I is increased. Consequently, intermediary failures are
almost completely eliminated at σ I = 7. An important difference to the macro-prudential policy
exercise with tighter capital requirements is the effect on bank profitability. In both cases (tighter


                                                                                             83
                                   Table 9: Effect of Varying σ I
                                         Bench (σ I = 5)     σI = 3       σI = 4    σI = 6      σI = 7
                                                                   Borrowers
1.   Mkt value of capital / Y (in %)     225.0                 226.6        226.4     221.4      219.0
2.   Mkt value of corp debt / Y (in %)   80.6                   84.4         83.9      72.2       64.5
3.   Book val of corp debt / Y (in %)    79.1                   82.1         81.7      72.2       65.1
4.   Market corp leverage (in %)         35.8                   37.3         37.1      32.6       29.4
5.   Book corp leverage (in %)           35.2                   36.2         36.1      32.6       29.7
6.   % leverage constr binds             0.32                   0.77         0.62      0.01       0.00
7.   Default rate (in %)                 2.25                   2.40         2.37      1.96       1.70
8.   Loss-given-default rate (in %)      43.09                 45.10        44.86     38.66      32.86
9.   Loss Rate (in %)                    0.96                   1.07         1.06      0.75       0.53
                                                                 Intermediaries
10.   Mkt fin leverage (in %)            93.3                   93.9         93.8      92.7       91.6
11.   Book fin leverage (in %)           97.1                   98.7         98.5      94.9       92.7
12.   % leverage constr binds            61.30                 93.61        82.39     30.66      20.70
13.   Bankruptcies (in %)                0.54                   1.45         1.26      0.07       0.03
14.   Wealth I / Y (in %)                5.6                     5.2           5.3      5.7        5.8
15.   Franchise value (in %)             33.9                   20.0         21.1      75.8       90.2
                                                                      Savers
16. Deposits / Y (in %)                  76.9                   81.1         80.5      68.5       60.5
17. Government debt / Y                  60.2                  115.7        110.6      19.0       15.4
                                                                      Prices
18.   Risk-free rate (in %)              2.19                   2.24         2.24      2.23       2.23
19.   Corporate bond rate 9in %)         4.24                   4.15         4.16      4.42       4.52
20.   Credit spread (in %)               2.05                   1.91         1.92      2.19       2.30
21.   Excess ret. corp. bonds (in %)     1.09                   0.87         0.90      1.45       1.72
                                                                     Welfare
22.   Aggr. welfare W pop                0.620               -0.38%       -0.39%   +0.28%     +0.52%
23.   Aggr. welfare W cev                0%                +16.20% +13.62%         -24.24%    -31.92%
24.   Value function, B                  0.285               -2.50%       -2.28%   +2.84%     +4.29%
25.   Value function, S                  0.336              +1.43%       +1.22%     -1.89%     -2.69%
26.   DWL/GDP                            0.008             +18.89% +15.31%         -18.68%    -30.84%
                                                              Size of the Economy
27.   GDP                                0.978              +0.29%       +0.25%     -0.65%      -1.09%
28.   Capital stock                      2.199              +1.00%       +0.87%     -2.24%      -3.72%
29.   Aggr. Consumption                  0.621               -0.07%       -0.05%   +0.02%       -0.00%
30.   Consumption, B                     0.291               -2.71%       -2.45%   +2.70%      +4.42%
31.   Consumption, S                     0.343              +2.17%       +1.98%     -2.25%      -3.75%
                                                                    Volatility
32.   Mkt value corp debt gr             0.029               -1.62%       -6.25% +10.61%      +78.99%
33.   Deposits gr                        0.049              -56.63%      -56.80%    -1.82%    +86.46%
34.   Dividend gr                        2.370              +7.71%       +3.93%    -30.67%     -38.58%
35.   Investment gr                      29.56%             -63.82%      -63.66%   -31.95%    +40.37%
36.   Consumption gr                     2.17%              -12.69%      -14.68%    -0.94%    +27.08%
37.   Consumption gr, B                  3.12%               -5.24%       -6.17%    -6.34%     +8.37%
38.   Consumption gr, S                  4.08%              -40.84%      -40.96%    -5.96%    +45.08%
39.   log (MU B / MU S)                  0.052              -25.85%      -27.18%    -9.44%    +29.32%




                                                  84
                 Figure 13: Financial Recessions with Counter-cyclical Capital Requirements

                          Consumption                                      Investment                                     DWL/GDP
    0.625                                               0.19                                              0.03


                                                        0.18                                             0.025
     0.62
                                                        0.17                                              0.02


    0.615                                               0.16                                             0.015


                                                        0.15                                              0.01
     0.61
                                                        0.14                                             0.005


    0.605                                               0.13                                                0
            0        5       10     15      20     25          0   5        10      15         20   25           0   5    10    15     20   25




                Corporate liabilities (=fin. assets)                   Financial liabilities                             Loan spread
     0.86                                               0.82                                              0.09
                                                                                                                         bench
                                                                                                          0.08
     0.84
                                                         0.8                                                              ={93%, 95%}
                                                                                                          0.07
                                                        0.78
     0.82                                                                                                 0.06

                                                        0.76                                              0.05
      0.8                                                                                                 0.04
                                                        0.74
                                                                                                          0.03
     0.78
                                                        0.72
                                                                                                          0.02

     0.76                                                0.7                                              0.01
            0        5       10     15      20     25          0   5        10      15         20   25           0   5    10    15     20   25




Blue line: responses to financial recession in economy with counter-cyclical capital requirements; Black line:
responses to financial recession in benchmark economy. The underlying shocks in the two cases are identical.


capital constraint and higher equity adjustment cost), intermediaries effectively become more risk
averse and require larger compensation for bearing risk, as evidenced by the large increase in the
excess return on loans (row 21). However, increasing σ I increases the franchise value of intermediaries
(row 15), since it raises the risk premium while at the same time not requiring banks to raise more
equity. Hence greater σ I raises the return on bank equity, while lower ξ does not.
  The overall welfare effects of larger equity adjustment frictions are comparable to the effects of tighter
ξ. Locally the reduction in bankruptcies of producers and intermediaries dominates the reduction in
the size of the capital stock, leading to a small aggregate welfare gain based on the population-weighted
measure (row 22). Like tighter capital regulation, greater σ I benefits equity owners of producers at
the expense of savers.
   The effects on macroeconomic volatility are nonlinear based on the same opposing forces that are
at play with tighter capital constraints: since higher intermediation frictions increase the cost of debt
funding, producers reduce the debt share of financing, which makes financial recessions less severe.
At the same time, greater intermediation frictions hamper banks’ ability to absorb aggregate risk
through their balance sheet. The net effect, at least locally around the benchmark level of σ I , is that
aggregate investment and consumption growth become less volatile with lower equity adjustment costs
(σ I = 3, σ I = 4), and risk sharing improves (MU ratio in row 40 becomes less volatile). Interestingly,
this is also the case for slightly higher adjustment costs (σ I = 6). However, as we increase σ I to
7, the impairment of banks’ risk-bearing capacity dominates the reduction in risk: both aggregate
consumption and investment growth are more volatile, and risk sharing between borrowers and savers
becomes worse (row 39).



                                                                       85
               Figure 14: Transition Dynamics After Change in Capital Requirement

                                    Value Fcn, B                                   Value Fcn, S
               0.294                                              0.336

               0.292                                              0.335

                                                                  0.334
                0.29
                                                                  0.333
               0.288
                                                                  0.332
               0.286
                                                                  0.331
               0.284
                                                                   0.33

               0.282                                              0.329

                0.28                                              0.328
                       0       15    30     45     60   75                0   15    30     45       60      75




                                      Output                                       Consumption
                0.99                                              0.635
                                                                                                    =0.97
                                                                                                    =0.90
                                                                   0.63
               0.985
                                                                  0.625


                0.98                                               0.62


                                                                  0.615
               0.975
                                                                   0.61


                0.97                                              0.605
                       0       15    30     45     60   75                0   15    30     45       60      75




                  Blue line: lower capital requirement; red line: higher capital requirement


D.7     Sensitivity of Macro-prudential Policy
In this appendix we study how sensitive the macro-prudential policy conclusions are to specific model
ingredients/parameter constellations. In each experiment, we compare the effects of relaxing bank
capital requirements by two percentage points versus tightening them by two percentage points, around
the benchmark model. In other words, we study a four percentage point relaxation from ξ = .92 to
ξ = .96. The first column of Table 10 reports the results from this particular relaxation for the
benchmark model. Firm loss rates and bank bankruptcies both increase, the size of the banking sector
and the economy as a whole increase, investment volatility falls modestly while consumption growth
volatility rises modestly, and aggregate welfare falls since the gains to the savers are insufficient to
offset the losses to the borrowers. All these results are in line with our discussion in the main text.

                           Table 10: Sensitivity of Macro-prudential Policy Experiment
                              Benchmark        No bankruptcy σ I = 0 No tax shield              Higher βB        Lower βS
                                                            Financial Fragility
   Loss rate                    +0.32%            +0.42%       +0.07%     +0.03%                  +0.15%         +0.20%
   Bankruptcies                 +3.72%             0.00%       +5.24%     +3.01%                  +2.92%         +3.21%
                                                           Size of the Economy
   GDP                         +0.83%             +0.72%       +0.54%     +0.21%                  +0.26%         +0.30%
   Deposits / GDP              +21.61%           +24.24%       +9.58%     +5.72%                  +14.04%        +14.17%
                                                             Macro Volatility
   Investment vol               -0.05%            -0.33%       +0.50%     +0.20%                  +0.16%         -0.04%
   Consumption vol              +0.05%            -0.15%       +0.37%     +0.13%                  +0.17%         +0.02%
   MU vol                       -1.65%            -1.64%       +0.54%     -0.07%                  -0.19%         -1.55%
                                                                  Welfare
   Borrower                     -5.61%            -3.16%       -2.36%     -3.69%                  -0.94%         -4.74%
   Saver                        +3.08%            +2.14%       +0.91%     +1.95%                  +0.22%         +2.53%
   Aggregate                    -1.01%            -0.35%       -0.59%     -0.69%                  -0.30%         -0.87%



                                                             86
  The other columns of Table 10 study the same change in macro-prudential policy in a model without
bankruptcy option (column 2), in a model without equity issuance costs (column 3), in a model without
tax shield for banks (column 4), in a model with more patient borrowers (column 5, βB increases by
0.15), and less patient savers (columns 6, βS decreases by 0.15). The latter two changes decrease the
wedge between the patience of borrowers and savers and reduce the need for intermediation services.
   The main finding is that the aggregate welfare changes from macro-prudential policy are robust to
these parameter variations. In all experiments, welfare decreases in response to the four percentage
point increase in maximum allowable financial sector leverage from 92% to 96%. The range of estimates
is -0.35%, when banks are not allowed to fail (and hence cannot be bailed out), to -1.01%. In all cases,
we see more fragility in the form of higher corporate loss rates and higher bank bankruptcies (except
of course when banks are not allowed to go bankrupt). When it is easier and cheaper for shareholders
to recapitalize banks, the size of the banking sector is naturally less sensitive to a change in macro-
prudential regulation. The basic trade-off between a larger banking sector and size of the economy
and more financial fragility is also present in every model. The quantitative slope of that trade-off
depends on the model details. The only results that are more fragile are those on macro-economic
volatility. That should not come as a surprise since, even in the benchmark model, macro-economic
volatility is non-monotonic in ξ. Risk sharing tends to improve (MU vol falls) as macro-prudential
policy is relaxed, reflecting the financial sector’s improved ability to absorb aggregate risk when it is
larger. The one exception is when bank equity can be costlessly adjusted, which is also the model
when the banking sector size changes the least and macro-economic volatility increases the most.




                                                   87
