                         NBER WORXING PAPER SERIES




                          REAL RIGIDITIES AND THE
                          NON-NEUTRALITY OF MONEY




                               Laurence Ball

                                David Rower




                           Working Paper No. 2476




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                December 1987




We are grateful for excellent research assistance from Charles Larson; for
helpful suggestions from Herschel Grossman, Christina Rower, Geoffrey Woglom,
and seminar participants at Harvard, Johns Hopkins, Michigan, Penn,
Wisconsin, Yale and the NBER; and for financiel support from the NSF. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Support from the Lynde and
Harry Bradley Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
                                        NBER Working Paper #2476
                                        December 1987




                Real Rigidities and the Non-Neutrality of Money




                                   ABSTRACT




      Rigidities in real prices are not sufficient to create rigidities in

nominal prices and real effects of nominal shocks. And, by themselves, snail

frictions in nominal adjustment, such as costs of changing, prices, create only

small non—neutralities.     But this paper shows that substantial nominal

rigidity can arise from a combination of real rigidities and small nominal

frictions. The paper shows the connection between real and nominal rigidity

given the presence of nominal frictions both in general and for several

specific sources of real rigidity: costs of adjusting real prices, asymmetric

demand arising front imperfect information, and efficiency wages.




Laurence Ball                                   David Romer
Department of Economics                         National Bureau   of Economic
Graduate School of Business Administration         Research
New York University                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
New   York, NY 10006                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 I. INTRODUCTION




    According to Keynesian economics, nominal wages and prices are rigid, and

so nominal   disturbances have real effects. Researchers have presented a wide
range   of explanations for wage and price rigidities; examples include implicit

contracts,     customer    markets,   social       custoiii.s,   efficiency   wages,

insider/outsider models, inventory models, and theories of countercyclical

markups under imperfect competition.1 These explanations have a common weak-

ness, however: they are theories of real rather than nominal rigidities. That

is, they attempt to explain why real wages or prices are unresponsive to

changes in economic activity. Real rigidity does not imply nominal rigidity:

without an independent source of nominal stickiness, prices adjust fully to

nominal shocks regardless of the extent of real rigidities.


    The purpose of this paper is to show that real rigidities nonetheless

have a crucial role in explaining nominal rigidities and the non-neutrality of

nominal shocks.     While real rigidities alone are not sufficient, nominal

rigidities can be explained by a combination of real rigidities and small

frictions in nominal adjustment.




  'For implicit contracts, see for example Azariadis (1975) and Baily (19711);
for customer markets, Okun (1982); for social customs, Akerlof (1980) and
Boner (1981!); for efficiency wages, Solow (1979), Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984),
and Bulow and Summers (1986); for insider/outsider models, Lindbeck and Snower
(1986); for inventories, Blinder (1982); and for countercyclical markups,
Stiglitz (1984), Rotemberg and Saloner (1986), and Bils (1986, 1987).
                                           2



    Real rigidities are important because nominal frictions alone ——        like
real rigidities alone --       are not enough to cause a large amount of nominal

rigidity.        In practice, the costs of making nominal prices and wages more

flexible    -—    for   example, by adjusting prices more frequently or adopting

greater    indexation    —— appear small. Recent research shows that in principle

the nominal rigidities caused by small costs of flexibility can be large

(Mankiw, 1985; Blanchard and ICiyotaki, 1987; Ball and Romer, 1987a). In these

models, however, small frictions have large effects only for very implausible

parameter values; for example, labor supply must be highly elastic.          For

plausible parameter values, nominal rigidity has large private costs.       As a

result, firms and workers choose only a small degree of rigidity, and nominal

shocks have only small real effects.


    We reverse these results by adding real rigidities to a model with a cost

of changing nominal prices.        Both the degree of nominal rigidity caused by

this friction and the resulting welfare loss are increasing in the degree of

real rigidity. Substantial real rigidity implies a large amount of nominal

rigidity even if the cost of changing prices is small.2'3


     The intuition behind these results is the following. Rigidity of prices

after a nominal shock is a Nash equilibrium if the gain to a firm from chang—




  2Akerlof and Yellen (1985) show that nominal rigidity can result from "near—
rational" behavior rather than costs of adjusting prices. Our central point
carries over to their model: a greater degree of real rigidity implies that a
greater degree of nominal rigidity can arise from a given departure from full
rationality.


  3Blanciard (1987a, b) also argues that real rigidities increase the real ef-
fects of nominal disturbances.
                                          3

ing   its nominal price, given that other nominal prices are unchanged, is less

than the cost of changing prices. But a change in one firm's nominal price

when other nominal prices are fixed is a change in the firm's real price.

Further, if other prices do not change, then the nominal shock affects real

aggregate demand. Thus nominal rigidity is an equilibrium if a firm's gain

from adjusting its real price in response to the change in real aggregate

demand is less than the cost of changing prices. If the firm desires only a

small change in its real price -—     that    is, if there is a large degree of real

rigidity —— then the gain from making the change is small.               Since real

rigidity reduces the gain from adjustment, it increases the range of nominal

shocks   for which   non-adjustment is an equilibrium.


      The   remainder of the paper consists of six sections. Since our point is
not tied to any specific     source of real rigidity, Section II studies a quite

general model.       In this model, imperfectly competitive price setters face a

small cost of changing prices -- a      "menu cost." We show that the degree of
nominal rigidity is increasing in the degree of real rigidity       under broad con-

ditions.


      Section III shows that nominal frictions alone are not sufficient for

large non-neutralities. We present a specific example of the general model of

Section II in which imperfect competition and the menu cost are the only

departures from Walrasian assumptions. We show that for plausible          parameter
values the model implies only small nominal rigidities.

      The following three sections illustrate the general relation between real
and nominal rigidity. In      each case, we add a specific source of real rigidity
                                           4


to the model of Section III and show that large non—neutralities can result.

Section IV presents our simplest example, in which we add an ad hoc cost of

adjusting real prices to the small fixed cost of adjusting nominal prices.

Section V presents a model in which the real rigidities have firm

microeconomic foundations.        Specifically, we combine our basic model with a

model of imperfect information and customer markets based on Stiglitz (1979,

1984) and Woglom (1982). Real rigidity arises from an asymmetry in the demand

curve facing a seller. Finally, Section VI considers real wage rigidity that

arises when firms pay efficiency wages. This example is motivated by the com-

mon belief that the labor market is an important source of real rigidities.


    Section VII offers concluding remarks.



                                  II. GENERAL RESULTS




     A. Assumptions and Overview

                                        of a large number of price-setting agents.
     Consider an economy consisting
                                                         real spending in the
We assume that agent  i's utility  depends on  aggregate
                                               p/P.4 In addition, there is a
economy, I, and on the agent's relative price,
                                                   menu cost. Thus agent i's
                            nominal prices -— the
small cost, z, of changing

 utility is given by


     (1)     Ui        W(Y, —f)    - ZDi
                            P




                                                       definitions of I and the
                             not depend on particular                  agents).
    4Our general results do        not depend on how we aggregate over
  price level P (that is, they do                          since the economy is
                       below is that if all agents (or,
  Our only assumption                        then P equals this price.
             but one) choose
                              the sameprice,
  large, all
                                                 5


where Di is a dummy variable that indicates whether the agent changes his

nominal price. In the specific models of later sections, an agent is usually

a "yeoman farmer" who sells a differentiated good that he produces with his

own labor.          We also, however, consider the case in which farmers hire each

other in a labor market.                 Finally, it is straightforward to extend our

analysis to the case in which (1) is the profit function of an
                                                                           imperfectly
competitive      firm (the model is closed by assuming that firms are owned by
households).         Under all these interpretations, Y    affects an agent's utility
(or   profits) by shifting out the demand curve that he faces —-           greater ag-
gregate      demand implies that the agent's sales are higher at a given relative

price. "1 affects utility by determining the point on the demand curve at

which the agent produces.


       To make nominal     disturbances possible, we introduce money. Assume that    a

transactions        technology   determines the relation between aggregate spending and

real money balances:


      (2)       Y


where H is the nominal money stock.5 Substituting (2) into (1) yields

                           H
      (3)       U     r              -
                                          zD1.
                          W(,—)



  5The      purpose of (2) is not to advance a particular theory of money but
simply to introduce a downward-sloping aggregate demand curve -- a negative
relation between Y and P. Our results would not change if, following Blanchard
and Kiyotaki, we introduced money by adding real balances to utility. In ad-
dition, while we assume below that fluctuations in aggregate demand arise from
fluctuations in money, it would be straightforward to introduce velocity
shocks instead.
                                            6


    We assume that in the absence of menu costs, there is a symmetric equi-

librium in prices                1 Vi) for a unique level of M/P. We normalize this

level to be one; in other words, we assume that W2(1,1):O (subscripts denote

partial derivatives). We also assume that W22(i,1)cO (price setters' second

order condition) and that W12>O (which guarantees stability of the

equilibrium).


     Part B of this section derives the degree of real price rigidity. We

measure real rigidity by the responsiveness of agents' desired real prices,

neglecting the menu cost, to shifts in real aggregate demand. Part C derives

the degree of nominal rigidity, defined by the largest monetary shock to which

prices do not adjust.            Under broad (although not universal) conditions,

changes     in W() that raise the degree of real rigidity lead to greater
nominal rigidity as well.           Finally, Part D computes the welfare loss from
equilibrium      nominal rigidity and shows that it also usually increases with

real rigidity. Thus real rigidities bolster the Keynesian view that economic

fluctuations resulting from nominal shocks are highly inefficient.


     B. Real Rigidity

             *
     Let           be agent i's utility-maxinizing real price in the absence of

menu costs.             This price is defined by the first order condition

W2(M/P,27/P):O. Differentiating this condition with respect to M/P yields

                 d(P7/P)
     ('I)
                  d(M/P)

 where henceforth we evaluate all derivatives at (1,1), the equilibrium in the

 absence of menu costs. We define a high degree of real rigidity as a small

 value of iT     -- a   small response of an agent's desired price to changes in real
                                             7


money, which shift aggregate       demand.


       Equation   (II) shows that a high degree   of real rigidity    can   result   from a


large value of -W22 or a small value of W12. Intuitively, when —W22 is large

——   that   is, when utility is very concave in an agent's relative price -—

                                                                in real money
changes in the price are very costly. When W12 is small, shifts

have little effect on W2, which determines the desired price.            Of the specific

sources of real rigidity that we consider in later sections, two raise -W22

and one lowers W12.                                  -



       C.   The EQuilibrium Degree of Nominal Rigidity

       We measure nominal rigidity through the following experiment.                 Assume

 that 14 is random. The distribution of 14 is continuous, symmetric around one,
 increasing for }K1, and decreasing for 1*1. All agents know the distribution.
 Each agent    sets a nominal price before 14 is realized and then, after observing

 14, has the   option of paying the menu costz and adjusting his price. We solve
 for   the range of realizations of N for which          non—adjustment of all prices is
                                                     (1_x*, 1+x*); x is our
 an equilibrium. This range is symmetric around one,
 measure of nominal rigidity. We show that a broad class of changes in W()

                                             as well. The derivation of         is similar
 that increase real rigidity raise

 to calculations in Ball and Romer (1987a, b), and so here we simply sketch the

 analysis.

        A preliminary step is to determine the price, o'          that   agents set before


  they observe the money supply. This is the aggregate price level if agents do

  not adjust ex post ——     that   is, if the money supply falls within (1-x, 1+x*).

  One can show that P can be approximated by
                                                        8


     (5)        -t    =        I       —


where we again evaluate derivatives at (1,1), and where (x*) is the
                                                                    variance

of K conditional on Me(1_x*,1+x*). Although P=M when prices are flexible, P0

differs from one, the mean of H, if W21110 ——                    certainty   equivalence fails if

utility is not quadratic.


     We now determine when non—adjustment of prices after K is realized is a

Nash equilibrium. We do so by comparing an agent's utility if he adjusts his

price and if he does not, given that no other agent adjusts. If agent I main-

tains a rigid price of P along with the others, then Di:O, H/P =
                                                                 M/P0, and
     =    1.
           Thus the agent's utility is W(±!, 1). If the agent adjusts despite
                                        P0
others' non-adjustment, then Din. Since one agent's behavior does not affect

the aggregate price level, H/P is still H/P0. Finally, the agent sets P1/P

equal to              the utility-maximizing level given H/P.                  Thus the agent's
                H
utility is W(—, —) — z.
                          P
-
     These results imply that agent i does not adjust —— and
                                                             so rigidity is an
equilibrium ——       if
    (6)         PC <
                                                *
                                           H   !'i       N
                      PC           =   W(—, —)       — W(—, 1)
                                           POP           P0
PC is the "private cost" of nominal rigidity: agent i's loss
                                                             from not setting

his relative price at the utility—maximizing level.
                                                                             According to (6),

rigidity is an equilibrium if this loss is less than the menu cost.
                                                                                             Ap-

proximating the private cost around (1,1) yields

                              -(W21)2
    (7)        Pc
                               2W22
                                                 9



where xM—1. Equations (6) and (7) imply that rigidity is an equilibrium when
                  *    *
H lies within (1-x ,1+x ), where


       (8)       x
       We can now show the connection between real and nominal rigidity. Using

the fact that y       r   -1121/1122, we can rewrite (8) as



       (9)       x
                          V   T12W22

If   there is no nominal friction, then nominal prices are completely flexible

regardless of the degree of real rigidity: x*EO if zz0. But for a positive
                                                                               that   is,
menu cost, increasing real rigidity while holding constant W22 ——
                                                                                   As it
decreasing it        by decreasing W12 -- leads to greater nominal rigidity.
                                                              becomes arbitrarily large.
 approaches zero, the degree of nominal rigidity
 Alternatively, using the definition of iv we can rewrite (8) as


        (10)         x =
                              V iiW12
                to (10), increasing real rigidity while holding constant W12 --
                                                                                      that
 According

 is, lowering iv      by increasing -W22 -— also increases nominal rigidity.

                                                                    caused by ei-
         Thus an increase in real rigidity -- a fall in -W121W22 --

 ther a reduction in                    or an increase in —W22 leads to greater nominal

 rigidity. Because the degree of nominal rigidity depends on more than the de-

 gree of real rigidity, one can construct examples in which changing a

 parameter       increases real rigidity but lowers x. Specifically, this can occur
  if    the    change raises 12 and also raises -W22 by a greater amount. But this
  is    not a natural case. As we show in the specific models of later sections,

  plausible sources of real rigidity simply raise -1122 or lower 1112.
                                                                                      .
                                           10



       To understand the connection between x and       it,   recall   that nominal

 rigidity is an equilibrium if an agent does not adjust his nominal price to a

 nominal shock given that others do not adjust. As explained in the introduc-

 tion, non-adjustment along with the others implies a constant real price, and

 the others' behavior implies that the nominal shock affects real aggregate

 demand; thus nominal rigidity is an equilibrium if an agent does not adjust

 his real price when demand shifts. An increase in real rigidity means that an

 agent   desires a smaller change in his real price after a given change in
 demand.       When the desired change is smaller, the cost of forgoing it is

smaller;       thus a menu cost is sufficient to prevent adjustment for a wider

range of shocks.6


       D. The Welfare Losses from Nominal Rigidity


       Since real rigidity increases nominal rigidity, it increases the economic

fluctuations resulting from shocks to nominal aggregate demand.
                                                                        Keynesians
believe not only that such fluctuations are large, but also that they are




  6Following Ball arid Romer (1987b), we can compute the range of monetary
shocks for which full adjustment of all prices is an equilibrium as well as
the range for which rigidity is an equilibrium. Adjustment is an equilibrium
for IxI>x** , x **   r'/2z/(_W22). As our previous paper points out, for many
specific models, x cx ——        that
                                   is, there is a range of shocks, x <pxIcx*,
for
sion
      which both
       for x
            11*
                 rigidity and
                                  * **
                              flexibility
                 with (9) yields x /x
                                          are equilibria. Combining the expres-
                                         r i/ri.
                                             Thus multiple equilibria require
sufficient real rigidity (mci), and greater real rigidity increases the range
of multiple equilibria.           Intuitively, multiple equilibria arise from
"strategic complementarity" in price—setting: an agent's desired nominal price
depends positively on others' prices, and so adjustment by others increases
his incentive to adjust. Real rigidity raises the degree of strategic com-
plernentarity -- when agents want stable real prices, their desired nominal
prices are closely tied to others' prices.
                                              11



highly inefficient -- and thus that reducing them through demand stabilization

is highly desirable. We now show that real rigidities strengthen this view:

greater real rigidity implies greater welfare losses from equilibrium nominal

rigidity. As we show in the next section, this result is important because

the clearest failure of menu cost models without real rigidities is an in-

ability to generate fluctuations with significant welfare costs.


     To simplify our welfare analysis, we modify the experiment of the pre-

vious section: following Ball and Romer (1987a), we assume that an agent must

decide whether to pay the menu cost before he observes the money supply. If

the agent pays, he can always adjust his price ex post; if he does not pay,

his price is always rigid. In other words, the degree of nominal rigidity is

 a zero—one variable. As in our earlier paper, this simplification does not

 affect the qualitative results.


      In this version of the model, one can show that (complete) rigidity is an

 equilibrium if

     (11)     Pc <     z
                               (Ta

                  PC       =              a
                                     22
                                                           x2:(M—1)2 in the ex-
 Comparing (11) with (7) shows that 4:E[01—1)2] replaces

 pression for the private cost. In choosing between rigidity and flexibility

 ex ante, agents compare the menu cost to the expected private loss from

 rigidity, which is increasing in the variance of money.


      The welfare loss from equilibrium rigidity depends on the relation of PC

  to the "social cost" of rigidity: the difference between E[W()] when all

  agents pay the menu cost and when none pays.      If no agent pays, then by
                                                          12



 reasoning similar to the derivation of (6), E[W(•)J
                                                                         E(W(M/P0,1)]; P3 is now
 given by

                                        W
       (12)       —
                      0
                          =        1—   —a. 21

 If all agents pay the menu coat, then M/P:1 and Pj/P:1 (the equilibrium under

 flexible prices); thus E[W(•)] r W(1,1). These results imply that the social

 cost of rigidity is


       (13)       SC r W(1,1) —                                1)]
                                                 E[W(M/P0,


                          = _____________ 2
                                                   CM.
                                     2W21

       combining (11) and (13) yields the ratio of the social to the private

cost of rigidity:

                              sc                      -
                              —         W22(W11W21 W1W211)
                                        ________________
       (14)       R
                              PC
                                (W21)3
Recall that nominal rigidity is an equilibrium as long as the private cost

does not exceed z.                 This implies that the largest possible social cost of

equilibrium rigidity is H tines z. Since the losses from
                                                                             rigidity disappear
whencrrO, Hz is also the maximum gain from stabilizing nominal
                                                                   aggregate
demand. Thus, for a given menu cost z, the welfare cost of rigidity and the
gains from demand stabilization are increasing in H. As discussed in Ball and
Roner (1987a), R can be greater than one -- the
                                                social cost of nominal
rigidity can exceed the private cost -— because
                                                rigidity has a negative exter-

nality.       Rigidity in one agent's price contributes to rigidity in the ag-

gregate price level. Greater price level rigidity
                                                                     causes larger fluctuations

in real aggregate demand, which harms all agents.


       The    size of H, like the degree of nominal rigidity, does not depend
                                      13



solely on the degree of real rigidity but is linked to it in important ways.

Consider first an increase in real rigidity caused by an increase in -W22. As

described above, this reduces the private cost of nominal rigidity -— the gain

from adjusting to a shock if others do not adjust.     In contrast, the social

cost of nominal rigidity is unaffected (W22 does not appear in the expression

for SC).    Intuitively, real rigidity is irrelevant to the difference in wel-

fare when all prices adjust and when none adjusts because all real prices are

one in both cases.     Thus real rigidity increases the ratio of social to

private costs of nominal rigidity by reducing the denominator while leaving

the numerator unchanged.


     The effect of an increase in real rigidity caused by a decrease in 4112 is

more complicated. A lower 12 like a higher -W22, reduces the private cost

of rigidity. But in principle it can affect the social cost as well. Nominal

rigidity affects not only the variance of output, as we emphasize, but also

 the mean. This follows from the deviation of the price level under stickiness

 from the certainty equivalent level (see our 1987a paper for details). The

 effect of rigidity on mean output depends on        in a complicated way; as a

 result, reducing W12 has in general an ambiguous effect on R. In the specific

 models of this paper, however, the effect of rigidity on mean output is unim-

 portant. Ignoring this effect, a smaller j2 has the same implications as a

 larger —W22: 11 rises because its denominator falls and its numerator is un-

 changed.
                                               11$




                            III. A SIMPLE YEOMAN FARMER MODEL




         This section   considers one example of the class of models studied above:

 the "yeoman farmer" model of Ball and Romer (1987a,b). Aside from imperfect

 competition and the menu cost, the model's assumptions
                                                             are Walrasian. We show
 that both the degree of nominal rigidity and the welfare loss from rigidity

 are small for plausible parameter values; thus menu costs are not enough to

 produce large real effects of money. The model of this section is also the

 basis for Sections lY—VI: in each of these, we add a specific source of real

 rigidity to the model and show that large non—neutralities can result.


     A. The Model7


     The agents in this model are a continuum of
                                                      farmers indexed by i and dis-

tributed uniformly between i:O and ii. Each farmer uses his own labor to

produce a differentiated good, then sells this product and purchases the

products of all other farmers. Farmer i's utility function is


                                 —
    (15)      Ui C — —1LiY           zDi   ,
                                                       c(c—l)/c    djJ"1
where Li is farmer i's labor supply, C is an index of farmer i's consumption,

Cii is farmer i's consumption of the product of farmer j, c is the elasticity

of substitution between any two
                                      goods (c>1), and y measures the extent of in-

creasing marginal disutility of labor ('p1). The coefficient on Li is chosen

so that equilibrium output neglecting menu costs is one, as in our general

model.




 Tsee Ball and Roiner (1987a) for a more detailed presentation of the
                                                                      model.
                                                 15



    Farmer I has a linear production function:


    (16)    Yi           Li

where Y1 is farmer i's output. As in Section II, a transactions technology

implies

                         H
    (17)    Y r          —




where in this model


    (18)                 110 Yidi ;
                                           p           F11- di]1R1d

P is the price index for consumption, C.

     Equations (15)—(18) determine the demand for farmer i's product:


    (19)                      M)(1)e

Farmer i's consumption equals his real revenues:


     (20)                    —.
                             pill



                (19) and (20) into (15) yields the specific form of w(')
                                                                                  in   this
 substituting
 model:


     (21)       U1
                             (M)(i)(1s) —         c1(M)1(i)YE — zDj

                              14
                     E
                             W(,    -i-)


      B. Are the Non—Neutralities Large?

                                                                      and the welfare loss
      We can now determine the degree of nominal rigidity

 from rigidity in this model.                  Taking the appropriate derivatives of (21),

 evaluating at (1,1), and substituting into (8) and (14) yields
                                            16



        (22)                                       (1+cy—c)2
                         /2(1+ic_s)z       R                    (R > 1)
                        V (c—1)(y—1)2
        As in previous papers, a second order menu coat leads to first order

nominal rigidity (x is proportional to ,i). But this does not imply that

menu costs prevent adjustment to sizable shocks (that is, 1* need not be

large). Similarly, R is greater than one, but this does not imply that menu

costs cause large welfare losses; since the loss from equilibrium rigidity is

Rz and z is small,      R must be   much greater than one. We now show that in this

model          and R are small for plausible parameter values. The results for R

are more clear-cut than the results for x1.


        Table 1 shows the private cost of non—adjustment to a five percent change

in the money supply, measured as a percentage of a farmer's revenue when all

prices are flexible, for various values of c and            The private cost equals

the menu cost needed to prevent adjustment to the shock ——      that   is, to make

greater than .05. The table also shows the values of R corresponding to the

values of c and y. To interpret the results, note that non—adjustment to a

five percent change in money implies a five percent change in real output.

Recall that s is the elasticity of demand for a farmer's product and y

measures the degree of increasing marginal disutility of labor.            The table

presents the private cost and R as functions of 1/(c—1), the markup of price

over marginal cost, and l/(y—i), farmers' labor supply elasticity.




  8Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987) present similar calculations.     While the
private cost is measured in units of utility and revenue is measured in dol—
lars, it is legitimate to compare them because the marginal utility of income
is always one.
                                        17



    We focus on a base ease in which, using evidence from empirical studies,

we take .15 as the value of the markup and .15 again as the labor supply elas-

ticity; these numbers imply cry:?.?.9 For these values, the private cost of

rigidity is seven tenths of a percent of revenue, which appears non-

                 (If the change in money is three rather than five percent, the
negligible.

private cost is three tenths of a percent of revenue.) Thus, while it is dif-

ficult to determine "realistic" values for costs of adjusting nominal prices,

trivial costs would not be sufficient to prevent adjustment in this example)0

In any case, the welfare result is very clear. When both the markup and the

labor supply elasticity are .15, H is 1.2 --     the   social cost of rigidity is

only slightly greater than the private cost.       Since the welfare loss from

rigidity is bounded by Rz, Rr1.2 and small menu costs imply that this loss is




   9For evidence on markups, see Scherer (1980); for labor supply elasticities,
 see Killingsworth (1983).


   10}Iow large are the costs of adjusting prices in actual economies? In many
 cases, the cost of physically changing a price (for example, by replacing a
 price tag) seem xi small.      But the lost convenience of fixing prices in
 nominal terms —— the cost of learning to think in real terms, and of computing
 the nominal price changes corresponding to desired real price changes —— may
 be larger. The costs of adjusting nominal wages appear larger than the costs
 of adjusting prices, especially if adjustment requires           union—management
 negotiations.      On the other hand, it appears relatively inexpensive to in-
 crease wage flexibility through greater indexation. Finally, if we follow
 Akerlof and Yellen in interpreting the nenu cost as a departure from full
  rationality,  it seems plausible that these departures involve losses sig-
  nificantly greater than the cost of a price tag.
                                         18



small.


      Table I shows that it is difficult to reverse these results. Since the

private cost of rigidity is decreasing in both the markup and the labor supply

elasticity, we consider the case in which each is 1.0; this is a generous up-

per bound for both.       In this case, the private cost of non—adjustment to a

five percent change in money is .011% of revenue, which is perhaps trivial.

But R:1L5 ——    the welfare cost of the business cycle is still only four and a

half times the menu cost. Only outlandish parameter values yield large values

of   R -- for example, a markup of one and a labor supply elasticity of ten im-
ply Rr72.

        Intuitively, the crucial problem for the model is that labor supply ap-
pears     to be inelastic (that is, realistic values of y    are large).   Since
workers    are reluctant to vary their hours of work, they have a strong Incen-

tive to adjust their wages (equal to their product prices in our yeoman farmer

model) when demand changes. Large private gains from flexibility imply that

farmers pay    the    menu cost after a nominal shock unless the shock is very

small,    and thus that only small shocks affect output and welfare.




  11Two changes in the model would strengthen these results. First, following
Bali and Rorer (1987a), we could introduce risk aversion in consumption. As—
stiaing   constant   relative risk aversion utility with a risk aversion coef-
ficient of four      (a
                   typical estimate; see for example Mankiw, 1981) raises the
private cost of rigidity to 1.2% of revenue and reduces R to 1.1. Second, by
assiaing self—employment, we have implicitly assumed that labor is immobile.
As we describe in Section VI, introducing labor mobility increases the private
gains     froe price adjustment.     If mobility is perfect, the effects are
dramatic: the private cost of non—adjustment is 38% of revenue and R is 0.015.
                                                   19


                           IV. AN AD HOC MODEL OF REAL RIGIDITY




       This section presents the first of three examples in which we add a

specific source of real rigidity to the yeoman farmer model.              Here, we add

real   rigidity as simply as possible by assuming ad hoc that real prices are
costly to change.

       A. The Implications of Costs of Adjusting Real Prices.

       Modify the utility function,          (15), to be


       (23) Ui             —
                               —Lii
                               Ye
                                         —
                                                 zDj       —
                                                                P

where k is a non-negative constant. With this change, equation (21) becomes


       (24)      Ui       (M)(i)(1
                           PP                -    £1(M)Y()-Yc
                                                   yeP P
                                                       P
                                 - zDj            k(j- —       1)


                          H
                      E W(—,
                               j-) — zfli
Equation      (23) adds a quadratic cost of adjusting real prices to the fixed cost

of adjusting nominal prices. (Each farmer begins with a real price of one be-

cause Pj:P0rP before           the money stock is observed.)        Following Rotemberg

(1982), we could interpret k(—1)2 as the cost of upsetting customers through

unstable      prices; this cost might be lost sales in a future period that is not
                                           20


included     explicitly in the model.12          Alternatively, we could interpret
  Pj
             as the cost of violating a social custom about "fair" prices (see

Akerlof, 1980, and Homer, 1984).13


        Substituting the appropriate derivatives of (24) into the definition of iT

yields
                         (y—1)(c—1)
    (25)                                             <   o,         it   0
                      (e—1)(1+yc—c)+2k          9k

Not surprisingly, the degree of real rigidity is increasing in the cost of ad-

justing real prices, and real prices become completely rigid as the cost ap-

proaches infinity.


       To determine the relation between real and nominal rigidity, we sub-

stitute the derivatives of (24) into (8) and (14):


    (26)         x* ://2[(c—1)(1+yc—c)+2k1z
                     V      (c—1)2(y—1)2

    (27)       H                     [(c—1)(1+yc—c) +         2k]
                      c(e—1)(y—1)2




  12Rotemberg assumes that customers dislike instability in nominal prices,
and therefore specifies a quadratic cost of adjusting nominal prices. In the
absence of money illusion, however, customers care only about real prices. We
adopt a quadratic functional form because presumably large real price changes
upset customers more than small changes. In contrast, it is realistic to as—
slime that the   cost of adjusting a nominal price is fixed: the cost of replac-
ing a   price tag does not depend on the new price.


  13Social    customs can be modeled more rigorously by assuming that consumers
receive disutility front purchasing the products of unfair sellers. For ex—
ample, product-specific taste shifters can be added to the utility function,
with the taste shifter for product i depending negatively on      — 1)2.  In
this case, a firm's demand decreases if it charges an unfair price. One can
show that the implications for price rigidity are similar to those of our ad
hoc model.
                                              21



             of (26) and (27) shows that both             and R are increasing in k, and
Inspection
                                                                       Thus increasing real
that both approach infinity as k approaches infinity.
                                                        real prices can lead to large
rigidity by introducing costs of changing

nominal rigidities. In terms of our general model, one can show that increas-

                                          utility more concave in prices -—
ing k lowers it by raising -W22 —- making

while   leaving W12 unchanged. As shown in Section ii, increasing real rigidity

in this way always produces greater nominal rigidity.


      B. Mow Much Real Rigidity is Necessaryl


        Section III showed that without costs of changing real prices, plausible
                                                                      ask how
 parameter values imply that there is little nominal rigidity. We now
                                                                       Table 2 presents the
 much real rigidity is needed to reverse this result.
                                                                        in
 private cost of nominal rigidity (again assuming a five percent change

 money) and R for various values of the markup, the labor supply elasticity,

 and the degree of real rigidity                   Note that, given the other parameters,

                                              k; we present results in terms
 there is a one-to-one relation between ¶ and
                                                          Since the results about the size
 of      because Ic has little economic meaning.

                                              Section III, we focus the present discus-
  of R are the most disappointing in

  sion on R.

                                                      of real rigidity is necessary for a
         Table 2 shows that a large degree

                                           if krO --            real   prices are costless to
  large a. As a benchmark, note first that
                                                            a markup of .15 and
  change, so the model reduces to the one in Section III ——

                                     of .15 imply it:.127 and (as shown above) Rrl.2.
  a labor supply elasticity

                  k so that   it   falls   to .05 -—   that   is, reducing the responses of
  Increasing

                  to demand shifts by more than half —-         raises   R to 3.0, but this is
  real   prices
                                           22


 still small.        (n.05 combined with a markup and labor supply elasticity of

 one implies Rr30.) Larger reductions in iT produce better results: n.O1 im-

 plies 11:15 for a markup and labor supply elasticity of .15 (and 11:150 for a

 markup and elasticity of one), and vr:.OO1 implies 11:152 (and 1500).


       While these results show that the necessary amount of real rigidity is

 large, they do not determine whether this much rigidity is realistic. Our ad

hoc model does not tie the degree of real rigidity to parameters of tastes or

 technology that we can estimate. The literature on customer
                                                                      markets, social

customs, and so on suggests that the costs of adjusting real prices may be

large --   certainly    there is no presumption that they are trivial, as with the

costs of adjusting nominal prices. Research has not gone far enough, however,

to produce quantitative estimates of the resulting real rigidity. We return

to the issue of how much real rigidity can be
                                                   generated by realistic models in

the following sections.



                     V. IMPERFECT INFORMATION AND CUSTOMER MARKETS




       A. Overview

       This section studies a version of our yeoman farmer model in which real
price rigidity is based on microeconomic foundations. The source of rigidity
is an asymmetry in the effects
                                on demand of price increases and decreases that
has   been explored   by Stiglitz (1979, 1984) and Woglom (1982). The central as—

sumption is that      changes in a firm's price are observed   by the firm's current

customers but not by other consumers. If the firm raises its price, it loses

sales both because some of its customers leave for other sellers and because
                                         23


its remaining customers buy less. If the firm lowers its price, it sells more

to current customers, but it does not attract other firms' customers, because

they do not observe the lower price.


    To introduce this asymmetry in demand, we modify our basic model by as-

suming that each of the goods in the economy is produced by many farmers

rather than by one, and that each farmer sells to a group of customers rather

than to everyone.         In addition, we introduce heterogeneity in tastes that

                                         customers who leave to be a smooth func-
causes the proportion of a farmer's

tion of the farmer's price.         Thus, while Stiglitz and Woglom study demand

curves    with kinks, we focus on the more appealing case of demand curves that
                  but are nonetheless differentiable at all points.     (Kinked demand
bend    sharply
 curves    are a limiting case of our model; we discuss the special features of
 this case below.)

        Part B of this section presents the revised model. Part C derives the
                                                         is asymmetric. Part D shows
 demand curve facing a farmer and shows that it

 that the asymmetry in demand leads to real price rigidity. Finally, Part E
 demonstrates the link between real and nominal rigidity in this example.

         B. Assumptions

         There is a continuum of differentiated goods, each produced by a con-
  tinuum of farmers. Goods are indexed        by j and   distributed   uniformly on the

  unit    interval; farmers are indexed by j and k and distributed uniformly on the

  unit square. We let ir(j,k) denote a point in the unit square.


         Each farmer   consumes all products but purchases a given product from only

  one    farmer, his "home seller" of that good.    A farmer observes the prices of
                                                                                      U



                                             2k


his home sellers. He does not observe other individual prices, but he knows

 the distribution of prices for each good.         In his role as a seller, each

farmer is the home seller of a continuum of farmers, his customers.           Each

producer     of good j begins as the home seller of an equal proportion of all
farmers.

        As in   our other models, each seller sets a nominal price before observing
the    money stock, and then, after H is revealed, can adjust by paying the menu

cost. After prices are determined, each farmer chooses whether to leave each

of his home sellers for another seller of the same product. For simplicity,

we assume that this search is costless, but that a farmer can search for a

seller of a given product only once: if the farmer leaves his home seller, he

is assigned to another and can neither search again nor return to his original

home seller. (Our results would not change if we introduced a search cost and

allowed farmers to choose how many times to search.) If a farmer leaves his

home    seller of a given product, he has an equal chance of being assigned to
each    other seller of the product.


       We introduce heterogeneity in tastes by modifying the utility function,

(15), to be


      (28)       Ui: Aci — BLiI         —
                                            zDi,
where


                 C1 :
      (29)
                        {f[(ei9D(ii)cij](Sl)/C dj}E1)
D(ij) is a dummy variable       equal   to one if farmer i remains with his home

seller of product J;
                          ei   measures farmer i's taste for remaining with his
                                          25



home seller of product j; and A and B are constants chosen for convenience.1

The important change in the utility function is the addition of the 8ij' to

the consumption index.     In words, farmer its utility gain from one unit of

                                                                  units from a
product j provided by his hone seller equals his gain from

different seller. We can Interpret farmers' tastes for their home sellers as

                                                For simplicity, a farmer is in-
arising from location, service, and the like.

different among all sellers of a given product who are not his home seller.


       We assume that     is distributed across i with a cumulative distribution

function, F('), which is the same for all j.    We also assume that the mean of

        8, is greater than one and that the density function of        f('), is

symmetric around 8 and single-peaked. The assumption that 8 Is greater than

one means that, all else equal, most buyers prefer to remain with their home

 sellers. This (plausible) assumption is necessary for imperfect information

 to lead to asymmetric demand.      If 8 had mean one, then half of a farmer's

 customers would leave if he charged a real price of one, and this would imply

 that price decreases save as many customers as price increases drive away.


        Aside from the modifications described here, the model is the same as in

 Section III.




      lUThe definitions of A and B are:


  A     [F(1) +   7 864f(8)doJh/(1_t)

        (c-1)A1+f(1)
  B
        [cA1+f(1)]y
  where F() and f() are defined below.
                                                                                          I

                                                 26


     C.    Product Demand

     The first step in studying this version of the model is to derive the

demand curve facing an individual seller. We focus on the case in which all

other sellers in the economy charge a real price of one; the analysis below

requires only the results for this case.


     A farmer sells to two groups of customers: original customers who remain

with him after they observe his price, and customers of other sellers who

leave and are assigned to him. An original customer stays if this maximizes

his utility gain per unit of expenditure. The utility function, (28), and the

assumption    that    others' real prices are one imply that a customer of farmer i

remains    if 15

    (30)                 <    e

One can    show that    if a customer stays, his demand for the farmer's product is


    (31)           (Ae)(t—1)(_) ()

Equations (30) and (31) imply that total demand from customers who stay is

                                             M
    (32)            f        cAe)(s_1)(_)t(_)fce)de
                                            P
                   $rei/P
    Customers of other sellers of farmer i's product also use the rule in

(30) (with the others' prices replacing               to decide whether to leave. Since

we assume that the other sellers charge a real price of one, their customers

switch if ed;        thus    the proportion that leaves is F(1). Our symnetry assuinp-




  15More precisely, if farmer i sells product j to farmer i', then farmer i'
remains if      <
                       ejj.
                         In the text, we suppress subscripts for simplicity.
                                               27


tions imply that the new customers assigned to farmer I are proportion F(1) of

his original customers. Finally, the demand from each new customer is given

by (31) with e replaced by one, since eD(ii)i for buyers who switch sellers.

Combining these results, the total demand from new customers is


      (33)


       Combining (32) and (33), farmer l's total demand is

                                                                               M
      (34)                 [F(1) +   f        ee-If(e)de} A(—)t(—)
                                                                 P
                                     erPj/P

                     E


Intuitively,     h(P1/P) gives the effect of farmer i's price on his number of

customers, and (as usual) (P/P) determines how much each customer buys.


       Equation (34) implies asymmetric responses to Increases and decreases in

a farmer's price. Straightforward computations lead to
                             3m                                     f(1)
                                                        C    +
                           31n(Pi/P)'(Pi/P):l                       Ml)

                             321n                            f(1)          f'(l)
                     -                              -
                                                    -                 +
                                                            1h(1)          h(1)
                           3ln(PjIP)2i/_l
 r    is the elasticity of demand evaluated at one, the farmer's ex ante real
price,       and p measures the change in the elasticity as the farmer's price

 rises around one.         p>O implies that price increases have larger effects on

 demand than price decreases.             A sufficient condition for p>O is f'(l)>O,

 which   is guaranteed by our        assumptions that E[e]>1 and that f() is       increas-

 ing below     its mean. Iff'(l) is large, then the asymmetry in demand is strong

 —-   the demand   curve   bends sharply around     one.
                                        28



    As in Stiglitz and Woglom, imperfect information is the source of asym-

metric demand. A price increase drives away customers, but a decrease does

not attract new customers, because customers of other sellers do not observe

it. The details of the results are more complicated than in previous papers,

however. Stiglitz and Woglora assume that a firm retains all        its customers if
it charges a real price of one, but we assume     that the   firm loses some cus-
tomers (those with Gd).     Thus   in our model a price decrease does raise the
number of customers; it   does not attract new customers, but it saves old cus-
tomers   who otherwise would leave. Demand is still asymmetric, because our as-

sumptions   about F() imply that the number   saved   is less than the number lost
by an increase.

    Figure 1 illustrates the asymmetry in our     model.   Since farmer i retains
original customers for whom   O>Fj/P,   the proportion of customers who stay is
given by the area under f()        to the right of P1IP.      The   change in this
proportion   resulting from a price change is the area under f N) between the

old and new prices. Figure 1 shows that a price increase starting from Ps/P

1 has a larger effect on the proportion who stay than a price decrease, be-

cause f'(l)>l.


    There are two limiting cases of our model. The first is f(1):f'(l)rO,

which implies that all customers remain with a farmer if his price is in the

neighborhood of one. In this case, flre, p:O, and the demand function reduces

to (19), the symmetric function in the basic model.           Small changes in a

farmer's price do not affect his number of customers, and so price affects

demand only because customers substitute the farmer's product for other goods.

The second case is f(6):O for G<1 and f'(l)n. This implies p-*: the demand
                                          29



curve is kinked, as in Stiglitz and Woglon.          In this case, all customers

                                                                   leaves as soon as
remain as long as Pi/PSi, but a non-negligible proportion

the price rises above one.


    D. Real Rigidity


     Substituting the demand equation, (34), into the utility function, (28),

yields W() for this model:

                                               —
    (36)    Ui     A_1)()h(1)(
                        - ZDj
                         H
                   E
                       W(,   --) —   zD

Substituting the appropriate derivatives of w() into the definition of TI

yields

     fll\          -— __________ .,                3w
                                                   —<0'
                                                      ,
                                                            li
                                                            p—ps
                                                                     -o
                                                                     —




                                                                    more asym-
 According to (37), real prices become more rigid as demand becomes
 metric. As the bend in the demand curve approaches a kink (ø÷°), real prices

 become    completely rigid. Intuitively, a sharply bent demand curve means that
 price increases       greatly reduce demand but decreases raise demand only a lit-

 tle. In this case, both increases and decreases are unattractive
                                                                          and farmers

 maintain    rigid prices.


      E. Nominal Rigidity


      We can now show the connection between real and nominal rigidity in this

  model. Substituting the derivatives of (36) into (8) and (1k) yields
                                              30


                     *
     (38)        x

                         V      (y_1)2(n_1)2

     (39)       R                        +
                         n(n—1)(y—1)2        n2(n—1)(y—1)
 Both xt    and R are increasing in p, and both
                                                approach infinity as p approaches
 infinity. Thus increasing real         rigidity by bending the demand curve leads   to
 greater nominal rigidity, and complete real rigidity arising from kinked

demand implies complete nominal rigidity.16 In terms of our general model,
                                       *
one can show that increases in p raise x and R because (like increases in k

 in the previous section) they increase -W22 while leaving W12 unchanged --      the
bend in the demand curve makes a seller's utility more concave in his price.


     As in Section III, one can compute the private cost of nominal rigidity

and R for various parameter values. The main qualitative result is the same

as before: a large degree of real rigidity is necessary for a large R. It is

again difficult to determine how much real rigidity is realistic, because we

do not know realistic values for p, the sharpness of the bend in the demand




  16Stiglitz and Woglom argue that kinked demand can lead to nominal rigidity
without referring explicitly to nominal frictions, which suggests that real
rigidities alone can cause nominal rigidity. Nominal frictions are implicit
in the Stiglitz-Woglom argument, however.      Neglecting menu costs, kinked
demand curves imply multiple real equilibria —— for example, each firm will
raise its price a small amount if all others do (this leaves relative prices
unchanged but reduces real money). Crucially, nominal disturbances do not af—
feet the set of real equilibria. Stiglitz and
                                                 Woglom argue informally that
nominal disturbances may move the economy from one real equilibrium to another
-- for example, if nominal
                           money falls and prices do not adjust, which is one
equilibrium response, then real money falls. This argument depends, however,
on the idea that when there are several equilibrium
                                                    responses to a shock, the
one with fixed nominal prices, rather than the one with fixed real prices, is
"natural." In   turn, this depends on a notion of the convenience of
prices in nominal terms, which (as we argue in note 10 above) amountsfixing
                                                                       to a
small cost of nominal flexibility.
                                       31



curve.



                   VI. THE LABOR MARKET AND REAL WAGE RIGIDITY




      A. Discussion

      For simplicity, the models of the previous sections suppress the labor
market and study the implications of real price rigidity arising from product

market imperfections.      Traditionally, however, macroeconomists have viewed

labor market imperfections as central to aggregate fluctuations. Motivated by

this view, we now present a model with a labor market in which rigidity in

firms' real prices is caused by rigidity in their real wages.          Real wage

rigidity arises from efficiency wage considerations.17


      The results of previous sections provide two more specific motivations

for this section. First, the small degree of nominal rigidity in our basic

yeoman farmer model arises largely from inelastic labor supply, which gives

farmers strong incentives to stabilize their employment by adjusting prices.

The   analogue when firms hire workers in a Walrasian labor market is that in-
 elastic   labor supply implies highly procyclical real wages -— large wage in-
 creases are needed   to elicit more work. Highly procyclical real wages imply

 hiily     procyclical marginal costs, which in turn imply strong incentives for
 price   adjustment when demand changes.    A potential   advantage of efficiency




   17Nominal rigidity still arises in prices but not wages because we do not
 introduce nominal frictions in wage setting. If we added such frictions, real
 wage rigidity would increase nominal wage rigidity just as real price rigidity
 increases nominal price rigidity.
                                           32


wage models is that firms set wages above the market clearing level. Since

real wages are not tied directly to labor supply, inelastic labor supply need

not imply procyclical real wáges.8


        A second motivation for this section is the difficulty in earlier sec-

tions of determining how much real price rigidity is realistic.          This dif-

ficulty reflects uncertainty about the values of key parameters (the cost of

adjusting   real prices and   the   sharpness of the bend in demand). In this sec-
tion,    the degree of real price rigidity is determined by the degree of real

wage rigidity -—   the responsiveness of real wages to demand shifts. We know

something about this parameter; in particular, the acyclicality of real wages

in actual economies suggests that a      high degree of rigidity is realistic.
      Our analysis of efficiency wages is tentative because research has not

yet   clearly established the implications of efficiency wages for the cyclical

behavior of real wages. In early efficiency wage models, in which workers'

effort depends only on their wages (such as Solow, 1979), wages are completely

acyclical. More recent tshirkingI models (such as Shapiro and Stiglitz, 1984)

imply procyclical real wages: when unemployment is high, workers are fearful

of being fired, and so firms can reduce wages without inducing shirking.

Blanchard (1987b) argues, however, that real wages are less procyclical when




  181n emphasizing the labor market, we depart from currently popular mac-
roeconomic theories that focus on the product market.     For example, Hall
(1986) argues that the combination of constant marginal cost and imperfect
competition leads to slow adjustment of the economy to shocks. These product
market theories are incomplete because they do not explain how their assump-
tions are consistent with labor market behavior —— for example, how marginal
cost can be acyclical despite inelastic labor supply.
                                            33


firms pay efficiency wages than in a Walrasian labor market, and Sparks (1986)

presents a modification of the shirking model in which real wages are acycli-

cal. These results appear plausible because, as noted above, efficiency wages

break the link between wages and labor supply that causes highly procyclical

real wages. But at present, the robustness of these results and the size of

the effect of efficiency wages on the cyclicality of real wages are unclear.

In what follows, we simply assume that real wages are substantially less

procyclical --       that   is, more rigid in the face of demand fluctuations -—   than

in a clearing market.19


        B. A Model


        We now present an example to illustrate the potential importance of ef-

ficiency wages.2° Since efficiency wages are a labor market phenomenon, a

preliminary step is to modify our basic model by assuming that farmers work

for each other rather than for themselves. For the moment, we assume that the

labor market is Walrasian. Farmers have two sources of income, profits from

their own farms and wages from working for others. Using the production func-

tion, (16), and the product demand equation, (19), one can derive the follow-




  191n all efficiency wage models, real wages are rigid in the sense that they
are set above market-clearing levels. This is not, however, the relevant type
of real rigidity. As throughout the paper, large real effects of money re-
 quire real rigidity in the sense of small responses to demand shifts.


   20Akerlof and Yellen (1985) also present a model that combines a small
 nominal friction ("near—rationality") with efficiency wages. They do not,
 however, ask how the real rigidity resulting from efficiency wages affects the
 size of the real effects of money. They introduce efficiency wages so that
 nominal shocks affect involuntary unemployment as well as employment and out-
 put.
                                           34




      (40) U1 r      i
ing expression for a farmer's utility:


                         +
                               H i (1—c)
                              (—)(—)          —
                                                   H i —s
                                                  w(—)(—)      —
                                                                    c—i



where w is the real wage. The first term in (40) is the farmer's labor in-
                                                                              - zDi


come; the second (as in the basic model) is the revenue from his farm; the

third is the wage bill he pays; and the fourth is the disutility from the

labor he supplies. Deriving a labor supply function from (40) and combining

it with the production function and our assumption that Y r HIP, we obtain


      (41)     w     ti(M)Y—i
                         CF
Equation (Iii) describes the cyclical behavior of real wages with a Walrasian

labor market. Finally, (40) and (41) lead to the form of W() for this case:

                          c—i H y    t'i -s        H i 1—c          c—i H y
      (42)     Wwai r    —(—) [1-(—) I +           —(----)      —


       We now introduce efficiency wages. We sinply assume that efficiency wage


considerations lead to wages that obey


      (43)     w -   3__(!)4
                      CF                 8>1, 1<4<y

The functional form of (43) is chosen for comparability with (41). We can in-

terpret (43) as giving the wage needed to prevent workers from shirking. 8>1

implies that in the vicinity of the no—shock equilibrium, wages are set above

the market—clearing level, and so suppliers of labor are rationed.                    (For

simplicity, we assume below that B is close to one). Since workers are off

their labor supply curves, the wage is no longer tied to 'f', which determines

the labor supply elasticity.        $cy means that wages respond less to demand

shifts than In a Walrasian labor market —-        in   other words, as in Blanchard the

"no   shirking condition" is flatter than the labor supply curve.
                                           35


    Following other efficiency wage models, we assume that part of the
rationing of hours of work occurs through unemployment. Specifically, we as-

sume that the division of labor input into workers and hours is given by


    (44)    Ei   r
                      (LD)a
    (45)                  (L1D)i—a ,     O<a<1


where Ej is the number of workers hired by farmer i, Hi is hours per worker,

and L0:EHj is the amount of labor the farmer hires. We assume that workers

are divided between employment and unemployment randomly.         (The division of

LiD into Ei and Hi proves irrelevant to the degree of nominal rigidity,

but relevant to the welfare loss from rigidity.)


     In this model, w() is a farmer's expected utility given his probability

of employment. Since the size of the labor force is one, this probability is

equal to Ei (equation (244)). The farmer's utility is determined by (40) with

the wage given by (43) and the farmer's labor supply equal to Hj (equation

 @5)) when employed and zero when unemployed.           Combining these results and


 using the fact that LiD 4=            yields

             W1(, J)
     (46)
                                                        +



                      -
                            ye P
      C. Real and Nominal Rigidity

      The solutions for W(•) in the two models lead to simple expressions for

 the degree of real price rigidity:


     (47)     flial          y-1; 1TEW           $-i.
                                               36


Our assumption that real wages are more rigid under efficiency wages, $<y,

implies that real prices are also more rigid. In terms of our general model,

efficiency wages increase real price rigidity by lowering W12 while leaving

W22 unchanged. In this respect the current model differs from our earlier ex-

amples, in which real rigidity arises from a higher -W22.               Intuitively, ef-

ficiency wages do not affect W22 because they do not make changes in a firm's

real price more costly. Instead, they reduce the responses of firms' desired

prices     to demand shifts because they reduce the effects of demand on the
determinants of the desired price. Specifically, the desired price is propor-
tional to marginal cost; since efficiency wages make           real   wages less respon-
sive to aggregate demand, they make marginal cost less responsive.

     To see   the implications of efficiency wages for nominal rigidity, we cal-

culate x and R for the two models. We assume for simplicity that 8=1 (this

implies that the no—shock level of employment under efficiency wages is close

to the level in a Walrasian labor market). The results are


    (48)
                *            /      2z
               XWal _\.I
                        y(y1)9s—o
                     :, //
                *                  2z
    (49)       XjJ
                       V (t_1)2(c_1)
                                 1+cy-c
    (50)


    (51)
                                          ($—1)2(c—1)
The expression for x is identical to the one for 4al except that

replaces '.    Efficiency        wages increase nominal rigidity (since 4rcy), and the

degree of nominal rigidity becomes large as the real wage becomes acyclical
                                        37


(4, approaches one). The effect of efficiency wages on R is more complex, but

     also becomes large as the real wage becomes acyclical.21


      As in previous sections, we now ask how much real rigidity is needed for

large non-neutralities. For various parameter values, Table 3 shows the de-

gree of real price rigidity, the private cost of non-adjustment to a five per-

cent change in money, and the value of R in both the Walrasian and the ef-

ficiency wage model. In contrast to our previous examples, the degree of real

price rigidity is determined by a parameter for which we know plausible

values, and so we can ask whether the amount of real rigidity needed for sub-

stantial nominal rigidity is realistic.


        As an empirically plausible base case, we assume that 4:1.1 ——   real   wages

are only slightly procyclical under efficiency wages -- and ar.5 --      variations

in   labor are divided equally between hours and employment.22 We assume as



  21While REW is much larger than Rwal for plausible parameter values (see
below), RWal is larger for some parameter values. This ambiguity arises be-
cause moving from the Walrasian to the efficiency wage model reduces -W11,
which implies smaller social costs of rigidity, as well as reducing W12. In-
tuitively, rigidity is less costly under efficiency wages because the result-
ing output fluctuations arise partly from fluctuations in employment; in the
Wairasian model, fluctuations arise entirely from changes in hours per worker.
Fluctuations in employment imply fluctuations in each individual's probability
of employment, which are costless on average because expected utility is
linear in this probability.     Fluctuations in hours are costly because utility
 is concave in hours.


     22Estimates of the cyclical behavior of real wages vary, but many studies
 find    that real wages are approximately acyclical (for example, Geary and Ken-
 nan, 1982). The choice of a:1/2 is based on the common finding (for example,
 Barsky and Miron, 1987) that at business cycle frequencies the elasticity of
 output with respect to employment is roughly two and the elasticity with
 respect to total manhours is roughly one.
                                          38


 above that the markup and labor supply elasticity are both .15.           For these

 parameter values, the introduction of efficiency wages has dramatic effects.

 In a Wairasian labor market, the private cost of rigidity is a huge 38% of

 revenue, and R is a tiny .02.23 But with efficiency wages, the private cost

 is less than one hundredth of a percent and H is 33. As in our other models,

 substantial nominal rigidity requires substantial real price rigidity ——         in
our base case, introducing efficiency wages reduces u from 6.7 to .1. But in

 this model, it is clear that this much real rigidity can arise from plausible

underlying assumptions ——       in   particular, the assumption that real wages

respond little to aggregate demand.


        There are two caveats concerning these results. First, the value of R is

quite sensitive to moderate changes in parameter values -—       for   example, if $

is raised from 1.1 to 1.5, H drops from 33 to 1.4.        Second, and most impor—




  23Note that nominal prices are much more flexible with a Walrasian labor
market than in the self—employment model of Section III -— the private cost of
rigidity is much larger and H is much smaller. These results reflect the
greater flexibility of real prices in the Walrasian model: for our base case,
1rr6.7 for the Walrasian model and ITr.13 with
                                               self—employment.   Intuitively,
the private gains from price adjustment are large with a Walrasian labor
market because when output falls (for example) the real wage is low. Since a
producer can hire as much labor as he wants at this wage, he can greatly in-
crease profits by cutting his price and increasing output.              With self—
employment, the gains from increasing output are      smaller   because a producer
faces   his own upward—sloping labor supply curve.     This difference in incen-
tives to adjust is very large if,     as we assume, labor supply is inelastic: in
this   case,   when output is low a producer faces a very low real wage in
                                                                        a Wal—
rasian market but very steep labor supply under self-employment,      Finally,
note that E:.02 implies that, with a Walrasian labor market, the private gains
from adjustment are much greater than the social gains. While an individual
producer can greatly increase profits by cutting his price when the real wage
is low, society cannot realize similar gains: if all sellers cut their prices,
then output rises and the real wage rises, which greatly reduces each seller's
gain from adjustment.
                                         39


tant, while   we have tied the degree of real rigidity to a parameter for which

we know plausible values -—   the cyclical sensitivity of real wages ——   it is a
parameter   of aggregate economic behavior,    not a   nicroeconomie parameter of
tastes or technology. We have not determined whether reasonable microeconomic
assumptions can produce the assumed real wage behavior given the rest of our
model. This reflects the fact that research has not completely determined how
efficiency wages affect the cyclicality of real wages, and highlights the im-
portance of future work on this issue. Our results simply show that if ef-
ficiency wages greatly reduce the responsiveness of real wages to demand, then
they explain large nominal rigidities.

                                 VII.   CONCLUSIONS




        Rigidities in real wages and prices are not sufficient to explain real

 effects of nominal disturbances. In the absence of nominal frictions, prices

 adjust fully to nominal shocks regardless of the degree of real rigidity.

 Small costs of adjusting nominal prices are also not enough to explain impor-

 tant non—neutralities.       With no real rigidities, these frictions cannot

 prevent adjustment to sizable nominal     shocks or cause nominal fluctuations to

 have   large welfare effects. This paper shows, however, that the combination

 of substantial real rigidity and small costs of nominal flexibility can lead

 to large real effects of money.


        To review the explanation for this result, non—adjustment of prices to a

 nominal disturbance is an equilibrium when no price setter wants to adjust his

 price if others do not adjust.         But non—adjustment to a nominal shock when
                                       40


others' prices are fixed implies non—adjustment of a real price to a change in

real demand. Real rigidity means    that a   price setter desires only a small

price change when demand shifts. In the absence of nominal frictions, a small

desired change implies that   non—adjustment is not an equilibrium. But since

the cost of forgoing a small adjustment is small, a small "menu cost" is suf-

ficient to make rigidity an equilibrium.24


     We demonstrate the connection between real and nominal rigidity in a

general class of models of imperfectly competitive price setters.       In ad-

dition, we present models in which real rigidities arise from three specific

sources: an ad hoc cost of changing real prices, imperfect information and

customer markets, and efficiency wages. For each model, we find that a large

degree of nominal rigidity arises only if the degree of real rigidity is

large. We do not fully resolve whether the necessary amount of real rigidity

is realistic. This requires development of models of real rigidities in which

the degree of rigidity is derived from microeconomic parameters for which we

know plausible values.


    Strengthening the foundations of Keynesian economics requires further

research into real rigidities. The point of this paper is that, along with

small nominal frictions, real rigidities can lead to large nominal rigidities.

Thus as we develop better explanations for real rigidities, we gain better ex-




  24Thus, for example, Keynes's argument that workers' concern for relative
wages can lead to nominal wage rigidity is correct if amended slightly. Con-
cern for relative wages is likely to reduce but not completely eliminate a
firm's desired adjustment to a nominal shock. Keynes is correct if there is a
small cost to prevent firms from making small adjustments.
                                     41



planations for nominal rigidities as well.
                                      42


                                  REFERENCES

Akerlof, George A. "A Theory of Social Custom, of Which Unemployment May
     Be One Consequence." Quarterly Journal of Economics 94 (1980):
     fl9—775.


_______   and Yellen, Janet L. "A Near—Rational Model of the Business Cycle,
     with Wage and Price Inertia." Quarterly Journal of Economics 100
     (1985): 823—838.

Azariadis, Costas. "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria."
     Journal of Political Economy 83 (1975): 1183—1202.

Baily, Martin Neil. "Wages and Unemployment under Uncertain Demand."
     Review of Economic Studies #1 (1974): 37—50.

Ball, Laurence, and Roner, David. "Are Prices Too Sticky?" NBER Working
     Paper #2171, February 1987. (1987a)

_______ and _______ .   "Sticky Prices As Coordination Failure." NBER
     Working Paper #2327, July 1987. (1987b)

Barsky, Robert, and Miron, Jeffrey. "The Seasonal Cycle   and the Business
     Cycle." Mimeo, University of Michigan, June 1987.

Bils, Mark. "Pricing in a Customer Market." Rochester Center for Economic
     Research Working Paper No. 30, revised Summer 1986.

_______    "Cyclical Pricing of Durable Luxuries." Rochester Center for
     Economic Research Working Paper No. 83, May 1987.

Blanchard, Olivier J. "Aggregate and Individual Price Adjustment."
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1987—1: 57—109. (1987a)

 _______    "Why Does Money Affect Output?" Handbook of Monetary Economics,
     Benjamin Friedman and Frank Hahn, eds. Amsterdan: North Holland,
     forthcoming. (1987b)

_______ and Iciyotaki, Nobuhiro. "Monopolistic Competition and the Effects
     of Aggregate Demand." American Economic Review 77 (1987): 6217_666.

Blinder, Alan. "Inventories and Sticky Prices." American Economic
     Review 72 (1982): 33U—348.

Bulow, Jeremy I. and Summers, Lawrence H. "A Theory of Dual Labor Markets
     with Applications to Industrial Policy, Discrimination, and Keynesian
                                            43


    Unemployment." Journal of Labor Economics 4 (1986): 376—414.

Geary, Patrick and Kennan, John. "The Employment-Real Wage Relationship:
     An International Study." Journal of Political Economy 90 (1982):
        854—871.


Hall,    Robert E. "Market Structure and Macroeconomic Fluctuations."
        Brookings   Papers on Economic Activity 1986—2: 285—338.

Killingsworth, Mark. Labor Supply. Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press, 1983.

Lindbeck, Assar and Dennis Snower. "Wage Setting, Unemployment, and Insider-
     Outsider Relations." American Economic Review 76 (May 1986): 235—239.

t4ankiw, N. Gregory. "The Permanent Income Hypothesis and the Real Interest
     Rate." Economics Letters, November 1981, 307—311.


_______         "Small Menu   Costs and Large Business Cycles." Quarterly Journal
        of   Economics 100 (1985): 529-537.

Okun, Arthur K. Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconomic Analysis.
     Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1982.

Romer, David. "The Theory of Social Custom: A Modification and Some
     Extensions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 99 (1984): 717-727.

Rotemberg, Julio J. "Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output."
     Review of Economic Studies 49 (1982): 517-531.

_______ and Saloner, Garth. "A Supergaiize—Theoretic Model of Price Wars
        during Booms." American Economic Review 76 (1986): 390—407.

Soberer, F.M. Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance, 2nd
        Edition. chicago: Rand—McNally, 1980.

Shapiro, Carl and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Equilibrium Unemployment as a
     Worker Discipline Device." American Economic Review 74 (1984):
        433—444.

Solow, Robert M. "Another Possible Source of Wage Stickiness." Journal
     of Macroeconomics 1 (1979): 79—82.


Sparks, Roger. "A Model of Involuntary Unemployment        and Wage Rigidity."
     Journal of Labor Economics 4 (1986): 560-581.
                                      44


Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Equilibrium in Product Markets with Imperfect
     Information." American Economic Review 69 (May 1979): 339—345.


_______    "Price   Rigidities and Market Structure." American Economic
    Review 69 (May 1979): 339—345.

Woglom, Geoffrey. "Underemployment Equilibrium with Rational Expectations."
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 97 (1982): 89—107.
                                          #5




                  TABLE I —       Simple Yeoman Farmer Model



                                Private Cost / fi




  Labor supply                            Mark—up (1/(c—1))
elasticity (l/(y—1))
                            5%                 15%       50%             100%

       .05             2.38 / 1.05      2.16 / 1.16   1.64 / 1.55     1.22 / 2.10

       .15              .79 / 1.06       .71 / 1.19    .53 / 1.65      .39 / 2.31
       .50              .23 / 1.10       .20 / 1.30    .14 / 2.04      .10 / 3.13
      1.00              .11 /    1.15    .10 / 1.47    .06 /   2.67    .04 / '1.50




Note: Private Cost is for a five percent change in money. Private Cost is
measured as a percentage of revenue when prices are flexible.
                                              #6




                              TABLE II -   Ad Hoc Model


                             Private Cost / R
                     for various degrees of Real Rigidity




    1/(c—1)r.15, 1/(y—i)r.15                  1/(c—1)r. 15, i/(y—1):1.00



       iT             PC / R                            iT               PC / R



      .127*         .71 I 1.19                        .115*            .10 / 1.117
       .050         .28 / 3.04                        .050             .04 / 3.37
      .025          .14 / 6.09                        .025             .02 / 6.75
      .010          .06 / 15.2                        .010             .01 / 16.9
      .005          .03 / 30.4                        .005             .00 / 33.7
       .002         .01 / 76.1                        .002             .00 / 84.3
       .001         .01 / 152.1                       .001             .00 / 168.6




    1/(c—1):i.00,   1/(y—1 )r. 15             1 / (   c—i): 1   .00,   1/(y—i):1 .00



       iT             PC / R                            iT               PC / R



       1174*        .39   /   2.31                     333*            .04 / 11.50
       .200         .17   /   5.37                    .200             .03   /   7.50
       .050         .04   /   21.5                    .050             .01   /   30.0
       .025         .02   /   43.0                    .025             .00   /   60.0
       .010         .01   /   107.5                   .010             .00   /   150.0
       .005         .00   /   214.9                   .005             .00   /   300.0
       .002         .00   /   537.3                   .002             .00   /   750.0


*    Real Rigidity when k:0



Note: Private Cost is for a five percent change in revenue. Private Cost is
measured as a percentage of revenue when prices are flexible.
                                              47




                              TABLE III —   Efficiency    Wage Model




          1/(y—1):1/(c—1)r.15                            l/(y—l)=1/(c—1):1.O0

                a:.50                                               a:.50


                        Pc       R                            iT       PC       R
Wal -——— 6.70        37.60       .02         Wa].   ——-      1.00              1.50
                                                                       .13
EW 2.00 1.00            .84      .40         ElI    2.00 1.00          .13     1.44
     1.50     .50       .21     1.44                1.50      .50      .03     4.50
     1.10     .10      .01     32.93                1.10      .10      .00    87.50
     1.05     .05      .00 130.19                   1.05      .05      .00   337.50




                                                         1/('y—1)=1/(e1):.15

               arO                                                 a:1.0O



      $       iT       PC        B                   $                 PC       R

Wal ———— 6.70 37.60              .02         Wal    --—     6.70 37.60          .02
ElI  2.00 1.00  .84              .91         EW     2.00 1.00         .84       .26
     1.50     .50     .21       3.60                1.50     .50      .21       .79
     1.10     .10     .01      89.15                1.10     .10      .01     114.56
     1.05     .05     .00 356.19                    1.05     .05      .00    55.60




Note: Private Cost is for a five percent change in revenue. Private Cost is
measured as a percentage of revenue when prices are flexible.
       ETM1R I - Imperfect Infrmation Model

        Asymmetric Effects of Price Changes




                                 W
                                 U,
                                 C
                                 U
                 U
                 U)
                                 cc
                                 C-)
                 C
                 U
                 cc
                 C-)       OW
                           C/)



               Wo
               >
               cW          'to-
f(6)           (n          WI
                           OD
                           c1't
                           DI
                           CI-

               N




                       1
                                              9
