                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              DO FOREIGN INVESTORS IMPROVE MARKET EFFICIENCY?

                                     Marcin Kacperczyk
                                     Savitar Sundaresan
                                       Tianyu Wang

                                     Working Paper 24765
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24765


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2018




We thank Miguel Ferreira, Anton Lines (discussant), Thomas Philippon (discussant), Tarun
Ramadorai, Antoinette Schoar, Raman Uppal, and seminar participants at the BPI/Nova
Conference, EDHEC, the Federal Reserve Board, the FIRS Conference, Imperial College, the
INQUIRE Conference, Lancaster University, the NBER Long-Term Asset Management
meetings, the Royal Economic Society Conference, the University of Oklahoma, and the
University of Reading for useful comments. We thank Pedro Matos for providing assistance with
institutional ownership data and Miguel Ferreira for sharing governance index data. Kacperczyk
acknowledges the support of the ERC Consolidator grant. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Marcin Kacperczyk, Savitar Sundaresan, and Tianyu Wang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Foreign Investors Improve Market Efficiency?
Marcin Kacperczyk, Savitar Sundaresan, and Tianyu Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 24765
June 2018
JEL No. G11,G12,G14,G15

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the impact of foreign institutional investors on global capital allocation and welfare
using novel firm-level international data. Using MSCI index inclusion as an exogenous shock to
foreign ownership, we show that greater foreign ownership leads to more informative stock prices
and this effect arises more from increased price efficiency than from improved firm governance.
We further show that the impact of capital flows on price efficiency is due to real efficiency
gains, as opposed to better information disclosure. Finally, we show that foreign ownership
increases market liquidity, reduces firms' cost of equity, and leads to subsequent growth in their
real investments, thus improving overall welfare.


Marcin Kacperczyk                               Tianyu Wang
Imperial College Business School                Imperial College London
Tanaka Building                                 South Kensington Campus
South Kensington Campus                         London, SW7 2AZ
London SW7 2AZ                                  U.K.
United Kingdom                                  t.wang12@imperial.ac.uk
m.kacperczyk@imperial.ac.uk

Savitar Sundaresan
Imperial College Business School
Tanaka Building
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ
United Kingdom
s.sundaresan@ic.ac.uk
1       Introduction

One of the key purposes of financial markets is to efficiently allocate capital to the real sec-
tor.1 Foreign investors have emerged as an important force in this process. As globalization
has increased, financial markets have witnessed substantial inflows of capital from foreign in-
vestors. The empirical literature has studied the consequences of financial market liberalization
for volatility and aggregate equity prices,2 but we know considerably less about the direct im-
pact of foreign portfolio investments on market efficiency and welfare. Moreover, the evidence
on aggregate efficiency and welfare in the international economics literature is either inconclusive
or finds economically small gains.3 In this paper, we revisit efficiency and welfare gains due to
foreign stock ownership using disaggregated panel data on firms and investors from 40 countries.
    Whether and how foreign investors affect the price informativeness of local stocks is not obvi-
ous. On the one hand, information held by foreign investors could be a subset of the information
held by domestic investors or corporate managers, which would imply limited impact on prices
and real decisions. Even if such investors could produce unique information, their capacity to
invest internationally could be constrained. On the other hand, foreign investors’ participa-
tion could indicate that the investment opportunity was too good to pass up, thus indicating
their being more informed about individual investment opportunities. Further, they can provide
unique expertise and better risk sharing, which would then lead to their higher impact on price
informativeness and welfare.
    We focus on institutional investors for several reasons. First, through their expertise and
superior resources, institutional investors possess a strong advantage over retail investors in iden-
tifying inefficiencies in asset prices and correcting them through trading (e.g., Bai, Philippon and
Savov, 2016). Second, through their voting power, they can affect firms’ real decisions either
through monitoring or by taking active ownership. Third, they are economically large with re-
gard to total global capital flows (e.g., Ferreira and Matos, 2008; Maggiori, Neiman and Schreger,
2017)4 and can thus meaningfully affect the liquidity and risk sharing of individual stocks.
    1
      The Q-theory of Tobin (1969) postulates that asset prices should convey useful information about the quality of
investments. Intermediation-based theories in the spirit of Bagehot (1873) and Schumpeter (1912) focus on lenders’
and intermediaries’ ability to screen out bad projects. Agency theory (Jensen, 1986) emphasizes contracting features
that incentivize managers to pursue value-maximizing investment policies. Empirically, Wurgler (2000) shows the
benefits of financial markets for investments in a sample of developed economies.
    2
      For empirical evidence on the topic, see, for example, Chan et al. (1992), Bekaert and Harvey (1995), Stulz
(1999), Bekaert et al. (2005), Chari and Henry (2004, 2008).
    3
      Passari and Rey (2015) provide an excellent summary of this evidence.
    4
      In our sample from 2000 to 2013, the value-weighted average institutional ownership increased from 50% to


                                                         1
    To conduct our empirical tests, we construct a rich panel data set on institutional equity
ownership worldwide. Our sample covers almost 24,000 firms from 40 countries, both developed
and emerging, between 2000 and 2016. These data have been used before in other contexts
(e.g., Ferreira and Matos, 2008) but, to our knowledge, we are the first to relate institutional
ownership worldwide to individual firms’ stock price informativeness, real efficiency, and welfare.
We supplement the data with macroeconomic, market, and accounting information. We follow
Bai et al. (2016) and define stock-level price informativeness as the predicted variation of cash
flows using market prices. It is a welfare-based measure and, therefore, more relevant to real
outcomes than other conventional measures are (e.g., price nonsynchronicity and variance ratios,
which we study for robustness). In forming predictions, we consider two horizons: one year and
three years.
    In our first set of results, we relate foreign institutional ownership to price informativeness at
the stock level. We begin with a portfolio sorting approach, sorting on foreign ownership, and
find that the average price informativeness of the portfolio with the highest ownership level is
significantly greater than that of the portfolio with the lowest ownership. The effect is statistically
and economically significant for both short and long horizons. A similar result is obtained when
we sort stocks based on their domestic ownership levels; however, foreign ownership contributes
relatively more to the higher price informativeness. In addition, the positive correlation between
foreign institutional ownership and price informativeness is stronger in developed markets than
in emerging markets.
    While the portfolio sorting approach is a good way to summarize correlations in the data, a
potential concern is that our results could be driven by other factors that affect ownership and
informativeness. To allay this concern, we use a multivariate regression approach in which we
can use time-varying firm characteristics and various fixed effects across firms, time, countries,
and industries. The results corroborate the finding that price informativeness increases with
institutional ownership with a high degree of economic and statistical significance.
    To address the possibility of omitted time-varying variables affecting our results, we take
advantage of the following institutional regularity: stocks added to the global Morgan Stanley
Capital International (MSCI) index subsequently experience a strong increase in foreign own-
ership. The event generates an economically meaningful and reasonably exogenous variation in

75% for U.S. stocks, while the average non-U.S. stock has observed an increase in its ownership levels from around
5% to 24%.


                                                        2
foreign ownership, which we exploit using difference-in-differences estimation. The exclusion re-
striction is that price informativeness is not driven by forces other than index reconstitutions,
which we believe is economically plausible.
   We first establish that the shock has a strong positive effect on firm-level foreign institutional
ownership. The average firm experiences a 20% increase in foreign ownership when added to
the index, relative to an otherwise similar control firm. We next explore the role of changes
in ownership on price informativeness. We find that the prices of stocks that are added to the
index become more informative about future fundamentals relative to a control sample of stocks
matched on propensity scores. Further, exogenous changes in foreign ownership are predictive
of future increases in capital expenditures, but not in research and development (R&D). None
of our tests indicate any visible violation of the parallel trend assumption, which validates our
empirical approach.
   One might still worry that the results on price informativeness could be driven by the me-
chanical response of the prices of stocks with different fundamental characteristics and potentially
different factor loadings. To alleviate this concern, we consider the effect of index reconstitution
on post-earnings announcement drift (P EAD). If an exogenous shock to foreign ownership indeed
improves market efficiency, one would expect that prices are going to revert back more quickly to
their fundamentals, that is, the P EAD should diminish. This is indeed what we find: following
inclusion in the MSCI index, stocks experience a decrease in P EAD, defined over one-, three-,
and five-day periods. Hence, we conclude that the effect on market efficiency is unlikely to be
due to systematic differences in the factor exposures of individual stocks.
   We further assess the robustness of our results to different measures of price informativeness.
We consider two popular alternatives: price nonsynchronicity and the variance ratio. Consistent
with our hypothesis that foreign investors improve price efficiency, we find that price nonsyn-
chronicity increases and the variance ratio decreases because of index inclusion shock. Both
results are statistically and economically significant.
   Next, we zoom in on the underlying economic mechanism. We consider two channels through
which foreign ownership could affect capital allocation efficiency: information and governance.
We test whether index inclusion generates improvements in the stocks’ information environment
and find evidence supporting this claim. We show that increased foreign ownership leads to (1)
higher market liquidity, thus reducing asymmetric information in the market; (2) an increase in



                                                  3
analyst coverage, which leads to improvement in information production; and (3) better market
risk sharing resulting in reduced cost of capital in the market. All three effects are statisti-
cally and economically highly significant. At the same time, we find no evidence of improved
firm governance due to increased foreign ownership, even though the index inclusion shock si-
multaneously increases the asset ownership of both active (information-oriented) and passive
(governance-oriented) institutional owners.
   In the last part of the paper, we study the cross-sectional variation in our main results using a
number of economically plausible frictions. First, we show that investors’ activeness and expertise
are relevant predictors of greater price efficiency, especially when capital flows from foreign insti-
tutions. Second, we show that foreign investors from countries with high financial development or
under a common law system have greater effects on price informativeness, especially when they
invest in countries with low financial development or under civil law. Third, we find that firms in
countries with tighter capital constraints are associated with a weaker impact of foreign investors
on the efficient allocation of capital. We thus propose a new angle through which to analyze the
consequences of capital controls.
   Overall, our results highlight an important role that foreign institutional investors play in
driving price efficiency worldwide. They have a positive impact on the information environment,
but less so on the underlying governance structure. Finally, the results show that institutional
and legal frictions are important determinants of capital allocation efficiency.


1.1   Literature Review

Our paper blends two empirical facts: the increasing level of stock price informativeness in the
U.S. market (Bai et al., 2016) and the increasing dominance of institutional ownership in the
equity market (Gompers and Metrick, 2001). Using a simple portfolio sorting approach, Bai et
al. (2016) show a positive relation between institutional ownership and price informativeness.
We extend their analysis to broader coverage of international stocks and decompose ownership
into domestic and foreign ownership. Furthermore, we highlight the role of foreign institutional
ownership in price informativeness and welfare and the role of a country’s financial environment
in affecting the efficiency margin.
   We also contribute to the literature on the information production of financial markets and




                                                  4
firms’ investment decisions.5 Bond, Edmans and Goldstein (2012) survey the literature, emphasiz-
ing the separation of genuinely new information produced in markets (revelatory price efficiency)
from what is already known and merely reflected in prices (forecasting price efficiency). Chen,
Goldstein and Jiang (2007) find that two measures of the amount of private information—stock
price nonsynchronicity and the probability of informed trading (PIN)—have a strong positive
effect on the sensitivity of corporate investment to stock prices. In an international setting, Wur-
gler (2000) finds that financial markets improve the allocation of capital, especially in countries
with a highly developed financial market, or ratio of equity market capitalization to gross do-
mestic product (GDP). State ownership is negatively related while firm-specific information and
minority investor rights are positively related to the efficiency of capital allocation.
    This study is also related to a broad literature on institutional investors and market effi-
ciency. This research provides mixed evidence on whether investors’ trading improves market
efficiency. Campbell, Ramadorai and Schwartz (2009) find that institutions trade aggressively
to exploit mispricing around earnings announcements. Boehmer and Kelley (2009) document a
positive relation between institutional shareholdings and the relative informational efficiency of
prices, measured as deviations from a random walk. Drawing on a recent trend of quantitative
trading, Stein (2009) discusses the potential negative effects of increasing institutional ownership
on market efficiency. The author’s focus is mostly on crowded trading and leverage effects. Our
paper differs from the previous studies that focus on price-based measures of market efficiency by
examining a welfare-based measure of price informativeness. In a general equilibrium framework,
Kacperczyk, Nosal and Sundaresan (2017) show that the increase in institutional (informed)
ownership increases price informativeness and greater concentration of ownership leads to lower
informativeness.
    Our paper further complements research related to institutional investors and market effi-
ciency worldwide. Using a sample of 3,189 global firms in 2002, He et al. (2013) show a positive
relation between large foreign block shareholdings and stock price informativeness (PIN and
return nonsynchronicity). Lin, Massa and Zhang (2014) investigate the role of country-level gov-
ernance in information processing by mutual funds. Using similar data, Bena et al. (2017) find
that greater foreign institutional ownership fosters long-term investment and innovation output.


   5
    Examples include Dow and Gorton (1997), Baker, Stein and Wurgler (2003), Goldstein and Guembel (2008),
Ozdenoren and Yuan (2008), Bakke and Whited (2010), Bond et al. (2010), Goldstein, Ozdenoren and Yuan (2013),
Kurlat and Veldkamp (2015), and Edmans, Goldstein and Jiang (2015).


                                                     5
    Finally, our paper is also related to the literature on international capital flows. Hau and Rey
(2006) develop an equilibrium model in which exchange rates, equity prices, and capital flows are
jointly determined. They show that the net equity flows into the foreign market are positively
correlated with foreign currency appreciation and financial market development. Hau and Rey
(2008) document facts about the mutual fund home bias in an international fund sample. Froot
and Ramadorai (2008) find that institutional cross-border flows are linked to fundamentals, while
closed-end fund flows are a source of price pressure in the short run. Jotikasthira, Lundblad
and Ramadorai (2012) show that flows to funds domiciled in developed markets force significant
changes in these funds’ emerging market portfolio allocations. These forced trades, or “fire sales,”
affect emerging market equity prices, pairwise correlations, and betas.


2    Data

Our primary data set is a panel that results from matching several databases. First, we merge
FactSet6 (with data on firm-level global institutional ownership), available from 2000 onward
with Datastream/Worldscope (for firm-level international stock market and accounting data).
FactSet reports holdings for a wide range of institution types, such as mutual funds, hedge funds,
pension funds, bank trusts, and insurance companies (Ferreira and Matos, 2008). For non-U.S.
firms, FactSet collects ownership data directly from national regulatory agencies, stock exchange
announcements (e.g., the Regulatory News Service in the United Kingdom), local and offshore
mutual funds, mutual fund industry directories (e.g., European Fund Industry Directory), and
company proxies and financial reports. Even though the data are available quarterly, for our
purposes, we use the last reported value in each calendar year.
    Next, we append the data on returns of open-end equity mutual funds from Lipper. We further
add equity index return data from MSCI, as well as country-level equity market capitalization,
the GDP, and industrial production from the World Bank. We also merge analyst data from
I/B/E/S. Finally, we merge bilateral trade data from the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
    Our aggregated database has an annual frequency and covers the period 2000–2016. Following
previous studies (e.g., Edmans, Jayaraman and Schneemeier, 2017), we exclude financial firms—
one-digit Standard Industry Classification (SIC) code 6—and firms with market capitalization

    6
      We thank Miguel Ferreira and Pedro Matos for making their ownership data available. Details can be found
at https://wrds-web.wharton.upenn.edu/wrds/ds/factset/holdingsbyfirmmsci/index.cfm?navId=195.


                                                      6
less than $1 million. A firm must have at least four successive years of earnings data and a
nonzero institutional ownership value to be included in our sample. We further limit our sample
to countries in which there are at least 20 firms with complete data. The final data set consists
of 23,811 unique firms for a total of 186,885 firm–year observations.


2.1    Institutional Ownership Variables

The data contain 9,449 institutional owners, 8,928 active, and 521 passive investors. Foreign
institutional ownership (F ORit ) is the fraction of a firm’s i shares held at time t by all institutions
domiciled in a country different than the one where the stock is listed, relative to the firm’s total
number of shares outstanding.7 The variable F ORit is set to zero if a stock is not held by
any foreign institution but is held by at least one domestic institution. Domestic institutional
ownership (DOMit ) is the fraction of a firm’s i shares held at time t by all institutions domiciled
in the same country where the stock is listed, relative to the firm’s total number of shares
outstanding. The variable DOMit is set to zero if a stock is not held by any domestic institution
but is held by at least one foreign institution.8 Total institutional ownership (IOit ) is the sum of
DOMit and F ORit .
    We define active (ACT IV Eit ) and passive (P ASSIV Eit ) fractional ownership variables based
on institutions’ investment types. Following Ferreira and Matos (2008), active institutions are
mutual funds, investment advisors, and hedge funds, while other institutions (bank trusts, pension
funds, and insurance companies) are considered passive. This classification is not perfect for
several reasons (Ferreira and Matos, 2008). For example, the mutual fund category includes index
funds and exchange-traded funds that invest passively. To address this concern, we categorize
these two types of funds as passive.9 Further, we decompose both measures depending on whether
active owners are foreign (F OR ACT IV Eit ) or domestic (DOM ACT IV Eit ). Similarly, we
separate passive ownership into F OR P ASSIV Eit and DOM P ASSIV Eit . Finally, for firms
listed outside the United States, we define U.S.-based foreign fractional institutional ownership

   7
      For multinational companies, we are able to track ownership at the trading desk/subsidiary level. Investments
from the Blackrock London office would therefore be considered domestic from the perspective of investing in U.K.
companies, but investments from Blackrock U.S. would be considered foreign in the same case.
    8
      Alternatively, for firms with no matched or missing ownership data, we can simply set the values of IO,
F OR, and DOM to zero. In this larger sample, the results are qualitatively and quantitatively similar; for more
discussion, see Section 3.4.4.
    9
      Our empirical results are quantitatively and qualitatively similar if we use the active (IO IN DEP ) and passive
(IO GREY ) classifications of Ferreira and Matos (2008), which can be accessed directly from FactSet. We observe
slight differences in ownership levels across the two investing groups.


                                                          7
(F OR U Sit ) and non–U.S.-based foreign ownership (F OR N U Sit ).
   We present basic summary statistics on the distribution of ownership data by country in
Table 1. Our sample includes 40 countries both from developed and emerging economies. The
United States has the largest number of listed stocks, with 5,131, while Hungary has the lowest,
27 stocks. An average firm in a developed country has a higher value of DOM (19.43%) than
that of F OR (4.70%), which is largely explained by the strong asymmetric pattern in the United
States, where an average firm has the value of DOM equal to 49.06% and the value of F OR
equal to 2.62%. In contrast, the average value of F OR is much higher than DOM in emerging
countries, where a typical foreign institution has an average ownership of 4.39% and a domestic
institution has a value of 2.60%. In addition, an average firm in a developed country has a higher
number of institutional investors, 87, than one in an emerging country, 25.
   In Figure 1, we present the time series of foreign and domestic ownership levels for two different
groups of firms, from developed and emerging countries. We aggregate ownership across firms
using weights proportional to their stocks’ market capitalization. We observe an increase over time
in institutional ownership, especially in developed countries. Domestic institutions are the key
owners in the United States, while foreign owners dominate countries outside the United States,
especially in emerging markets. In Figure 2, we present the time series of average active and
passive ownership (both domestic and foreign) for the same regions. In both groups, we observe
a dominant role of active investors in institutional ownership. However, passive ownership has
been increasing steadily over time, especially in emerging markets.
   In Panel A of Table 2, we present the summary statistics for the main institutional ownership
variables. The average firm-level institutional ownership in our sample equals 19.5%, with an
interquartile range between 1.5% and 24.6%. The distribution is highly right skewed, with a
median equal to 7.5%. Of the 19.5% average ownership, 14.9% is accounted for by domestic
ownership while the remaining 4.6% comes from foreign ownership. The majority of domestic
ownership is active (13.1%) with 1.8% being passive. Similarly, within foreign ownership, active
investors own 4% of the total while passive investors own 0.6%. Finally, firms outside the United
States exhibit almost an equal share of foreign ownership from U.S. institutions (2%) and non–
U.S. institutions (2.6%). All the above variables are highly dispersed and vary across countries,
industries, and firms and over time. We provide formal definitions of the variables in Appendix
IA.1.



                                                 8
2.2   Stock Market and Accounting Variables

We define the market valuation of firm i at time t as the natural logarithm of market capi-
talization (Mit ) to total assets (Ait ), log(M/A)it . Our cash flow variable (E/A)it is earnings
before interest and taxes (EBIT ), divided by total assets. The investment variables include re-
search and development (R&D)/Ait , capital expenditures (CAP EX/A)it , and total investments
IN V EST M EN Tit = (CAP EXit + R&Dit )/Ait , all scaled by total assets. Additional account-
ing variables include the logarithm of sales log(SALES)it , measured in thousands of dollars;
LEV ERAGEit , defined as book debt divided by total asset; CASHit , defined as cash holdings
scaled by total assets; T AN GIBILIT Yit defined as net property, plant, and equipment scaled
by total assets; and F ORSALEit , defined as the percentage of foreign sales in total sales. The
variable CLOSEit is the ownership fraction of stock i at time t of all corporate insiders in this
firm. We also use variables related to market liquidity and public information. The variable
AN ALY ST is the number of analysts covering a given stock (based on a one-year forecast pe-
riod); log(V OLU M E) is the natural logarithm of the dollar stock volume in year t; BID − ASK
SP READ is the ratio of the difference between closing ask and closing bid prices over the closing
mid-price calculated at a daily frequency and then averaged within year t; log(AM IHU D) is the
natural logarithm of Amihud’s liquidity measure, which is the ratio of the absolute return over
the dollar stock volume calculated using a daily frequency and then averaged within year t; and
V OLAT ILIT Y is the daily stock return volatility (as a percentage). To mitigate the effect of
outliers, we winsorize all variables at 1%.
   Panel B of Table 2 presents the summary statistics for the market and accounting variables.
The average firm in our sample has an E/A ratio of 0.02 and a log ratio log(M/A) of −0.32.
The (R&D)/A ratio is 0.02 and the CAP EX/A ratio is 0.05. The average book leverage of a
typical firm in our sample equals 0.22, with a standard deviation of 0.20. On average, tangible
assets account for 30% of total assets, foreign sales make up 20% of all sales, and cash comprises
17% of total assets. Further, corporate insiders, on average, hold 30.9% of all shares in a typical
firm, but the distribution of this quantity is highly variable across countries and firms. We also
observe significant cross-sectional and time-series variation in all the variables.




                                                  9
2.3     Country-Level Variables

We measure the intensity of the connection between any two countries using several different
indicators: bilateral trade relations, geographical distance, language, border connections, and
colonial origin. The bilateral trade relation between any pair of countries is defined as the sum
of their bilateral exports, scaled by the sum of their GDPs. We use reported exports for each
country, measured in current U.S. dollars. The remaining connection measures are from Mayer
and Zignago (2011). The distance variable is the population-weighted average between large
cities in each country pair. The variable for common language equals one if a common language
is spoken by over 9% of the population in both countries. The border connection variable equals
one if both countries share a common border. The variable for colonial origin equals one if the
two countries have the same colonial origin.
    Financial system classification data are from Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (1999). The de-
gree of capital control for each country is based on the Chinn–Ito index (Chinn and Ito, 2006),
which measures the country’s current account restrictions based on extracting the first principle
component from the indicator variables that codify the tabulation of restrictions on cross-border
financial transactions reported in the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Ex-
change Restrictions.10


2.4     Price-Informativeness Variables

We use the correlation of a company’s equity market valuation with its cash flows multiplied by
the standard deviation of its cash flows as our primary measure of price informativeness (P I). The
correlation being scaled by the standard deviation reflects the fact that a high level of correlation is
more meaningful when the asset itself is quite volatile. This measure is definitionally equivalent
to the covariance of market valuation and cash flows, normalized by the volatility of market
valuation, which is the definition used by Bai et al. (2016). Similarly, we measure aggregate
efficiency as a correlation of investment with earnings, multiplied by the standard deviation of
earnings. As before, the multiplicative term shows that correlation matters more for volatile
earnings. This term expresses the amount of variation in earnings that can be explained by
investment. We present the micro foundation of the informativeness measures in Appendix IA.A.

   10
     The binary variables include an indicator variable for multiple exchange rates (k1), a variable for restrictions
on the current account (k2), a variable for capital account transactions (k3), and a variable indicating the surrender
of export proceeds (k4). The variable k3 is often used for measuring capital controls.


                                                         10
3     Empirical Results

In this section, we present our main empirical results on institutional capital flows and price
informativeness.


3.1   Portfolio Sorts

We begin by presenting portfolio sort results. In each year and within each country, we sort
firms with nonzero ownership levels into equally sized portfolio bins according to institutional
ownership. We exploit the within-country variation in the data to account for the possibility
that different countries are characterized by different degrees of institutional access to financial
markets. Subsequently, we obtain the measure of price informativeness (P I) by estimating the
following cross-sectional regression model for each bin:


                   Ei,h /Ai = a + b1,h log(M/A)i + b2,h (Ei /Ai ) + b3,h SIC1 + ei,h            (1)

where h is an earnings horizon of either one or three years and SIC1 is a one-digit SIC industry
classifier. We also include country fixed effects to account for any time-invariant country-specific
unobservables. Next, for each bin k, we calculate P Ik,t+h for horizon h as b1,h × σ (log(M/A)),
where the second term in the formula is the cross-sectional standard deviation of log valuation
ratios in a given year. We obtain the time series of P I measures for two different horizons and
each group k.
    In Figure 3, we present the time series evolution of these measures, broken down by type of
institutional investor (domestic or foreign) and forecasting horizon (short or long). Each figure
shows three lines, each representative of a given tercile of the ownership sort. We observe that
P I is generally trending upward over time. In the cross section, P I is always strictly increasing
in the level of institutional ownership, even though the growth rate in P I over time has been the
highest for the stocks in the lowest ownership tercile.
    We next assess the statistical significance of the average estimates by aggregating the measures
for each group across all years. To improve precision, we sort observations into quintiles. We
calculate standard errors using the Newey–West method with four lags. We present the results in
Panel A of Table 3. Columns (1) to (3) report the results corresponding to total ownership (IO)
sorts. The portfolio sorts generate considerable spread in institutional ownership, ranging from



                                                  11
1.5% for the lowest ownership quintile to 41.5% for the highest. We observe a strongly increasing
pattern in P I across the five portfolios: low-ownership firms have less informative stock prices
than high-ownership firms do. For both one- and three-year horizons, the respective differences
are economically and statistically highly significant.
   We further improve on this simple sort in a few ways. First, we decompose the effect by
conditioning on the institution’s country of origin, which we find preserves the results. Second,
we explore the differences between stocks with zero institutional ownership and those in the
lowest ownership quintile and find that the entry of foreign investors to a stock has a bigger
impact on price informativeness than the entry of domestic investors. Third, we separate firms
into developed countries, emerging markets, U.S. only, and non-U.S. countries and find that the
previous results tend to be stronger for firms in developed countries, although the effects are
somewhat weaker for shorter horizons. Finally, we perform a double sort in which we first sort
all firms within each country and year into quintile portfolios based on their values of DOM
and then, within each quintile sort, we further split firms into halves according to their value of
F OR.11 All the results are presented in Tables IA.3 and IA.4 of the Appendix.


3.2      Regression Results

One of the concerns related to the portfolio sort analysis is omitted variables correlated with
institutional ownership and with price informativeness. For example, companies with large assets
could have significant institutional ownership and be more informationally efficient. This would
bias the coefficient of the market capitalization downwards. In this section, we establish the
robustness of our results with respect to such omitted characteristics. Specifically, we estimate
the following pooled regression model using firm-level data:


              Ei,t+h /Ai,t = a + b1,h log(M/A)i,t + b2,h log(M/A)i,t × IOi,t + b3,h Xi,t + ei,t+h   (2)


where Xi,t is a vector of controls, including E/A, log(Asset), CLOSE, LEV ERAGE, T AN GIBILIT Y ,
log(SALES), F ORSALES, and CASH. ei,t is measurement error. We also include firm and
country×year fixed effects.12 To account for possible dependence across firms and years, we
cluster standard errors in the two dimensions. The coefficient of interest is b2,h , which measures

  11
       We consider splits into halves to ensure that our tests have sufficient statistical power.
  12
       The results are robust when controlling for industry or industry×year fixed effects.


                                                           12
average price informativeness conditional on institutional ownership. We present the results in
Table 4.
   In column (1), we show the results for the one-year specification without controls but with
all fixed effects. The coefficient b2,h is statistically significant at the 1% level of significance. In
column (4), we show that a similar effect holds for price informativeness with a longer future
horizon of three years.
   To better understand the economic mechanism behind the ownership results, we decompose
total institutional ownership into its two components, F OR and DOM , and estimate the relative
contribution to price informativeness of the two types of investors, using the following regression
model:


Ei,t+h /Ai,t = a+b1,h log(M/A)i,t +b2,h log(M/A)i,t ×F ORi,t +b3,h log(M/A)i,t ×DOMi,t +b4,h Xi,t +ei,t+h
                                                                                                    (3)
The coefficients of interest are b2,h and b3,h , which measure average price informativeness con-
ditional on foreign and domestic institutional ownership, respectively. We present the results in
columns (2) and (3) for a one-year horizon with and without stock-level controls. We find that
the effect of foreign ownership on price informativeness is at least as large as that of domestic
ownership. In columns (5) and (6), we report the results for a three-year horizon. The results
remain qualitatively similar.
   The above results may be difficult to interpret because both measures of institutional owner-
ship exhibit different variability in the data. Domestic ownership is about three times as variable
as foreign ownership is. To address this issue, we construct another variable, F or Ratio, defined
as the ratio of foreign to total ownership, and use it instead of F OR and DOM in our regression
model. We present the results from the estimation in columns (7) and (8). For each of the
two horizons, we observe a positive and statistically significant coefficient of the interaction term
between F or Ratio and log(M/A), which means that foreign ownership has a stronger economic
effect on price informativeness than domestic ownership does, even though both are statistically
important.
   Next, we analyze the impact of institutional ownership separately for firms in developed and
emerging countries. For each group, we estimate the regression model in (3), with and without
controls. We present the results in Table 5. For brevity, we only report the coefficients of the
main variables. Panel A reports the results for developed and Panel B reports those for emerging

                                                  13
markets. We observe striking differences between the two groups. The effects are strong and
statistically significant for both types of ownership in developed countries but they are significant
only for a short horizon for emerging countries. For the long horizon, neither type of ownership
is statistically different from zero. In untabulated results, we also analyze differences between
a subsample of U.S. and non-U.S. firms. For the U.S. sample, we find that domestic ownership
has a larger effect on price informativeness than foreign ownership does. In all specifications, the
coefficients of F OR are statistically insignificant. The results become markedly different when
we consider a sample of non-U.S firms. We find that foreign institutions have a much stronger
impact on prices at both shorter and longer horizons. Moreover, while domestic ownership is an
important predictor for short horizons, its significance disappears when we consider a three-year
horizon.
   Overall, our results suggest that domestic institutional ownership and foreign institutional
ownership are both important predictors of price informativeness in the unconditional sample.
The effect is much stronger for the sample of developed countries. At the same time, institutions
do not improve price efficiency in emerging markets beyond their short-term impact.


3.3   Real Efficiency

Our results show that greater foreign institutional ownership is associated with higher price in-
formativeness. Where is the added information coming from? A hypothesis of interest is whether
it comes from greater information production by the institutions or simply improved informa-
tion disclosure. For example, total information could have remained unchanged but the amount
of information that firms with higher ownership disclose could have increased in relative terms,
perhaps due to more accurate financial reporting. This would make prices more informative,
but it would not significantly improve real allocations. We test such a disclosure hypothesis by
looking at aggregate efficiency, estimated as the sensitivity of future firms’ cash flows to their
contemporaneous investment levels. If disclosure were to affect price informativeness, then one
would expect aggregate efficiency to remain unchanged because it depends on the information
available to the firm’s manager, which is unaffected by disclosure. Testing this hypothesis is of
broader interest, since aggregate efficiency is a key factor in economic growth.
   To this end, we estimate the following regression model:


 Ei,t+h /Ai,t = a+b1,h Investi,t +b2,h Investi,t ×F ORi,t +b3,h Investi,t ×DOMi,t +b4,h Xi,t +ei,t+h (4)

                                                  14
where Invest denotes the investment level of firm i at time t. We use three different measures of
investment: CAP EX/A, R&D/A, and (CAP EX + R&D)/A. All regressions include the same
control variables as equation (2). We also include firm and country×year fixed effects. We cluster
standard errors by firm and year. Our coefficients of interest are b2,h and b3,h , which measure
aggregate efficiency conditional on the source of demand for firm’s equity. We present the results
in Panel A of Table IA.6 in the Appendix.
   We present the results for one-year and three-year horizons. The results indicate that foreign
institutional ownership plays a dominant role in driving aggregate efficiency. In all but one
case, its effect is positive and statistically significant. On the other hand, domestic ownership
only matters only for R&D investments and is insignificant for capital expenditures and total
investment. We conclude that the informational role of foreign investors operates through better
aggregate efficiency, while the role of domestic investors may be partly explained by improved
disclosure.
   Another question of interest is whether the greater informativeness extends to real firm de-
cisions. Our framework implies that, as prices become more informative, they should better
predict investment levels. We evaluate this hypothesis by estimating the following pooled regres-
sion model:


 Investi,t+h /Ai,t = a+b1,h log(M/A)i,t ×F ORi,t +b2,h log(M/A)i,t ×DOMi,t +b3,h Xi,t +ei,t+h (5)


where all the variables are identical to those in equation (2). Our coefficients of interest are
b1,h and b2,h . We present the results in Panel B of Table IA.6. We find that foreign ownership
has a weak predictive power of investment in the short run, while domestic ownership predicts
investment in the long run. When we decompose investment levels into capital expenditure
and R&D components, we can see that the effect of foreign ownership operates largely through
capital expenditure changes while domestic ownership affects only R&D. This result suggests
that different sources of institutional ownership could complement each other in the way they
affect investments.


3.4   Identification and Alternative Efficiency Measures

Our results so far can be largely interpreted as associations and not as causal relations. One of
the potential concerns underlying our analysis is that of omitted variables bias. In particular,


                                               15
price informativeness may be higher for reasons unrelated to institutional ownership but at the
same time correlated with that variable. In this section, we address this concern by taking
advantage of exogenous changes to foreign ownership due to MSCI index inclusion. Our empirical
implementation is via the difference-in-differences estimation. We further explore the robustness
of the identification for different measures of price informativeness. Finally, we briefly discuss the
issue of sample selection resulting from our focus on firms with nonzero institutional ownership.


3.4.1   Difference-in-Differences Approach

Our identification strategy is based on a quasi-natural experiment previously used in the litera-
ture (e.g., Bena et al., 2017). We compare the price informativeness of firms newly added to the
M SCI All Country World Index (ACW I) to a sample of comparable firms that did not expe-
rience the addition. Several foreign institutions only hold stocks that are part of the index and
thus an addition to the index is a positive shock to these stocks’ foreign ownership levels. Our
identification strategy assumes that firms are added to an index for reasons other than their price
informativeness; hence, one can consider the shock as being plausibly exogenous. The exclusion
restriction of our test is that any informativeness changes are not due to reasons other than the
increase in ownership levels based on index addition.
   We require that at least five years of accounting and ownership data be available for the
tested firms (two years before and two years after the inclusion year). Our empirical approach is
a standard difference-in-differences estimation. In our sample, 714 firms with complete accounting
and market data are affected by the index inclusion treatment. Our treatment is staggered over
multiple years and involves different companies and countries; hence, our results are unlikely
driven by specific time trends affecting particular groups of stocks.
   For each firm in the treatment group, we identify five nearest matches using the propensity
score matching algorithm. These serve as a counterfactual control group. Our matching, with
replacement, is based on the following ex-ante (one year before inclusion) characteristics: F OR,
DOM , log(Sales), F ORSALES, Market Capitalization, log(M/A), E/A, IN V EST M EN T ,
and country fixed effects. Panel A of Table 6 shows the quality of the matching by showing the
average values of each matched characteristic separately for the treatment and control groups.
The results indicate that the treated firms are not statistically different from the control firms.
The only statistically significant difference, at the 10% level, is for the level of investments.



                                                 16
   Next, we visually inspect trends in the data around the inclusion period. Our goal is to
assess the plausibility of the parallel trend assumption that underlies the difference-in-differences
methodology. While the assumption is theoretically untestable, one can make some inferences
based on the patterns observed in the data prior to the shock. In Figure 4, we plot the time series
of the differences between the treatment and control groups with respect to domestic and foreign
ownership and price informativeness. The window from year -1 to year 0 is when the treated firm
is added to the index. We find that both foreign ownership and price informativeness increase for
treated firms relative to the control group following the shock. At the same time, the domestic
ownership of the same stocks does not change, which suggests that general trends in ownership do
not drive our results. Further, we do not observe any clear pre trends in both quantities within
a three-year window before the shock. This evidence is comforting and suggests that any effect
we identify is not a continuation of a general differential trend between the two groups of firms.
   Next, we validate the significance of the effects using the multivariate regression framework,
which allows us to directly control for any differences in observables across two groups of firms,
as well as time-invariant unobservables. Specifically, for each firm, we define an indicator variable
Af ter that is equal to one for the period following the inclusion year and zero for all the years
before it. We also define an indicator variable T reat, equal to one for firms added to the M SCI
ACW I during our sample period and to zero for all firms in the control group. To zoom in on the
shock, we restrict our analysis to the window of three years before addition to three years after
addition (including the inclusion year). We estimate the following regression model separately
for F OR and DOM :


                IOi,t = a + b1 T reati + b2 Af tert + b3 T reati × Af tert + b4 Xi,t + ei,t      (6)


where IO is a generic variable for F OR and DOM . We present the results in Panel B of Table 6.
We find that firms added to the index experience an increase in foreign ownership of 1.8 percentage
points, on average. The effect is statistically significant at the 1% level and economically large,
given that the average firm in the pre-treatment sample has an average foreign ownership level
of 8.8%. On the other hand, the effect for domestic firms is economically much smaller and
statistically insignificant.
   Subsequently, we examine the consequence of the shock for price informativeness by estimating




                                                    17
the following regression model:


Ei,t+h /Ai,t = a+b1,h log(M/A)i,t +b2,h T reati ×Af tert +b3,h log(M/A)i,t ×T reati ×Af tert +b4,h Xi,t +ei,t+h
                                                                                                        (7)
Our coefficient of interest is b3,h , which measures the change in the price informativeness of the
treated firms relative to the control firms around the shock. We present the results in Panel C
of Table 6. In column (1), we present the results for a one-year horizon. We find that, because
of the shock, the price informativeness of treated firms increases significantly more on a relative
basis. The effect is economically large and statistically significant at the 5% level of significance.
In turn, the changes in price informativeness for the control firms are not statistically different
from zero. In column (2), we consider changes in price informativeness for a three-year horizon.13
Again, we find a statistically significant difference between the treatment and control groups.
The effect is three times as large as that for a short horizon and is economically large. We further
show that the sensitivity of future investments to current market valuation improves at the one-
year horizon but is much weaker at three three-year horizon. This effect is entirely driven by
the increase in capital expenditures (columns 3 and 4) and not R&D expenses (columns (5) and
(6)), which suggests that the effect of foreign institutions operates mostly through the less risky
investment channel.
   We also evaluate whether changes in the index composition affect the aggregate efficiency of
the treated firms. To this end, we estimate the following regression model:


Ei,t+h /Ai,t = a+b1,h Investmenti,t +b2,h T reati ×Af tert +b3,h Investmenti,t ×T reati ×Af tert +b4,h Xi,t +ei,t+h
                                                                                                        (8)
where Investment is a generic variable for two different types of investments: capital expenditures
and R&D. We present the results in Panel A of Table 7. The top panel illustrates the results for
CAP EX for a short horizon (column (1)) and a long horizon (column (2)). We find that index
inclusion shock, on average, improves firms’ aggregate efficiency but the effect is statistically
significant only for a short horizon. In turn, the results for R&D in the bottom panel paint the
opposite picture. The role of foreign investors is negligible in the short perspective but improves
efficiency in the longer horizon.

   13
      In order to avoid overlapping forecast period before and after the addition shock, we only compare the
observations at three years before and two years after the addition.


                                                    18
   Overall, we conclude that most of the results we identified in the OLS regression framework
are robust to potential endogeneity concerns via the index inclusion experiment. Foreign investors
tend to improve price informativeness, which manifests itself through changes in aggregate effi-
ciency.


3.4.2     Post-Earnings-Announcement Drift

One of the possible concerns with the analysis based on covariance-based informativeness measure
is that it may also capture effects other than changes in market efficiency. For example, the
addition to an index may reflect differential exposure of individual stocks to risk factors rather
than the market efficiency effect. To address this concern, we provide an alternative test, based on
post-earnings-announcement drift (P EAD). The P EAD measures the sensitivity of abnormal
stock returns following earnings surprise. Notably, the P EAD is not subjected to risk-based
explanations and is a standard way to capture deviations from price efficiency. In a fully efficient
market, prices immediately adjust to any earnings surprises and the drift should be zero. To the
extent that the presence of foreign investors improves market efficiency, one would expect the
magnitude of the drift to decrease as foreign ownership increases.
   To construct the variable P EAD, we need to define unexpected earnings surprises. We
consider two different measures of standardized unexpected earnings (SU E): a time series SUE
and a consensus-based SUE. The time-series SU E is based on a seasonal random walk model
with drift (e.g., Bernard and Thomas (1989, 1990)),


                                              Ei,q − Ei,q−4 − Ui,t
                                  SU Ei,t =                                                     (9)
                                                      σi.t

where Ei,q measures quarterly earnings per share in quarter q, Ei,q−4 is earnings per share four
quarters before, Ui,t and σi.t are the mean and standard deviation of (Ei,q − Ei,q−4 ) over the
preceding eight quarters.
   The consensus-based SU E is based on analysts’ forecasts (Livnat and Mendenhall, 2006). It is
computed as the quarter’s actual earnings minus the average of the most recent analyst forecasts,
divided by the standard deviation of those forecasts. Livnat and Mendenhall (2006) argue that
institutional trading reacts more to analysts’ consensus-based earnings surprises rather than to
time series–based earnings surprises.
   We hypothesize that the magnitude of the P EAD should decrease after a firm is added to


                                                 19
the MSCI index. Formally, we estimate the following regression model:




CAR d1 dn = a+b1,h SU Ei,t +b2,h T reati ×Af tert +b3,h SU Ei,t ×T reati ×Af tert +b4,h Xi,t +ei,t+h
                                                                                               (10)
where CAR d1 dn denotes the cumulative abnormal return (stock return minus market return)
from the first day to the nth day after a quarterly earnings announcement. For robustness, we
consider n = 1, 3, or 5.
   In Figure 5, we show the evolution of the consensus-based P EAD around the index inclusion
period for the three horizons of abnormal returns. Consistent with our hypothesis, stocks added
to the MSCI index experience a drop in P EAD relative to stocks in the control group, which
suggests that increased foreign ownership improves market efficiency. We further assess the
robustness of this result by estimating a multivariate regression model. To allow for serial and
cross-sectional dependence in the data, we cluster standard errors in the firm and time dimensions.
Our coefficient of interest is b3 , which measures the response of abnormal returns to earnings
surprises for the treated stocks relative to the counterfactual control group. We present the
results in Panel D of Table 6.
   We find that P EAD becomes relatively smaller for stocks added to the MSCI index. The
result holds for three different specifications of abnormal returns and is statistically significant
at the 5% level. Further, the result is robust to alternative specifications of unexpected earnings
surprises. Overall, we conclude that an exogenous shock to foreign institutional ownership has a
significant positive effect on market efficiency and is unlikely to be due to spurious comovement
between prices and earnings.


3.4.3   Alternative Efficiency Measures

Our measure of price informativeness is based on cash flow predictability from prices. Although
this measure has a solid theoretical foundation, the question remains whether our findings are ro-
bust to alternative measures of efficiency. In this section, we consider other popular alternatives.
Our first alternative is the price nonsynchronicity of Roll (1988), calculated as 1 − R2 , where R2
is the R-squared from a regression of individual stock returns on the market factor. We deter-
mine price nonsynchronicity by estimating the market model using weekly stock returns for each



                                                20
stock-year pair.14 Conceptually, higher levels of nonsynchronicity indicate greater information
revelation in prices and thus more efficient prices.
   As before, we first inspect patterns in price nonsynchronicity around the index inclusion
period for stocks in the treatment group relative to those in the control group. The results,
presented in Figure 5, indicate that the treatment group experiences a significant increase in
non-synchronicity upon inclusion in the index. Moreover, we observe no visible differences in
pre-trends between the treatment and control groups. We further corroborate the findings using
a difference-in-differences regression model for the same measure. Column (1) in Panel E of Table
6 reports the results. We find that price nonsynchronicity increases significantly for stocks added
to the index relative to those in the control group.
   Another measure of price efficiency is the variance ratio (e.g., Boehmer and Kelley, 2009). In
a random walk process, the ratio of long- to short-term return variances equals one, using the
same data window. Any deviation from one should reflect less informative prices. To account
for this benchmark, we compute the standardized variance ratio as |1–V R(nday, mday)|, where
VR(nday, mday) is the ratio of the return variance over m days to the return variance over n
days, divided by the length of the period. We subsequently use the (1day, 5days) version of the
measure in our difference-in-differences estimation model. The results are presented in Panel E
of Table 6, column (2). We find that the standardized variance ratio decreases for stocks added
to the index relative to those in the control group; that is, their prices become more informative.


3.4.4      Sample Selection Issues

One of the important features of our analysis is that we only condition our sample on firms
that have non-zero total institutional ownership. Hence, our analysis can be interpreted purely
from the intensive margin perspective. However, not every firm is held by institutional investors
and, hence, our results could be biased by not accounting for such firms in our analysis. In this
section, we present the results corresponding to those reported in Tables 3 and 4 by conditioning
on all firms. In particular, we assume that all firms that are missing from our sample have zero
institutional ownership. We repeat the previous tests by first looking at the portfolio sort results
for the zero-ownership firms and then considering the regression results using the full sample of
firms. In the latter case, we additionally include an indicator variable M ISSIN G that is equal


  14
       We use Wednesday prices to calculate returns. The result is robust when using other days’ prices.


                                                         21
to one for all firm–years with zero total ownership and to zero for all other observations. This
approach accounts for any systematic reasons such firms do not attract institutional ownership.
We report our results in Tables 3 (IO zero) and IA.5.
     We find that, if anything, the results become stronger when we include the missing firms.
First, the portfolio of zero-ownership firms has much lower price informativeness than all other
portfolios do. Second, the coefficient of the interaction terms between institutional ownership
and market valuation becomes significantly larger compared to all the previous specifications.
These results are consistent with our hypothesis that a lower degree of ownership is associated
with lower price informativeness.15


4        Testing the Economic Mechanism

Our results thus far indicate a strong causal relation between the degree of foreign institutional
ownership and the level of price informativeness and real efficiency. In this section, we shed
more light on the possible economic mechanisms behind these results. We consider two different
channels through which foreign ownership can affect capital allocation efficiency, one based on
information and the other based on corporate governance.


4.1      The Information-Based Channel

Foreign investors’ decisions to enter financial markets should be related to their expected impact
on the information environment in the target market. Foreign investors can affect that environ-
ment in at least three ways. First, they can affect market liquidity and thus reduce asymmetric
information in the market. They can also affect the decision of sell-side analysts to cover the
target markets; that is, they can improve information production. Finally, they can improve risk
sharing and thus reduce the cost of capital in the market. In all three cases, one would expect
market efficiency and welfare to improve. In this section, we empirically evaluate all three pos-
sibilities in the context of the index inclusion experiment. Specifically, we estimate a regression
model akin to that in formula (6), with various information measures as dependent variables.
     We consider two measures of market liquidity: turnover (trading volume over share outstand-
ing) and the bid–ask spread. We present the results in Table 7. We find that stocks that are
    15
    We note that our underlying assumption is that firms not included in the analysis have zero institutional
ownership. However, some firms may simply have information that is missing from the database but are still
owned by institutions. If this were the case, however, our findings would be biased downwards.


                                                     22
added to an index, on average, experience a significant increase in their market liquidity, rela-
tive to a comparable group of control stocks. Average turnover increases by about 10% of the
standard deviation while the bid–ask spread decreases by close to 15% of the standard deviation.
Both effects are economically and statistically significant.
   Next, we evaluate the impact of stock index inclusion on the stock analyst coverage. Our
measure of coverage is based on the number of sell-side analysts issuing forecast in a given year.
We present the results in Table 7. Our results indicate that stocks added to the index experience
a relatively greater increase in analyst coverage of about three analysts per stock, that is, 20%
of the standard deviation. The effect is significant both economically and statistically. Hence,
stock inclusion could lead to the greater production of relevant information coming from increased
analyst coverage. Following the evidence of Hong and Kacperczyk (2010), one can also argue such
information should be, on average, less biased thus enhancing its quality.
   Finally, we examine the risk-sharing effects of the changing composition of asset ownership by
looking at two different measures of the cost of capital: idiosyncratic volatility and the implied
cost of equity (ICOE). We focus on idiosyncratic volatility rather than total volatility because
a stock’s addition to an index mechanically affects its comovement with the market and thus its
beta. We follow Gebhardt et al. (2001) and calculate ICOE using the residual income model.
First, Figure 8 graphically shows the differences in the measures of cost of capital around index
inclusion. Among the three measures we consider, the patterns in ICOE show the most significant
reduction in the cost of equity, consistent with our hypothesis. We further assess the statistical
significance of the results using the difference-in-differences regression model. We present the
results in Panel B of Table 7. We find a significant negative relation between inclusion in the
index and a firm’s cost of equity. The result is economically large: as a result of the index
inclusion treated firms experience a reduction in their cost of equity of about 1.1% relative to
firms in the control group. At the same time, we do not find a significant relationship between
inclusion in the index and idiosyncratic volatility or a firm’s beta (although the signs of both
coefficients are negative).
   The reduction in the cost of equity of treated firms suggests that these firms should invest
more as a result, since the threshold for accepting profitable projects drops, holding investment
opportunities constant. This mechanism leads to a testable hypothesis of changes in investment
levels. We assess this hypothesis separately for investments in capital expenditures and R&D and



                                                 23
report the results in columns (4) and (5) of Panel B. We find a positive effect on both types of
investment due to the shock, but the result is statistically more significant for changes in capital
expenditures. Overall, our results point to economically significant welfare gains associated with
the increased foreign stock ownership, a novel result relative to evidence in the international
finance literature.


4.2   The Governance-Based Channel

An alternative channel through which institutional ownership could affect price efficiency is im-
proved corporate governance through better monitoring. To the extent that increased institu-
tional ownership increases incentives to better monitor, one could expect better efficiency as a
result. This function could be especially facilitated by large passive owners, as has been suggested
in the literature. We assess the relevance of index inclusion on different types of ownership by
decomposing foreign ownership into active and passive components. We present the effect of
index inclusion on the two types of ownership in Figure 6. The results indicate that both types
of ownership increase due to index inclusion, even though the magnitude of the change is 60%
larger for active investors. Given that passive investors increase their presence one could expect
they could improve the governance inside the firms they hold.
   We test this hypothesis formally by using the composite governance index of Albuquerque et
al. (2018). The index is based on 16 attributes divided into four subcategories: board, audit, anti-
takeover provisions, and compensation and ownership. We estimate the difference-in-differences
regression model with the governance index as a dependent variable. The results are reported in
Panel D of Table 7. We do not find a significant relation between index inclusion and governance,
leading us to believe that monitoring, or governance, more broadly, is not a dominant channel
through which MSCI index inclusion can affect price informativeness. A possible reason why
we find no significance is the absence of serious agency problems that would limit the efficient
allocation of capital inside treated firms.
   In sum, our results indicate that institutional owners are more likely to improve price efficiency
through their impact on the information environment than through their effect on governance
structure inside the firms they own.




                                                24
5        Cross-Sectional Evidence

In this section, we provide additional cross-sectional evidence that tests limits of our conceptual
framework. In particular, we exploit variation in terms of investors’ trading and monitoring
activity, their investing expertise, their familiarity with a target country, their legal and finance
background, and the scope of capital controls.


5.1      Investor Activeness

One of the possible factors driving our results is investor activeness. To the extent that price
informativeness responds to investors’ uncovering mispricing in financial markets and properly
accounting for risk, one would expect firms with larger shares of active investors to be more
informationally efficient.
     We classify institutions with respect to their activeness and relate price informativeness to
the relative ownership of the most active investors. We consider three measures of activeness.
Our primary measure is defined based on the type of institutional investor. We consider active
investors to be mutual funds, hedge funds, and investment advisors. In this classification, we
exclude index funds and exchange traded funds. We also entertain two alternative measures of
activeness: one that aggregates the ownership of investors whose foreign or domestic investment
return in our sample is above the median value;16 and another one that aggregates the ownership
of investors with a long (greater than one year) investment horizon. The former measure captures
investors’ ability to uncover and trade away mispricing; the latter one relates to investors’ ability
to monitor and thus improve the firm’s informational efficiency. We generically define all three
dimensions of active ownership separately for foreign and domestic owners as F OR ACT IV E
and DOM ACT IV E, respectively. In a similar vein, we define the variables related to passive
ownership as F OR P ASSIV E and DOM P ASSIV E. Our coefficients of interest are those of
variables constructed as interactions between log(M/A) and the various activeness measures. We
present the results in Table 8.
     Columns (1), (3), and (5) of Table 8 show the effects on short-horizon efficiency for the three
activeness measures. We find that activeness is an important determinant of informativeness,
    16
      In each year, we calculate the domestic and foreign investment returns of each institutional investor. Then,
for each stock, active (passive) ownership is the sum of the shares owned by institutions with returns in the top
(bottom) 25% among institutions holding this stock. The ranking is carried out each year for domestic and foreign
institutions, respectively. Alternatively, we also use market-adjusted domestic and foreign returns and find a similar
ranking.


                                                         25
especially for foreign investors. In all three specifications, we find the coefficients of the respective
interaction terms to be positive and highly statistically significant. Similarly, the effect for the
interaction terms with domestic ownership is slightly weaker but still statistically significant at
the 1% level. Columns (2), (4), and (6) report the results for the specification with a three-year
horizon. Again, the coefficients of F OR ACT IV E and DOM ACT IV E continue to be positive
and statistically significant at the 1% level, except in one case. However, the effects for passive
ownership are largely insignificant.


5.2    Investor Expertise

One could also imagine that some investors are simply more skilled in terms of predicting future
cash flows and that differences in investors’ expertise affect our results. Since expertise is difficult
to observe, we use ownership by U.S institutional investors as a proxy. In particular, we decompose
foreign ownership into that of U.S. investors and that of non–U.S. investors and estimate the
regression model in (3). We present the results in Table IA.7 in the Appendix. Overall, our
results suggest that investors’ activeness and expertise are relevant predictors of price efficiency,
especially when capital flows in from foreign institutions. Moreover, foreign U.S. institutions play
a much bigger role than foreign institutions do outside the United States. We interpret these
findings as consistent with the expert position some investors play in financial markets.


5.3    Investor Familiarity

Another factor possibly signifying the role of foreign institutional investors in price informative-
ness is investors’ familiarity with the target market. Many studies have argued that investors
located in close proximity to a given market could possess a distinct informational advantage
(e.g., Coval and Moskowitz, 2001). In this section, we evaluate this claim with regard to our in-
formation setting. We hypothesize that stocks held by institutions from countries with a greater
degree of familiarity with the home country should exhibit greater price efficiency.
   We define familiarity based on a distance metric between the home country of a given stock and
that of a foreign investor holding this stock. In each case, we define the variable F OR CLOSE
as the fraction of total foreign ownership of investors from countries that are in close proximity
to the home country. By construction, F OR F AR is equal to the difference between F OR and
F OR CLOSE. Our first measure of familiarity is based on the degree of bilateral trade between


                                                   26
the home country and the domicile country of a foreign investor. We classify an institutional
investor as closely related if the level of bilateral trade between the investor’s country of domicile
and a stock’s home country is above the median value for all countries with which the stock’s
country trades. Our second measure is based on the geographic distance between the two coun-
tries. Investors from countries that are below the median distance of all countries relative to the
stock’s home country are considered in close proximity. Following Mayer and Zignago (2011),
distance is calculated using the great circle formula, which uses the latitudes and longitudes of
the most important cities/agglomerations (in terms of population). The third measure is based
on the similarity in languages. Investors from countries where the official language is identical to
that of the country of the stock the investor holds are in close proximity. The fourth measure is
based on common geographical borders. Countries are in close proximity if they share a border.
Finally, the last measure is based on colonial background, with countries that have the same
colonial history being in close proximity.
   We estimate the following pooled regression model separately for each proximity measure:


Ei,t+h /Ai,t = a + b1,h log(M/A)i,t × F OR CLOSEi,t + b2,h log(M/A)i,t × F OR F ARi,t + b3,h Xi,t + ei,t+h
                                                                                                      (11)

 All the regressions include the same control variables as equation (2). We also include firm,
and country×year fixed effects. We cluster standard errors by firm and year. Our coefficients
of interest are b1,h and b2,h . We present the results in Table IA.8 in the Appendix. In Panel A,
we report the results for a one-year horizon. Both F OR CLOSE and F OR F AR are positive
and statistically significant in all five cases. For three of the five cases—trade, distance, and
colony—the coefficient of F OR CLOSE is larger. These results jointly offer weak support for the
hypothesis that similarity amplifies the informativeness effect. The hypothesis is less supported
when we move to a longer, three-year horizon, as shown in Panel B. Now, the coefficient of
F OR F AR is generally greater both economically and statistically.


5.4    Investors’ Legal and Financial Background

We hypothesize that foreign investors from countries with greater financial system development
should exert a greater impact on the price informativeness of stocks in their target countries.
We measure the degree of financial development using three proxies. First, we use the ratio of
a country’s stock market capitalization relative to its GDP. Countries with above-median levels


                                                   27
are considered to have a high level of development. We define the ownership of stock i at time
t by institutional investors from highly developed countries as F OR F IN Highi,t and that by
institutional investors from low-development countries as F OR F IN Lowi,t . Second, we use
the legal system in the investors’ country. Countries under common law are considered highly
developed. We define the ownership of institutions from such countries as F OR COM M ONi,t
and the ownership of institutions from civil law countries as F OR CIV ILi,t . Third, we measure
development using the predominant form of a country’s financial system. Countries that are
more market oriented are considered highly developed and those with a bank-oriented system are
considered less developed. As before, we define variables that are based on the fractional foreign
ownership of investors coming either from high-development countries (F OR M ARKETi,t ) or
low-development countries (F OR BAN Ki,t ). Using the three measures, we estimate the following
pooled regression model:



 Ei,t+h /Ai,t = a+b1,h log(M/A)i,t ×F IN DEV Highi,t +b2,h log(M/A)i,t ×F IN DEV Lowi,t +b3,h Xi,t +ei,t+h (12)


 where F IN DEV High and F IN DEV Low are the generic names for measures of high and
low development, respectively. All the regression models include the same control variables as
equation (2). We also include firm, and country×year fixed effects. We cluster standard errors by
firm and year. Our coefficients of interest are b1,h and b2,h . We present the results in Table IA.9
in the Appendix. In each panel, we additionally separate out the respective systems of the home
country and report the results for short and long horizons. Overall, we conclude that there is
spillover from highly financially developed countries to countries of lesser financial development.
Foreign investors from highly financially developed countries or from countries under common law
exert a larger effect on price informativeness, especially when they invest in stocks from countries
of low financial development or civil law–based countries. We observe no differences between
foreign investors from countries with a market-based or a bank-based financial system, whereas
the financial system of the home country is important.


5.5    Capital Controls

We hypothesize that countries with tighter capital controls are more difficult for foreign investors
to penetrate, because foreign investors in these countries cannot trade their assets freely. We
evaluate this hypothesis empirically using a measure of capital controls based on Chinn and Ito

                                                      28
(2006). Specifically, we define an indicator variable OP ENi,t equal to one if the Chinn–Ito index
for the country in which stock i is listed is above the median of all countries in year t and zero
otherwise. We estimate the following pooled regression model:


            Ei,t+h /Ai,t = a + b1,h log(M/A)i,t × F ORi,t × OP ENi,t + b2,h Xi,t + ei,t+h         (13)

    All the regression models include the same control variables as equation (2). We also include
firm and year fixed effects. We cluster standard errors by firm and year. Our coefficient of interest
is b1,h . We present the results in Table 9.
    Column (1) of Table 9 presents the results for a one-year horizon and column (2) those for a
three-year horizon. We find that capital controls play a significant role in the way foreign investors
affect price informativeness. The effect of moving from a country with high constraints to one
with low constraints is positive and statistically significant at the 1% level. It is also economically
large. For a one-year horizon, the increase in informativeness is 78% and it is even larger for a
three-year horizon. Notably, in the latter case, we observe that the level of informativeness for
countries with high constraints is not statistically different from zero. Hence, in the long run,
capital constraints could be a strong impediment to foreign investors in their allocation of capital.


6    Concluding Remarks

The global investment landscape has been changing rapidly over the last few decades. The
growing presence of institutional investors has resulted in the greater penetration of financial
markets by capital flows. Given that institutional investors are generally more sophisticated and
have more resources than individual households do, the question is whether individual companies
can benefit from their presence. In this paper, we examine the role of institutional capital flows
in the price informativeness of stocks and welfare.
    We find that stocks with greater institutional ownership have more informative prices. The
effect is mostly confined to stocks located in developed markets and can be attributed to the
presence of both domestic and foreign investors. The results are robust to potential endogeneity
concerns. Our analyses indicate the important role of active institutions, market familiarity, and
country-specific capital controls. We also find that the increase in price informativeness is mostly
due to improved real investment efficiency and not to better information disclosure.



                                                  29
   Overall, our results underscore the significant role of foreign institutional investors in price
efficiency. They also emphasize the importance of informational and capital frictions for the
functioning of capital markets.




References
Albuquerque, Rui A., Luis Brandao Marques, Miguel A. Ferreira, and Pedro P.
 Matos, “International Corporate Governance Spillovers: Evidence from Cross-Border Mergers
 and Acquisitions,” The Review of Financial Studies Forthcoming, 2018.

Bagehot, Walter, “Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market,” Henry S. King and
 Co. Pub., 1873.

Bai, Jennie, Thomas Philippon, and Alexi Savov, “Have Financial Markets Become More
 Informative?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2016, 122 (3), 625 – 654.

Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy C. Stein, and Jeffrey Wurgler, “When Does the Market Mat-
 ter? Stock Prices and the Investment of Equity-Dependent Firms,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 2003, 118 (3), 969–1005.

Bakke, Tor-Erik and Toni M. Whited, “Which Firms Follow the Market? An Analysis of
 Corporate Investment Decisions,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2010, 23 (5), 1941–1980.

Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey, “Time-Varying World Market Integration,” The
 Journal of Finance, 1995, 50 (2), 403–444.

  , , and Christian Lundblad, “Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 2005, 77 (1), 3 – 55.

Bena, Jan, Miguel Ferreira, Pedro Matos, and Pedro Pires, “Are Foreign Investors
 Locusts? The Long-Term Effects of Foreign Institutional Ownership,” Forthcoming in Journal
 of Financial Economics, 2017.

Bernard, Victor L. and Jacob K. Thomas, “Post-Earnings-Announcement Drift—Delayed
 Price Response or Risk Premium,” Journal of Accounting Research, 1989, 27, 1–36.

   and , “Evidence that Stock Prices do not Fully Reflect the Implications of Current Earnings
  for Future Earnings,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 1990, 13 (4), 305 – 340.

Boehmer, Ekkehart and Eric K. Kelley, “Institutional Investors and the Informational
 Efficiency of Prices,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2009, 22 (9), 3563–3594.

Bond, Philip, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein, “The Real Effects of Financial Markets,”
 Annual Review of Financial Economics, 2012.

  , Itay Goldstein, and Edward Simpson Prescott, “Market-Based Corrective Actions,”
  The Review of Financial Studies, 2010, 23 (2), 781–820.



                                               30
Campbell, John, Tarun Ramadorai, and Allie Schwartz, “Caught on Tape: Institutional
 Trading, Stock Returns, and Earnings Announcements,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2009,
 92 (1), 66 – 91.

Chan, K.C., G. Andrew Karolyi, and Rene M. Stulz, “Global Financial Markets and the
 Risk Premium on U.S. Equity,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1992, 32 (2), 137 – 167.

Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry, “Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence from a
 Natural Experiment,” The Journal of Finance, 2004, 59 (3), 1295–1324.

   and , “Firm-Specific Information and the Efficiency of Investment,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 2008, 87 (3), 636 – 655.

Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, “Price Informativeness and Investment Sensitivity
 to Stock Price,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2007, 20 (3), 619–650.

Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito, “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,
 Institutions, and Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics, 2006, 81 (1), 163–192.

Coval, Joshua D. and Tobias J. Moskowitz, “The Geography of Investment: Informed
 Trading and Asset Prices,” Journal of Political Economy, 2001, 109 (4), 811–841.

Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Ross Levine, “Bank-Based and Market-Based Financial Systems
 - Cross-Country Comparisons,” Policy Research Working Paper Series 2143, The World Bank
 1999.

Dow, James and Gary Gorton, “Stock Market Efficiency and Economic Efficiency: Is There
 a Connection?,” The Journal of Finance, 1997, 52 (3), 1087–1129.

Edmans, Alex, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, “Feedback Effects, Asymmetric Trading,
 and the Limits to Arbitrage,” American Economic Review, December 2015, 105 (12), 3766–97.

  , Sudarshan Jayaraman, and Jan Schneemeier, “The Source of Information in Prices
  and Investment-Price Sensitivity,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2017.

Ferreira, Miguel and Pedro Matos, “The Colors of Investors’ Money: the Role of Institutional
  Investors Around the World,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2008, 88 (3), 499 – 533.

Froot, Kenneth and Tarun Ramadorai, “Institutional Portfolio Flows and International
  Investments,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2008, 21, 937–971.

Gebhardt, William R., Charles M. C. Lee, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, “Toward an
 Implied Cost of Capital,” Journal of Accounting Research, 2001, 39 (1), 135–176.

Goldstein, Itay and Alexander Guembel, “Manipulation and the Allocational Role of
 Prices,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2008, 75 (1), 133–164.

  , Emre Ozdenoren, and Kathy Yuan, “Trading Frenzies and Their Impact on Real Invest-
  ment,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2013, 109 (2), 566–582.

Gompers, Paul A. and Andrew Metrick, “Institutional Investors and Equity Prices,” The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (1), 229–259.


                                            31
Hau, Harald and Helene Rey, “Exchange Rates, Equity Prices, and Capital Flows,” The
 Review of Financial Studies, 2006, 19 (1), 273–317.

   and    , “Home Bias at the Fund Level,” American Economic Review, May 2008, 98 (2),
  333–38.

He, Wen, Donghui Li, Jianfeng Shen, and Bohui Zhang, “Large Foreign Ownership and
 Stock Price Informativeness Around the World,” Journal of International Money and Finance,
 2013, 36, 211 – 230.

Hong, Harrison and Marcin Kacperczyk, “Competition and Bias,” Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 2010, 125 (4), 1683–1725.

Jensen, Michael C., “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers,”
  The American Economic Review, 1986, 76 (2), 323–329.

Jotikasthira, Chotibhak, Christian Lundblad, and Tarun Ramadorai, “Asset Fire Sales
  and Purchases and the International Transmission of Funding Shocks,” The Journal of Finance,
  2012, 67 (6), 2015–2050.

Kacperczyk, Marcin, Jaromir Nosal, and Savitar Sundaresan, “Market Power and Price
 Informativeness,” Imperial College Business School working paper, 2017.

Kurlat, Pablo and Laura Veldkamp, “Should We Regulate Financial Information?,” Journal
 of Economic Theory, 2015, 158, 697 – 720.

Lin, Chunmei, Massimo Massa, and Hong Zhang, “Mutual Funds and Information Diffu-
  sion: The Role of Country-Level Governance,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2014, 27 (11),
  3343–3387.

Livnat, Joshua and Richado R. Mendenhall, “Comparing the Post Earnings Announcement
  Drift for Surprises Calculated from Analyst and Time Series Forecasts,” Journal of Accounting
  Research, 2006, 44 (1), 177–205.

Maggiori, Matteo, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, “International Currencies and
 Capital Allocation,” Working Paper, 2017.

Mayer, Thierry and Soledad Zignago, “Notes on CEPII’s Distances Measures: The GeoDist
 Database,” Working Papers 2011-25, CEPII December 2011.

Ozdenoren, Emre and Kathy Yuan, “Feedback Effects and Asset Prices,” The Journal of
 Finance, 2008, 63 (4), 1939–1975.

Passari, Evgenia and Helene Rey, “Financial Flows and the International Monetary System,”
 Economic Journal, May 2015, 125 (584), 675–698.

Roll, Richard, “R2,” The Journal of Finance, 1988, 43 (3), 541–566.

Schumpeter, Joseph, “Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung,” Dunker und Humblot,
  Leipzig, Germany., 1912.

Stein, Jeremy, “Presidential Address: Sophisticated Investors and Market Efficiency,” The
  Journal of Finance, 2009, 64 (4), 1517–1548.

                                              32
Stulz, Rene M. M., “Golbalization, Corporate Finance, and the Cost of Capital,” Journal of
  Applied Corporate Finance, 1999, 12 (3), 8–25.

Tobin, James, “A General Equilibrium Approach To Monetary Theory,” Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking, 1969, 1 (1), 15–29.

Wurgler, Jeffrey, “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” Journal of Financial
 Economics, 2000, 58 (1-2), 187–214.




                                           33
                             Table 1: Summary Statistics: Countries

The sample period is 2000-2013. # of firms is the number of firms in each country. # of firm-year
is the number of firm-year observations. FOR and DOM are equal-weighted foreign and domestic
institutional ownership in percentage level across the whole sample, respectively. Inst. per firm
is the average number of institutional investors per firm.

              Country          # of firms   # of firm-year   FOR     DOM     Inst. per firm
                                         Developed Countries
              Australia          945            6182          4.94    1.47         28
              Austria             71             656          8.87    2.00         51
              Belgium            105            1022          7.22    2.75         45
              Canada             1235           7530          9.03   13.46         54
              Denmark             107             941         5.37   10.15         49
              Finland            124            1324          8.78    9.16         64
              France              651            5541         5.74    4.37         66
              Germany             620            5373         6.79    4.49         60
              Hong Kong           560            4774         5.32    1.62         34
              Ireland             78             639         33.48    0.66        155
              Israel             284            1767          8.52    1.21         30
              Italy               246            2303         5.99    2.05         53
              Japan              3412           32291         3.00    2.43         39
              Netherlands         156           1369         19.61    5.26        124
              New Zealand          85             691         3.96    1.61         23
              Norway              182            1381         6.44   10.45         40
              Portugal             50             481         4.07    2.71         54
              Singapore           270            2086         6.19    1.14         38
              Spain               134            1304         6.15    3.54         98
              Sweden              309            2558         6.11   12.54         46
              Switzerland         209            2077        12.01    6.07        115
              United Kingdom     1428           11193         5.16   17.59         57
              United States      5131           42701         2.62   49.06        168
                                         Emerging Countries
              Brazil              245            1792        10.00    2.59        71
              Chile                87             757         3.51    1.02        31
              China              2165           11233         3.18    3.38        22
              Greece              216            1677         4.06    0.33        19
              Hungary              27             218         9.12    1.14        38
              India               919            6465         4.01    4.25        21
              Indonesia           185            1418         4.94    0.12        25
              Malaysia            452            3176         2.41    0.86        16
              Mexico               85             769         9.76    0.66        69
              Philippines          68             548         5.66    0.08        26
              Poland              314            2159         2.42   17.48        20
              Russia             169            1094         10.57    0.20        53
              South Africa        216            1708         5.82    5.62        44
              South Korea         951            7077         4.82    0.16        22
              Taiwan              934            7326         3.99    0.85        23
              Thailand            219            1755         4.75    0.79        20
              Turkey             167            1529         5.30     0.16        21
              Developed           7419          50701         4.39    2.60        87
              Emerging           16392         136184         4.70   19.43        25
              All                23811         186885         4.62   14.86        70


                                                 34
                                     Table 2: Summary Statistics

The sample period is 2000-2016. This table reports the mean, standard deviation, median, 25
percent and 75 percent quantiles, and number of observations for institutional ownership, market,
and accounting variables. The definitions of variables are provided in the Appendix.


                                                      Mean    STD     Q25     Median   Q75

              N =186,885
              Ownership Variables (%)
              IO                                      19.48   26.71   1.50     7.51    24.63
              FOR                                     4.62    8.81    0.12     1.26    5.43
              FOR US                                  2.02    6.26    0.00     0.08    1.39
              FOR NUS                                 2.60    4.68    0.00     0.57    3.28
              DOM                                     14.86   25.33   0.06     2.56    14.77
              FOR ACTIVE                              4.05    8.06    0.08     1.01    4.46
              DOM ACTIVE                              13.06   21.95   0.05     2.39    13.51
              FOR PASSIVE                             0.61    1.53    0.00     0.00    0.51
              DOM PASSIVE                             1.88    4.35    0.00     0.00    0.58

              Market and Accounting Variables
              E/A                                     0.02    0.24    0.01     0.06    0.11
              log(M/A)                                -0.32   1.00    -0.98    -0.33   0.33
              R&D/A                                   0.02    0.06    0.00     0.00    0.01
              CAPEX/A                                 0.05    0.06    0.02     0.04    0.07
              INVESTMENT/A                            0.08    0.09    0.02     0.05    0.10
              LEVERAGE                                0.22    0.20    0.04     0.19    0.34
              TANGIBILITY                             0.30    0.23    0.11     0.26    0.45
              log(SALES)                              12.41   2.24    11.24   12.49    13.80
              FORSALES                                0.20    0.30    0.00     0.00    0.34
              CASH                                    0.17    0.18    0.05     0.11    0.23
              CLOSE (%)                               30.89   27.48   0.72    27.79    53.12
              ANALYST                                 18.80   15.60   6.00    16.00    28.00
              TURNOVER                                1.88    2.55    0.62     1.31    2.48
              BID-ASK SPREAD(%)                       0.24    0.29    0.07     0.14    0.27
              IVOL(%)                                 5.08    2.90    3.22     4.25    5.85
              CAPM BETA                               1.11    1.82    0.78     1.27    1.64
              ICOE                                    0.11    0.06    0.08     0.10    0.14
              Price Non-synchronicity                 0.79    0.16    0.60     0.75    0.89
              |V R(1d, 5d) − 1|(%)                    18.34   14.41   7.13    15.17    25.97
              CAR d1 d1(%)                            0.22    4.61    -1.78    0.01    1.97
              CAR d1 d3(%)                            0.23    5.60    -2.57    0.04    2.81
              CAR d1 d5(%)                            0.31    6.21    -2.97    0.09    3.33
              SUE(Consensus)                          1.22    3.06    -0.25    0.87    2.45
                                                 35
              SUE(Time-series)                        -0.05   1.55    -0.88    0.12    0.88
                                   Table 3: Price Informativeness and Institutional Ownership: Single-Sorted Portfolios

     This table reports average price informativeness in each group sorted by total (IO), foreign (FOR), and domestic ownership (DOM ),
     respectively. P I1 (P I3) measures price informativeness in one (three) year horizon, constructed as in equation (1). In Panel A, firms
     with non-zero ownership are sorted into five equal-sized portfolios sorted by ownership levels within their own country. IO 0 is a
     portfolio with zero-ownership firms. In Panels B and C, firms with non-zero ownership in developed and emerging countries are sorted
     into equal-sized tercile portfolios. Newey-West standard errors with four lags are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
     statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                      Panel A: All Countries
                                            IO                                        FOR                                    DOM
                            ( 1)          ( 2)         ( 3)             ( 4)         ( 5)         ( 6)         ( 7)         ( 8)         ( 9)
                            IO(%)       P I1 × 100    P I3 × 100       FOR(%)       P I1 × 100   P I3 × 100   DOM (%)      P I1 × 100   P I3 × 100
             IO   0(Zero)    0.00         −5.31         −7.84            0.00         −5.08        −7.52        0.00         −3.49        −5.30
             IO   1(Low)     1.50         −5.15         −6.80            0.19         −1.58        −2.90        1.70         −4.85        −6.76
             IO   2          8.52         −0.92         −2.37            0.98         −0.16        −0.98        9.32         −0.64        −1.76
             IO   3         17.67          0.27         −0.23            2.64          0.64         0.27       18.54          0.66         0.17
             IO   4         27.09          1.49          1.83            6.02          0.91         0.52       27.06          1.17         1.40
36




             IO   5(High)   41.53          2.38          2.45           16.62          1.92         1.79       37.35          2.09         2.51
             Low-Zero         1.50***       0.16         1.04***          0.19***      3.50***      4.62***      1.70***     −1.36        −1.45*
                             (0.16)        (0.65)       (0.30)           (0.03)       (0.16)       (0.69)       (0.15)       (0.91)       (0.71)
             High-Low       40.03***        7.53***      9.25***        16.43***       3.50***      4.69***    35.65***       6.93***      9.26***
                            (1.12)         (0.61)       (0.69)          (1.41)        (0.17)       (0.33)      (3.04)        (0.97)       (1.29)

                                                                   Panel B: Developed Countries
             IO 1(Low)       5.03         −2.95         −4.43            0.17         −2.33        −3.81        4.69         −3.18        −4.99
             IO 2           22.99          0.15         −0.50            2.10          0.11        −0.56       17.59          0.31        −0.24
             IO 3(High)     44.02          1.66          1.85           11.68          1.04         0.98       33.97          1.50         1.75
             High-Low       38.99***       4.61***       6.28**         11.51***       3.37***      4.79***    29.28***       4.68***      6.74***
                            (0.68)        (0.35)        (0.53)          (1.11)        (0.28)       (0.25)      (1.03)        (0.49)       (0.65)

                                                                   Panel C: Emerging Countries
             IO 1(Low)       0.64           2.12         3.06            0.19          2.23         3.11         0.63         2.95         3.38
             IO 2            3.53           2.37         3.23            1.41          2.72         3.61         1.82         3.09         3.87
             IO 3(High)     15.03           3.26         4.40           11.64          3.02         3.99         3.65         2.73         3.86
             High-Low       14.39***        1.14***      1.33**         11.45***       0.79**       0.88         3.02**      −0.22         0.48*
                            (1.21)         (0.37)       (0.64)          (0.57)        (0.36)       (0.69)       (1.11)       (0.42)       (0.25)
                                        Table 4: Price Informativeness and Institutional Ownership: Regression Evidence

     This table shows results from estimating pooled ordinary least squares (OLS) regression models of future earnings on institutional ownership and
     its interaction term with current market valuation, as in equations (2) and (3). The E/A is EBIT to total asset, log(M/A) is the log-ratio of market
     cap to total asset. IO, FOR, and DOM are total, foreign, and domestic institutional ownership, respectively. For Ratio is the foreign ownership
     over total ownership. The definitions of variables are provided in the Appendix. All regression models include firm, and country×year fixed effects.
     Robust standard errors, clustered at firm and year levels, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%,
     5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                            ( 1)           ( 2)         ( 3)         ( 4)           ( 5)         ( 6)           ( 7)           ( 8)
                                                         Ei,t+1 /Ai,t                             Ei,t+3 /Ai,t                Ei,t+1 /Ai,t   Ei,t+3 /Ai,t
              log(M/A)i,t                    0.018***        0.018***     0.009***   −0.009***      −0.009***    −0.025***       0.003         −0.033***
                                            (0.002 )        (0.002 )     (0.002 )    (0.003 )       (0.003 )     (0.003 )       (0.003 )       (0.003 )
              IOi,t                         −0.009                                   −0.085***                                  −0.004         −0.028**
                                            (0.011 )                                 (0.013 )                                   (0.011 )       (0.014 )
              F ORi,t                                      −0.040**     −0.030**                    −0.178***    −0.104***
                                                           (0.014 )     (0.013 )                    (0.017 )     (0.017 )
              DOMi,t                                        0.003        0.004                      −0.049***    −0.004
                                                           (0.011 )     (0.011 )                    (0.015 )     (0.014 )
              log(M/A)i,t ∗ IOi,t             0.082***                                 0.050***                                   0.070***       0.050***
37




                                             (0.005 )                                 (0.008 )                                   (0.005 )       (0.008 )
              log(M/A)i,t ∗ F ORi,t                          0.105***     0.083***                    0.057***     0.054***
                                                            (0.013 )     (0.011 )                    (0.015 )     (0.013 )
              log(M/A)i,t ∗ DOMi,t                           0.077***     0.061***                    0.046***     0.038***
                                                            (0.005 )     (0.004 )                    (0.009 )     (0.008 )
              F or Ratioi,t                                                                                                    −0.008***      −0.008**
                                                                                                                                (0.002 )       (0.004 )
              log(M/A)i,t ∗ F or Ratioi,t                                                                                        0.010***       0.016***
                                                                                                                                (0.002 )       (0.003 )
              Ei,t /Ai,t                                                  0.237***                                 0.142***      0.237***       0.142***
                                                                         (0.017 )                                 (0.014 )      (0.017 )       (0.014 )
              log(Asset)i,t                                             −0.046***                                −0.061***     −0.046***      −0.061***
                                                                         (0.005 )                                 (0.005 )      (0.005 )       (0.005 )
              CLOSEi,t                                                    0.001                                    0.003         0.001          0.003
                                                                         (0.002 )                                 (0.003 )      (0.002 )       (0.003 )
              LEV ERAGEi,t                                                0.058***                               −0.018          0.058***     −0.017
                                                                         (0.009 )                                 (0.016 )      (0.009 )       (0.016 )
              T AN GIBILIT Yi,t                                         −0.019*                                    0.017       −0.018           0.018
                                                                         (0.011 )                                 (0.012 )      (0.011 )       (0.012 )
              log(SALES)i,t                                               0.032***                                 0.014***      0.032***       0.014***
                                                                         (0.004 )                                 (0.004 )      (0.004 )       (0.004 )
              F ORSALESi,t                                                0.002                                    0.004         0.002          0.004
                                                                         (0.003 )                                 (0.006 )      (0.003 )       (0.006 )
              CASHi,t                                                     0.021*                                 −0.002          0.021**      −0.001
                                                                         (0.011 )                                 (0.014 )      (0.010 )       (0.014 )
              Fixed Effects                   Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
              Observations                  186,714       186,714       186,714      165,344       165,344       165,344       186,714        165,344
              R2                              0.677         0.677         0.706        0.612         0.612         0.621         0.706          0.621
                                   Table 5: Price Informativeness and Institutional Ownership: Regional Analysis

     This table shows results from estimating a pooled ordinary least squares (OLS) regression model of future earnings on institutional
     ownership and its interaction with current market valuation as in equation (3) for each country subsample. E/A is EBIT to total
     asset, log(M/A) is the log-ratio of market cap to total asset. FOR and DOM are foreign and domestic institutional ownership. Control
     variables are same as in Table 4 (not shown). All regression models include firm, and country×year fixed effects. Robust standard
     errors, clustered at firm and year levels, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
     and 1% levels, respectively.

                                              Panel A: Developed Countries                                  Panel B: Emerging Countries
                                 ( 1)                  ( 2)     ( 3)                  ( 4)     ( 5)                  ( 6)         ( 7)                  ( 8)
                                        Ei,t+1 /Ai,t                   Ei,t+3 /Ai,t                   Ei,t+1 /Ai,t                       Ei,t+3 /Ai,t
         log(M/A)i,t               0.007***          0.002      −0.022***         −0.034***      0.046***              0.029***     0.025***              0.002
                                  (0.002 )          (0.002 )     (0.004 )          (0.003 )     (0.002 )              (0.002 )     (0.004 )              (0.004 )
         F ORi,t                 −0.061***         −0.055***    −0.183***         −0.131***    −0.017                  0.020      −0.186***             −0.049**
                                  (0.017 )          (0.016 )     (0.022 )          (0.022 )     (0.020 )              (0.018 )     (0.032 )              (0.025 )
         log(M/A)i,t ∗ F ORi,t     0.128***          0.097***     0.079***          0.069***     0.046***              0.047***   −0.005                  0.012
                                  (0.016 )          (0.013 )     (0.018 )          (0.016 )     (0.013 )              (0.011 )     (0.026 )              (0.023 )
38




         DOMi,t                    0.005           −0.005       −0.042**          −0.019         0.017                 0.049**    −0.107***               0.003
                                  (0.012 )          (0.013 )     (0.015 )          (0.015 )     (0.019 )              (0.019 )     (0.030 )              (0.022 )
         log(M/A)i,t ∗ DOMi,t      0.091***          0.071***     0.063***          0.052***     0.034                 0.036**    −0.008                −0.004
                                  (0.005 )          (0.005 )     (0.009 )          (0.008 )     (0.021 )              (0.018 )     (0.017 )              (0.014 )
         Controls                  No                Yes          No                Yes          No                    Yes          No                    Yes
         Observations            136,022           136,022      120,124           120,124      50,692                50,692       45,220                45,220
         R2                        0.677             0.708        0.610             0.618        0.602                 0.628        0.581                 0.626
  Table 6: Institutional Ownership and Price Informativeness: Difference-in-Differences Model

This table shows results from estimating difference-in-differences regression model of institutional
ownership and price informativeness around the year a stock is added to the MSCI ACWI index.
Treatment group includes 714 firms added to the MSCI ACWI during the sample period. Control
group includes five firms that best match each treated firm using propensity scores matching.
T reat is equal to one if a firm in the treatment group, and zero otherwise. Af ter is equal to
one in the year when the treated firm is added to the MSCI ACWI and thereafter, and zero
otherwise. The E/A is EBIT to total asset, log(M/A) is the log-ratio of market cap to total
asset. Panel A reports the comparison of the variables in the treated and control groups in
pre-treatment period. Panels B, C, D, and E report estimates from the regression models for
ownership, price informativeness, post-earnings-announcement drift, price nonsynchronicity, and
variance ratio. Control variables are the same as in Table 4. All regression models include firm
and country×year fixed effects. Robust standard errors, clustered at firm and year, are reported
in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

                                        Panel A: Pre-Treatment Comparison
                                                       Treated Group          Control Group          ttest (p value)
                    F OR                                       0.088                 0.085                0.43
                    F OR ACT IV E                              0.078                 0.074                0.23
                    F OR P ASSIV E                             0.010                 0.011                0.17
                    DOM                                        0.348                 0.353                0.66
                    log(M/A)                                   0.133                 0.081                0.13
                    M arket Cap($Bil)                          6.276                 5.750                0.20
                    F ORSALES                                  0.272                 0.262                0.42
                    E/A                                        0.109                 0.107                0.53
                    Analyst                                   19.148                18.239                0.15
                    Close                                      0.266                 0.264                0.82
                    R&D/A + CAP EX/A                           0.086                 0.081                0.09


                                                           Panel B: Ownership
                                             ( 1)               ( 2)                ( 3)                   ( 4)
                                              FOR                DOM           FOR ACTIVE             FOR PASSIVE
                  T reat ∗ Af ter              0.018***         −0.006                0.011***               0.007***
                                              (0.002 )          (0.004 )             (0.001 )               (0.001 )
                  Observations               24,230             24,230              24,230                 24,230
                  R2                           0.869             0.975                0.856                 0.777


                                       Panel C: Price Informativeness and Investment
                                ( 1)                ( 2)               ( 3)                   ( 4)                ( 5)            ( 6)
                              Ei,t+1 /Ai,t      Ei,t+3 /Ai,t     CAP EXi,t+1 /Ai,t     CAP EXi,t+3 /Ai,t      R&Di,t+1 /Ai,t   R&Di,t+3 /Ai,t
 log(M/A) ∗ T reat ∗ Af ter       0.013**            0.039**             0.003*                0.012**              0.001         −0.004
                                 (0.006 )           (0.016 )            (0.001 6)             (0.006 )             (0.001 )       (0.004 )
 Observations                   24,230              6,716              24,230                 6,753               24,230          6,753
 R2                               0.667              0.696               0.737                 0.742                0.931          0.891




                                                                   39
                             Difference-in-Differences Model (Continued)


                                  Panel D: Post-Earnings-Announcement Drift
                          ( 1)              ( 2)               ( 3)              ( 4)            ( 5)            ( 6)
                                  Consensus − based SU E                                   T ime − series SU E
                         CAR d1 d1         CAR d1 d3       CAR d1 d5           CAR d1 d1       CAR d1 d3     CAR d1 d5
SU E                        0.341***          0.412***           0.433***        −0.120***       −0.115**        −0.161***
                           (0.021 )          (0.024 )           (0.025 )          (0.030 )        (0.035 )        (0.039 )
SU E ∗ T reat ∗ Af ter    −0.120***         −0.115**           −0.161***         −0.211***       −0.165*         −0.238**
                           (0.045 )          (0.052 )           (0.057 )          (0.081 )        (0.099 )        (0.114 )
Observations              42,787            42,787             42,787            44,233          44,233          44,233
R2                          0.100             0.098              0.095             0.067           0.067           0.066


                         Panel E: Price Nonsynchronicity and Variance Ratio
                                                   ( 1)                       ( 2)
                                            Price Nonsynchronicity          |V R − 1|(%)
                         T reat ∗ Af ter             0.033***                 −0.971*
                                                    (0.010 )                   (0.573 )
                         Observations              21,722                     21,440
                         R2                          0.345                      0.191




                                                          40
                   Table 7: Economic Channel: Difference-in-Differences Model

This table shows results from estimating difference-in-differences regression model of aggregate
efficiency (Panel A), volatility, beta, implied cost of equity, CAPEX, and R&D investments (Panel
B), liquidity and analyst coverage (Panel C), and governance (Panel D) around the year a stock
is added to the MSCI ACWI index. Treatment group includes 714 firms added to the MSCI
ACWI during the sample period. For each treated firm control group includes five firms that best
match the treated firm using propensity scores matching. T reat is equal to one if a firm in the
treatment group, and zero otherwise. Af ter is equal to one in the year when the treated firm is
added to the MSCI ACWI and thereafter, and zero otherwise. All regression models include firm
and country×year fixed effects. Robust standard errors, clustered at firm and year, are reported
in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

                                          Panel A: Aggregate Efficiency
                                                                            ( 1)                 ( 2)
                                                                          Ei,t+1 /Ai,t      Ei,t+3 /Ai,t
                         CAP EXi,t /Ai,t ∗ T reat ∗ Af ter                     0.134***            0.059
                                                                              (0.046 )            (0.123 )
                         Observations                                        20,418               6,716
                         R2                                                    0.685               0.654
                         R&Di,t /Ai,t ∗ T reat ∗ Af ter                      −0.073                0.664*
                                                                              (0.080 )            (0.401 )
                         Observations                                        20,418               6,716
                         R2                                                    0.681               0.647


                            Panel B: Volatility, Beta, ICOE, and Investment
                              ( 1)           ( 2)                  ( 3)                   ( 4)                ( 5)
                             Idio Vol         Beta                 ICOE                  CAPEX                R&D
          T reat ∗ Af ter     −0.142         −0.039                −0.011***                0.007***            0.0017*
                               (0.206 )       (0.059 )              (0.003 )               (0.002 )            (0.000 9)
          Observations        21,722         21,722                17,268                 23,823              23,823
          R2                    0.542          0.553                 0.582                  0.666               0.874


                                Panel C: Liquidity and Analyst Coverage
                                               ( 1)                       ( 2)                   ( 3)
                                             Turnover                 Bid-Ask                Analyst
                      T reat ∗ Af ter            0.201***                 −0.036***                2.959***
                                                (0.044 )                   (0.007 )               (0.302 )
                      Observations             22,790                     16,820                 24,230
                      R2                         0.745                      0.760                  0.912


                                            Panel D: Governance Index
                                            T reat ∗ Af ter           −0.009
                                                                      (0.007 )
                                            Observations              7,784
                                            R2                         0.835



                                                              41
                                                       Table 8: Activeness of Institutional Investors

     This table shows the results from estimating pooled ordinary least squares (OLS) regression model of future earnings on institutional
     activeness and its interaction term with current market valuation, as in equation (3). Ownership is divided into active and passive
     groups based on three different measures. The first measure is based on institutional types. Active institutions include mutual funds,
     hedge funds, and fund advisors, while passive ones include pension funds, banks, and insurance companies. The second measure is
     based on holding period. Active (passive) ownership is sum of the shares owned by investors that have holding periods longer (less
     than or equal) than one year. The third measure is based on the performance of an institutional investor in its domestic and foreign
     investments. Each year, we calculate investment returns for each institutional investor on their domestic and foreign portfolios. For
     each stock, year, and investor origin, active (passive) ownership is sum of the shares owned by institutions with returns in the top
     (bottom) 25% among institutions holding this stock. E/A is EBIT to total assets, log(M/A) is the log-ratio of market cap to total
     assets. Control variables are same as in Table 4 (not shown). All regression models include firm, and country×year fixed effects.
     Robust standard errors, clustered at firm and year levels, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
     the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                              ( 1)             ( 2)            ( 3)           ( 4)            ( 5)             ( 6)
                                            Active=Institution Type         Active Alt. = Holding Period   Active Alt.2 = Portfolio Return
42




                                            Ei,t+1 /Ai,t     Ei,t+3 /Ai,t    Ei,t+1 /Ai,t   Ei,t+3 /Ai,t    Ei,t+1 /Ai,t     Ei,t+3 /Ai,t
             log(M/A)i,t                       0.008***       −0.026***         0.008***      −0.026***        0.011***       −0.022***
                                              (0.002 )         (0.003 )        (0.002 )        (0.003 )       (0.002 )         (0.003 )
             F OR ACT IV Ei,t                −0.022*          −0.076***       −0.016          −0.100***        0.003          −0.097***
                                              (0.012 )         (0.019 )        (0.014 )        (0.016 )       (0.022 )         (0.029 )
             F OR P ASSIV Ei,t               −0.012           −0.307***       −0.069          −0.061         −0.037           −0.118***
                                              (0.053 )         (0.083 )        (0.040 )        (0.053 )       (0.028 )         (0.029 )
             log(M/A) ∗ F OR ACT IV Ei,t       0.080***         0.071***        0.092***        0.066***       0.174***         0.110***
                                              (0.011 )         (0.015 )        (0.010 )        (0.013 )       (0.024 )         (0.030 )
             log(M/A) ∗ F OR P ASSIV Ei,t      0.175***       −0.011            0.064           0.048          0.099***         0.109***
                                              (0.050 )         (0.074 )        (0.045 )        (0.044 )       (0.029 )         (0.029 )
             DOM ACT IV Ei,t                   0.010            0.010           0.008           0.010          0.014            0.049*
                                              (0.010 )         (0.013 )        (0.009 )        (0.014 )       (0.009 )         (0.026 )
             DOM P ASSIV Ei,t                −0.018           −0.010          −0.010            0.006        −0.021           −0.009
                                              (0.029 )         (0.045 )        (0.025 )        (0.036 )       (0.021 )         (0.027 )
             log(M/A) ∗ DOM ACT IV Ei,t        0.053***         0.045***        0.061***        0.051***       0.090***         0.062***
                                              (0.005 )         (0.008 )        (0.004 )        (0.008 )       (0.010 )         (0.015 )
             log(M/A) ∗ DOM P ASSIV Ei,t       0.110***         0.054           0.067**       −0.042           0.081***         0.060***
                                              (0.026 )         (0.032 )        (0.023 )        (0.036 )       (0.013 )         (0.014 )
             Controls                          Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
             Observations                    172,277          153,881         172,277         153,881        171,354          153,008
             R2                                0.715            0.629           0.715           0.629          0.714            0.627
          Table 9: Price Informativeness and Institutional Ownership: Capital Controls

This table shows results from estimating pooled ordinary least squares (OLS) regression model of
future earnings on institutional ownership and its interaction term with current market valuation,
as in equation (13). OPEN is based on Chinn-Ito index (Chinn and Ito, 2006) that measures the
financial openness of each country. It is an indicator variable equal to one if the openness index is
above median level in each year, otherwise to be zero. E/A is EBIT to total assets; log(M/A) is
the log-ratio of market cap to total assets. Control variables are same as in Table 4 (not shown).
All regression models include firm and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors, clustered at
firm and year levels, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                        ( 1)           ( 2)
                                                      Ei,t+1 /Ai,t   Ei,t+3 /Ai,t
                    log(M/A)i,t                          0.018***     −0.005
                                                        (0.003 )       (0.003 )
                    F ORi,t                            −0.038**       −0.176***
                                                        (0.016 )       (0.032 )
                    OP ENc,t                           −0.006         −0.024**
                                                        (0.006 )       (0.012 )
                    log(M/A) ∗ OP ENc,t                −0.017***      −0.032***
                                                        (0.004 )       (0.004 )
                    F OR ∗ OP ENc,t                      0.035          0.125***
                                                        (0.022 )       (0.037 )
                    log(M/A) ∗ F ORi,t                   0.060***       0.020
                                                        (0.013 )       (0.021 )
                    log(M/A) ∗ F OR ∗ OP ENc,t           0.047***       0.078**
                                                        (0.013 )       (0.028 )
                    Controls                             Yes            Yes
                    Observations                       165,138        147,551
                    R2                                   0.711          0.624




                                                 43
                                          Developed Countries                                                                 Emerging Countries
                                                                                                         0.20




             0.5


                                                                                                         0.15


             0.4
 Ownership




                                                                                             Ownership
             0.3                                                                                         0.10




             0.2
44




                                                                                                         0.05


             0.1




             0.0                                                                                         0.00
                       2000                 2005                 2010          2013                               2000         2005                2010   2013

                                                                        Domestic Ownership                Foreign Ownership


                                                           Figure 1: Institutional Ownership: Domestic vs Foreign

                   This figure shows the domestic and foreign institutional ownership in each country sample from 2000 to 2013. In each year, we calculate
                   the average institutional ownership weighted by market capitalizaton.
                                         Developed Countries                                                               Emerging Countries
                                                                                                       0.20




             0.5


                                                                                                       0.15


             0.4
 Ownership




                                                                                           Ownership
             0.3                                                                                       0.10




             0.2
45




                                                                                                       0.05


             0.1




             0.0                                                                                       0.00
                      2000                 2005                 2010          2013                               2000       2005                2010   2013

                                                                        Active Ownership               Passive Ownership


                                                           Figure 2: Institutional Ownership: Active vs Passive

                   This figure shows the active and passive institutional ownership in each country sample from 2000 to 2013. In each year, we calculate
                   the average institutional ownership weighted by market capitalizaton.
                                                                                Foreign Ownership
                                                 PI1                                                                         PI3

            0.02



            0.00
      PI




           −0.02



           −0.04
                   2000                  2005                      2010               2013     2000                  2005                       2010         2013
                                                                               Domestic Ownership
                                                 PI1                                                                          PI3

           0.025

           0.000
     PI
46




          −0.025

          −0.050

          −0.075
                   2000                  2005                      2010               2013     2000                   2005                      2010          2013




                                                                          IO_1(low)     IO_2     IO_3(high)


                                     Figure 3: Price informativeness over time and across institutional ownership

     P I1 and P I3 are price informativeness measures in one and three years horizons, respectively, constructed as in Formula (1). We estimate a separate
     regression model for each year t = 2000:2013 for each ownership group from low to high sorted by domestic (DOM ) and foreign ownership (FOR),
     respectively.
                              Foreign Ownership                                                            Price Informativeness


     .03




                                                                                      .025
     .02




                                                                                      .015
     .01




                                                                                      .005
                                                                                      -.005
     0




                                                                                      -.015
     -.01




            -3         -2         -1              0            1   2                          -3    -2         -1              0             1   2
                                    Addition Year                                                                Addition Year


                                 95% CI      Treated-Control                                                  95% CI       Treated-Control




                              Domestic Ownership
     .03
47

     .02
     .01
     0
     -.01
     -.02
     -.03




            -3         -2         -1              0            1   2
                                    Addition Year


                                 95% CI      Treated-Control




                                       Figure 4: Ownership and Price Informativeness Surrounding the Additions to MSCI
            This figure shows point estimates and 95% confidence interval of the differences in ownership (FOR and DOM ) and price informativeness
            between treated firms and control firms around stock additions to the MSCI ACWI index. Year 0 is the year when the treated firms
            added to the MSCI ACWI index.
                                PEAD_d1_d1                                                                    PEAD_d1_d5


     .2




                                                                                    .2
                                                                                    .1
     .1




                                                                                    0
     0




                                                                                    -.1
     -.1




                                                                                    -.2
     -.2




           -3         -2        -1              0            1   2                        -3      -2           -1              0            1   2
                                  Addition Year                                                                  Addition Year


                               95% CI      Treated-Control                                                    95% CI      Treated-Control




                           Price Nonsynchronicity                                                      %|Variance Ratio (1d,5d) - 1|
     .06




                                                                                    2
48

     .05




                                                                                    0
     .04
     .03




                                                                                    -2
     .02
     .01




                                                                                    -4
           -3         -2        -1              0            1   2                        -3      -2           -1              0            1   2
                                  Addition Year                                                                  Addition Year


                               95% CI      Treated-Control                                                    95% CI      Treated-Control




                             Figure 5: PEAD, Price Nonsynchronicity and Variance Ratio Surrounding the Additions to MSCI
           This figure shows point estimates and 95% confidence interval of the sensitivity of the post earnings announcement to the earnings
           surprise, price nonsynchronicity and variance ratio, between treated firms and control firms around stock additions to the MSCI ACWI
           index. Year 0 is the year the first year after the treated firms added to the MSCI ACWI index.
                           Foreign Active Ownership                                                      Foreign Passive Ownership
     .03




                                                                                       .01
     .02




                                                                                       .005
     .01




                                                                                       0
     0




                                                                                       -.005
     -.01




            -3        -2         -1              0            1    2                           -3   -2         -1              0            1   2
                                   Addition Year                                                                 Addition Year
49




                                95% CI      Treated-Control                                                    95% CI     Treated-Control




                                          Figure 6: Foreign Institutional Ownership Surrounding the Additions to MSCI
            This figure shows point estimates and 95% confidence interval of the differences in ownership (F OR ACT IV E and F OR P ASSIV E)
            between treated firms and control firms around stock additions to the MSCI ACWI index. Year 0 is the year when the treated firms
            added to the MSCI ACWI index.
                                  Turnover                                                                      Bid-Ask Spread


     .4




                                                                                          -.02
     .2




                                                                                          -.07
     0




                                                                                          -.12
     -.2




           -3         -2        -1              0             1       2                          -3    -2        -1              0             1   2
                                  Addition Year                                                                    Addition Year


                                95% CI     Treated-Control                                                      95% CI       Treated-Control




                                   Analyst
     4
50

     2
     0
     -2




           -3         -2        -1              0             1       2
                                  Addition Year


                                95% CI      Treated-Control




                                                        Figure 7: Liquidity Surrounding the Additions to MSCI
           This figure shows point estimates and 95% confidence interval of the turnover ratio, bid-ask spread, analyst coverage between treated
           firms and control firms around stock additions to the MSCI ACWI index. Year 0 is the first year after the treated firms added to the
           MSCI ACWI index.
                                       Idiosyncratic Volatility                                      CAPM Beta
1.5




                                                                                  .2
1.2




                                                                                  .15
                                                                                  .1
.9




                                                                                  .05
.6




                                                                                  0
                                                                                  -.05
.3




                        -3       -2         -1              0            1   2           -3   -2     -1              0            1   2
                                              Addition Year                                            Addition Year


                                           95% CI      Treated-Control                              95% CI      Treated-Control



                                      Implied Cost of Equity                                          CAPEX/A
.005 .01




                                                                                  .02
                                                                                  .015
0
-.02 -.015 -.01 -.005




                                                                                  .01
                                                                                  .005
                                                                                  0




                        -3       -2         -1              0            1   2           -3   -2     -1              0            1   2
                                              Addition Year                                            Addition Year


                                           95% CI      Treated-Control                              95% CI      Treated-Control



                                               R&D/A                                               Governance Index
.002




                                                                                  3
                                                                                  2
0




                                                                                  1
-.002




                                                                                  0
                                                                                  -1
-.004




                                                                                  -2
-.006




                                                                                  -3




                        -3       -2         -1              0            1   2           -3   -2     -1              0            1   2
                                              Addition Year                                            Addition Year


                                           95% CI      Treated-Control                              Treated-Control      95% CI



                             Figure 8: Volatility, Market Beta and Investment Surrounding the Additions to MSCI
                        This figure shows point estimates and 95% confidence interval of the volatility, market beta,
                        implied cost of equity, governance index, CAPEX and R&D between treated firms and control
                        firms around stock additions to the MSCI ACWI index. Year 0 is the first year after the treated
                        firms added to the MSCI ACWI index.

                                                                             51
                                    Appendix to

“Do Foreign Investors Improve Market Efficiency?”

                                          Abstract

  This appendix presents supplementary results not included in the main body of the paper.
IA.A       Motivating Price Informativeness

In this section, we lay out the micro foundation of the measure of price informativeness we use
to test the main predictions of the paper. We also discuss the role of different information sets
in market efficiency. Our framework is based on that of Bai, Philippon, and Savov (2016).


IA.A.1     Frim Value

In q-theory, a firm with investment k in new capital and productivity z, will have an ex post
fundamental value of
                                                                   γ 2
                               v(z, k) = (1 + z)(k̄ + k) − k −         k
                                                                   2k̄

where k̄ is the firm’s current assets and γ is a parameter that guides the adjustment costs. If the
discount rate is normalized to zero, the investment equation becomes

                                             k∗
                                         γ      = E[z|Im ]
                                             k̄

where I is the information set of the firm’s manager and k ∗ is the value-maximizing level of
capital. Therefore, the ex post maximized value of the firm is

                          v(z, k ∗ )          z            1
                                     = 1 + z + E[z|Im ] −    E[z|Im ]2
                             k̄               γ           2γ

If z is assumed to have mean 0, then the ex ante average value for a continuum of firms is

                                                        k̄
                                E[v(z, k ∗ )] = k̄ +       V [E[z|Im ]]
                                                       2γ

The last equation reflects aggregate welfare, which depends linearly on the value of current assets
and the cross-sectional variance of productivity under the managers’ information sets. We now
show further details on the nature of this information.




                                               IA – 1
IA.A.2     Information Environment

A firm’s manager has information about z generated from the firm itself (inside information),
which is denoted
                                            η = z + η

where η ∼ N (0, ση2 ). Similarly, traders also have (independent) information about z, denoted


                                             s = z + s


where s ∼ N (0, σs2 ). Finally, to account for the fact that traders and managers have common
information sources, we assume that traders obtain a signal from the manager:


                                            η 0 = η + η 0


where η0 ∼ N (0, ση20 ). In the model, η and s are fundamental sources of information that can
improve welfare. The traders only see η 0 and s, while the managers observe η, η 0 , and p, the
price, which provides a signal of s. Therefore, none of them has complete information.


IA.A.3     Equilibrium and Measures of Price Informativeness

Managers use their information sets to pick k, so their optimal decision becomes

                                               k̄
                                        k∗ =      E[z|η, η 0 , p]
                                               γ

Traders influence the price using their information sets, so the price becomes


                                   p = αE[F (z, k ∗ )|η 0 , s] + βu


where F is the payoff of the claim traded in the market and u is noise trading demand. Aggregate
efficiency depends on how much of the managers’ information is reflected in future cash flows:


                                      VM = V [E[z|η, η 0 , q]]



                                               IA – 2
where q is a measure of market value.
   A first-order approximation yields forecasting price efficiency, a measure of informational
efficiency of prices alone:
                                          VF P E = V [E[z|q]]

The part of VM that is due to market prices (revelatory price efficiency) is


                              VRP E = V [E[z|η, η 0 , q]] − V [E[z|η, η 0 ]]


When prices are not very informative, the above measure is low and, when prices are informative,
the above measure is high. The measure we focus on in the paper is F P E, which we express as

                                                p
                                                 VF P E


which is the predicted variation of future cash flows from current market prices. When traders
produce more information, prices become more informative and, therefore, F P E increases.




                                                 IA – 3
                                                                     Table IA.1: Variable Definition



         Variable                             Definition
         Ownership Variables (Source: FactSet Ownership)
         IO                                Ownership by all institutions
         DOM                               Ownership by all institutions domiciled in the same country as where the stock is listed
         FOR                               Ownership by all institutions domiciled in a different country as where the stock is listed
         FOR US                            Ownership by all institutions domiciled in U.S. and the stock is listed in non-U.S. countries
         FOR NUS                           Ownership by all institutions domiciled in a different country (non-U.S.) as where the stock is listed
         DOM ACTIVE (Institution type)     Ownership by all domestic active institutions (e.g., mutual funds, independent investment advisers, and hedge funds)
         FOR ACTIVE (Institution type)     Ownership by all foreign active institutions (e.g., mutual funds, independent investment advisers, and hedge funds)
         DOM PASSIVE (Institution type)    Ownership by all domestic passive institutions (e.g., bank trusts, insurance companies, and other institutions)
         FOR PASSIVE (Institution type)    Ownership by all foreign passive institutions (e.g., bank trusts, insurance companies, and other institutions)
         DOM ACTIVE (Holding period)       Ownership by all domestic institutions with holding periods longer than one year
         FOR ACTIVE (Holding period)       Ownership by all foreign institutions with holding periods longer than one year
         DOM PASSIVE (Holding period)      Ownership by all domestic institutions with holding periods shorter than or equal to one year
         FOR PASSIVE (Holding period)      Ownership by all foreign institutions with holding periods shorter than or equal to one year
         FOR CLOSE (Bilateral trade)       Ownership by institutions domiciled in a foreign country that has strong bilateral trades (above median level each year) with the country
IA – 4




                                           where the stock is listed
         FOR FAR (Bilateral trade)         Ownership by institutions domiciled in a foreign country that has weak bilateral trades (below median level each year) with the country
                                           where the stock is listed
         FOR CLOSE (Geographic distance) Ownership by institutions domiciled in a foreign country that has long geographic distance (above median level each year) to the country
                                           where the stock is listed
         FOR FAR (Geographic distance)     Ownership by institutions domiciled in a foreign country that has short geographic distance (below median level each year) to the country
                                           where the stock is listed
         FOR CLOSE (Language)              Ownership by institutions domiciled in a foreign country that speaks same language as the country where the stock is listed
         FOR FAR (Language)                Ownership by institutions domiciled in a foreign country that speaks different language as the country where the stock is listed
         FOR CLOSE (Border)                Ownership by institutions domiciled in a foreign country that has connected border with the country where the stock is listed
         FOR FAR (Border)                  Ownership by institutions domiciled in a foreign country that has no connected border with the country where the stock is listed
         FOR CLOSE (Colony)                Ownership by institutions domiciled in a foreign country that has same colonial origin as the country where the stock is listed
         FOR FAR (Colony)                  Ownership by institutions domiciled in a foreign country that has different colonial origin as the country where the stock is listed
         FOR FIN High                      Ownership by foreign institutions from a country with high financial market development index (total equity market capitalization scaled
                                           by GDP above median level each year)
         FOR FIN Low                       Ownership by foreign institutions from a country with low financial market development index (total equity market capitalization scaled
                                           by GDP below median level each year)
         FOR COMMON                        Ownership by foreign institutions from a country with a common law system
         FOR CIVIL                         Ownership by foreign institutions from a country with a civil law system
         FOR MARKET                        Ownership by foreign institutions from a country with a market-based financial system
         FOR BANK                          Ownership by foreign institutions from a country with a bank-based financial system
                                                              Variable Definition (Continued)



         Variable         Definition
         Key and Control Variables (Source: Worldscope)
         E/A            EBIT divided by total assets
         log(M/A)       Logarithm of market capitalization divided by total assets
         R&D/A          Research and development expenditures divided by total assets
         CAPEX/A        Capital expenditures divided by total assets
         INVESTMENT the sum of research and development expenditures and capital expenditures divided by total assets
         LEVERAGE       Ratio of total debt to total assets
         TANGIBILITY Net property, plant, and equipment divided by total assets
         log(SALES)     Logarithm of sales (in $1000)
         FORSALES       Foreign sales divided by total sales
         CASH           Cash and/or liquid items divided by total assets
         CLOSE          Ratio of shares held by insiders to total shares
         OPEN           OPEN is an indicator variable based on Chinn-Ito index (Chinn and Ito, 2006), equal to one if the openness index is above the median level
IA – 5




         ANALYST        The number of analysts covering a stock at the end of each year
         log($Volume)   Logarithm of dollar trading volume
         Bid Ask Spread Ask price minus bid price scaled by mid price
         log(Amihud)    Logarithm of Amihud’s price impact measure
         VOLATILITY     Realized volatility of daily stock returns
                 Table IA.2: Summary Statistics: Other Ownership Variables

This table reports the mean, standard deviation, median, 25 percent and 75 percent quantiles,
for the different institution ownership.

                                               Mean    STD     Q25    Median   Q75

             Ownership Variables (%)
             FOR ACTIVE (return)                1.42    3.04   0.00    0.11     1.51
             FOR PASSIVE(return)                0.94    2.51   0.00    0.01     0.65
             DOM ACTIVE (return)                3.55    7.61   0.00    0.03     2.64
             DOM PASSIVE (return)              2.67     6.15   0.00    0.01     1.92
             FOR ACTIVE (Holding period)        4.34    8.56   0.05    1.00     4.89
             FOR PASSIVE (Holding period)      0.32     1.41   0.00    0.00     0.15
             DOM ACTIVE (Holding period)       14.23   24.47   0.02    2.30    14.13
             DOM PASSIVE (Holding period)      0.71     2.66   0.00    0.00     0.20
             FOR CLOSE (Bilateral trade)        3.83    7.88   0.01    0.82     4.27
             FOR FAR (Bilateral trade)         0.68     3.07   0.00    0.00    0.37
             FOR CLOSE (Geographic distance)    2.30    6.18   0.00    0.19     1.82
             FOR FAR (Geographic distance)     2.37     5.60   0.00    0.26    2.26
             FOR CLOSE (Language)              1.79     5.87   0.00    0.00     1.02
             FOR FAR(Language)                 2.88     6.58   0.00    0.46    2.71
             FOR CLOSE (Border connection)      0.79    3.65   0.00    0.00     0.13
             FOR FAR (Border connection)       3.88     7.78   0.05    0.89    4.39
             FOR CLOSE (Colony)                 0.08    0.70   0.00    0.00     0.00
             FOR FAR (Colony)                   4.59    8.92   0.09    1.19     5.21
             FOR FIN High                       4.05    8.36   0.05    0.92     4.39
             FOR FIN Low                        0.62    1.45   0.00    0.01     0.63
             FOR COMMON                         3.61    7.91   0.03    0.75     3.66
             FOR CIVIL                          1.15    2.42   0.00    0.12     1.23
             FOR MAKRET                         3.91    8.20   0.03    0.86     4.18
             FOR BANK                           0.76    1.74   0.00    0.04     0.76




                                           IA – 6
                                     Table IA.3: Price Informativeness and Institutional Ownership: Regional Analysis

         This table shows the price informativeness in each group sorted by total (IO), domestic (DOM ) and foreign ownership (FOR), for
         different country subsamples. Firms are sorted into low, median, high ownership groups, if their ownership are below or above the
         33.3%, 66.7% threshold in each country-year group. P I1 and P I3 are price informativeness measures in one and three years horizons,
         respectively, constructed as in equation (1). Newey-West standard errors with four lags are reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***
         indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                            IO                                    DOM                                   FOR
                                                                      Panel A: U.S.
                             IO(%)       P I1 × 100   P I3 × 100   DOM (%)      P I1 × 100   P I3 × 100   FOR(%)      P I1 × 100   P I3 × 100
                IO 1(Low)     12.57        −4.72        −7.45       11.80         −4.77        −7.54        0.09        −4.00        −6.68
                IO 2          55.90         0.71        −0.27       52.79          0.88        −0.06        1.44         0.20        −0.88
                IO 3(High)    89.02         2.08         2.65       84.65          1.94         2.63        6.72         1.12         1.00
                H-L           76.45***      6.80***     10.10***    72.84***       6.71***     10.17***     6.63***      5.11***      7.68***
                              (1.49)       (0.82)       (1.01)      (1.52)        (0.87)       (1.01)      (0.93)       (0.5)        (0.56)
IA – 7




                                                                    Panel B: Non-U.S.
                IO 1(Low)      1.47        −0.37        −0.62         1.06        −0.54        −1.12        0.20        −0.15        −0.57
                IO 2           6.85         0.63         0.56         3.31         0.70         0.71        1.99         0.85         0.87
                IO 3(High)    20.63         1.99         2.37         7.72         1.80         2.30       12.89         1.65         2.02
                H-L           19.16***      2.35***      2.99***      6.66***      2.34***      3.42***    12.69***      1.80***      2.59***
                              (1.09)       (0.24)       (0.41)       (0.76)       (0.2)        (0.37)      (0.69)       (0.28)       (0.37)
                                 Table IA.4: Price Informativeness and Institutional Ownership: Double-Sorted Portfolios

         This table reports average price informativeness of portfolios sorted first by domestic (DOM ) and then by foreign ownership (FOR).
         For each country-year, firms with non-zero ownership are first split into equal-sized five groups by domestic ownership, then split by
         their foreign ownership if they are below or above the 50% threshold. P I1 (P I3) measures price informativeness in one (three)-year
         horizon, constructed as in equation (1). Newey-West standard errors with four lags are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
         significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                           P I1 × 100                                    P I3 × 100
                                                             FOR                                           FOR
                                              Low        High       High-Low                Low        High       High-Low
                               IO 1(Low)     −2.21       −0.84         1.38***   (0.21)    −3.07       −1.49         1.58***   (0.31)
                                  IO 2       −1.10       −0.12         0.98***   (0.33)    −1.90       −0.98         0.92*     (0.49)
                                  IO 3        0.47        0.88         0.41      (0.33)    −0.35        0.78         1.14***   (0.34)
                       DOM
                                  IO 4        0.94        1.62         0.68***   (0.14)     1.17        2.52         1.34***   (0.09)
                              IO 5 (High)     1.64        2.08         0.44      (0.27)     1.96        2.47         0.51      (0.51)
                                High-Low      3.85***     2.91***                           5.03***     3.96***
                                             (0.46)      (0.24)                            (0.70)      (0.31)
IA – 8
                                 Table IA.5: Price Informativeness and Institutional Ownership: Sample with Zero Ownership

         This table shows results of pooled ordinary least squares (OLS) regression of future earnings on institutional ownership and its
         interaction term with current market valuation as in equation (3). The E/A is EBIT to total asset, log(M/A) is the log-ratio of market
         cap to total asset. IO, FOR and DOM are total, foreign and domestic institutional ownership, respectively. For Ratio is the foreign
         ownership over total ownership. All regression models include firm and country×year fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered
         in firm and year levels are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
         respectively.

                                                               Ei,t+1 /Ai,t                             Ei,t+3 /Ai,t
                         log(M/A)i,t              −0.023***      −0.024***    −0.020***    −0.052***      −0.052***    −0.053***
                                                  (0.003 )       (0.003 )     (0.002 )     (0.005 )       (0.005 )     (0.005 )
                         IOi,t                     0.035**                                 −0.035*
                                                  (0.014 )                                 (0.019 )
                         F ORi,t                                   0.024      −0.054**                    −0.112***    −0.187***
                                                                  (0.020 )    (0.018 )                    (0.028 )     (0.029 )
                         DOMi,t                                    0.041**    −0.019                      −0.005       −0.068**
                                                                  (0.014 )    (0.015 )                    (0.023 )     (0.025 )
IA – 9




                         log(M/A)i,t ∗ IOi,t        0.143***                                 0.112***
                                                   (0.009 )                                 (0.009 )
                         log(M/A)i,t ∗ F ORi,t                     0.201***     0.133***                    0.168***     0.111***
                                                                  (0.019 )     (0.015 )                    (0.024 )     (0.021 )
                         log(M/A)i,t ∗ DOMi,t                      0.131***     0.089***                    0.098***     0.060***
                                                                  (0.008 )     (0.007 )                    (0.009 )     (0.008 )
                         Ei,t /Ai,t                                             0.300***                                 0.283***
                                                                               (0.016 )                                 (0.023 )
                         log(Asset)i,t                                        −0.018**                                   0.001
                                                                               (0.007 )                                 (0.010 )
                         CLOSEi,t                                               0.003                                    0.007
                                                                               (0.003 )                                 (0.006 )
                         LEV ERAGEi,t                                         −0.026**                                 −0.153***
                                                                               (0.011 )                                 (0.021 )
                         T AN GIBILIT Yi,t                                    −0.017                                     0.061***
                                                                               (0.013 )                                 (0.017 )
                         log(SALES)i,t                                          0.033***                                 0.016***
                                                                               (0.004 )                                 (0.006 )
                         F ORSALESi,t                                         −0.003                                     0.001
                                                                               (0.004 )                                 (0.009 )
                         CASHi,t                                                0.018*                                 −0.047**
                                                                               (0.010 )                                 (0.024 )
                         Observations             248,336       248,336       248,336      220,993       220,993       220,993
                         R2                         0.646         0.646         0.694        0.580         0.580         0.604
                                                   Table IA.6: Investment-to-Earnings, Price-to-Investment Sensitivities

          This table shows results of regression analysis of investment-to-earnings, price-to-investment sensitivity and institutional ownership.
          E/A is EBIT to total asset, R&D/A is research and development to total asset, CAP EX/A is capital expenditure to total asset, and
          IN V EST M EN T is the sum of R&D/A and CAP EX/A. Panel A reports the results for investment-to-earnings sensitivity, and Panel
          B reports the results for price-to-investment sensitivity. All regression models include firm, and country×year fixed effects. Control
          variables are same as in Table 4 (not shown). Robust standard errors, clustered at firm and year levels, are reported in parentheses. *,
          **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                      Panel A: Investment-to-Earnings Sensitivity (Aggregate Efficiency)
                                                      Invest=INVESTMENT                          Invest=R&D/A                          Invest=CAPEX/A
                                                     Ei,t+1 /Ai,t     Ei,t+3 /Ai,t         Ei,t+1 /Ai,t     Ei,t+3 /Ai,t           Ei,t+1 /Ai,t        Ei,t+3 /Ai,t
                              Investi,t               −0.140***         −0.131***           −0.420***         −0.479***             −0.038**               0.030
                                                       (0.019 )          (0.022 )            (0.036 )          (0.056 )              (0.014 )             (0.027 )
                              F ORi,t                 −0.082***         −0.182***           −0.053***         −0.146***             −0.061***            −0.123***
                                                       (0.014 )          (0.022 )            (0.011 )          (0.018 )              (0.014 )             (0.020 )
                              Invest ∗ F ORi,t          0.499***          0.850***            0.574*            1.680***              0.323**              0.188
IA – 10




                                                       (0.151 )          (0.166 )            (0.314 )          (0.292 )              (0.137 )             (0.174 )
                              DOMi,t                    0.004           −0.013              −0.004            −0.034*                 0.008                0.019
                                                       (0.012 )          (0.019 )            (0.010 )          (0.015 )              (0.014 )             (0.019 )
                              Invest ∗ DOMi,t           0.051             0.132               0.260***          0.849***              0.026              −0.290**
                                                       (0.042 )          (0.102 )            (0.085 )          (0.148 )              (0.065 )             (0.135 )
                              Controls                  Yes               Yes                 Yes               Yes                   Yes                  Yes
                              Observations            186,714           165,344             186,714           165,344               186,714              165,344
                              R2                        0.705             0.621               0.706             0.623                 0.704                0.621



                                                                       Panel B: Price-to-Investment Sensitivity
                                          IN V EST M EN Ti,t+1      IN V EST M EN Ti,t+3         R&Di,t+1 /Ai,t   R&Di,t+3 /Ai,t         CAP EXi,t+1 /Ai,t       CAP EXi,t+3 /Ai,t
                log(M/A)i,t                        0.024***                 0.021***                  0.004***         0.006***                     0.019***            0.013***
                                                  (0.001 )                 (0.002 )                  (0.001 )         (0.001 )                     (0.001 )            (0.001 )
                F ORi,t                            0.018**                  0.007                     0.002          −0.002                         0.010**             0.006
                                                  (0.006 )                 (0.014 )                  (0.002 )         (0.004 )                     (0.005 )            (0.012 )
                log(M/A) ∗ F ORi,t                 0.011*                   0.007                   −0.002           −0.005                         0.012***            0.017**
                                                  (0.006 )                 (0.009 )                  (0.002 )         (0.003 )                     (0.004 )            (0.008 )
                DOMi,t                             0.010**                  0.022**                 −0.003           −0.010***                      0.013***            0.034***
                                                  (0.003 )                 (0.009 )                  (0.002 )         (0.003 )                     (0.003 )            (0.007 )
                log(M/A) ∗ DOMi,t                  0.000                    0.007*                    0.002**          0.007***                   −0.001                0.001
                                                  (0.002 )                 (0.004 )                  (0.001 )         (0.002 )                     (0.002 )            (0.003 )
                Controls                           Yes                      Yes                       Yes              Yes                          Yes                 Yes
                Observations                     186,714                  167,546                   186,714          167,546                      186,714             167,546
                R2                                 0.695                    0.663                     0.890            0.822                        0.634               0.630
                                 Table IA.7: Price Informativeness and Institutional Ownership: The Role of U.S. Investors

          This table shows results from estimating pooled ordinary least squares (OLS) regression model of future earnings on institutional
          ownership and its interaction term with current market valuation, as in equation (3). Foreign ownership (FOR) is decomposed into
          FOR US and FOR NUS depending on whether the investor is from U.S. or Non-U.S. countries. E/A is EBIT to total assets, log(M/A)
          is the log-ratio of market cap to total assets. All regression models include firm, and country×year fixed effects. Control variables are
          same as in Table 4 (not shown). Robust standard errors, clustered at firm and year levels, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***
          indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                    Developed (Ex U.S.)                 Emerging
                                                                   Ei,t+1 /Ai,t   Ei,t+3 /Ai,t   Ei,t+1 /Ai,t   Ei,t+3 /Ai,t
                                        log(M/A)i,t                    0.014***    −0.020***         0.029***      0.001
                                                                      (0.002 )      (0.003 )        (0.002 )      (0.004 )
                                        DOMi,t                         0.028       −0.038            0.049**       0.003
                                                                      (0.017 )      (0.036 )        (0.019 )      (0.022 )
                                        F OR U Si,t                  −0.066**      −0.133***         0.008       −0.072
                                                                      (0.025 )      (0.032 )        (0.023 )      (0.044 )
                                                                     −0.018        −0.094**                      −0.039
IA – 11




                                        F OR N U Si,t                                                0.028
                                                                      (0.023 )      (0.042 )        (0.025 )      (0.036 )
                                        log(M/A) ∗ DOMi,t              0.048***      0.008           0.036**     −0.003
                                                                      (0.015 )      (0.018 )        (0.018 )      (0.014 )
                                        log(M/A) ∗ F OR U Si,t         0.055***      0.067***        0.062***      0.054*
                                                                      (0.016 )      (0.023 )        (0.017 )      (0.030 )
                                        log(M/A) ∗ F OR N U Si,t       0.130***      0.031           0.036**     −0.021
                                                                      (0.025 )      (0.042 )        (0.014 )      (0.035 )
                                        Controls                       Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes
                                        Observations                 93,375        83,673          50,692        45,220
                                        R2                             0.660         0.575           0.628         0.627
                                            Table IA.8: Price Informativeness and Institutional Ownership: Familiarity

          This table shows results from estimating pooled ordinary least squares (OLS) regression model of future earnings on institutional
          ownership and its interaction term with current market valuation, as in equation (11). Foreign ownership (FOR) is decomposed
          into FOR CLOSE and FOR FAR depending on the connection closeness between the home country and each foreign country. The
          connection closeness is measured by five different variables respectively, including bilateral trades, geographical distance, language
          commonality, border connection and colony origin. E/A is EBIT to total assets, log(M/A) is the log-ratio of market cap to total assets.
          Panel A reports the results for a 1-year horizon, and Panel B reports the results for a 3-year horizon. All regression models include
          firm, and country×year fixed effects. Control variables are same as in Table 4 (not shown). Robust standard errors, clustered at firm
          and year levels, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                         Panel A: 1-Year Horizon
                                                       Bilateral Trade   Geographical Distance        Language      Border       Colony
                                                                                                 Ei,t+1 /Ai,t
                            log(M/A)i,t                     0.007***              0.007***               0.007***     0.007***     0.007***
                                                           (0.002 )              (0.002 )               (0.002 )     (0.002 )     (0.002 )
                            F OR CLOSEi,t                 −0.032***             −0.030                 −0.044**     −0.045         0.052
IA – 12




                                                           (0.011 )              (0.020 )               (0.016 )     (0.026 )     (0.063 )
                            F OR F ARi,t                  −0.011                −0.027*                −0.012       −0.023       −0.030**
                                                           (0.030 )              (0.015 )               (0.018 )     (0.014 )     (0.012 )
                            log(M/A) ∗ F OR CLOSEi,t        0.092***              0.096***               0.073***     0.049*       0.183***
                                                           (0.011 )              (0.009 )               (0.013 )     (0.027 )     (0.054 )
                            log(M/A) ∗ F OR F ARi,t         0.067***              0.082***               0.105***     0.100***     0.088***
                                                           (0.025 )              (0.021 )               (0.012 )     (0.010 )     (0.010 )
                            Controls                        Yes                   Yes                    Yes          Yes          Yes
                            Observations                  172,277               172,277                172,277      172,277      172,277
                            R2                              0.714                 0.714                  0.714        0.714        0.714


                                                                         Panel B: 3-Year Horizon
                                                       Bilateral Trade   Geographical Distance        Language      Border       Colony
                                                                                                 Ei,t+3 /Ai,t
                            log(M/A)i,t                   −0.027***             −0.027***              −0.027***    −0.027***    −0.027***
                                                           (0.003 )              (0.003 )               (0.003 )     (0.003 )     (0.003 )
                            F OR CLOSEi,t                 −0.108***             −0.160***              −0.099***    −0.053       −0.057
                                                           (0.020 )              (0.032 )               (0.030 )     (0.044 )     (0.155 )
                            F OR F ARi,t                  −0.072**              −0.054**               −0.110***    −0.120***    −0.109***
                                                           (0.028 )              (0.023 )               (0.022 )     (0.022 )     (0.016 )
                            log(M/A) ∗ F OR CLOSEi,t        0.062***              0.060***               0.047**      0.071        0.160
                                                           (0.012 )              (0.020 )               (0.019 )     (0.040 )     (0.152 )
                            log(M/A) ∗ F OR F ARi,t         0.089***              0.074***               0.079***     0.064***     0.064***
                                                           (0.023 )              (0.020 )               (0.013 )     (0.015 )     (0.012 )
                            Controls                        Yes                   Yes                    Yes          Yes          Yes
                            Observations                  153,881               153,881                153,881      153,881      153,881
                            R2                              0.628                 0.628                  0.628        0.628        0.628
        Table IA.9: Price Informativeness and Institutional Ownership: Knowledge Spillover

This table shows results from estimating pooled ordinary least squares (OLS) regression model of future earnings
on institutional ownership and its interaction term with current market valuation, as in equation (12). Origin
countries are classified into two groups by three indicators: financial development index (market capitalization over
GDP) above the median level, the law system (common or civil law), and financial system (market or bank based).
In addition, foreign investors origins are separated by these three measures. F OR F IN High (F OR F IN Low)
denotes the foreign ownership from higher (lower) financial development countries, which the total equity market
capitalization over GDP is above (below) median. F OR COM M ON (F OR CIV IL) denotes the foreign ownership
from countries with common (civil) law. F OR M ARKET (F OR BAN K) denotes the foreign ownership from
countries with market-based (bank-based) financial system. E/A is EBIT to total assets; log(M/A) is the log-ratio
of market cap to total assets. All regression models include firm, and country×year fixed effects. Control variables
are same as in Table 4 (not shown). Robust standard errors, clustered at firm and year levels, are reported in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                      Origin Country Financial Development
                                               High            Low             High        Low
                                                      Ei,t+1 /Ai,t                     Ei,t+3 /Ai,t
            log(M/A)i,t                         0.002                  0.022***   −0.034***           −0.007
                                               (0.003 )               (0.002 )     (0.003 )            (0.004 )
            F OR F IN Highi,t                 −0.054***                0.004      −0.133***           −0.068**
                                               (0.016 )               (0.014 )     (0.023 )            (0.027 )
            F OR F IN Lowi,t                  −0.012                   0.073      −0.142                0.028
                                               (0.055 )               (0.062 )     (0.100 )            (0.110 )
            log(M/A) ∗ F OR F IN Highi,t        0.091***               0.081***     0.063***            0.038**
                                               (0.016 )               (0.011 )     (0.020 )            (0.018 )
            log(M/A) ∗ F OR F IN Lowi,t         0.191***               0.116**      0.128               0.026
                                               (0.054 )               (0.057 )     (0.086 )            (0.070 )
            Observations                      127,233                42,926       113,787             38,032
            R2                                  0.725                  0.654        0.634               0.623

                                                             Origin Country Law System
                                            Common              Civil        Common                   Civil
           log(M/A)i,t                        −0.010***            0.023***       −0.048***           −0.006**
                                               (0.003 )           (0.002 )         (0.005 )            (0.003 )
           F OR COM M ONi,t                   −0.075***          −0.001           −0.155***           −0.075***
                                               (0.021 )           (0.017 )         (0.038 )            (0.023 )
           F OR CIV ILi,t                     −0.144**             0.003          −0.191              −0.030
                                               (0.055 )           (0.037 )         (0.113 )            (0.054 )
           log(M/A) ∗ F OR COM M ONi,t          0.093***           0.068***         0.086***            0.040**
                                               (0.019 )           (0.013 )         (0.031 )            (0.017 )
           log(M/A) ∗ F OR CIV ILi,t            0.166***           0.071**          0.197**           −0.004
                                               (0.053 )           (0.034 )         (0.093 )            (0.045 )
           Observations                       72,054             89,317           62,593              82,257
           R2                                   0.730              0.636            0.637               0.593

                                                           Origin Country Financial System
                                             Market             Bank           Market                 Bank
            log(M/A)i,t                       −0.002               0.022***       −0.038***           −0.006
                                               (0.003 )           (0.002 )         (0.003 )            (0.004 )
            F OR M ARKETi,t                   −0.052***          −0.003           −0.105***           −0.095***
                                               (0.019 )           (0.020 )         (0.025 )            (0.026 )
            F OR BAN Ki,t                       0.002              0.087          −0.220**              0.052
                                               (0.056 )           (0.052 )         (0.108 )            (0.102 )
            log(M/A) ∗ F OR M ARKETi,t          0.088***           0.064***         0.083***            0.027
                                               (0.015 )           (0.011 )         (0.024 )            (0.017 )
            log(M/A) ∗ F OR BAN Ki,t            0.201***           0.172***         0.173**             0.028
                                               (0.044 )           (0.061 )         (0.072 )            (0.072 )
            Observations                      99,350              72,927          87,274              66,607
            R2                                  0.726 IA    –   13 0.634            0.635               0.602
