NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

QUANTIFYING THE BENEFITS OF SOCIAL INSURANCE:
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE AND HEALTH
Elira Kuka
Working Paper 24766
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24766

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018

I am grateful to Marianne Bitler, Scott Carrell, Brian Duncan, Hilary Hoynes, Doug Miller, Dann
Mil-limet, Rafael Lalive, Chris O’Leary, Marianne Page, Na’ama Shenhav, Ann Stevens, and
seminar participants UC Davis, the WEAI Graduate Student Dissertation Workshop, and
Dartmouth College for excellent com- ments and suggestions. I also thank Brian Melzer for
providing UI benefits data, Raj Chetty for making available his UI calculator, and Hilary Hoynes
for providing the original Gruber (1997) calculator. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Elira Kuka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Quantifying the Benefits of Social Insurance: Unemployment Insurance and Health
Elira Kuka
NBER Working Paper No. 24766
June 2018
JEL No. H5,I1
ABSTRACT
While the Unemployment Insurance (UI) program is one of the largest safety net program in the
U.S., research on its benefits is limited. This paper exploits plausibly exogenous changes in state
UI laws to empirically estimate whether UI generosity mitigates any of the previously
documented negative health effects of job loss. The results show higher UI generosity increases
health insurance coverage and utilization, and leads to improved self-reported health. Moreover,
these effects are stronger during periods of high unemployment rates. Finally, I find no effects on
risky behaviors nor on health conditions.

Elira Kuka
Department of Economics
Southern Methodist University
3300 Dyer Street, Umphrey Lee Center
Dallas, TX 75275
and NBER
ekuka@smu.edu

1

Introduction

The Great Recession was one of the deepest and longest recessions in the post World War II
period. The unemployment rate increased from 4.6 to 9.6 percent between 2007 and 2010,
and the average duration of unemployment increased from 17 to 40 weeks (U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics). In response to the crisis, the U.S. Congress authorized unprecedented expansions to the Unemployment Insurance (UI) program, lengthening the maximum duration
of benefits from 26 to as high as 99 weeks (Rothstein, 2011). As a result of both the depth of
the recession and the expansion of the program, UI spending increased substantially, making
it the largest U.S. safety net program during this period (Bitler and Hoynes, 2016).
The significant increase in the size of the UI program, coupled with the slow recovery of
the labor market after the recession, has spurred renewed interest in estimating the effects
of UI on job search and exit from unemployment, and how these affect the optimal level of
UI payments.1 Because the theory of optimal UI insurance (Baily, 1978; Chetty, 2006) holds
that benefit amounts should be set at a level where the costs of the program (the moral
hazard effects) should equal its benefits (reduced income fluctuations), the size of this moral
hazard is key in calculating the optimal level of UI. On the other hand, understanding and
estimating the benefits of UI is equally important, but the literature on these benefits is
limited.2
Given that the literature on job loss has shown that job displacement leads to significant
negative effects on earnings, health and mortality, children’s educational achievement and infant health (Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan, 1993; Stevens, 1997; Sullivan and Von Wachter,
2009; Oreopoulos, Page and Stevens, 2008; Lindo, 2011), UI could play an important role
in mitigating these effects. In this paper, I concentrate on previously unexamined potential
benefits of UI on the wellbeing of its recipients by empirically estimating the effect of UI
generosity on the health insurance coverage, health status and health risk behaviors of the
unemployed. Understanding the health effects of UI is not only interesting because health
represents an important aspect of individuals’ wellbeing, but also because it creates important externalities,3 whose presence implies different optimal levels of UI benefits than those
1
For example, see Farber and Valletta (2011); Rothstein (2011); Hagedorn et al. (2013); Schmieder,
Von Wachter and Bender (2012); Chetty (2008); Landais, Michaillat and Saez (2010); Kroft and Notowidigdo
(2016); Lalive, Landais and Zweimüller (2015).
2
Many works on this subject focus only on measuring the effect of UI on consumption smoothing (Gruber,
1997; Browning and Crossley, 2001; Kroft and Notowidigdo, 2016; East and Kuka, 2015). To my knowledge,
the only papers that analyze other possible benefits of UI are Hsu, Matsa and Melzer (2018) and Barr
and Turner (2015), which examine the effect of UI on consumer credit markets and college enrollment,
respectively.
3
For example, while drinking and smoking lead to negative externalities on children, spouses and the neighborhood, improved mental health and increased healthy behaviors may have important positive spillovers

2

previously found.
Previous research has shown that job loss is associated with negative effects on health.
For example, Sullivan and Von Wachter (2009) find that displaced male workers in the U.S.
experience a 50-100 percent increase in mortality rate in the years immediately following a job
loss. Studies conducted in Northern Europe have found smaller but statistically significant
increases in mortality (Browning and Heinesen, 2012; Eliason and Storrie, 2009). Other
work has analyzed the mechanisms that cause this increase in mortality, finding that job
displacement leads to negative effects on cardiovascular health, driven by increases in smoking
(Black, Devereux and Salvanes, 2015). In addition, Schaller and Stevens (2015) show that
job loss leads to reduced insurance coverage, self-reported health, and health utilization. It
is important to note that the reported health effects have been found in the presence of
current safety net programs and public health provisions, implying that these effects could
be even larger in their absence.
Unemployment Insurance (UI) is likely to mitigate the negative health effects of job loss
through different channels. First, UI can operate through an income effect. Higher UI payments may imply higher investments in health, leading to improved health, and/or increases
in risky behaviors, such as smoking and alcohol consumption, which may lead to negative
health effects. Thus my analysis contributes to the literature on the causal relationship
between income and health. Second, individuals living in more generous UI states may experience less economic uncertainty, which reduces stress. Hence higher UI payments could
lead to improved mental health and to decreases in smoking, alcohol consumption and illnesses associated with stress. Third, UI leads to longer unemployment spells and decreased
time spent working, which could affect health through changes in time use. Overall, the
expected effect of UI generosity on health is ambiguous.
My empirical strategy relies on exploiting plausibly exogenous variation in the level of UI
payments caused by changes in state UI laws, similar to Gruber (1997). For this purpose, I
have built a UI calculator for 1993–2015 based on state UI laws, which allows me to calculate
the amount of UI that an individual is eligible for, given his individual earnings prior to
unemployment and the number of children in the household. However, given that individual
UI payments are a function of earnings and that earnings are correlated with health, using
individual UI payments might lead to biased estimates of the effect of UI generosity on
health. To avoid this possible bias, I create “simulated UI replacement rates”, a measure of
the generosity of the state UI program that depends only on state policy variation, and not
(Marcus, 2013; Yakusheva, Kapinos and Eisenberg, 2014). Moreover, the uninsured cause financial externalities to hospitals (and other providers) who bear the costs of providing them uncompensated care (Garthwaite,
Gross and Notowidigdo, 2018; Finkelstein, Mahoney and Notowidigdo, 2017).

3

on the characteristics of the sample of individuals unemployed in each state and year (Currie
and Gruber, 1996a; Cohodes et al., 2016).
To generate the simulated replacement rates I use the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of
Income and Program Participation (SIPP), which contain detailed monthly employment and
earnings information for a large sample of individuals. I identify individuals that have lost
their job through no fault of their own at the beginning of their unemployment spell, and
I calculate their earnings for the 12 month period prior to unemployment. I thus create a
national, fixed sample of all job losers in the 1996–2013 period, and use this constant sample
to calculate average replacement rates, equal to UI payment eligibility divided by weekly
earnings, for each state, year and number of children cell.
After obtaining this measure of state UI generosity, I merge it to the individual observations in the 1996–2013 SIPP. The longitudinal aspect of the SIPP and the detailed
information on reason for job separation allow me to construct a sample of involuntary job
losers observed 12 months prior to 24 months after job loss. I then use an event study model
to analyze how UI generosity affects individual UI benefits received and health insurance
coverage, before and after job loss, after controlling for state and year fixed effects.
I also merge my measure of UI generosity to the 1993–2015 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). While this dataset is a only a repeated cross section of employed and
unemployed individuals, and thus does not allow to follow job losers over time, it contains
detailed information on a variety of important health outcomes, such as self-reported health,
insurance coverage, risky behaviors, doctor visits and preventive care. I use this dataset
to first estimate the effects of higher UI generosity on health with a state and year fixed
effect model on the sample of the unemployed. Second, I estimate a triple differences model
which adds employed individuals as a control group for the unemployed, which allows me to
control for health shocks at the state and year level that affect the employed and unemployed
equally.
The results obtained with the SIPP data show that a 1 standard deviation increase in
UI generosity is associated with a $22 increase in monthly UI benefits, and a 1.6 percent
increase in health insurance coverage, which is driven by private health insurance coverage.
Importantly, the event studies rule out differential pre-trends in insurance coverage, and
show that UI only affects insurance status after job loss. Moreover, the results are robust to
a variety of specification checks and placebo analyses.
The BRFSS results confirm the effects on insurance coverage, and show that higher UI
generosity leads to increases in having a routine check-up, self-reported health, and having
a breast exam. Moreover, these effects are stronger during periods of high unemployment
rates, when the need for UI may be highest. Lastly, I find no strong evidence of significant
4

short-term effects of UI on risky behaviors, such as alcohol consumption or smoking, nor on
health conditions such as diabetes and blood pressure.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 I provide some background
information on the UI program and the relevant literature, while Sections 3 and 4 describe
the data and the empirical methodology used. Section 5 contains the findings, including
robustness and heterogeneity analyses. Finally, Section 6 concludes.

2

Background

2.1

Unemployment Insurance

Unemployment Insurance (UI) is a joint federal-state social insurance program that provides
temporary cash payments to help alleviate economic hardship for individuals who experience
job loss through no fault of their own. Although the program is federally mandated, it is
administered at the state level and subject to state laws regarding eligibility for the program,
as well as the level and duration of UI payments. Typically, individuals are eligible for up
to 26 weeks of payments, but the Extended UI program provides additional weeks during
periods in which states experience high unemployment rates. Moreover, Congress has the
power to enact further extensions during recessions under the Emergency UI program, as it
did during the Great Recession.4
The typical weekly UI statutory replacement rate, defined as the UI payment as a share of
pre-unemployment weekly earnings, is 50 percent of such earnings (Kroft and Notowidigdo,
2016). However, each state establishes a nominal minimum and a maximum level of UI
payments, as well as minimum earnings for eligibility for the program, making the actual
replacement rate nonlinear in earnings. Therefore, individual replacement rates may vary
significantly from the average. While the statutory earnings replacement rate and the dependent allowance are fairly constant within states over time, states change the maximum
and minimum amounts of UI payments frequently, to either keep up with inflation or when
UI funds are low (Smith and Wenger, 2013). Given these changes in the nonlinearity of the
replacement rates, UI generosity varies within states across time. Moreover, some states
provide small additional allowance for dependents (mainly children),5 which provides additional variation within states and across number of children. The identification strategy in
4

In this paper I do not take advantage of the variation in the maximum weeks of UI eligibility, as these
are often extended during period of recessions. Since recessions are associated with worse health (Ruhm,
2000), using this variation might lead to biased estimated effects of UI on health.
5
As of 2014, fourteen states provide additional dependent payments. These are Arizona, Connecticut,
Illinois, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Jersey, New Mexico, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode
Island and Tennessee.

5

this paper relies on taking advantage of these sources of variation in UI generosity.
Panel (a) of Figure (1) presents a map of the average simulated replacement rate in each
state in 1993, the first year of my period of analysis. These simulated replacement rates
are constructed using a fixed sample of the unemployed to calculate UI payment levels for
each state and year, and therefore depend only on policy variation.6 While the average
replacement rate for the 1993–2015 period is 41 percent, with an average real ($2015) weekly
benefit level eligibility of $205, Figure (1) shows that there is substantial variation in UI
generosity across states and regions. For example, Oregon and Michigan had the highest
replacement rates, both above 52 percent, while California and Florida were among the least
generous states, with replacement rates around 38 percent.
In Panel (b) of Figure (1) I show how these replacement rates changed between 1993
and 2015, the first and last years of my period of analysis. Again, this uses a constant
sample of unemployed. This map shows that changes in UI generosity were geographically
dispersed and not strongly correlated with the initial level of generosity (in 1993). For
example, while California and Oregon experienced large increases in UI generosity, Michigan
and Florida enacted decreases in generosity. Finally, to present a comprehensive overview of
the variation in state UI laws over time, in Appendix Figure (B.1) I plot trends in average
simulated replacement rates for each state and number of children, for the period between
1993 and 2015.7 These graphs illustrate the substantial variation in generosity across states,
as well as the smaller, but still sizable variation across number of dependents and within
states over time. My empirical strategy exploits this variation, and its exogeneity will be
discussed below in Section 4.

2.2

Relevant Literature

This paper contributes to the literatures on the benefits of UI, job loss, and the effects of
government programs on health. The first body of work analyzes the UI program and its
optimal level of UI. In large part this literature focuses on analyzing the effect of UI on job
search and unemployment duration, known as the moral hazard effect (Meyer, 1990; Katz
and Meyer, 1990; Card and Levine, 2000; Lalive, Van Ours and Zweimüller, 2006; Farber and
Valletta, 2011; Rothstein, 2011). This collection of work finds that higher UI payments and
longer durations lead to reduced job search and longer unemployment spells. In addition,
another part of this literature analyzes the differential effects of UI across varying liquidity
6

More details regarding the construction of these replacement rates will be presented in Section 4 and in
the Appendix.
7
This figure is composed of one subfigure per state, each containing simulated replacement rates by
number of children.

6

constraints and business cycles (Card, Chetty and Weber, 2007; Chetty, 2008; Kroft and
Notowidigdo, 2016; Schmieder, Von Wachter and Bender, 2012).
The literature on the benefits of UI is more limited and is primarily focused on the
consumption smoothing benefits of the program (Gruber, 1997; Browning and Crossley,
2001; Kroft and Notowidigdo, 2016; East and Kuka, 2015). These studies show that higher
UI payments lead to a smaller drop in consumption when an individual is laid off. Other
work has found that increased UI generosity leads to lower precautionary savings, increased
spousal labor supply, improvements in consumer credit markets, increased college enrollment,
and decreased suicide rates (Engen and Gruber, 2001; Cullen and Gruber, 2000; Hsu, Matsa
and Melzer, 2018; Barr and Turner, 2015; Cylus, Glymour and Avendano, 2014). Note that
some of these effects could be mechanisms for improved health, as changes in labor supply
and college enrollment could affect the availability of cheaper employer or college provided
health insurance.
The two closest papers to my own are Brown (2010) and (Cylus, Glymour and Avendano,
2015), who analyze whether unemployment is associated with a loss of private health insurance coverage8 or decreased self-reported health, respectively, and whether UI generosity
plays a role in mitigating such effects. In this paper, I not only extend and improve upon
their analyses,9 but I also study the effects of UI on health utilization, health status, and
healthy behaviors, which are ultimately the main outcomes of interest for policy.
A second important and relevant strand of literature is the one analyzing the negative
effects of job loss on health.10 For example, job displacement is associated with increased
mortality (Sullivan and Von Wachter, 2009; Browning and Heinesen, 2012; Eliason and Storrie, 2009), which could be driven by decreased cardiovascular health (Black, Devereux and
Salvanes, 2015), increased risky behaviors, including alcohol consumption, smoking and unhealthy eating (Deb et al., 2011; Classen and Dunn, 2012), and increased suicide risk and
hospitalization due to mental health problems, as well as spending on antidepressants and
related drugs (Kuhn, Lalive and Zweimüller, 2009).
8

Unemployed individuals can use UI to purchase health insurance either in the private market or through
their former employer (through COBRA).
9
I use simulated replacement rates that are constructed with a fixed sample of unemployed that does not
vary year by year. Moreover, I include state fixed effects and state specific linear time trends.
10
The literature on job loss is extensive. This line of research has found that job displacement leads to
significant earning losses in the year immediately following job loss, and that these losses persist in the
long-run (Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan, 1993; Stevens, 1997; Davis and Von Wachter, 2011). Job loss
has also been linked to other important family dynamics outcomes, such as increased spousal labor supply,
increased probability of divorce, and decreased fertility (Stephens, 2002; Charles and Stephens, 2004; Lindo,
2010; Eliason, 2012). Moreover, job loss has important intergenerational repercussions, leading to decreased
children’s educational achievement and infant health (Oreopoulos, Page and Stevens, 2008; Rege, Telle and
Votruba, 2011; Stevens and Schaller, 2011; Lindo, 2011).

7

Another important mechanism that could lead to worsening health status is the loss of
health insurance coverage incurred after displacement, since in the U.S. around 88 percent
of insurance coverage is acquired through the workplace (Brown, 2010). In fact, Gruber and
Madrian (1997) find that job loss leads to a 20 percentage point (p.p.) reduction in the
probability of being covered by health insurance. Lastly, Schaller and Stevens (2015) use
more recent data to confirm that job loss leads to reduced self-reported health, insurance
coverage and health utilization. My paper will contribute to this literature by understanding
how UI mitigates some of these negative effects.
Third, this paper contributes to the literature on the relationship between government
programs and health. Studies of programs that directly provide health insurance and medical
services find that Medicaid expansions for children and pregnant women can lead to increases
in health utilization and improvements in infant health (Currie and Gruber, 1996a,b). Moreover, Medicaid expansions for low-income adults are associated with higher health care utilization, lower out-of-pocket medical expenditures and debt, improved self-reported health,
although there are no short term effects on health conditions such as hypertension or high
cholesterol (Finkelstein et al., 2012; Baicker et al., 2013).
Government programs can affect health not only through the direct provision of insurance
and medical services, but also through income effects. For example, increases in government
welfare and nutrition programs are associated with increased health insurance coverage,
health utilization, and self-reported health (Bitler, Gelbach and Hoynes, 2005; Evans and
Garthwaite, 2014; Hoynes, Page and Stevens, 2011; Hoynes, Schanzenbach and Almond,
2016). While part of this literature analyzes welfare programs due to interest in the effects of
their specific characteristics on the target population, another is interested in these programs
as income shifters, and it is ultimately interested in understanding the relationship between
income and health.11 Given that UI provides temporary income to job losers, my work will
provide further evidence on this relationship.
11

Given the strong, positive correlation between income and health, many researchers are interested in
analyzing its causality, and have used a variety of methodologies to do so. Apart from the methodologies
that exploit welfare program expansions as income shifters, other researchers have exploited lottery winnings,
inheritances, a rise in South African pensions, a social security notch, a drop in income due to crop damage,
and changes in stock market prices (Lindahl, 2005; Meer, Miller and Rosen, 2003; Case, 2004; Snyder and
Evans, 2006; Banerjee et al., 2010; Cotti, Dunn and Tefft, 2013). These studies find varied results, and do
not reach a consensus on the causal relationship between income and health.

8

3
3.1

Data and Descriptive Statistics
Data Sources

I use two main sources of data to analyze the effects of UI on health, each with its relative
strengths, which I describe in detail below.
3.1.1

SIPP

The first main source of data are the 1996, 2001, 2004 and 2008 panels of the Survey of
Income and Program Participation (SIPP),12 maintained by the U.S. Census Bureau. Each
SIPP panel is a longitudinal survey that interviews a sample of representative households at
four month intervals (waves) for 2.5 to 4 consecutive years. Importantly, the SIPP collects
detailed information demographics, labor force participation, earnings, program participation and health insurance coverage, and it collects this information for each month in the
period between interviews, allowing the construction of a detailed monthly (short) panel of
individuals. Jointly, these panels contain information for the 1996–2013 time period.13
To be eligible for the UI program, an individual must lose his job without fault of his
own. Therefore, to create the sample of interest, I identify individuals that lose a job through
no fault of their own, defined as all individuals ages 18-60 who declare that the main reason
for having stopped working for previous employer is: “on layoff”, “employer bankrupt”,
“employer sold business” or “slack work or business conditions”. I observe a total of 17,112
of such involuntary job losses in the 1996–2013 period.14 I then use the month and year
of this job separation to identify the exact month of job loss, and to restrict the sample
to observations 12 months before to 24 months after the job loss. Additionally, I create a
post-displacement indicator that turns to one from this month onwards, as well as indicators
for all (two-month) periods before and after job loss, which allow me to analyze in detail the
differential effects of UI generosity before and after job loss, and how these evolve over time.
I also use the SIPP data to construct the measure of UI generosity. I identify involuntary
job losers as above, and for each these individuals I collect information on quarterly earnings
prior to job loss as well as demographics during the month of job loss. After excluding from
the sample individuals with zero wage earnings, who could be self-employed and therefore
12

I do not use earlier SIPP panels as do not contain information om reason for job separation, which is
fundamental for my analysis.
13
I exclude Maine, North Dakota, South Dakota, Vermont and Wyoming from the 1996 and 2001 panels,
as these panels does not contain unique state identifiers for these states.
14
There are a total of 93,539 job separations in this period, out of which 19,452 are involuntary. Moreover,
if an individual experiences more than one unique episode of involuntary job loss, I use the first episode only,
hence I am left with 17,112 events for the analysis.

9

not eligible for UI, I am left with a sample of 14,238 unique individuals for which I have the
information necessary to calculate UI generosity.
The SIPP data is the ideal dataset for my analysis for a variety of reasons. First, I use its
longitudinal aspect and information of the date of job loss to conduct event study analyses
of the effects on UI, providing visual evidence of the main identification assumption, as
discussed in detail below. Second, the detailed information on reason of job separation allows
me to create a sample of individual likely to be eligible for UI. Third, I use information on UI
receipt to provide evidence of a positive relationship between my measure of UI generosity
and UI receipt, and of the size of the “first-stage”. Fourth, the detailed information on type
of health insurance coverage allow me analyze whether UI affects insurance coverage through
private or public (Medicaid) coverage. The main disadvantage of the SIPP is that I cannot
analyze other health outcomes of interest, such as utilization, self-reported health, and risky
behaviors.15
3.1.2

BRFSS

The second main source of data is the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS),
a telephone based cross-sectional survey that collects information on the major personal
health behaviors associated with the leading causes of death in the U.S., such as tobacco
and alcohol use, diet, hypertension and diabetes. Although it began as a survey of only
fifteen states in 1984, by 1993 the BRFSS had become a nationwide survey with at least
100,000 participants per year. For this reason, in this analysis I will concentrate on the
1993–2015 surveys only.
The survey is composed of core and optional modules, where the core module questionnaires are conducted in every state, and the optional ones are conducted only in the states
that elect to do so. In my analysis I will mainly use data from the core modules, which include
questions regarding health utilization, self-reported health, healthy or risky behaviors, and
health conditions. Moreover, the core modules contain important demographic information,
as well as current employment status and state of residence. The employment status variable
asks responders whether they are currently employed for wages, self-employed, unemployed
for less than one year, unemployed for more than one year, homemakers, students, retired,
or unable to work.
The sample used for the analysis contains individuals who have been unemployed for less
than one year, who are those more likely to be eligible for UI. Unfortunately, the BRFSS does
15

While for a subsample of this data one could merge additional information from the SIPP topical waves
that collect information on a few adult health outcomes, these questionaries are administered only once or
twice in each panel, not allowing for a longitudinal analysis.

10

not separately identify individuals that are unemployed because of job loss, or those who
quit their previous jobs or are new entrants into the labor force. Therefore my unemployed
sample is composed of both UI eligible and non-eligible individuals, which may lead to
measurement error. In addition to those unemployed for less than one year, my sample also
includes individuals who are currently working for wages, who act as a control group in
some of the empirical specifications. Finally, I restrict my sample to individuals aged 18 to
60, similar to the SIPP, and I exclude all individuals with missing demographic information.
After these restrictions, the unemployed and employed samples include 144,993 and 2,678,294
individuals, respectively.
3.1.3

Other sources

To calculate UI weekly benefit eligibility in the SIPP, I use a UI calculator containing data on
state UI laws that I constructed from a variety of sources. The main information was collected
from the Employment and Training Administration, which reports semi-annual information
on state payment schedules. Moreover, I supplemented this data with information from the
calculators used in LaLumia (2013), Chetty (2008) and Gruber (1997), as well as other state
laws and documents. As explained above, the formula used to calculate payments varies
by state and year, and includes the percent of earnings to be replaced by UI, a minimum
and maximum amount of weekly payments, and a minimum amount of earnings required for
eligibility to the program.16 In addition, some states have an additional allowance depending
on the number of children of the unemployed individual, which are incorporated into the
calculations.
Finally, I use data on state economic conditions, safety net per capita expenditures, and
state safety net eligibility in order to control for possible state-level confounders. Appendix
B.3 contains detailed descriptions and sources for these data.

3.2

Descriptive Statistics

Panel (a) of Table (1) contains summary statistics for the main demographics in the SIPP and
BRFSS samples, while Panel (b) contains statistics on the main outcomes of interest. In each
panel, the first column presents information for the main sample of job losers in the SIPP,
observed 12 months before to 24 months after job loss. The second column provides statistics
for the SIPP sample used to calculate UI generosity, hence it contains one observation per
16

The methods to calculate UI eligibility vary considerably across states, and may dependent on annual
earnings, quarterly earnings, or number of hours worked. For more information on state UI laws, see the
Appendix.

11

job loser and at the time of job loss. The last two columns contain summary statistics for
the BRFFS sample, separately for unemployed and employed workers.
Panel (a) shows that involuntary job losers and the unemployed are more likely to be
younger and male relative to the employed. They also tend to be more disadvantaged, as
demonstrated by the higher likelihood of being black and the lower likelihood of having a
college degree and being married. Moreover, column (2) shows that in the year prior to job
loss, average annual earnings of involuntary job losers were $32,357. Panel (b) shows that
average monthly UI in the main SIPP sample, for individuals observed 12 months before to
24 after job loss is substantial, and equal to $145. Moreover, it shows that job losers and
the unemployed fare worse relative to the employed among a wide set of health outcomes,
such as insurance coverage, health utilization, self-reported health, and risky behaviors.
Before moving to the discussion of the empirical strategy, I provide some descriptive
evidence from the SIPP to motivate the main analysis. To do so, for each involuntary job
loser in the 1996-2013 SIPP I calculate a) their simulated replacement rate, the measure of
UI generosity, in the month of job loss, and b) the difference in UI benefits and insurance
coverage in the 24 months after relative to the 12 months before job lob loss.
In Figure (2) I plot the linear relationships between the two, as well as the underlying
data grouped in 20 equal-sized bins. The figure shows striking patterns, with a 10 p.p.
increase in the replacement rate being correlated to a $89 and 1.3 p.p. increase in monthly
UI and health insurance coverage. These relationships contain variation stemming also from
cross-state differences, but my empirical strategy will mainly rely on within state variation.
Hence, I next collapse the individual data to obtain state-year average replacement rates
and differences in UI and insurance upon job loss. Figure (3) plots the long-term changes
in these averages between 2013 and 1996, for each state separately. Again, the results show
that larger increases in UI generosity are correlated with larger increased in UI benefits and
insurance coverage, suggesting a causal role for UI.

4

Empirical Strategy

My overall identification strategy relies on variation in UI generosity within states and across
number of children and time that is driven by changes in state UI laws. In this section,
I first describe how I construct this measure, then I describe the empirical specifications
that I employ for each of my two main data sources, and last I discuss possible threats to
identification.

12

4.1

Simulated UI Replacement Rate

To measure state UI generosity, I use the SIPP sample of all individuals that are observed
in the first month of their unemployment spell between the years 1996–2013. This sample
is therefore a national, fixed sample that does not vary across states and years. I then use
information on pre-unemployment earnings17 and number of children for this fixed sample
to calculate UI eligibility for each individual in each state and in each year. Once I calculate
each individual’s UI weekly payments, I divide these payments by the individual’s weekly
earnings to obtain a simulated replacement rate. Finally, I collapse the data to the year,
state and number of children cell,18 and I calculate average simulated replacement rates for
each cell, RRcst . These measures are all shown in Appendix Figure (B.1)
Simulated measures of program generosity have been widely used in the literature, as
they provide variation that is not due to individual characteristics but states’ legislative
environment only (Currie and Gruber, 1996b; Gruber, 1997; Moffitt and Wilhelm, 1998;
Cohodes et al., 2016).19 This is important in the case of UI, since its payment formula is a
nonlinear function of individual earnings, with higher earnings implying lower replacement
rates due to the maximums in UI levels. Given that higher earnings are correlated with
improved health, using individual replacement rates without fully controlling for earnings
might lead to downward biased estimates of the effect of UI on health.

4.2

SIPP

Given that the SIPP is a longitudinal survey, for which I created a panel of job losers observed
12 months before to 24 months after job loss, I assign each job loser a simulated replacement
rate according to the year, state and number of kids in the month of their job loss. I then
estimate the following specification:
Hicst = αi + β1 RRcst ∗ Licst + β2 Licst + γ1 Xicst + γ2 Zst + νc ∗ Licst +
θt ∗ Licst + δs ∗ Licst + λs ∗ t + icst ,

(1)

where i, c, s, and t represent individual, number of children, state and year, respectively.
H is the health outcome of interest, RR is the simulated replacement rate, and L is an
indicator equal to 1 in the 24 months after job loss. X includes demographic controls, such
as indicators for age, marital status, gender, race, ethnicity, education and calendar month of
interview, while Z includes cubic polynomials for the state unemployment rate and the state
17

Earnings are adjusted for inflation.
The number of children variable takes the value of 4 for individuals with 4 or more children.
19
An additional benefit of a simulated instrument is that it provides one unique measure of program
generosity that includes all the features of state policies.
18

13

average annual wage.20 I also include individual fixed effects αi , as well as fixed effects νc , θt ,
δs , all three allowed to differ before and after job loss, to control for permanent differences
in outcomes across years, states and number of children, separately for individuals prior and
after job loss. Finally, I include λs ∗ t, which controls for state-specific linear time trends.
All regressions are weighted using sampling weights, and the standard errors are clustered
at the state level.
In this model, β1 is the main coefficient of interest, representing the differential effect of
UI after job loss, when the individual is eligible for UI. Importantly, given that I include
individual effects, the analysis exploits within-individual variation in health.21 Moreover,
after controlling for νc ∗ L, θt ∗ L and δs ∗ L, the remaining major sources of variation
in UI generosity that I use for identification are differences in UI generosity within states
across number of children, and within states over time. Thus one of the main identification
assumptions is that these differences in state UI generosity are not correlated with other
factors that affect individual changes in health outcomes upon job loss.
Note that the longitudinal aspect of the data also allows for a more flexible, and convincing, model relative to Equation (1). For all baseline results, I estimate event study
analyses similar to Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1993) by creating dummy variables for
each month in the unemployment spell, and interacting these dummies with the replacement
rate, with all other aspects of the models identical to Equation (1). This specification allows
me to estimate the differential impacts of UI in each month prior and after job loss, providing
compelling evidence of the absence of differential pre-trends, the other main identification
assumption in the analysis.

4.3

BRFSS

The BRFSS sample contains repeated cross sectional observations of unemployed and working individuals. Thus, I assign simulated replacement rates according to the year, state and
number of children at the time of observation. I start by estimating the following state and
year fixed effects model for the sample of unemployed individuals only:
Hicst = β0 + β1 RRcst + γ1 Xicst + γ2 Zst + νc + θt + δs + λs ∗ t + icst ,

(2)

where all variables are identified as in equation (1). Also in this model, β1 is the main
coefficient of interest, as it represents the average effect of UI among unemployment individ20
If states change UI laws because of low UI funds or adverse economic conditions, flexibly controlling for
such conditions may be important. Below I explain this in detail.
21
My specification does not include a main effect on RRcst since this is absorbed by the individual fixed
effects.

14

uals. This analysis thus exploits across state, year and number of children variation in the
health of the unemployed, with the main assumption being that changes in state UI laws are
uncorrelated with other state health shocks.
Second, I employ a triple differences methodology, which uses the sample of employed
individuals as a control group for the unemployed. This relies on the assumption that
the employed are not affected by UI laws, and that the two groups have similar trends in
health. By adding this group of individuals I can estimate triple differences regressions of
the following form:
Hicst = β0 + β1 RRcst + β2 RRcst ∗ Uicst + β3 Uicst + γ1 Xicst + γ2 Zst +
νc ∗ Uicst + θt ∗ Uicst + δs ∗ Uicst + λs ∗ t + icst ,

(3)

where U is an indicator that is equal to 1 if the individual is currently unemployed, and 0
if he is working. νc ∗ U , θt ∗ U and δs ∗ U represent differential number of children, state
and year fixed effects for the unemployed and the employed groups. In this model the effect
of UI is captured by β2 , which represents the differential effect of UI for the unemployed
compared to the employed. These triple differences also allow for the inclusion of state-byyear-by-number of children fixed effects, which I include in parts of analyses to better absorb
health shocks that are common to the two groups.
The triple differences model has some benefits and drawbacks relative to the state and
year fixed effects model. The inclusion of the employed allows me to control for state level
health shocks and differences in health by number of children across states that affect the
employed and unemployed equally. Moreover, the main identification assumption in these
triple differences models is that changes in state UI laws are uncorrelated with state level
shocks that affect the unemployed differentially from the employed. The assumption in this
model is indeed weaker than that of the state and year fixed effects one.
However, there is also a potential drawback to this method. If employed individuals are
partially treated by UI, the estimated effects obtained with a triple differences model will
lead to effects that are biased towards zero. Employed individuals may be treated by UI
through different channels. First, employed individuals could be receiving UI through other
members of the household who could be unemployed. Second, the stress of the employed
could be reduced because of higher UI generosity even if they do not receive UI payments, as
larger UI generosity may reduce the uncertainty and stress associated with the possibility of
becoming unemployed. Third, larger UI payments could lead to longer job search and better
job quality, which could improve health either through direct provision of health insurance
coverage or through increased wages (Nekoei and Weber, 2017).

15

4.4

Threats to Identification

Both SIPP and BRFSS empirical analyses rely on the assumption that differences in UI
generosity within states are not correlated with other factors that affect changes in health
status and utilization upon job loss. For example, one could worry that the relationship
between health and number of children is different across states, and correlated to differences
in state UI generosity across number of children.22 Not only does this story not seem very
plausible, but also note that the BRFSS triple difference analysis controls for such differences.
A second possible worry could be that state legislators change UI generosity during
periods of recessions, which also affect individual health. To rule out this type of concern, I
test whether UI generosity is correlated to state-level economics conditions. I use a state and
year panel to estimate a model where the dependent variable is RRst ,23 the measure of UI
generosity, and the independent variables are measures of state economic conditions, such as
unemployment rates, average weekly wages and employment rates, all allowed to take cubic
forms. All regressions include state and year fixed effects as well as state specific linear time
trends,24 and these results are shown in Table (2).
Overall, the results suggest no significant relationship between these economic conditions
and UI generosity. For example, column (1) shows that a 1 p.p. increase in the unemployment
rate is estimated to lead to a statistically insignificant 0.1 p.p. decrease in the simulated
replacement rate. sAppendix C contains a more thorough discussion, and further evidence,
on the relationship between state economic conditions and UI generosity. In summary, the
only evidence I find for such relationship is that lagged economic conditions are correlated
with UI laws, implying that state legislators might decrease UI generosity if the state just
went through a downturn and the trust fund balances are low. In sensitivity checks, I will
show that flexibly controlling for lagged economic conditions does not affect the results.
One could also be worried that changes in UI generosity occur contemporaneously to
changes in eligibility for other safety net program, in which case β1 would not capture the
effect of UI only. Hence I next analyze the relationship between state UI generosity and
other state-level policies and expenditures, with results shown in Panels (a) and (b) of Table
(3), respectively. These results suggest that, after controlling for the vector Zst , state and
year fixed effects and state specific linear time trends, UI replacement rates are exogenous
to the size and generosity of the state safety net. The only statistically significant result
22

In sensitivity analysis I will show that adding state-by-number of children-by job loser fixed effects does
not affect the SIPP estimates.
23
RRst is a (state by year) weighted average of the simulated replacement rate RRcst .
24
Hsu, Matsa and Melzer (2018) conduct similar tests and confirm that these laws are not correlated to
states’ current UI trust fund balances, state unemployment rates, average earnings, GDP growth, or home
price growth.

16

is that UI generosity is correlated to higher AFDC/TANF maximum benefits, although
it is not correlated to AFDC/TANF spending. Importantly, and as expected, higher UI
replacement rates are correlated with higher maximum level of UI benefits and higher UI
spending. Lastly, as UI generosity varies also across the number of children, Appendix C
provides further analyses of the relationship between UI and state economic conditions and
spending at the state-year-number of children level. These results are similar to the ones at
the state-year level only.
Another possible threat to identification may be due to selection, since the BRFSS analysis is cross-sectional in nature, and I can only identify individuals that are employed or
unemployed at the time of the interview. In fact, even if state UI laws are exogenous, the
sample of the unemployed may be endogenous to UI, as prior literature has shown that
higher UI benefits lead to longer unemployment spells (Katz and Meyer, 1990; Farber and
Valletta, 2011; Rothstein, 2011; Kroft and Notowidigdo, 2016). One might then worry that
changes in sample composition might be driving the results. The results from the SIPP
analysis, however, greatly alleviate these concerns, as the individual fixed effects control for
unobserved preferences for health insurance coverage. Nevertheless, I will adress this issue
further in Section 5.3.

5
5.1
5.1.1

Results
SIPP Analysis
Main Effects

Figure (4) presents coefficients from the event study analysis estimating the effect of UI
generosity on monthly UI benefits received, the “first-stage” relationship. Reassuringly, I
find zero effects of UI prior to job loss, and an immediate increase in UI benefits upon job
loss. This increase is smaller in the first two months, as applying and obtaining UI benefits
may not be immediate, and largest in months 3 to 6 since job loss. Note that after month
6, the effect of UI generosity decreases, as job losers find new employment and UI benefits
start to expire.
Panel (a) of Figure (5) contains event study results when analyzing the likelihood of
health insurance coverage, and shows that higher UI generosity does not affect insurance
coverage prior to job loss, but leads to a significant increase in insurance after job loss.
Panels (b) and (c) show that these results are mainly driven by an increase in private health
insurance, and not by Medicare/Medicaid. Importantly, none of the outcomes display trends
prior to job loss, satisfying one of the major assumptions in these types of analyses.
17

Table (4) contains the results obtained when estimating the average effect of UI after
job loss, as in Equation (1). I estimate that 10 p.p. increase in the replacement rate leads
to statistically significant $45, 2.1 p.p. and 1.5 p.p. increases in monthly UI benefits, any
health insurance coverage, and private insurance coverage, respectively, and to a statistically
insignificant 0.8 p.p. increase in public insurance. Given that in my sample the standard
deviation of the UI replacement rate is 5 percentage points and that average insurance
coverage is 64 percent, my results imply that a 1 standard deviation increase in UI generosity
leads to a 1 p.p. (or 1.6 percent) increase in health insurance coverage.
To put these results into perspective, it is useful to calculate the propensity to consume
health insurance out of UI. Comprehensive data on premium prices for non-group – not
employer nor government provided - health insurance is scarce. I use information from
Kaiser Family Foundation reports (KFF, 2004, 2010) to estimate that average insurance
premiums cost between $299 and $531 a month.25 This implies that a $100 increase in
monthly UI receipt leads to an increase in health insurance spending of $15-24. Another
useful exercise is to compare the health insurance effects of UI to those from another income
transfer program, the EITC. Hoynes, Miller and Simon (2015) estimate that the 1993 EITC
expansion led to $1000 and 3.6 p.p. increase in (annual) EITC and health insurance coverage,
effects of similar magnitude to the ones I estimate for UI.
5.1.2

Specification Checks

Panels (a) and (b) of Table (5) show results from specification checks for the two main
SIPP outcomes. In column (1) I present the baseline results shown in Table (4), and in
column (2) I show that excluding individual fixed effects does not significantly affect the
estimates. In columns (3) and (4) I omit state-specific linear time trends and controls for
economic conditions, respectively. In column (5) I show results from regressions that include
additional, flexible controls for lagged economic conditions,26 and in column (6) I include as
additional controls the state safety net generosity variables contained in Panel (a) of Table
(3). These results suggest that the estimated effects are not sensitive to the inclusion or
25

KFF (2004) contains information from 2003 data from eHealthInsurance.com, the largest vendor of nongroup insurance in the period, and shows that the average monthly premium for this type of insurance was
$192 and $358 (2015$) for individual and family plans, respectively. (KFF, 2010), a 2010 survey of people
who purchase their own insurance, shows that self-reported individual and family monthly premiums average
$327 and $643, respectively. Given that 35.5% of my sample is single and childless, I assume they would
purchase individual plans, while the remaining job losers would buy family plans. Hence, I calculate the
average monthly plan to cost between $299 and $531. Note that these insurance costs are substantially lower
then total premiums for employer provided insurance, which likely reflects the fact that non-group insurance
may provide lower benefits (KFF, 2004).
26
Specifically, I include cubic polynomials for the 1 and 2-year lags of both the state unemployment rate
and net UI reserves.

18

exclusion of state-level controls.
In column (7) I test the importance of allowing the state, year and number of children
fixed effects to differ prior and after job loss. While the qualitative results remain the same,
omitting these controls changes the magnitude of the effects. Given the obvious differences
in UI receipt between job losers and the employed, who are not eligible for UI, fixed effects
that do now allow for differential effects by employment status may not be able to fully
capture fixed state differences in UI receipt, suggesting that these types of controls may be
fundamental.
In columns (8) to (11) I show the sensitivity of the results to including children-by-yearby-job loss, children-by-state-by-job loss and state-by-year-by-job loss fixed effects, which
absorb various portions of the overall variation in UI generosity. The results show that
including the first two sets of fixed effects separately does not significantly affect the results,
but that including state-by-year-by-job loss fixed effects, which absorb all variation within
states over time, reduces the coefficient on UI, rendering it statistically insignificant although
still positive. When I include all three sets of fixed effects jointly, in the last column, the
coefficient on health insurance coverage loses statistical significance, suggesting that these
fixed effects might absorb too much of the overall variation in UI. Reassuringly, the coefficient
remains of a similar magnitude as the baseline.
Given that Appendix Figure (B.1) shows that UI generosity increased significantly during
the Great Recession, due to both national and state-level policies, one might worry that this
period is spuriously driving all the results. Appendix Table (A.1) provides evidence against
this threat, as it shows that the baseline results are not sensitive to dropping years 2008–2010
from the analysis.
Next, I conduct placebo tests where I analyze the effects of UI individuals that experience
a job separation, but who are less likely to be eligible for UI. Columns (1) and (2) contain
the baseline results for involuntary job losers. In the next two columns, I present results
when analyzing individuals that quit their job to start a new employment. Among this set
of individuals, higher UI generosity leads to small, negative and statistically insignificant
effects on UI receipt and health insurance coverage after the job separation. In the last two
columns I include all individuals that experience a job separation during the SIPP panel,
but whose separation is not due to not an involuntary job loss nor due to quitting to take
another job.27 Again, higher UI generosity does not lead to statistically significant increases
in UI receipt nor health insurance.
27

Reasons for these separations are varied, for example retirement, childcare or family obligations, illness
and injury, schooling, being fired, etc.

19

5.2
5.2.1

BRFSS Analysis
Main Effects

The results in the prior subsections provide causal evidence that UI leads to increased health
insurance coverage among job losers, and rule out a variety of possible threats to identification. Given my interest in understanding also whether UI affects utilization and other
health outcomes, for the remainder of the analysis I will focus on the results obtained with
the BRFSS data.
I present the results for health insurance coverage and health utilization in Table (7).
This table contains three separate panels. In Panel (a) I present the results obtained when
estimating the state and year fixed effects model on the unemployed sample. Panel (b)
displays the results obtained with the triple differences estimation strategy. In this set of
results, the coefficient on the replacement rate represents the effect of UI on the employed,
while the coefficient on the interaction between the replacement rate and the unemployed
indicator captures the differential effect of the replacement rate on the unemployed. Finally,
Panel (c) shows the results obtained when estimating triple differences models that include
state-by-year-by-number of children fixed effects, which absorb the main replacement rate
effect.
In column (1) of Table (7) I analyze whether UI generosity affects the likelihood of
(any) health insurance coverage. Panel (a) shows that a 10 p.p. increase in the simulated
replacement rate leads to a statistically significant 3.3 p.p. increase in the likelihood of
having insurance. This effect is larger in size that the one estimate with the SIPP, but
within its confidence interval. Panels (b) shows a small but statistically significant effect of
UI on the health insurance of employed individuals, and a large, significant differential effect
on the unemployed. As mentioned previously, it is plausible that the employed might be
affected by UI generosity through multiple channels. If the employed are indeed partially
treated by UI, then the coefficients on the interaction between the replacement rate and
the unemployed are a lower bound of the effect of UI. Lastly, Panel (c) shows that adding
state-by-year-by-number of children fixed effects does not alter the estimated effects on the
unemployed, implying that changes in UI laws are not correlated to average state-level health
shocks.
Column (2) shows results for the effect of UI on the likelihood of having a routine checkup
in the last year. The results are consistent across the three panels and show that a 10 p.p.
increase in the replacement rate leads to around 3.4 p.p. increases in the likelihood of having
a routine checkup. Again, adding state-by-year-by-number of children fixed effects does not
greatly affect the estimates. The results obtained when analyzing the effect of UI on the

20

probability of affording a doctor when needed, which I present in column (3), are instead
statistically insignificant.
I also analyze whether higher UI payments lead to increased clinical breast exams (CBE),
which are physicals exams performed during routine medical checkups that can improve the
chance of early breast cancer detection. The BRFSS contains information on whether the
respondent ever had a breast exam and whether she had one in the last year. I expected
increased routine checkups in the last year to also increase breast cancer screenings in the
same period. On the other hand, I do not expect UI to have a strong effect on the likelihood
of ever having a CBE, and this can act as a placebo test. Indeed, the results show that a 10
p.p. increase in the replacement rate leads to a 5 p.p. increase in the probability of having
a CBE in the last year and to a small, statistically insignificant effect on the probability of
ever having such an exam.
In Table (8) I present the results for self-reported health. The first variable of interest
is general health status, which I analyze as a continuous variable (1–5), as an indicator
for being in good, very good or excellent health, or as an indicator for being in excellent
health. In addition, I analyze the number of days in which the respondent felt physically
or mentally healthy. For this analysis I use as outcomes both the number of days on which
the respondent felt healthy, and whether they were healthy during the whole month. It is
important to note that while subjective, measures of self-reported health are good predictors
of mortality (Idler and Benyamini, 1997; DeSalvo et al., 2006).
The estimated effects are imprecisely estimated, with effects on self-reported health that
are generally statistically significant at the 10 percent level. For example, the results in
Panel (c) suggest that higher UI generosity leads to statistically significant 0.023 increase in
general health and a marginally significant 0.85 p.p. increase in the likelihood of being in
excellent health. These results are in in line with (Cylus, Glymour and Avendano, 2015),
who find that higher state UI maximum payments lead to improved self-reported health for
those experiencing job loss. The results obtained when analyzing the number of days in
which the respondent felt physically or mentally healthy are mixed, with some evidence of
improved physical health among the unemployed.
Appendix Table (A.2) presents results obtained when analyzing risky behaviors such as
BMI, smoking, alcohol consumption, and pregnancies. These results suggest that higher UI
generosity does not lead to significant changes in the likelihood of obesity (defined as having
BMI of 25 or larger), smoking behavior or pregnancy. The only significant effect is on binge
drinking, defined as the number of days in a month having at least 5 drinks, where I estimate
that a 10 p.p. increase in UI generosity leads to a 0.17 increase in the number of days the
unemployed binge drink.
21

I also analyze a variety of other health outcomes contained in the BRFFS, such as health
conditions (high blood pressure, high cholesterol and diabetes), and female cancer prevention
(mammographies). The analysis of these outcomes does not generally yield significant results,
therefore I do not presents most of those results here. There are two explanation for these
results. First, the zero results could be driven by real null effects of the program. Second,
these health effects could be impossible to detect in the short-run, as these health conditions
may need a longer time to develop. Importantly, my findings are similar to (Finkelstein
et al., 2012), who find that in the short-run providing free Medicaid to low-income adults
increases their health utilization and self-reported health, but it does not lead to short-term
improvements in health conditions.
5.2.2

Heterogeneity Analyses

Next, I explore whether the estimated effects on health insurance, utilization and selfreported health found in the BRFSS are differential across business cycles. East and Kuka
(2015) provide evidence that UI’s consumption smoothing effects are concentrated among
individuals unemployed during the worst local economic conditions. Possible explanations
for this finding are that UI payments are extended during periods of recessions and that
UI take-up rates increase with the unemployment rate, which imply that during recessions
increases in UI generosity are experienced for more months and among more individuals.
These mechanisms may also generate similar differential effects across cycles on health. If
take-up is higher, or the duration of payments is greater, the total amount of income received increases, which could potentially compound the income effects. In addition, since
the bad state of the economy may lead to more uncertainty and higher stress levels for those
experiencing job loss, UI may play an even larger role in attenuating these negative effects.
In order to explore differential effects across cycles, I create two dummy variables that
indicate whether the respondent lives in a state and year with an above or below median average state unemployment rate.28 I interact these indicators with the simulated replacement
rate. Panels (a) and (b) of Table (9) show these results for the unemployed sample and the
triple differences sample, respectively.
These findings suggest that indeed UI leads to larger beneficial effects on all outcomes
of interest during periods of high unemployment rates compared to periods with low unemployment rates, although these coefficients are not always statistically significantly different
from each other (as shown by the p-values obtained from testing the equality of the two coefficients). Interestingly, the effects on self-reported health are statistically significant during
28

The median unemployment rate is created using state-year observations and weighting by the state
population. For the 1993–2015 period, the median unemployment rate is 5.5 p.p.s.

22

periods of high unemployment rates, when a 10 p.p. increase in UI generosity is estimated
to lead to a 1-1.6 p.p. increase in the likelihood of feeling in excellent general health.
In Table (A.3) I analyze whether the results are heterogenous across demographic groups,
each panel containing results for one of the main health outcomes of interest. The results on
health utilization show generally similar effects of UI generosity across gender and marital
status, as well as smaller effects for unemployed individuals that have a college degree, have
children, or live in states that are below median in their Medicaid generosity. Since UI is
included as income in the calculation of Medicaid eligibility, UI may crowd-out Medicaid in
states that do not have generous Medicaid programs. On the other hand, the effect of UI on
self-reported health status is larger among individuals living in the least generous Medicaid
states.29

5.3

Issues of Selection

One possible concern with my identification strategy is that, even if state UI laws are exogenous to the health status of the state population, the sample of the unemployed in the
BRFSS may be endogenous to such laws. For example, prior literature has shown that
higher UI payments levels and UI extensions are associated with a decrease in job search
and a decrease in the rate of unemployment exit (Katz and Meyer, 1990; Farber and Valletta, 2011; Rothstein, 2011; Kroft and Notowidigdo, 2016). If this moral hazard effect is
correlated with health, the measured effects of UI on health may be biased by changes in
sample composition. Note, however,s that this concern is not relevant for the SIPP analyses,
as they include individual fixed effects and thus control for fixed individual characteristics
and health.
For sample selection to bias the BRFSS estimates, it must be correlated with unobserved characteristics that also affect health. Because I cannot explicitly test for changes
in unobserved characteristics, I analyze whether the observed characteristics of my BRFSS
(and SIPP) samples are changing with UI generosity. The characteristics that I analyze
are number of individuals in each state-year-number of children cell, as well as individual
characteristics such as gender, age, education, and race. Panels (a) and (b) of Table (10) contain results for unemployed and employed individuals in the BRFSS, and Panel (c) contains
results for job losers in the SIPP. The results show that UI generosity is not significantly correlated with the observed characteristics of the samples, as only two coefficients out of 24 are
statistically significant. This suggests that UI generosity might also not be correlated with
unobserved characteristics. Interestingly, a 10 p.p. increase in the simulated replacement
29

These results are only suggestive, and not causal, as states that are more or less generous in Medicaid
are different among many other dimensions.

23

rate is associated with a statistically significant 1.8 p.p. decrease in probability of being
a female among the unemployed. This effect is not surprising, as males traditionally have
higher UI participation rates, and therefore are more likely to respond to changes in UI.30

6

Conclusion

The depth of the Great Recession combined with the legislated expansions to the Unemployment Insurance (UI) program resulted in UI being the largest safety net program during this
period. Despite the importance of this program as part of the U.S. safety net, little is known
about its benefits and whether the program mitigates some of the negative effects of job
loss. Given that job loss has been associated with decreased health and increased mortality,
this paper analyzes whether UI leads to improved health among unemployed individuals. I
expect these health effects to be driven by several mechanisms: increased income, reduced
economic uncertainty and stress, and changes in time use.
To empirically estimate these effects, I use data from both the 1996–2008 panels of
the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and the 1993–2015 Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). The empirical strategy exploits exogenous yearly
variation in state UI laws that are primarily driven by changes in the nonlinearity of payments
with respect to earnings. As a measure of UI generosity, I use a fixed, national sample from
the SIPP to calculate state simulated average generosity, which depend only on the UI laws
and not on the characteristics of the unemployed. The results show that higher UI generosity
is associated with increased UI benefits, health insurance coverage and health utilization.
These effects are stronger during recessions, when job uncertainly and its related stress are
higher. Moreover, during recessions UI also leads to improved self-reported general health
status. Lastly, these results are robust to a variety of specification checks conducted with
both the BRFSS and the SIPP.
My findings suggests that UI plays an important role in mitigating some of the negative
health effects of job loss. Such improvements in health utilization and self-reported health
are important as they may lead to significant positive health externalities on the family and
the neighborhood, as well as decreased financial externalities on hospitals and insurers who
subsidize the emergency hospital visits of the uninsured. Moreover, the results suggest that
the Baily-Chetty canonical model for optimal UI (Chetty, 2006), which ignores externalities,
may underestimate the optimal level of UI benefits.
30

In heterogeneity analyses, I analyzed the differential effects of UI by gender, and the results showed that
the effects are similar across males and females.

24

References
Baicker, Katherine, Sarah L Taubman, Heidi L Allen, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan H Gruber,
Joseph P Newhouse, Eric C Schneider, Bill J Wright, Alan M Zaslavsky, and Amy N
Finkelstein. 2013. “The Oregon experiment? Effects of Medicaid on clinical outcomes.”
New England Journal of Medicine, 368(18): 1713–1722.
Baily, Martin Neil. 1978. “Some aspects of optimal unemployment insurance.” Journal of
Public Economics, 10(3): 379–402.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and Tim Watts. 2010. “Long-run health
impacts of income shocks: wine and phylloxera in nineteenth-century France.” The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 92(4): 714–728.
Barr, Andrew, and Sarah Turner. 2015. “Out of work and into school: Labor market policies
and college enrollment during the Great Recession.” Journal of Public Economics, 124: 63–
73.
Bitler, Marianne, and Hilary Hoynes. 2016. “The More Things Change, the More They
Stay the Same? The Safety Net and Poverty in the Great Recession.” Journal of Labor
Economics, 34(S1): S403–S444.
Bitler, Marianne P, and Hilary W Hoynes. 2010. “The State of the Social Safety Net in the
Post–Welfare Reform Era.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Bitler, Marianne P, Jonah B Gelbach, and Hilary W Hoynes. 2005. “Welfare reform and
health.” Journal of Human Resources, 40(2): 309–334.
Black, Sandra E, Paul J Devereux, and Kjell G Salvanes. 2015. “Losing heart? The effect of
job displacement on health.” ILR Review, 68(4): 833–861.
Brown, David. 2010. “Maintaining Health Insurance Coverage for the Unemployed: the Role
of Unemployment Insurance.”
Browning, Martin, and Eskil Heinesen. 2012. “Effect of job loss due to plant closure on
mortality and hospitalization.” Journal of Health Economics, 31(4): 599–616.
Browning, Martin, and Thomas F Crossley. 2001. “Unemployment insurance Benefit Levels
and Consumption Changes.” Journal of Public Economics, 80(1): 1–23.
Card, David, and Phillip B Levine. 2000. “Extended benefits and the duration of UI spells:
evidence from the New Jersey extended benefit program.” Journal of Public economics,
78(1): 107–138.
Card, David, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber. 2007. “Cash-on-hand and Competing Models
of Intertemporal Behavior: New Evidence from the Labor Market.” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 122(4): 1511–1560.
Case, Anne. 2004. “Does money protect health status? Evidence from South African pensions.” In Perspectives on the Economics of Aging. 287–312. University of Chicago Press.
25

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, and Melvin Stephens. 2004. “Disability, job displacement and divorce.”
Journal of Labor Economics, 22(2): 489–522.
Chetty, Raj. 2006. “A general formula for the optimal level of social insurance.” Journal of
Public Economics, 90(10): 1879–1901.
Chetty, Raj. 2008. “Moral Hazard versus Liquidity and Optimal Unemployment Insurance.”
Journal of Political Economy, 116(2): 173–234.
Classen, Timothy J, and Richard A Dunn. 2012. “The effect of job loss and unemployment duration on suicide risk in the United States: a new look using mass-layoffs and
unemployment duration.” Health Economics, 21(3): 338–350.
Cohodes, Sarah R, Daniel S Grossman, Samuel A Kleiner, and Michael F Lovenheim. 2016.
“The effect of child health insurance access on schooling: Evidence from public insurance
expansions.” Journal of Human Resources, 51(3): 727–759.
Cotti, Chad, Richard Dunn, and Nathan Tefft. 2013. “The Dow is killing me: risky health
behaviors and the stock market.” Social Science Research Network, 25.
Cullen, Julie Berry, and Jonathan Gruber. 2000. “Does Unemployment Insurance Crowd out
Spousal Labor Supply?” Journal of Labor Economics, 18(3): 546–572.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996a. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of
Medical Care, and Child Health.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2): 431–466.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996b. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women.” Journal of Political Economy,
1263–1296.
Cylus, Jonathan, M Maria Glymour, and Mauricio Avendano. 2014. “Do generous unemployment benefit programs reduce suicide rates? A state fixed-effect analysis covering
1968–2008.” American journal of epidemiology, kwu106.
Cylus, Jonathan, M Maria Glymour, and Mauricio Avendano. 2015. “Health Effects of Unemployment Benefit Program Generosity.” American journal of public health, 105(2): 317–
323.
Davis, Steven J, and Till Von Wachter. 2011. “Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 43(2 (Fall)): 1–72.
Deb, Partha, William T Gallo, Padmaja Ayyagari, Jason M Fletcher, and Jody L Sindelar.
2011. “The effect of job loss on overweight and drinking.” Journal of health economics,
30(2): 317–327.
DeSalvo, Karen B, Nicole Bloser, Kristi Reynolds, Jiang He, and Paul Muntner. 2006. “Mortality Prediction with a Single General Self-Rated Health Question.” Journal of general
internal medicine, 21(3): 267–275.

26

East, Chloe N, and Elira Kuka. 2015. “Reexamining the consumption smoothing benefits of
Unemployment Insurance.” Journal of Public Economics, 132: 32–50.
Eliason, Marcus. 2012. “Lost jobs, broken marriages.” Journal of Population Economics,
25(4): 1365–1397.
Eliason, Marcus, and Donald Storrie. 2009. “Does job loss shorten life?” Journal of Human
Resources, 44(2): 277–302.
Engen, Eric M, and Jonathan Gruber. 2001. “Unemployment insurance and precautionary
saving.” Journal of monetary Economics, 47(3): 545–579.
Evans, William N, and Craig Garthwaite. 2014. “Giving Mom a Break: The Impact of
Higher EITC Payments on Maternal Health.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 6: 2258–290.
Farber, Henry S, and Robert Valletta. 2011. “Extended Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Duration in the Great Recession: The US Experience.” manuscript June,
24.
Feenberg, Daniel, and Elisabeth Coutts. 1993. “An introduction to the TAXSIM model.”
Journal of Policy Analysis and management, 12(1): 189–194.
Finkelstein, Amy, Neale Mahoney, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2017. “What Does (Formal)
Health Insurance Do, and For Whom?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 23718.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P
Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, et al. 2012. “The Oregon Health Insurance
Experiment: Evidence from the First Year*.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
127(3): 1057–1106.
Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross, and Matthew J Notowidigdo. 2018. “Hospitals as insurers of
last resort.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10(1): 1–39.
Gruber, Jonathan. 1997. “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance.” The American Economic Review, 87(1): pp. 192–205.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Brigitte C Madrian. 1997. “Employment separation and health insurance coverage.” Journal of Public Economics, 66(3): 349–382.
Hagedorn, Marcus, Fatih Karahan, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman. 2013. “Unemployment Benefits and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role of Macro Effects.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19499.
Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond. 2016. “Long-run impacts of childhood access to the safety net.” The American Economic Review, 106(4): 903–
934.

27

Hoynes, Hilary, Doug Miller, and David Simon. 2015. “Income, the earned income tax credit,
and infant health.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1): 172–211.
Hoynes, Hilary, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2011. “Can targeted transfers improve
birth outcomes?: Evidence from the introduction of the WIC program.” Journal of Public
Economics, 95(7): 813–827.
Hoynes, Hilary W, and Erzo FP Luttmer. 2011. “The insurance value of state tax-andtransfer programs.” Journal of Public Economics, 95(11): 1466–1484.
Hsu, Joanne W, David A Matsa, and Brian T Melzer. 2018. “Unemployment insurance as a
housing market stabilizer.” American Economic Review, 108(1): 49–81.
Idler, Ellen L, and Yael Benyamini. 1997. “Self-rated health and mortality: a review of
twenty-seven community studies.” Journal of health and social behavior, 21–37.
Jacobson, Louis S, Robert J LaLonde, and Daniel G Sullivan. 1993. “Earnings Losses of
Displaced Workers.” The American Economic Review, 685–709.
Katz, Lawrence F, and Bruce D Meyer. 1990. “The Impact of the Potential Duration of
Unemployment Benefits on the Duration of Unemployment.” Journal of Public Economics,
41(1): 45–72.
KFF. 2004. “Update on Individual Health Insurance.” Kaiser Family Foundation/eHealthInsurance 7133-02.
KFF. 2010. “Survey of People Who Purchase Their Own Insurance.” Kaiser Family Foundation 8077-R.
Kroft, Kory, and Matthew J Notowidigdo. 2016. “Should unemployment insurance vary
with the unemployment rate? Theory and evidence.” The Review of Economic Studies,
83(3): 1092–1124.
Kuhn, Andreas, Rafael Lalive, and Josef Zweimüller. 2009. “The public health costs of job
loss.” Journal of Health Economics, 28(6): 1099–1115.
Lalive, Rafael, Camille Landais, and Josef Zweimüller. 2015. “Market externalities of
large unemployment insurance extension programs.” The American Economic Review,
105(12): 3564–3596.
Lalive, Rafael, Jan Van Ours, and Josef Zweimüller. 2006. “How Changes in Financial
Incentives Affect the Duration of Unemployment.” The Review of Economic Studies,
73(4): 1009–1038.
LaLumia, Sara. 2013. “The EITC, Tax Refunds, and Unemployment Spells.” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(2): 188–221.
Landais, Camille, Pascal Michaillat, and Emmanuel Saez. 2010. “Optimal Unemployment
Insurance Over the Business Cycle.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
28

Lindahl, Mikael. 2005. “Estimating the effect of income on health and mortality using lottery prizes as an exogenous source of variation in income.” Journal of Human Resources,
40(1): 144–168.
Lindo, Jason M. 2010. “Are children really inferior goods? Evidence from displacementdriven income shocks.” Journal of Human Resources, 45(2): 301–327.
Lindo, Jason M. 2011. “Parental job loss and infant health.” Journal of Health Economics,
30(5): 869 – 879.
Marcus, Jan. 2013. “The effect of unemployment on the mental health of spouses–Evidence
from plant closures in Germany.” Journal of health economics, 32(3): 546–558.
Meer, Jonathan, Douglas L Miller, and Harvey S Rosen. 2003. “Exploring the health–wealth
nexus.” Journal of health economics, 22(5): 713–730.
Meyer, Bruce D. 1990. “Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells.” Econometrica,
58(4): 757–782.
Moffitt, Robert A., and Mark Wilhelm. 1998. “Taxation and the Labor Supply: Decisions
of the Affluent.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 6621.
Nekoei, Arash, and Andrea Weber. 2017. “Does Extending Unemployment Benefits Improve
Job Quality?” The American Economic Review, 107(2): 527–561.
Oreopoulos, Philip, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2008. “The intergenerational
effects of worker displacement.” Journal of Labor Economics, 26(3): 455–000.
Rege, Mari, Kjetil Telle, and Mark Votruba. 2011. “Parental job loss and children’s school
performance.” The Review of Economic Studies, 78(4): 1462–1489.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2011. “Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Fall 2011, 143.
Ruhm, Christopher. 2000. “Are Recessions Good For Your Health?” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 115(2): 617–650.
Schaller, Jessamyn, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2015. “Short-run effects of job loss on health
conditions, health insurance, and health care utilization.” Journal of health economics,
43: 190–203.
Schmieder, Johannes F, Till Von Wachter, and Stefan Bender. 2012. “The Effects of Extended
Unemployment Insurance over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Regression Discontinuity Estimates over 20 Years.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2): 701–752.
Smith, Daniel L, and Jeffrey B Wenger. 2013. “State unemployment insurance trust solvency
and benefit generosity.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 32(3): 536–553.
Snyder, Stephen E, and William N Evans. 2006. “The effect of income on mortality: evidence
from the social security notch.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3): 482–495.
29

Stephens, Melvin. 2002. “Worker Displacement and the Added Worker Effect.” Journal of
Labor Economics, 20(3): 504–537.
Stevens, Ann Huff. 1997. “Persistent Effects of Job Displacement: The Importance of Multiple Job Losses.” Journal of Labor Economics, 165–188.
Stevens, Ann Huff, and Jessamyn Schaller. 2011. “Short-run effects of parental job loss on
children’s academic achievement.” Economics of Education Review, 30(2): 289–299.
Sullivan, Daniel, and Till Von Wachter. 2009. “Job displacement and mortality: An analysis
using administrative data.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3): 1265–1306.
Yakusheva, Olga, Kandice A Kapinos, and Daniel Eisenberg. 2014. “Estimating Heterogeneous and Hierarchical Peer Effects on Body Weight Using Roommate Assignments as a
Natural Experiment.” Journal of Human Resources, 49(1): 234–261.

30

Figure 1: Variation in UI Generosity
(a) Simulated Replacement Rates in 1993

(.51,.54]
(.44,.46]
(.38,.4]

(.48,.51]
(.42,.44]
(.36,.38]

(.46,.48]
(.4,.42]
[.24,.36]

(b) Change in Simulated Replacement Rates - 1993–2015

(0,.11]

[−.2,0]

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The sample includes all
individuals that experience an involuntary job loss, observed in the month of job loss, who do not have missing demographics
and who are ages 18-60. I then run this simulated sample through the UI generosity calculator, and then collapse the sample
to have an average simulated replacement rate for each state and year.

31

−.1

100

Change in UI Amount
150
200

250

Change in Any Insurance
−.09
−.08
−.07

300

−.06

Figure 2: UI Generosity and Change in UI Benefits and Insurance Upon Job Loss

Estimated β= 0.128 (0.056)

50

−.11

Estimated β= 890.6 (154.4)

.3

.35

.4
.45
Replacement Rate

.5

.55

.3

(a) Monthly UI Benefits ($2015)

.35

.4
.45
Replacement Rate

.5

.55

(b) Any Health Insurance Coverage

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The sample includes all
individuals that experience an involuntary job loss, observed in the month of job loss, who do not have missing demographics
and who are ages 18-60. For each of these individuals, I calculate the change in UI benefits and insurance coverage between the
24 months after and the 12 months prior to job loss. I then estimate the relationship between this change and the simulated
replacement rate the individual is eligible for. Last, I collapse the data into 20 equivalent bins, and I plot both these binned data
and the estimated relationship (dashed line).

400

Figure 3: 1996–2013 Differences in UI Generosity and Change in UI Benefits and Insurance
Upon Job Loss
.2

MT

300

KS

WI

NM
MA

200

NV
KY

CA
MT

MN

NE

0

MI

MI

−.2

100

MA

RI
NJ
VA
MO
IL PA
OK
MS
NY
GA
TN
TX
IAOH ID
WI
FL NC
SC
WA UT
OR
IN
AL
LA
AZ
HI

MD

RI

AL

OK
CT
MO
HI
SC
IN
AZ
WA UT
FL
PANY
GA
KY OR
MS
OH NJ
IL
NC
CO
TX
TN
DC
MN
VA
IA
WV
NVLA
AR
KS ID
DE

0

CT

CO

CA
MD
NH

AK

Estimated β= 0.413 (0.289)

NH

AR

−.4

−100

NM

Estimated β= 836.5 (187.8)

WV
AK

−.1

−.05
0
Change in Replacement Rate

.05

NE

.1

−.1

(a) Monthly UI Benefits ($2015)

−.05
0
Change in Replacement Rate

.05

.1

(b) Any Health Insurance Coverage

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The sample includes all
individuals that experience an involuntary job loss, observed in the month of job loss, who do not have missing demographics and
who are ages 18-60. For each of these individuals, I calculate the change in UI benefits and insurance coverage between the 24
months after and the 12 months prior to job loss, as well as the simulated replacement rate the individual is eligible for. I then
collapse the data at the state-year level, and for each state I calculate the 1996-2013 differences in UI generosity and change in
UI and insurance upon job loss, plotted in the figures.

32

−1200

−700

Estimated Coefficents
−200
300
800

1300

Figure 4: Effect of UI Generosity on Monthly UI Benefits ($2015) - “First Stage” – SIPP

−12

−8

−4

0
4
8
12
Months From Unemployment

16

20

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP). The sample includes all individuals that experience an involuntary job loss, 12 months prior to 24 months after the start of the spell, who do
not have missing demographics and who are ages 18-60. The figures display coefficients and confidence intervals for the interactions between UI replacement rates
and months relative to job loss. The regression includes individual fixed effects,
flexible demographic controls, and cubic polynomials for the state unemployment
rate and the state average annual wage. Moreover, the results include year-by-job
loss, number of children-by-job loss, and state-by-job loss fixed effects, as well as
state-specific linear time trends, and are weighted using the SIPP provided sample
weights. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses.

33

−.3

−.2

Estimated Coefficents
−.1
0
.1
.2
.3

.4

Figure 5: Effect of UI Generosity on Health Insurance Coverage – SIPP

−12

−8

−4

0
4
8
12
Months From Unemployment

16

20

−.3

−.3

−.2

−.2

Estimated Coefficents
−.1
0
.1
.2

Estimated Coefficents
−.1
0
.1
.2
.3

.3

.4

.4

(a) Any

−12

−8

−4

0
4
8
12
Months From Unemployment

16

20

−12

(b) Private

−8

−4

0
4
8
12
Months From Unemployment

16

20

(c) Medicare/Medicaid

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The sample includes
all individuals that experience an involuntary job loss, 12 months prior to 24 months after the start of the spell, who do
not have missing demographics and who are ages 18-60. The figures display coefficients and confidence intervals for the
interactions between UI replacement rates and months relative to job loss. All regressions include individual fixed effects,
flexible demographic controls, and cubic polynomials for the state unemployment rate and the state average annual wage.
Moreover, the results include year-by-job loss, number of children-by-job loss, and state-by-job loss fixed effects, as well as
state-specific linear time trends, and are weighted using the SIPP provided sample weights. Standard errors are clustered by
state and shown in parentheses.

34

Table 1: Sample Summary Statistics – BRFSS and SIPP
SIPP 1996–2013: Samples

A: Demographics
Age
Female
Black
College
Married
N. Children

Main

Calculator

Unemployed

Employed

36.76
(11.67)
0.423
(0.494)
0.145
(0.352)
0.175
(0.380)
0.467
(0.499)
0.875
(1.128)

37.14
(11.69)
0.411
(0.492)
0.131
(0.337)
0.177
(0.382)
0.478
(0.500)
0.850
(1.115)
32356.9
(33230.3)

34.71
(12.21)
0.461
(0.498)
0.180
(0.384)
0.181
(0.385)
0.360
(0.480)
0.966
(1.175)

38.75
(11.28)
0.462
(0.499)
0.108
(0.311)
0.353
(0.478)
0.598
(0.490)
0.953
(1.127)

0.636
(0.481)

0.917
(0.276)

0.647
(0.478)
0.649
(0.477)
0.633
(0.482)
0.856
(0.351)
0.58
(0.494)
0.415
(0.493)
0.548
(0.498)
0.782
(0.413)
0.273
(0.445)
0.209
(0.235)
0.0375
(0.105)
144,993

0.731
(0.443)
0.877
(0.328)
0.742
(0.438)
0.944
(0.229)
0.662
(0.473)
0.556
(0.497)
0.498
(0.500)
0.836
(0.371)
0.145
(0.352)
0.214
(0.232)
0.0240
(0.0761)
2,678,294

Annual Wage Prior To Job Loss ($2015)
B: Outcomes
Monthly UI Benefits ($2015)
Health Insurance Coverage
Private Health Insurance
Medicare/Medicaid

145.4
(551.9)
0.634
(0.482)
0.544
(0.498)
0.101
(0.302)

Checkup Last Year
Can Afford Doctor
Breast Exam Last Year
Good Health Status
Physically Healthy
Mentally Healthy
High BMI
Any Exercise
Smoking Daily
% Days Drinking
% Days Binge Drinking
Observations

BRFSS 1993–2015: Sample

444,451

14,238

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP)
and the 1993–2015 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). The first column contains SIPP
individuals that experience an involuntary job loss, observed monthly over a period of 12 months prior to
24 months after such loss. The second column contains SIPP individuals that experience an involuntary
job loss, observed in the month of job loss. The third and fourth columns show statistics for the BRFFS
samples of individuals who have been unemployed for less than a year and those who are currently
working for wages, respectively. For all samples I exclude individuals with missing demographics and
those older than 60. All statistics are weighted using the sample weights provided in the two datasets.

35

Table 2: Effect of State Economics Conditions on UI Generosity
Unemployment Rate (%)

(1)
-0.102
(0.161)

(2)
-1.839
(1.220)
0.221
(0.143)
-0.009
(0.006)

41.08
0.926
1173

41.08
0.927
1173

Unemployment Rate2
Unemployment Rate3
Average Weekly Wage ($2015, 1000s)
Average Weekly Wage2
Average Weekly Wage3
Employment Rate (%)
Employment Rate2
Employment Rate3
Mean R-rate
R-squared
Observations

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)
-1.904∗
(1.051)
0.237∗
(0.121)
-0.009∗
(0.005)
1.761
36.641
67.535
(3.592) (78.511)
(79.573)
-19.027
-54.077
(85.749)
(87.080)
0.042
12.559
(30.262)
(30.911)
0.220
-7.809 -14.956
(0.169) (9.805) (10.470)
0.163
0.321
(0.211) (0.224)
-0.001
-0.002
(0.002) (0.002)
41.08
41.08
41.08
41.08
41.08
0.926
0.927
0.926
0.926
0.928
1173
1173
1173
1173
1173

Notes: UI replacement rates are calculated using the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP). The state unemployment rate and employment level comes from the BLS, the state
population is from SEER, average weekly wages are calculated with the CPS, and net reserves are from ETA.
All regressions include state and year fixed effects, as well as state-specific linear time trends. All statistics are
weighted using state population. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10,
** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Table 3: Effect of UI Generosity on Safety Net Programs
Min Wage

State EITC

A: State Program Parameters
0.008
0.012
State R-rate
(0.017)
(0.085)
Mean Y
Mean R-rate
Observations

Medicaid Thresh

Welfare Reform

Max UI

5.503∗∗
(2.305)

2.947
(4.250)

0.382
(0.403)

10.895∗∗∗
(3.311)

0.07
0.41
1173

0.05
0.41
1173

6.22
0.41
1173

2.25
0.41
1122

0.75
0.41
1173

4.43
0.41
1173

SNAP

EITC

ADFC

Medicaid

SS

UI

3.138
(4.180)

-46.779
(63.535)

21.587
(35.815)

31.086∗∗
(13.487)

8.565
0.41
1173

118.159
0.41
1173

231.494
0.41
1173

13.316
0.41
1173

B: State Program Spending/Population
State R-rate
-11.503
-8.725∗∗∗
(12.012)
(2.395)
Mean Y
Mean R-rate
Observations

Max AFDC

14.778
0.41
1173

16.493
0.41
1173

Notes: UI replacement rates are calculated using the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP). State EITC generosity is from the Tax Policy Center, data on welfare reform come
from Bitler and Hoynes (2010), and state Medicaid/SCHIP income eligibility thresholds, minimum wages,
AFDC/TANF generosity, and gross state product (GSP) come from the University of Kentucky Center for
Poverty Research. State spending on SNAP, EITC, AFDC/TANF, Medicaid, and SSDI comes from the Bureau
of Economic Analysis Regional Economic Accounts, and UI spending comes from ETA. All regressions include
flexible controls for state economic conditions, as well as year and state fixed effects and state-specific linear
time trends. All statistics are weighted using state population, obtained from SEER. Standard errors are
clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

36

Table 4: Effect of UI Generosity on UI Benefits and Insurance Coverage – SIPP
Monthly UI
R-rate * Loss
Mean Y
Observations

Benefit
448.630∗∗∗
(143.341)
144.79
444451

Health Insurance
Any
0.208∗∗∗
(0.068)
0.64
444451

Private Public
0.148∗∗ 0.084
(0.072) (0.053)
0.55
0.10
444388 444331

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income
and Program Participation (SIPP). The sample includes all individuals that experience an involuntary job loss, 12 months prior to 24
months after the start of the spell, who do not have missing demographics and who are ages 18-60. All regressions include individual
fixed effects, flexible demographic controls, and cubic polynomials
for the state unemployment rate and the state average annual wage.
Moreover, the results include year-by-job loss, number of children-byjob loss, and state-by-job loss fixed effects, as well as state-specific
linear time trends, and are weighted using the SIPP provided sample weights. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in
parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

37

38
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

0.192∗
(0.101)
0.121
(0.150)

497.4∗∗∗
(139.1)
43.3
(49.8)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.208∗∗∗
(0.068)

448.6∗∗∗
(143.3)

(2)

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.209∗∗∗
(0.069)

453.4∗∗∗
(142.1)

(3)

Yes

Yes
Yes

0.206∗∗∗
(0.068)

455.6∗∗∗
(149.7)

(4)

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.211∗∗∗
(0.068)

444.1∗∗∗
(133.1)

(5)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.196∗∗
(0.074)

462.8∗∗∗
(156.2)

(6)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.151∗∗∗
(0.050)

875.5∗∗∗
(129.5)

(7)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.208∗∗∗
(0.066)

445.9∗∗∗
(151.0)

(8)

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.185∗∗
(0.073)

506.9∗∗∗
(180.1)

(9)

257.0
(160.0)

(11)

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.244∗∗ 0.236
(0.099) (0.143)

283.9
(176.7)

(10)

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The sample includes all individuals that experience
an involuntary job loss, 12 months prior to 24 months after the start of the spell, who do not have missing demographics and who are ages 18-60. All
regressions include flexible demographic controls, and are weighted using the SIPP provided sample weights. Standard errors are clustered by state and
shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Individual FEs
State Linear Trends
State Economic Conditions
Lagged State Economic Conditions
State Safety Net
State*Loss, Kids*Loss, Year*Loss FEs
Year*Kids*Loss FEs
State*Kids*Loss FEs
State*Year*Loss FEs

R-rate

B: Any Health Insurance
R-rate * Loss

R-rate

A: Monthly UI ($2015)
R-rate * Loss

(1)

Table 5: Effect of UI Generosity on UI Benefits and Insurance Coverage - Sensitivity to Specification – SIPP

Table 6: Placebo Effect of UI Generosity on UI Benefits and Insurance Coverage - Placebo
Involuntary Job Loss

R-rate * Loss/Separation
Mean Y
Observations

Monthly
UI
448.630∗∗∗
(143.341)
144.79
444451

Any
Insurance
0.208∗∗∗
(0.068)
0.64
444451

Quit For Another Job
Monthly
UI
-11.976
(0.072)
18.69
386410

Any
Insurance
-0.016
(0.053)
0.75
386410

Other Separations
Monthly
Any
UI
Insurance
13.975
0.073
(30.075)
(0.055)
29.46
0.73
1375489 1375489

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP).
The sample includes all individuals that experience a job separation, 12 months prior to 24 months after
the start of the spell, who do not have missing demographics and who are ages 18-60. In the first two
columns I include those that experience a job separation because of involuntary job loss, in the next
two columns I include individuals who quit to get another job, and in the final two columns I include
all those that experience a job loss that is not involuntary job loss nor quitting for another job. All
regressions include individual fixed effects, flexible demographic controls, and cubic polynomials for the
state unemployment rate and the state average annual wage. Moreover, the results include year-by-job
loss, number of children-by-job loss, and state-by-job loss fixed effects, as well as state-specific linear
time trends, and are weighted using the SIPP provided sample weights. Standard errors are clustered
by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Table 7: Effect of UI Generosity on Health Insurance and Utilization – BRFSS
Breast Exam
Health Insurance

Checkup

Afford Doctor

Last Year

Ever

A: State,Year Fixed Effects: Unemployed
0.327∗∗
R-rate
(0.123)

0.344∗∗∗
(0.104)

0.078
(0.087)

0.526∗∗
(0.227)

0.064
(0.114)

Mean Y
Observations

0.54
144066

0.59
117712

0.70
140273

0.69
40358

0.84
46216

0.277∗∗∗
(0.075)
0.076∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.271∗∗∗
(0.059)
0.025
(0.062)

0.029
(0.046)
0.055
(0.036)

0.609∗∗∗
(0.177)
0.122∗∗
(0.054)

0.064
(0.075)
-0.070
(0.048)

0.85
2817386

0.65
2316660

0.87
2724142

0.75
895227

0.91
961936

C: Triple Differences, State*Year*Kids FEs
0.272∗∗∗
0.244∗∗∗
R-rate * Unemployed
(0.074)
(0.060)

0.030
(0.047)

0.590∗∗∗
(0.185)

0.047
(0.072)

Mean Y
Observations

0.87
2724135

0.75
895139

0.91
961847

B: Triple Differences
R-rate * Unemployed
R-rate
Mean Y
Observations

0.85
2817386

0.65
2316650

Notes: Data are from the 1993–2015 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). The
sample includes individuals who have been unemployed for less than a year or who are currently
working for wages. I exclude individuals with missing demographics and those older than 60.
All regressions include flexible demographic controls, as well as cubic polynomials for the state
unemployment rate and the state average annual wage. Moreover, the results in Panel A include
year and state fixed effects and state-specific linear time trends, the results in Panels B and C
contain additional state-by-job loss, year-by-job loss, and children-by-job loss fixed effects, and
Panel C also includes state-by-year-by-number of children fixed effects. The results are weighted
using the BRFSS provided sample weights. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in
parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

39

Table 8: Effect of UI Generosity on Self-Reported Health – BRFSS
General Health

Mentally Healthy

Excellent

Days

Always

Days

Always

A: State,Year Fixed Effects: Unemployed
0.237
0.032
R-rate
(0.185)
(0.080)

0.122∗
(0.067)

0.536
(1.219)

-0.134
(0.106)

-1.805
(2.751)

-0.198
(0.165)

Mean Y
Observations

Continuous

Good

Physically Healthy

3.47
144532

0.83
144532

0.18
144532

26.32
139220

0.63
139220

24.32
139076

0.53
139076

0.191∗
(0.106)
0.064
(0.051)

0.043
(0.042)
0.016
(0.010)

0.081∗
(0.046)
0.054∗∗
(0.022)

2.189∗∗
(0.892)
0.244
(0.284)

-0.023
(0.057)
-0.043
(0.044)

0.048
(1.276)
-0.726
(0.649)

-0.130
(0.095)
-0.045
(0.045)

3.76
2818225

0.91
2818225

0.25
2818225

27.89
2731728

0.69
2731728

26.91
2727278

0.65
2727278

C: Triple Differences, State*Year*Kids FE
R-rate * Unemployed
0.236∗∗
0.057
(0.107)
(0.044)

0.085∗
(0.045)

2.245∗∗
(0.875)

-0.029
(0.050)

0.084
(1.294)

-0.130
(0.091)

Mean Y
Observations

0.25
2818225

27.89
2731724

0.69
2731724

26.91
2727274

0.65
2727274

B: Triple Differences
R-rate * Unemployed
R-rate
Mean Y
Observations

3.76
2818225

0.91
2818225

Notes: Data are from the 1993–2015 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). The sample
includes individuals who have been unemployed for less than a year or who are currently working for
wages. I exclude individuals with missing demographics and those older than 60. All regressions include
flexible demographic controls, as well as cubic polynomials for the state unemployment rate and the state
average annual wage. Moreover, the results in Panel A include year and state fixed effects and statespecific linear time trends, the results in Panels B and C contain additional state-by-job loss, year-by-job
loss, and children-by-job loss fixed effects, and Panel C also includes state-by-year-by-number of children
fixed effects. The results are weighted using the BRFSS provided sample weights. Standard errors are
clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

40

Table 9: Heterogeneity of Effects by Economic Conditions – BRFSS
Utilization

Insurance
Coverage

General Health Status

Checkup

Afford Doctor

Continuous

Good

Excellent

A: State,Year Fixed Effects: Unemployed
R-rate * 0-5.5 % UR
0.272∗∗
(0.111)
R-rate * 5.5+ % UR
0.365∗∗∗
(0.136)

0.300∗∗
(0.126)
0.375∗∗∗
(0.101)

0.005
(0.098)
0.126
(0.097)

-0.003
(0.234)
0.406∗∗
(0.186)

-0.096
(0.098)
0.122
(0.078)

0.067
(0.081)
0.159∗∗
(0.070)

P-value UR Low=High
Observations

0.259
144066

0.411
117712

0.167
140273

0.001
144532

0.000
144532

0.122
144532

B: Triple Differences, State*Year*Kids FEs
0.084
R-rate * 0-5.5 % UR * Unemployed
(0.092)
R-rate * 5.5+ % UR * Unemployed 0.342∗∗∗
(0.077)

0.145
(0.096)
0.294∗∗∗
(0.063)

-0.138∗∗
(0.068)
0.111∗∗
(0.049)

0.012
(0.140)
0.325∗∗
(0.132)

-0.100
(0.071)
0.128∗∗∗
(0.046)

0.060
(0.054)
0.096∗
(0.057)

P-value UR Low=High
Observations

0.136
2316650

0.006
2724135

0.042
2818225

0.001
2818225

0.581
2818225

0.005
2817386

Notes: Data are from the 1993–2015 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). The sample includes
individuals who have been unemployed for less than a year or who are currently working for wages. I exclude
individuals with missing demographics and those older than 60. All regressions include flexible demographic controls,
as well as cubic polynomials for the state unemployment rate and the state average annual wage. Moreover, the
results in Panel A include year and state fixed effects and state-specific linear time trends, while the regressions in
Panel B include state-by-job loss, year-by-job loss, children-by-job loss, and state-by-year-by-number of children fixed
effects. The results are weighted using the BRFSS provided sample weights. Standard errors are clustered by state
and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

41

Table 10: Effect of UI Generosity on Sample Characteristics – BRFSS and SIPP
Number of

Demographics

Job Losers

Female

Married

Age

Less HS

College

White

Black

A: Unemployed, BRFSS
R-rate
-10352.1
(63616.1)

-0.185∗∗∗
(0.066)

-0.062
(0.144)

-0.784
(2.749)

-0.283∗
(0.148)

-0.017
(0.093)

0.174
(0.142)

0.128
(0.123)

0.463
144993

0.363
144993

34.548
144993

0.183
144993

0.179
144993

0.572
144993

0.178
144993

B: Employed, BRFSS
-338671.5
R-rate
(778345.1)

-0.040
(0.049)

0.085
(0.084)

2.228
(2.850)

-0.128∗
(0.066)

-0.010
(0.074)

0.129
(0.096)

-0.030
(0.042)

Mean Y
Observations

257030.4
5845

0.462
2678294

0.601
2678294

38.518
2678294

0.084
2678294

0.347
2678294

0.711
2678294

0.107
2678294

C: Job Losers, SIPP
R-rate
7922.0
(39624.0)

-0.219
(0.185)

0.205
(0.187)

10.508∗∗
(4.008)

0.072
(0.244)

0.095
(0.120)

-0.144
(0.162)

0.132
(0.130)

Mean Y
Observations

0.421
17112

0.451
17112

36.128
17112

0.146
17112

0.169
17112

0.776
17112

0.144
17112

Mean Y
Observations

22828.8
5719

15815.2
2939

Notes: Data are from the 1993–2015 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) and the 1996–2008
panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The BRFSS sample includes individuals
who have been unemployed for less than a year or who are currently working for wages, and the SIPP sample
includes all individuals that experience a job separation, observed at the start of the spell. From both samples I
exclude individuals with missing demographics and those older than 60. The data is collapsed at the state, year
and number of children level when analyzing sample size in column (1), while all other results are estimated at
the individual level. All regressions include cubic polynomials for the state unemployment rate and the state
average annual wage, year and state fixed effects and state-specific linear time trends. The results are weighted
using the provided sample weights. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10,
** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

42

A

Further Results
Table A.1: Effects of UI Generosity on UI Benefits and Insurance Coverage Sensitivity to Dropping 2008-2010 – SIPP
Baseline Sample

R-rate * Loss
Mean Y
Observations

Monthly
UI
448.630∗∗∗
(143.341)
144.79
444451

Drop 2008-2010 Observations

Any
Monthly
Insurance
UI
0.208∗∗∗ 466.203∗∗
(0.068)
(190.807)
0.64
119.30
444451
331733

Any
Insurance
0.225∗∗∗
(0.069)
0.65
331733

Drop 2008-2010 Job Losers
Monthly
UI
508.145∗∗∗
(177.452)
112.78
309010

Any
Insurance
0.197∗∗∗
(0.067)
0.66
309010

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP).
The sample includes all individuals that experience an involuntary job loss, 12 months prior to 24 months
after the start of the spell, who do not have missing demographics and who are ages 18-60. The first two
columns contains the baseline results. In columns (3) and (4) I drop observations in years 2008-2010, while
in the last two columns I drop those individuals who lose their job in 2008-2010. All regressions include
individual fixed effects, flexible demographic controls, and cubic polynomials for the state unemployment
rate and the state average annual wage. Moreover, the results include year-by-job loss, number of childrenby-job loss, and state-by-job loss fixed effects, as well as state-specific linear time trends, and are weighted
using the SIPP provided sample weights. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Table A.2: Effect of UI Generosity on Risky Behaviors – BRFSS
Smoking

BMI
High (>25)

N. Days Drinking

Pregnant

Sometimes

Daily

Any

At Least 5

Now

A: State,Year Fixed Effects: Unemployed
R-rate
-0.128∗
0.161∗
(0.070)
(0.086)

0.124
(0.083)

0.051
(0.085)

-1.816
(2.150)

1.662
(1.259)

-0.012
(0.051)

Mean Y
Observations

0.40
138279

0.36
143454

0.27
143454

5.54
102455

1.99
70010

0.07
47739

B: Triple Differences, State*Year*Kids FEs
R-rate * Unemployed
-0.049
0.086
(0.056)
(0.078)

0.054
(0.086)

0.072
(0.046)

-2.435
(1.813)

1.665∗∗∗
(0.619)

-0.097
(0.084)

Mean Y
Observations

0.24
2799285

0.18
2799285

6.03
2018944

1.32
1520878

0.04
830688

0.58
138279

0.60
2698627

Normal (18-25)

0.39
2698627

Notes: Data are from the 1993–2015 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). The sample includes
individuals who have been unemployed for less than a year or who are currently working for wages. I exclude
individuals with missing demographics and those older than 60. All regressions include flexible demographic controls,
as well as cubic polynomials for the state unemployment rate and the state average annual wage. Moreover, the
results in Panel A include year and state fixed effects and state-specific linear time trends, while the regressions in
Panel B include state-by-job loss, year-by-job loss, children-by-job loss, and state-by-year-by-number of children fixed
effects. The results are weighted using the BRFSS provided sample weights. Standard errors are clustered by state
and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

43

Table A.3: Heterogeneity of Effects by Demographics – BRFSS
(1)
A: Insurance Coverage
0.327∗∗
R-rate
(0.123)
R-rate * Female

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.233∗
(0.123)
0.185
(0.114)

0.307∗∗
(0.145)

0.408∗∗∗
(0.129)

0.317∗∗
(0.122)

-0.209
(0.137)

R-rate * Married

0.046
(0.108)
-0.495∗∗∗
(0.091)

R-rate * College
R-rate * No Children

0.064
(0.072)
0.666∗∗∗
(0.160)

R-rate * Generous Medicaid
B: Check-up
R-rate

0.344∗∗∗
(0.104)

R-rate * Female
R-rate * Married

0.356∗∗ 0.370∗∗∗
(0.163) (0.120)
-0.024
(0.149)
-0.059
(0.110)

0.381∗∗∗
(0.107)

0.311∗∗∗
(0.092)

-0.229∗∗
(0.104)

R-rate * College

0.260∗∗∗
(0.091)

R-rate * No Children

0.476∗∗

R-rate * Generous Medicaid
C: General Health Status
0.237
R-rate
(0.185)
R-rate * Female

-0.047
(0.171)

0.282∗
(0.163)
-0.088
(0.154)

R-rate * Married

0.231
(0.159)

0.216
(0.179)

0.220
(0.194)

0.815∗∗
(0.382)

0.014
(0.243)

R-rate * College

0.132
(0.228)

R-rate * No Children

0.118
(0.121)
-0.718∗
(0.379)

R-rate * Generous Medicaid

Notes: Data are from the 1993–2015 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS).
The sample includes individuals who have been unemployed for less than a year or who are
currently working for wages. I exclude individuals with missing demographics and those
older than 60. All regressions include flexible demographic controls, cubic polynomials
for the state unemployment rate and the state average annual wage, as well as year and
state fixed effects and state-specific linear time trends. The results are weighted using the
BRFSS provided sample weights. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in
parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

44

B

Data Appendix

In this section, I first describe how I create the UI calculator that assigns weekly benefit amounts
to unemployed individuals. Then I describe how I compute the simulated replacement rates that
I use as the measure of UI generosity throughout the paper. Last, I describe all the sources of
data used in the various analyses contained in this paper.

B.1

UI Laws and Calculator

The Unemployment Insurance (UI) program is a federal-state joint program, financed by a mix
of federal and state payroll taxes. While the federal government specifies broad guidelines, states
set their own UI programs, leading to a lot of variety in eligibility criteria, benefit amounts
and benefit duration across states.31 In general, both eligibility and benefit amounts depend on
individuals’ work history prior to (involuntary) job loss, and in some states also on their number
of dependents.32
To determine eligibility for the UI program, a state examines an individual’s earnings and/or
hours/weeks of employment during the “base period”, which most states define as the first 4 of
the last 5 completed calendar quarters of earnings prior to job loss.33 There are several methods
that states use to determine eligibility for benefits, in order of occurrence:
1. Multiple of High-Quarter Wage – Individuals must earn a certain minimum in the quarter
with the highest earnings of their base period. Moreover, their earnings in the base year
must be a multiple of their highest earnings quarter (ie. 1.5).
2. Multiple of Weekly Benefit Amount – After computing individuals weekly benefit amount
(WBA), states confer UI eligibility only if their earnings in the base period are greater than a
multiple of the WBA (ie. 40). States may also require positive earnings in multiple quarters
of the base period.
3. Flat Qualifying Amount – Individuals must have earned a minimum amount in the base
period.
4. Weeks/Hours of Employment – Individuals must have worked a minimum amount of hours/weeks
at a certain weekly/hourly wage in the base period.
31

In this paper I do not take advantage of the variation in duration of benefits, hence I will ignore duration of
benefits for the remainder of this appendix.
32
For more information, see https://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/comparison2017.asp. Rules explained in this Appendix are as of January 1st, 2017.
33
As of 2017, exceptions to this standard are Massachusetts and Minnesota, which use the last 4 quarters.
Moreover, some states use alternative base periods (ABPs) or Extended Base Periods (EBPs) to confer eligibility
to some individuals that are attached to the labor market but might not quality according to their work history in
the base year. For this project, I do not use any rules on ABP and EBP earnings to assign UI eligibility.

45

States also follow different methods for determining the weekly benefit amount an individual
receives, with the WBA equal to:
1. High-Quarter Method – A percent of total earnings in the highest quarter of the base year
(ie. 1/26). This is the most popular method.
2. Multi-Quarter Method – A percent of total (or average) earnings in multiple quarters in the
base period.
3. Annual-Wage Method – A percent of annual wages in the base period.
4. Weekly-Wage Method – A percent of average weekly wages in the base period.
Moreover, states also have rules on minimum and maximum weekly benefits, which they use if an
individual’s WBA is below or above these thresholds. These thresholds vary considerably across
states and years, with the minimum WBA varying from no minimum to $151 between 1993–2015,
and the maximum varying between $140 and $798. Furthermore, some states allow additional
benefits for dependents, which vary between $1 and $25 per dependent, up to a maximum dependent allowance. Lastly, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009 increased
unemployment benefits by $25 per week for all recipients, with some states providing temporary
additional benefits on top of the federal increase.
To construct the UI calculator, I gathered information on these state laws for all years from 1993
to 2015 from a variety of sources. The main information was collected from the Employment and
Training Administration (ETA), which reports semi-annual information on state benefit schedules.
Moreover, I supplemented this data with information from the calculators used in Gruber (1997),
Chetty (2008) and LaLumia (2013), as well as other state laws and documents whenever the ETA
information was incomplete.

B.2

Simulated Replacement Rates

To create the simulated replacement rates, my measure of UI generosity, I start with a sample of
newly unemployed individuals from the 1996, 2001, 2004, and 2008 panels of the Survey of Income
and Program Participation (SIPP), which cover individuals interviewed in years 1996–2013. To
create the sample, I perform the following sample restrictions. First, I identify individuals that are
currently working or unemployed, and I restrict the sample to those who are unemployed at least
once during the survey and who, prior to unemployment, were working for at least three months
and had positive earnings. This restriction is needed to assure that we have information on at
least one full quarter of earnings. After creating variables for quarterly earning for all quarters
prior to the current one,34 I restrict the sample to individual who are newly unemployed, i.e. who
34

Since the SIPP is a short longitudinal survey, following individuals for 2–4 years at most, I cannot always
collect information on all 4 quarters of earnings prior to job loss. When this is the case, I assume earnings in the
previous quarter are the same as earnings in the last quarter the individual is observed working. This assumption
introduces some measurement error when calculating UI benefit eligibility.

46

were employed in the previous month but are now unemployed. Last, I restrict the sample to
individuals aged 18 to 60, who are more likely to be attached to the labor market.35 After all
these restrictions, the sample is comprised of 64,730 individuals.
Once I have this fixed, national sample of individuals, I calculate their weekly UI benefits
according to each state-year set of laws. For example, I first assume all individuals in the sample
lost their job in 1993 in Alabama, transform their earnings in 1993 values, calculate their federal
taxes according to TAXSIM (Feenberg and Coutts, 1993),36 calculate their UI weekly benefits
eligibility according to the law present in Alabama in January of 1993, and then divide these
benefits by the individual’s weekly earnings to obtain their simulated replacement rate. Then I
re-start the calculator assuming the individual lost their job in 1993 in Alaska, and so forth and so
on for all state and year combinations. Finally, I collapse the data to the year, state and number
of children cell to capture the average simulated replacement rates in each of these cells. The
simulated replacement rates I obtained from this exercise are plotted in Figure B.1.

B.3

Data Sources

State employment and unemployment: Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 1993–2015
State population: National Cancer Institute SEER; 1993–2015
State average weekly earnings: March Supplement of the Current Population Survey (CPS); 1994–
2016
State UI benefits paid and reserves: Department of Labor Employment Training Administration
(ETA) and Hsu, Matsa and Melzer (2018); 1993–2015
State spending on SNAP, AFDC/TANF, Medicaid, EITC, and SS : Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) Regional Economic Accounts; 1993–2015
State EITC parameters: Tax Policy Center; 1993–2015
Maximum AFDC/TANF benefits and minimum wages: University of Kentucky Center for Poverty
Research (UKCPR); 1993–2015
State welfare reform: Bitler and Hoynes (2010); 1993–2015
State Medicaid/SCHIP income eligibility thresholds (for children and pregnant women): Hoynes
and Luttmer (2011), the Maternal and Child Health Update from National Governor’s Association
and the Kaiser Family Foundation Annual Updates; 1993–2014
State-by-number of children employment, unemployment, and population: Current Population Survey (CPS); 1993–2015

35

I also exclude from the sample individuals whose birth year from interview to interview was different by more
than one year, around 1 percent of the sample, as these may not be the same individuals.
36
Prior to 2002, Michigan’s WBA formula depended on an individuals’ average tax rate.

47

Figure B.1: Average Simulated Replacement Rates

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7

Arkansas

.7

Arizona

.7

Alabama

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

0 Children
3 Children

.7
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

.7
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

.7
.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7
Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
1 Child
4+ Children

0 Children
3 Children

Illinois

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

0 Children
3 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

Idaho

.7

Georgia

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

.2
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7
Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
1 Child
4+ Children

0 Children
3 Children

Florida

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

0 Children
3 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

D.C.

.7

Delaware

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

.2
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7
Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
1 Child
4+ Children

0 Children
3 Children

Connecticut

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

Colorado

.7

California

1 Child
4+ Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

48

2 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7

Kansas

.7

Iowa

.7

Indiana

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

0 Children
3 Children

.7
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

.7
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

.7
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

2 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

.7
.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7
Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
1 Child
4+ Children

0 Children
3 Children

Nevada

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

0 Children
3 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

Nebraska

.7

Montana

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

.2
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7
Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
1 Child
4+ Children

0 Children
3 Children

Missouri

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

0 Children
3 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

Mississippi

.7

Minnesota

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

.2
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7
Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
1 Child
4+ Children

0 Children
3 Children

Michigan

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

0 Children
3 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

Massachusetts

.7

Maryland

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

.2
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7
Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
1 Child
4+ Children

0 Children
3 Children

Maine

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

Louisiana

.7

Kentucky

1 Child
4+ Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

49

2 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7

New Mexico

.7

New Jersey

.7

New Hampshire

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

0 Children
3 Children

.7
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

.7
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

.7
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

2 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

.7
.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7
Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
1 Child
4+ Children

0 Children
3 Children

Texas

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

0 Children
3 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

Tennessee

.7

South Dakota

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

.2
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7
Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
1 Child
4+ Children

0 Children
3 Children

South Carolina

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

0 Children
3 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

Rhode Island

.7

Pennsylvania

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

.2
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7
Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
1 Child
4+ Children

0 Children
3 Children

Oregon

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

0 Children
3 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

Oklahoma

.7

Ohio

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

.2
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7
Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
1 Child
4+ Children

0 Children
3 Children

North Dakota

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

North Carolina

.7

New York

1 Child
4+ Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

50

2 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7

Virginia

.7

Vermont

.7

Utah

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

0 Children
3 Children

2 Children

.7
.2
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

.7
Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
1 Child
4+ Children

0 Children
3 Children

Wisconsin

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

West Virginia

.7

Washington

1 Child
4+ Children

0 Children
3 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years

2 Children

0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

Hawaii

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.2

.2

.2

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6

Simulated Replacement Rate
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7

.7

Alaska

.7

Wyoming

1 Child
4+ Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
Years
0 Children
3 Children

1 Child
4+ Children

2 Children

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The sample includes all individuals that
experience an unemployment spell, at the start of their spell. I then run this simulated sample through the UI generosity calculator, and then
collapse the sample to have an average simulated replacement rate for each state, year and number of children.

51

C

Additional Tests for Exogeneity of UI

One of the major identification assumptions in my analysis is that changes in UI generosity
are not correlated other factors that also affect health status and utilization. For example,
one could be worried that legislators change UI generosity when they observe worsening economic conditions. Table (2) showed no evidence of this possible threat to identification, as UI
generosity is not correlated to state unemployment rates, average earnings, and employment
rates. In this section, I probe further into this question.
Given that states are believed to change UI benefits when state UI funds are low (Smith
and Wenger, 2013), which usually occurs immediately after periods of high unemployment
rates, in Table (C.1) I test whether lagged unemployment rates and net UI reserves are
correlated with current UI generosity. These results suggest that the unemployment rate
and net UI reserves in the previous year are the variables more significantly correlated with
UI generosity, providing some empirical evidence that states do indeed decrease UI benefits
after periods of bad economic conditions, when UI funds are likely depleted.
While one may be worried that states change UI during recessions, which are correlated
with improved health, the results in Table (C.1) suggest that UI generosity decreases after
periods of high unemployment rates, weakening this worry. Nevertheless, it is important to
fully and flexibly control for both current and lagged economic conditions. Therefore, all
my baseline specifications contains flexible control for current conditions, and in robustness
checks I showed that the main results are not sensitive to also including flexible controls
for lagged conditions, suggesting that past economic conditions are not also correlated with
the health of currently unemployed individuals. Moreover, note that in the triple difference
BRFSS specification that includes state-by-year-by-number of children fixed effects, these
fixed effects absorb all (observed and unobserved) state-by-year variation, including state
economic conditions.
Lastly, in Section 4.4 I discussed how contemporaneous changes in other safety net programs could lead to biased estimates of UI, and I used state-year level observations to show
that state UI generosity is not significantly correlated to changes in other programs’ generosity nor spending per capita. However, one might argue that these tests are not computed
at the right level of aggregation, as the measure of UI generosity varies also across number
of children. Hence, I use information from the 1993–2015 CPS and the 1996–2013 SIPP
datasets to construct average state economic conditions and program spending at the stateyear-number of children level, and I repeat the analyses above with these data. Appendix
Tables (C.2) and (C.3) show similar results to the ones discussed above, at the state-year
level only.

52

Table C.1: Effect of State Lagged Economics Conditions on UI Generosity
1 Lag Unemployment Rate (%)
1 Lag Unemployment Rate2
1 Lag Unemployment Rate3
2 Lag Unemployment Rate (%)
2 Lag Unemployment Rate2
2 Lag Unemployment Rate3

(2)
(1)
-2.604∗ -2.116
(1.330) (1.571)
0.289∗
0.295
(0.151) (0.193)
-0.011∗ -0.012
(0.006) (0.007)
-0.616
(0.935)
-0.008
(0.113)
0.001
(0.004)

(3)

0.040∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.001∗∗
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)

1 Lag (UI Net Reserves/Population) (%)
1 Lag (UI Net Reserves/Population)2
1 Lag (UI Net Reserves/Population)3
2 Lag (UI Net Reserves/Population) (%)
2 Lag (UI Net Reserves/Population)2
2 Lag (UI Net Reserves/Population)3
Unemployment Rate (%)
Average Weekly Wage ($2015, 1000s)
R-squared
Observations

0.928
1173

0.931
1173

0.930
1173

(4)

(5)
-2.137
(1.373)
0.263
(0.171)
-0.010
(0.007)
-0.400
(0.885)
-0.063
(0.119)
0.006
(0.005)
-0.028
-0.030
(0.044) (0.036)
-0.001∗ -0.002∗∗
(0.001) (0.001)
0.000
0.000
(0.000) (0.000)
0.083
0.068∗
(0.052) (0.040)
-0.000
-0.001
(0.000) (0.001)
-0.000
0.000
(0.000) (0.000)
0.010
(0.175)
-0.779
(2.952)
0.933
0.938
1173
1173

Notes: UI replacement rates are calculated using the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income
and Program Participation (SIPP). The state unemployment rate and employment level comes
from the BLS, the state population is from SEER, average weekly wages are calculated with the
CPS, and net reserves are from ETA. All regressions include state and year fixed effects, as well
as state-specific linear time trends. All statistics are weighted using state population. Standard
errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

53

Table C.2: Effect of State Economics Conditions on UI Generosity –
State-Year-Number of Children Observations
Unemployment Rate (%)

-0.065
(0.081)

Unemployment Rate2
Unemployment Rate3

-0.404
(0.273)
0.027
(0.022)
-0.001
(0.001)

Employment/Population

-0.242
(0.225)
0.025
(0.020)
-0.001
(0.001)
10.275
(12.472)
-0.126
(0.144)
0.001
(0.001)

Employment/Population2
Employment/Population3

-0.640∗∗
(0.249)
0.040∗∗
(0.019)
-0.001∗
(0.000)

1 Lag Unemployment Rate (%)
1 Lag Unemployment Rate2
1 Lag Unemployment Rate3
2 Lag Unemployment Rate (%)
2 Lag Unemployment Rate2
2 Lag Unemployment Rate3

-0.392
(0.260)
0.030
(0.023)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.486∗
(0.250)
0.021
(0.028)
-0.000
(0.001)

1 Lag (UI Net Reserves/GSP) (%)

0.016
(0.012)
-0.001∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.000∗
(0.000)

1 Lag (UI Net Reserves/GSP)2
1 Lag (UI Net Reserves/GSP)3
2 Lag (UI Net Reserves/GSP) (%)
2 Lag (UI Net Reserves/GSP)2
2 Lag (UI Net Reserves/GSP)3
Mean R-rate
R-Squared
Observations

41.00
0.842
5865

41.00
0.842
5865

41.00
0.842
5865

41.00
0.843
5865

41.00
0.844
5865

41.01
0.845
5814

0.010
(0.025)
-0.001∗∗
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
0.007
(0.023)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
41.01
0.845
5763

-0.587∗∗
(0.286)
0.049∗
(0.026)
-0.001∗
(0.001)
-0.469∗∗
(0.223)
0.022
(0.022)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.006
(0.023)
-0.001∗∗
(0.000)
0.000∗
(0.000)
0.001
(0.021)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
41.01
0.848
5763

Notes: UI replacement rates are calculated using the 1996–2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP). The state unemployment rate, employment level and population comes from the CPS, and net reserves are from
ETA. All regressions include state, year and number of children fixed effects, as well as state-specific linear time trends.
All statistics are weighted using cell population from the CPS. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in
parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

54

Table C.3: Effect of UI Generosity on Safety Net Spending

A: CPS Data
R-rate
Mean Y
Observations
B: SIPP Data
R-rate
Mean Y
Observations

SNAP

ADFC

SSI

SS

UI

-3.114
(19.265)

4.207
(9.009)

66.983
(78.713)

-173.842
(541.643)

-94.040
(63.853)

20.63
5865

8.20
5865

50.90
5865

841.91
5865

48.58
5865

1.224
(28.895)

6.431
(9.511)

69.673
(94.897)

-227.999
(653.723)

-90.855
(70.557)

23.85
5033

7.83
5033

53.77
5033

731.98
5033

41.17
5033

Notes: UI replacement rates are calculated using the 1996–2008 panels
of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). Program
spending at the year, state and number of children level is calculated
with CPS and SIPP data. All regressions include cubic polynomials for
the state unemployment rate and the state average annual wage, as well
as state, year and number of children fixed effects and state-specific
linear time trends. All statistics are weighted using cell population
from the CPS/SIPP. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown
in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

55

