NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRODUCTIVITY IN AMERICAN WHALING:
THE NEW BEDFORD FLEET
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

Lance Davis

Robert Galiman
Teresa Hutchins

Working Paper No. 2477

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1987

Most of the research on which this paper was based was funded by the National
Science Foundation and the NBER project, Productivity and Industrial Change
in the World Economy. Grants to Galiman from the Kenan Foundation helped
finance the construction of the capital stock estimates. The Division of
Humanities and Social Sciences at the California Institute of Technology
provided funds for the collection of the labor data. The Carolina Population
Center helped plan and carry out the computer operations. We thank in
particular Judith Kovenock, Karin Gleiter, Kathleen Gallagher, and Billie
Norwood. Paul Cyr, of the New Bedford Public Library, was a kind and helpful
guide through the whaling data. Evidence from the Joseph Dias manuscript is
published with the permission of the Baker Library of the Graduate School of
Business, Harvard University. We thank Michael Butler, Emil Friberg and
Eugene Dyar for research assistance. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in Development of the American Economy. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2477
December 1987

Productivity in American Whaling:
The New Bedford Fleet in the Nineteenth Century

ABSTRACT

From the end of the War of 1812 until the Civil War the New Bedford
whaling fleet grew spectacularly; thereafter it declined, equally
spectacularly. By the end of the century New Bedford's day was over. During
the 88 years of this period, the technical configuration of the fleet, the
hunting grounds visited, and the types of whales pursued all changed
dramatically, and more than once.
The literature on whaling suggests that the collapse of the industry was
due, in part, to declining productivity, occasioned by the disappearance of
the whales (because of over—hunting) and the deterioration of the quality of
labor. The shifts in the composition of the fleet are viewed, chiefly, as the
result of efforts by whalemen to overcome their problems.
In this paper, productivity data (superlative indexes), by voyage, are
employed in multiple regression analysis to trace the relationships between
the changes in the composition of the fleet and productivity. The propositions
that declining labor quality and whale stocks had important consequences for
productivity are subjected to test, while the impacts of technical changes on
productivity are measured.

Lance E. Davis
Division of Humanities
and Social Sciences
California Institute of
Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125

Robert E. Gailman
Department of Economics
University of North
Carol i na

Chapel Hill, NC 27599—3305

Teresa Hutchins
Department of Economics
University of North
Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3305

(1) Introduction
In economics, productivity change is often associated with technical

change, an inward movement of a production frontier. Looking at the matter
from the level of the firm, where, after all, the principal relevant
decisions are made, it is customary to focus on the choice of an
appropriate technology, with attention devoted to the role of factor prices
in determining exactly where on the frontier the firm will locate its

production activities.'
Life in the firm, however, is likely to be more complex than this

model suggests. Frequently there are many productive operations, and each
could be affected by a variety of alternative techniques. Each technique,
in turn, may employ a range of types of labor and forms of capital. Over
time, techniques, factor prices, and output prices all can change. New

opportunities crop up and new problems appear. The defensive actions of
the firm faced by a new problem may be as important (by preventing the
deterioration of productivity) as the firm's decision to exploit a new

opportunity. Finally, the level of productivity may be importantly
influenced by decisions that are only peripherally (if at all) related to

matters of production technique in the usual sense of the phrase. The
decision to open a new source of a raw material or to exploit a new market
are two obvious examples.

This paper examines productivity in the context of the complete web of

entrepreneurial decisions influencing production. We are interested in the
reactions of entrepreneurs to shifting opportunities and problems, the ways
in which decisions about technique are related to other business decisions,
and the relative weights of the factors influencing productivity.
Whaling was competitive - -

the

industry was made up of many,

relatively small, firms. Major decisions were in the hands of the whaling

2

agent who hired the crew, rigged and provisioned the vessel, laid plans for
the voyage, provided the captain with access to overseas credit and with

information and guidance before and during the voyage.2 We are interested
in the choices the agents made, the influence of exogenous developments on
these choices, and the impact of the agent's decisions on the productivity

of the venture. The unit of analysis is the individual whaling voyage, for
the voyage was the focus of all of these decisions.

Part (2) provides a brief historical and economic background. Part
(3) describes the data set, and Part (4), the system for measuring

productivity. Part (5) lays out the opportunities and problems facing
agents and the choices they were obliged to make. It also develops the
variables that figure in the empirical analysis. Part (6) contains the
empirical analysis, and Part (7) is a summary of conclusions.

(2) Historical Economic Background
In July of 1842 seaman Herman Melville deserted the whaler Acushnet in
the Marquesas, where he spent a month with the natives of the Taipi Valley.

He subsequently treated this experience in his novel Typee. Before he
finally reached home he had material for three more books, Omoo, Mardi, and

Moby-Dick. The first two were based on visits to Tahiti and Eimo,
occasioned by a second desertion (this time from an Australian whaler), the
last, on Melville's life aboard the Acushnet and later the Nantucket whaler

Charles and Henry, on which he served as boatsteerer. The dates of
Melville's sailing from Fairhaven aboard the Acushnet, January 1841, and of

his publication of Moby-Dick, October 1851 (in London, under the title ]

Whale), nicely delineate the apogee of American whaling.
Although the peak of American whaling occurred in 1841-1851, the

3

history of the industry spanned centuries. It began with the first
colonial settlements along the east coast of North America and persisted,

albeit weakly, until 1974 when whaling was finally outlawed.3 Long before
whaling became illegal, the mode of whaling celebrated by Melville had
disappeared and had been replaced by modern methods pioneered by the

Norwegians. The Americans never adopted the new techniques on a large
scale and were effectively out of whaling by the beginning of World War I.

The industry has changed in other ways as well. Modern whalers seek whale
meat and cooking oils, rather than the illuminants, lubricants, and

structural materials brought back by Melville's whalemen. Modern whaling
is therefore an entirely new industry, prosecuted by new techniques in
pursuit of new ends.

By the outbreak of the Revolution, the American whaling industry had

evolved from a land-based operation into a deep-sea industry. In its

earliest stages whalemen stuck close to shore, Whales were sighted from
the beach and hunted down from small boats. The process of rendering the

blubber into oil took place on land. Gradually, however, whalemen left the
shore, and instead of waiting for whales to swim close to land, went

looking for the whales. Technological change and geographical expansion
occurred rapidly. By the 1770's the process of rendering blubber had been
moved aboard the vessel, and Yankee whalemen were routinely cruising the
Atlantic from Newfoundland to the Falkland Islands.4
Favorable market conditions helped to foster these developments.

Blessed with a growing export market in Great Britain, the colonial whale
fishery expanded until 1774 when, in the words of Alexander Starbuck, the
Revolutionary War caught the industry in its "full tide of success."5 For
the next forty years it suffered a series of major economic reversals, and

4
at no time were conditions stable long enough to allow it to experience any
period of sustained growth.6
Although our subject is the American whaling industry, most of the
material used in this paper refers to vessels that sailed from New Bedford,

Massachusetts. Nantucket had been the principal American whaling port at
the beginning of the nineteenth century, and San Francisco assumed that

position at the end. In the years between 1825 and 1890, however, New
Bedford dominated the industry. Subject to some year-to-year variation,
over those sixty-five years, the port's vessels, on average, represented
more than fifty percent of the nation's whaling tonnage (see Table 1).
Moreover, while vessels from other ports tended to specialize in certain
whaling grounds and in either sperm or baleen whales, the New Bedford
whalers ranged over all the world's hunting grounds and sought both species

of whales. Thus the New Bedford whalers not only constitute a
representative sample of the American industry, but they also present a
microcosmic picture of the behavior of the firms that made up the industry.
Our study encompasses more than half of the American industry; the
Americans, in turn, operated about eight-tenths of the world's whaling

fleet over the last eight decades of the 19th century. There had been some
British competition before the 1840's; the Australians hunted whales
throughout the period; and, after the mid 1890's, the Norwegians dominated
the industry; but between 1820 and 1890 the industry was virtually an
American monopoly.

Marine biologists inform us that there are two types of proper whales:

the baleen (suborder Mysticeti) and the catchelot (suborder Odonoceti). In
the 19th century the Americans hunted one variety of catchelot (the sperm

whale) and four varieties of baleen: the right, the gray, the bowhead, and

5

the humpback.

The five varieties do not all inhabit the same parts of the ocean.
Sperm whales are found in the tropical and subtropical regions of the

Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. The rights prefer cooler waters.
They travel in the North Atlantic from Bermuda to Greenland, in the North
Pacific from Japan to the Pacific Northwest and as far north as the Arctic
circle, and in the South Atlantic from Brazil, and in South Pacific from

Chile, to the Antarctic ocean. The whalers looked for bowheads in the
Arctic ocean, the Okhotsk Sea, the Bering Straits, and the North Pacific
above the 54th parallel; however, since those animals had discovered the
Northwest Passage centuries before Martin Frobisher began his fruitless

search, they also appeared in Hudson's Bay and in Davis Strait. Like the
sperms and rights, the humpbacks and grays inhabit the more temperate
climes.

During the first few decades of the nineteenth century, sperm oil and

spermacete were used primarily as illuminants. Spermacete, a solid, made
the highest quality candles; sperm oil was burned in lighthouses and public

buildings where high intensity illumination was required. In the second
and particularly in the third quarter of the century, sperm oil came to be
used increasingly as a lubricant to ease the movements of light, rapidly

moving machines (the spindles of cotton and woolen mills, for example). In
fact, the expansion of sperm oil production after 1830 matches very closely
the rise of the cotton textile industry.

Whale oil, obtained from the blubber of baleen whales, was the

illuminant chosen by the average consumer. Technically inferior to sperm
oil both as an illuminant and as a lubricant, its relatively low price made
it one of the most popular lamp fuels in the 1820's, '30's, and early

6

'40's.7 By the latter dates whale oil began to face ever stiffening
competition from new illuminants (coal oil, coal gas, and, in the 1850's,

kerosene), but total sales held up fairly well as manufacturers began to
use it to lubricate their heavy machinery.8
Whalebone, or baleen, is not really whale bone but the bone-like
screen that the whale uses as a filter to separate its food (kriil) from

sea water. In the nineteenth century, whalebone was used in the
manufacture of stays, corsets, hoops, whips, umbrellas, carriage shades,
and almost any other product that required a strong flexible material - -

needs now met by plastics and specialty steels.
The quantity of sperm oil that the fleet brought home increased

rapidly from 1820 until the late 1830's. Then growth ceased, although
output remained fairly constant until the middle of the next decade. By
the late 1840's, however, the catch had begun to decline. The fall
continued, although with some significant pauses, until the end of the

century (see Table 2). The real price of sperm oil doubled between 1820
and 1850 but then began to fall; by the end of the century the price was no
higher than it had been in 1820.
The quantity of whale oil that the captains brought back to New
Bedford increased until the early 1850's, stabilized until the Civil War,

and then began an almost continuous decline. In no post-helium year did
output come close to matching its pre-war peak. Over the nine decades the
real price of whale oil displayed a profile that was similar to that of
sperm oil except that the decline in the second half of the century was

more gentle. Over most of the period the ratio of the price of sperm oil
to the price of whale oil averaged about 2:1; by 1900, however, the ratio
had fallen to 3:2.

7

At the beginning of the nineteenth century whalebone was in such small
demand that captains often refused to surrender the valuable storage space

needed to bring it back. Gradually, as demand increased, returning cargoes
contained more and more of the strong, flexible material. By the Civil
War, high prices --

prices

inflated by the fashions of the day - - made

whalebone a very desirable addition to a whaler's catch. Indeed, the case
can be made that it was the growing demand for whalebone that kept the

fishery profitable and encouraged the pursuit of the Arctic bowhead. Like
whale oil, the quantity of whalebone brought back increased yearly until

the mid 1850's, peaked at that time, and then began to decline. Output
recovered some ground in the 1880's, but even at that time it did not reach

the levels attained before the War. Because of the rapid rise in price,
however, the value of the bone brought back continued to rise.10 The real
price, in fact, rose from $.lO a pound in 1820 to more than $5.00 a pound

in 1905. Exports of baleen (primarily to England, France, and Germany)
commanded a significant proportion of total output over the entire
nineteenth century.11
Given the similarity in the production paths of all three of the
industry's major products, it should not come as a surprise that the
fortunes of the industry improved steadily from the end of the War of 1812

until some time in the mid 1850's and then gradually declined. The
industry had, in fact, all but disappeared by the time of the Archduke's

assassination in the streets of Sarajevo. The real value of the industry's
total output was about $1.2 million in 1820, it had reached $12 million by
mid-century, but it had fallen to less than $1.2 million fifty years later.
The geographic dispersion of the stock of whales meant that New

Bedford whalers could be found all over the world. The chronicler of the

8

port's fleet lists no fewer than fifty-one whaling grounds, but for our
analysis the fifty-one have been grouped into four: (1) the Atlantic Ocean,
Hudson's Bay and Davis Strait, (2) the Indian Ocean, (3) the Pacific Ocean,
and (4) the Western Arctic.
If interest centers on their relative contribution to New Bedford's

prosperity over the entire ninety-year period, the list, in order of
importance, would be the Pacific, the Atlantic, the Indian, and finally,

the Arctic; however, within those nine decades the contribution of

individual grounds ebbed and flowed (see Table 3). There were, for
example, no voyages to any of the western grounds in the last decade of the

period. The Indian Ocean drew a significant fraction of the city's fleet
only in the middle decades, a period that saw almost no vessels hunting in

the Atlantic. Finally, although the Arctic drew whaling captains from New
Bedford in only four of the nine decades, during those four decades it was
by far the most profitable.

It is a long way from New Bedford to the Arctic Ocean. The vessels
employed in the trade depended on the wind for power, and once on station

it was still necessary to find the whales. As a result, voyages were long,
averaging almost three years (see Table 4). Over time, the length of a
typical voyage increased. Although the increase was due in part to the
opening of grounds further and further removed from the New England coast,

it was also due to a non-trivial increase in the length of stay in each

ground. A trip to the Atlantic averaged less than two years while a
typical voyage to the Arctic or Pacific, which might have taken only two
years when the ground first opened, took almost four in the 1870's.

As the whaling fleets of New England began to hunt more extensively in
the Pacific, captains found it efficient to restock and refit during a

9

voyage. In response to these needs the ports of Honolulu and Lahaina
emerged as rendezvous points. There whalers could pick up fresh
provisions, recruit new seamen, and repair their vessels. Beginning about
1840 the Hawaiian ports and Panama also became important centers for

transshipnients of oil and bone.12 Captains wishing to continue whaling
were able to ship their catch on whalers or merchant ships returning to New
England.

Despite the widespread innovation of iron ships and steam power in the
passenger and carrying trades, the New Bedford whalers that undertook those

three- and four-year voyages were virtually all sailing vessels. Ships,
barks, brigs, sloops, and schooners all found employment in whaling, but

most of the fleet was made up of ships and barks. Taken together the
brigs, sloops, and schooners made up less than five percent of the number
of vessels in the New Bedford total, and they represented only two percent
of the city's total whaling tonnage.
Ships accounted for fifty-six percent of the number of vessels that

sailed from New Bedford. They were relatively large vessels, averaging
about 350 tons, but they were set apart from the barks, brigs, sloops, and
schooners not so much by their relatively greater size as by their rigging.

They had three square-rigged masts (i.e., sails were set on yard arms
attached at the center to the masts). The barks that made up thirty-nine
percent of the vessels operating out of New Bedford were on average, at 285

tons, smaller than the ships. More importantly, they were square-rigged on
the fore and main masts and fore-and-aft rigged on the mizzen (i.e., on the
rear mast sails were set vertically and were attached directly to the mast

and to the stern of the vessel). The average size of both classes of
vessel rose over the first four decades. For the increase was about twenty

10

percent, for barks, about twice that. Thus by the 1860's when a typical
ship had attained a size of about 380 tons an average bark was 320.
Ships were the rigging of choice when the industry emerged from the

wartime doldrums and they retained that position through most of the period

of expansion (see Table 5). Gradually, however, the number of barks
increased in absolute and, even more impressively, as the fleet began to

contract, in relative terms. In 1845 there had been one bark for every 5.3
ships; by 1875 the ratio had been reversed, and there was one bark for
every .53 ships.

The post-bellum increase in the proportion of barks underscores two

characteristics of the whaling fleet. First, the capital stock was very
malleable. Even as vessels shifted from whaling to the merchant marine and
the whaling fleet contracted, new barks were constructed and ships were

rerigged as barks. Second, as the demand for whalebone rose, the bowheads
of the Arctic became an ever more favored target; the rise in the
importance of that northern ground, with its ice bergs and ice pack, put an
increased premium on maneuverability - -

an

important feature of the bark-

rigged vessel.

Although barks were better able to escape the winter freeze, losses at

sea of all types of vessels were very high. Of the approximately seven
hundred and fifty vessels that sailed at least once from New Bedford in

search of whales, no fewer than two hundred and thirty-one were lost. The
crude loss rate per voyage averaged almost nine percent; the loss rate per
year at sea was 3.2 percent (2.6 for ships, 3.5 for barks, and an
astounding 8.6 percent for the brigs, schooners, and sloops that made up
the remainder of the fleet -- see Table 6).

No summary of the industry could be complete without some mention of

11

the men who manned the whalers. On average, twenty-seven men (including
three or four officers) were needed to sail and hunt a ship. Because a
bark was, on average, smaller, it required only about twenty-three (see

Table 7). However, although the bark used a smaller crew, it actually
represented a more labor-intensive technology; the trade-off faced by the
agent who planned the voyage was between greater maneuverability and higher

labor costs. Over time, average crew size increased for both classes of
vessel. In the case of ships, for example, the figure rose from twenty-one
to thirty-three. Although average vessel size was increasing, the size of
the crew was rising even more rapidly; between 1820 and 1905 the
labor/capital ratio rose by about fifteen percent.

Whaling was a risky enterprise. A sailor risked life and limb. The
owner risked the loss of his vessel, and, depending upon the luck of the

hunt, he also faced financial feast or famine. In an attempt to spread the
risk, the owners and seamen adopted a system of labor payments that made
remuneration depend on the success of the voyage.
Every member of the crew was entitled to a fraction (a lay) of the net

receipts of the voyage. On average, the total labor share amounted to
slightly more than one-third of the receipts from the sale of the catch.

Although there are examples of total lays as low as twenty-six percent and
as high as thirty-seven percent, the average was about thirty-four.

Individual crewmen were compensated on the basis of the position held and

their level of skill and experience. Thus a captain's share was typically
about one-sixteenth, but there were voyages where the captain received as
much as one-eight and others where his pay fell as low as one-twentieth.
Progressively smaller shares were allocated to the other officers, the
cooper, the boatsteerers, seamen, other artisans (blacksmiths, carpenters,

12

sailmakers, etc.), ordinary seamen, greenhands, and boys. The latter, the
youngest and least skilled crewmen, typically received a share of about
one-two hundred and fiftieth.

The industry expanded and then contracted, and that pattern is

reflected in the catch and profit figures. In the case of sperm oil, there
is evidence of some decrease in the catch as new vessels entered, but, as
exit reduced competition, it appears to have rebounded strongly (see Table

8). For whale oil, however, the pattern is one of fairly continuous
decline. Finally, while the pattern for whalebone is somewhat mixed, it
appears that the "catch" increased to about 1850, remained at those levels
until the mid 1880's, and then fell as the New Bedford fleet, faced with
competition from vessels based on the West Coast, began to withdraw from
the Arctic grounds.

The trends in catch correlate closely with the movements in profits

(see Table 9). Profits appear to have declined through the mid 1850's -- a
decline most likely associated with increased competition -- and then, as

competition lessened, they increased once again. The post-bellum increase
was sufficient to return industry profits to the levels that had prevailed
in the earlier years.

Of perhaps even greater interest, however, is the average level of the

industry's profits. Although subject to a great deal of year-to-year (and
voyage-to-voyage) variation, the average appears to have been about forty-

five percent per year (with allowance for vessels lost at sea). That
figure is consistent with contemporary observations; it provides some
insight into the level of "normal" profits in a risky, but competitive,

industry. Certainly it does suggest the motivation that induced ship
owners to continue to send their vessels out in search of whales even when

13

there was one chance in ten that the vessel would not return. As late as
1900, although ships appear to have proved no longer profitable, the owners
of the fifteen or so barks, brigs, sloops and schooners that remained in
the fleet were earning nearly seventy percent per year on their investment.

(3) Sources of Data
At the heart of the analysis presented in this paper is a set of
measurements of productivity computed at the level of the individual

voyage. Most, but not all, of the whaling voyages that ended at New
Bedford in the years 1820-1906 are represented in the data set. The
productivity estimates enter as dependent variables in a regression
analysis designed to explain the variations of productivity across voyages.

The principal source of data is a Baker Library manuscript produced by
Joseph Dias, probably a whaling captain himself, and certainly the son and

grandson of whaling captains.13 Dias apparently took his data from ships
logs, newspapers, and port records, as did those better- known students of

whaling, Alexander Starbuck and Reginald B. Hegarty.14 The Dias manuscript
covers a longer period of time than do the works of Starbuck or Hegarty,

and it is organized by vessel. Both the Starbuck and Hegarty volumes are
organized by voyage, a much less convenient system. The Starbuck and
Hegarty volumes, together with Whaling Masters, were used to check Dias and
to fill out his record, but Dias is the primary source of the analyses in
this paper.15
Dias recorded the following information for each New Bedford
whaling vessel:

(1) the dates of each of its voyages (sailing and return),
(2) the names of the captain and agent at each voyage,

14

(3) the vessel type (ship, bark, brig, sioop, schooner)
(4) the date and place of construction (usually),
(5) incidents of rerigging (ships were sometimes rerigged as barks),

(6) the mode of exit from the fleet (condemnation, transfer to
another port, loss by sinking, running aground, fire, etc.),

(7) the product of each voyage, in physical units (sperm oil, whale
oil, whalebone, occasionally other products),

(8) hunting grounds visited (Dias identified 51, which we combined
into four: (a) the Atlantic Ocean, Davis Strait, and Hudson's Bay; (b) the
Indian Ocean; (c) the Pacific Ocean; (d) the Arctic Sea north of the
Pacific, Bering Strait, and Okhotsk Sea),

(9) the tonnage of the vessel (a measure of capacity),16
(10) quite rich notes on events of the voyage, particularly touching

the loss of men to disease, accidents aboard, desertion, and the attacks of
whales, mutineers, islanders of the northern and southern seas.
The mode of entry into the fleet - -

construction

or transfer in from

another port or the merchant marine -- can be inferred from the
construction and voyage data.

While the Dias data set contains a good deal of information on
capital, output, and firm organization, as well as various vessel traits

and activities that might have affected productivity, it does not report
output prices, factor shares in income, or labor and land (i.e., the stock
of whales) inputs -

- information

necessary to estimate productivity and

interpret the estimates. Price data are readily available, notably in
Starbuck and Tower. Officers and crewmen were paid subsistence and a share
of the product, each man's share being referred to as a "lay." Lays

commonly ranged from ten to twenty percent for captains to .2 to .4 of a

15

percent for green boys, and summed to about one-third of the value of
output; we assumed a total lay of thirty-four percent for all voyages.
Subsistence has been estimated to have been about $35-60 per man per year,

in prices of 1844.17 As between these two values the choice does not

appear important. The productivity results obtained are virtually
identical, regardless of which is used.

There are three important sources of labor data; none is perfect; the

two that appear most comprehensive were used.18 Two caveats: First, while
the labor data cover all of the years under consideration they are more

nearly complete for the periods 1820-1834 and 1840-1880. Second, the data
refer chiefly to crewmen recruited before vessels left New Bedford. Extra
crewmen were sometimes added in the Canaries or Hawaii; more often, crewmen

who died or deserted were replaced at a port of call. The data provide,
therefore, no more than a rough index of the average number of men aboard
during a voyage, but there is no reason to believe that errors in the labor
data bias our results.

(4) Productivity. Indexes19

The measure of productivity chosen is a translog multilateral
productivity index, a so-called ttsuperlative index."20 The index has

characteristics that are very well suited to the industry and the problems

under analysis. It is designed to handle multi-product firms and
industries, of the type represented by nineteenth-century American whaling.
The underlying model assumes optimizing behavior and is, therefore, clearly

suited to competitive activities of the likes of American whaling. The
measure was developed to permit multilateral comparisons and as a result it
is not subject to base reversal problems, a very important characteristic

16

since the voyage productivity estimates were to be used in a regression

analysis. Moreover, it is readily computed and economical of data,
requiring no more evidence than is available.

There are, however, few examples of absolute perfection, and the

index, while superlative, is not one of them. It poses one minor and
readily handled computational problem. Two other difficulties arise out of
the application of the index to whaling and to individual whaling voyages.
As to the computational problem, whalers typically returned with whale
oil, sperm oil, and whalebone, but not infrequently, they returned with

only two, say whale oil and bone, or one, say sperm oil. Occasionally they
even came back ttclean,tt that is, with no marketable catch. Since the

superlative index cannot handle zeroes, these cases posed problems. The
first two might have been solved by distinguishing three separate whaling
industries, one specializing in baleen whales, one in sperm whales, and the

third a generalist baleen-sperm industry.21 Such an approach, however,
would distort the reality of nineteenth-century New Bedford whaling.
Whalers did not regularly specialize to the exclusion of one type of whale.
It is true that a vessel setting out for the Arctic was after bowheads
(baleens), but between New Bedford and the Arctic it passed through waters
inhabited by sperm whales and was prepared to take them, as opportunity

afforded. Once the western Arctic was opened, a common pattern was to hunt
bowheads and then, in the off season, move to California to take gray
whales, or to the coasts of New Zealand and Australia for humpbacks and

sperm whales. Moreover, as prices and opportunities shifted, vessels
emphasized one type of activity over another. Thus it appears that New
Bedford whaling should be regarded as one industry, not three.
A better solution to the computational problem is to substitute small

17

positive values for the zeros. If values much less than e (the base of
natural logs) are selected, large negative weights are assigned to the
shares accorded the missing products, and the results that emerge are

counter-intuitive. For example, with a value of .001, a relatively
unsuccessful voyage that resulted, nonetheless, in three types of output
might register a higher level of productivity than a successful voyage with

only two. These anomalies disappear with values in excess of e. Three and
ten, both very small values when compared with typical whaling output

levels, were tried. The results of the two sets of calculations were
similar, suggesting that the index is not very sensitive to the specific
value selected as long as it is small but greater than e.22
A second and more serious problem emerges because there is no obvious
way to introduce land --

that

is, the stocks of whales --

directly

into the

productivity calculations. Thus, the indexes do not measure total factor
productivity, but only the productivity of labor and capital. In an
attempt to work around this problem, whale stocks were introduced on the
right-hand side of the regression, as independent variables helping to
explain the level of productivity of labor and capital.

Finally, and most seriously, the calculations do not include the
effects of truly disastrous voyages - -

voyages from which vessels failed to

return. The indexes refer only to vessels that came back to New Bedford.
The omission is unlikely to have affected the long-term drift of our
productivity measurement for the industry as a whole, since, over time,

loss rates do not seem to have changed dramatically, on average. (See
Table 6.) Of course, the level and the year-to-year variations are
affected, but the former is unimportant and the latter are not the chief
concern of this paper.

18

Of more importance, however, is the effect of the exclusion of

disastrous voyages from the regressions. Whaling was a risky
business in which luck and the skill of the agent and captain -figuring directly in our regression analysis - -

played

neither

important roles.

One therefore has to expect a substantial amount of unexplained variance.

If the disastrous voyages were introduced into the analysis, the

unexplained variance would, no doubt, increase. Moreover, since older
vessels had higher loss rates than younger ones, and since loss rates
varied among hunting grounds, the age and hunting ground variables would
also be affected but, happily, in predictable ways.23
The form of the productivity index is as follows:

=
ln?lk

1/2

-

where:

1/2

+ R.)(lnY1
(Wk +

W

)(lnXk

lnY.)

-

-

ln X),

the R's are the shares of total revenue produced by the three
individual outputs;

the Y's are quantities of individual outputs;
the W's are factor shares of income;
the X's are quantities of factor inputs;

the R's, Y's, W's, and X's are average values across all
observations.

Three outputs -- sperm oil, whale oil, and baleen -- and two inputs - -

labor

and capital (man months and ton months) --

are distinguished.24

The sources of the evidence and our estimating decisions have been
discussed in Section (3), above.

19

(5) Influences on Productivity
The productivity index for the whole New Bedford industry declines
from 1820 -- when the industry was still very small --

to

the mid 1830's,

when the industry was quite large. During the period of its maturity (1835
onward), New Bedford whaling exhibited less pronounced changes in

productivity. Plotted, the productivity index describes a profile like
that of a dinner plate:

it declines, gradually flattens out, and finally

rises again (see the chart). Although a trend line fitted to the index in
the years of maturity exhibits little movement, the industry was by no

means quiescent in the period. It changed dramatically in size, in the
composition of its capital stock, in the structure of its output, in the
relative importance of the hunting grounds it visited, in the sources of
its labor supply, in the ways in which production was organized, in its

techniques of production, and, no doubt, in other ways as well. The
changes reflected responses to shifts in the environment in which the New
Bedford whalers operated, and represented the efforts of whaling men to

cope with new problems and to exploit new opportunities. The central
concern of this paper is with the estimation of the direction in which, and

the strength with which, each of these influences pressed productivity. We
want to understand the forces affecting the industry and the ways in which

its entrepreneurs and managers responded to them. The following
subsections consider the factors that influenced productivity and attempt
to capture them in a series of variables that can be used in the regression
analysis.

>
U
a
0
aU0
><
LU

a
z

1.81.61.41.21.0-

0.80.6O.4
0.2-

I

1830

I

1835

I

1840

I

1845

I

1850

I

1855

I

1860

I

1865

I

1870

I

1

1875' 1880

1685

I

1890

I

INDEX OF TOTAL FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY,
NEW BEDFORD WHALING VOYAGES ENDING IN THE YEARS 1820—1898

I

1825

0.0
1820

VOYAGE ENDING YEAR

1895

I

1900

SOURCES: SEE TEXT. THE INDEX NUMBERS ARE UNWEIGHTED MEANS OF VOYAGEPRODUCTIVITY CALCULATIONS, THE LAITER COMPUTED FROM A CAVES—
CHRISTENSEN—DIEWERT TYPE FORMULA REPRODUCED IN THE TEXT. GIVEN THE NATURE OF ThESE DATA, UNWEIGHTED MEANS ARE UNUKELY TO DIFFER MUCH
FROM WEIGHTED MEANS. THE CALCULATIONS WERE MADE FROM THE DATA USED IN THE REGRESSION ANALYSIS DESCRIBED IN THE TEXT.

20
(a)

Whale Stocks
The drift of the industry productivity index across time, the

persistent search for new hunting grounds, contemporary complaints, and
even the structure of output, all suggest that, as the industry expanded,

there were pressures on the stock of whales. The evidence on stocks before
large-scale hunting began, on the procreative capacities of the whales, and
on the amount of hunting conducted in the nineteenth century suggests that
there was no global problem, no general ecological disaster resulting from

American whaling in the 19th century.25 Depletion of some hunting grounds,
and possibly some species of whales, however, might have required whalers
to seek out new grounds, the search raising costs and reducing the
productivity of capital and labor.

To test this proposition we developed annual indexes of hunting

pressures on the whale populations of the four hunting grounds. Pressure
index numbers reflecting hunting dates and destinations were attached to

each voyage. Thus a vessel that hunted in the Pacific had assigned to it
sperm and baleen pressure index numbers relevant to the Pacific and to the

dates of the voyage. If excessive hunting was reducing the productivity of
whaling capital and labor, the regression coefficients of these indexes

should have negative signs. (Details are contained in Appendix 1.)

(b) Vessel Competition
There is a second possible effect of hunting on measured productivity.

Even if whale stocks were not being depleted, increased hunting might lead
to lower productivity simply because of greater competition among vessels.

One vessel coming upon a pod of sperm whales might be able to take all the
largest whales by itself; however, if it approached the pod in company with

21

other vessels, it would be less likely to come away with as many barrels of

oil. The one case slides over into the other, of course. One vessel alone
would be unable completely to destroy a pod, but three or four vessels

might do so. Still, it appears useful to distinguish analytically between
the two cases. To that end a second index reflecting whaling competition
in each year and in each hunting ground was constructed. The index number
for any given ground and year is a ratio: the numerator is the number of
vessel tons leaving for the hunting ground two years previously, divided by

300 (to convert the tons to "standardized vessels"). The denominator is
the number of whales (all species combined) in the ground before intensive

hunting began, per 100 square miles in the hunting ground. Thus the index
can be interpreted as the number of standard sized vessels per whale per

100 square miles per hunting ground. Since the index is designed to
measure competition in the ground, it could be expected to carry a negative
coefficient in the regression, if competition affected productivity

unfavorably. (Appendix 1 provides more details of the construction of the
index.)

(c) Specialization
The degree to which whalers specialized in a particular type of whale

varied from vessel to vessel and voyage to voyage. In an effort to see how
far specialization mattered we included dununy variables indicative of the

degree and type of specialization. Specifically, we divided voyages into
three groups (of roughly equal size): those in which sperm oil contributed
at least ninety percent of the value of output, those in which whale oil
and baleen contributed at least ninety percent of the value of output, and

all others. This device also helps to deal with a technical problem. All

22

productivity indexes have trouble dealing effectively with output mixes far

removed from the mean mix and the superlative index is no exception. The
specialization dunimies segregate voyages in which the degree of

specialization was pronounced and permit the regression to standardize for
them (the issue is discussed further below).

(d) Hunting Grounds
The search for whales carried New Bedford whalers from the Atlantic to
the Indian and Pacific oceans, and finally to that bonanza ground, the

western Arctic. One would expect to find productivity varying initially
from ground to ground, the differences disappearing as the fleet adjusted

its hunting activities. In the case of the Arctic, however, equilibrium
was probably not achieved before the New Bedford whalers began abandoning

their home port for the west coast port of San Francisco. Furthermore, the
Arctic was by far the most dangerous ground, exhibiting much higher rates

of vessel loss than the other grounds. Thus, even if whalemen, owners, and
agents were risk neutral, it should have taken higher rates of gain, gross,

to attract whalers to the Arctic. Therefore, since the analysis excludes
vessels that were lost while whaling, one would expect that vessels hunting
in the Arctic would appear to be more productive than vessels that avoided

that ground. As among other grounds, differences might be slight, with the
new grounds of the Indian and Pacific oceans perhaps displaying modestly
higher average productivities than the Atlantic.

One word of warning: Although acknowledged mixed voyages (i.e.,
voyages reported to have been to the Pacific and Arctic, for example) are
excluded from the regression data set, to some extent all voyages to any

ground but the Atlantic were mixed. That is, even if the vessel was sent

23

to hunt in the Arctic, Indian, or Pacific Ocean, it was forced to pass
through other grounds, and captains seldom passed up a chance to catch a

whale. Moreover, if weather or catch proved discouraging captains
frequently steered to adjacent grounds for short periods of time. Thus the
assignment of ground should not be thought to have precluded the
possibility that the vessel hunted at least a little in other grounds.

(e) Rig Types
As time passed hunting grounds shifted, and so did the way vessels

were rigged. There had never been more than one or two of the smaller
vessels --

brigs,

sloops, and schooners --

in

the Pacific and Indian

oceans, and there was none at all in the western Arctic, but by the middle

of the period they had all but disappeared from the Atlantic as well. Over
the first half of the period barks gradually eroded the dominant position
previously held by ships in all grounds, but they really came into their
own in the western Arctic, where the relative ease of handling and of
launching the two stern boats were matters of great importance.

In the regression, barks, brigs, sloops, and schooners are grouped

together. It should be kept in mind however that the three smaller classes
represented only a tiny fraction of the total. Thus the comparison is
really between ships and barks (excluding all but barks does not affect any
result).

The performance of this somewhat heterogeneous group was compared with

the performance of ships. The expectation as to sign is somewhat
ambiguous. Ships dominated in the Atlantic, Indian, and Pacific grounds in
most years, but barks were more important in the Arctic and ultimately

pushed their competitors from the other grounds as well. On net for all

24

grounds and all years the coefficient on the ship dummy was thought likely
to be positive.

(f) Vessel Size
The shift toward ships and toward more distant grounds was associated
with an increase in the size of whalers, but vessel size also rose

independently of these developments. That is, standardizing for rig and
hunting ground, vessel size increased. The shift seems not to have been a
pure scale phenomenon.26 Tonnage was entered (squared, since tonnage also
appears in the formula used to estimate productivity) as an independent

variable. Given the shift toward larger vessels, we expected a positive
sign on the coefficient of this variable.

(g) Mode of Entry into the Fleet
Some vessels were built for whaling, others transferred into the fleet
froni the merchant marine, and still others, vessels that had originally

entered by one of these two routes, were rerigged (ships were often

rerigged as barks, particularly to hunt the Arctic). Ceteris paribus, one

would expect vessels built for the fleet to be most productive. Whether
one should expect this result to emerge from the statistical analysis,

however, is not so clear. In the flush times of New Bedford whaling,
particularly when the Arctic was opened, many vessels were quickly
transferred into the whaling fleet and many ships were rerigged as barks to

fit them for Arctic hunting. It took longer to design and build vessels to
exploit this rich ground, and, by the time these entrants were in service,
some of the "first arrival" gains had almost certainly evaporated.

Transferred and rerigged vessels may, then, exhibit unusually high

25

productivity levels, for market as opposed to technical reasons.

(h) Age of Vessel
The age of the vessel (entered as age and age squared) also captures

the effects of more than a single set of forces. Elements of wear and tear
that influenced productivity, a technical characteristic that one might
hope to capture in the age variable, are confounded with the consequences

of qualitative differences among vessels. Effective vessels were
presumably survivors; ineffective vessels were transferred by their owners
to other activities, were condemned at an early age, or were destroyed in

service. The regression should pick up this influence as well as capital
consumption. Thus one could expect to find a positive sign on the
coefficient for age, as poor vessels were screened out with advancing age,

and a negative sign on the coefficient for age squared, as wear and tear
reduced even an efficient vessel's effectiveness.

As a second device for uncovering the influence of the deterioration
of a vessel's productive capacity, the last voyage of each vessel was

identified. If poor productivity performances eventually led to
condemnation or to transfer to other activities, the variable should have a
negative sign.

(i) Innovations
Although they were not equally important, three types of technical
innovations were widely adopted in the whaling fleet between the 1820's and

the 1880's. The first reflected improvements in maritime technology in
general; the other two were associated with improvements in whaling

narrowly defined. Although the years between 1820 and 1845 have been

26

viewed by some specialists as technologically unprogressive, the period

was, in fact, marked by substantial technical progress. There was a series
of advances that were first tested in the merchant fleet and then borrowed

by the builders of whaling vessels. These advances included, in addition
to the substantial gains realized by improvements in the techniques of ship

construction, "patented rigging, deck machinery, and fittings. Such things
as geared capstans and windlasses, iron strapped blocks, geared
steering, .

. .geared winches, new mast and spar ironwork. . .rod rigging and

turnbuckles, screw- or lever-operated, were [also] introduced."27 In
addition the number of sails was increased (the top sail, for example, was
divided into an upper and a lower half) for ease in handling.28
The second set of innovations was in vessel design: barks were

specifically designed for whaling. These new vessels were first built in
the vicinity of New Bedford in the mid-l850's. They were constructed with
raking stems and with sharper lines than the usual whalers. "The hull
design of these vessels had much in common with that of the clippers.

Their sailing qualities were disguised by the heavy appearance of the hull,
above water, which was emphasized by the deck houses and the whale boats
carried on strong davits [another innovation] or on skids above the deck.

These American whalers were built of wood, copper sheathed below the

waterline.

.

.

." 29

.

They were, in fact, medium clippers, "sharp floored

and easy bilged to make them roll down when 'cutting out' a whale."3°
The third group of innovations was in "whalecraft," the implements
employed to capture and kill the whale -- harpoons, lances, whale guns of

various types.31 According to Scammon (see Appendix 2) in a period of
twenty years these innovations had as revolutionary an impact on whaling as
had all the vessel design changes that took place between the 17th and the

27

late 19th centuries. The successful inventions were made in the relatively
short period, 1848-1865, and were widely diffused by the mid-1870's. The
most significant of the group, the darting gun, was invented last (1865),
and did not begin to diffuse rapidly until the early 1870's.
(See Appendix 2.)

Unfortunately, the Dias data do not indicate the equipment carried on

the various whaling voyages. The period during which the innovations
diffused is clear, however, as well as the fact that they diffused very

widely. In the regression, therefore, a dummy was entered to distinguish
voyages sailing before January 1, 1870, by which date the chief design and

whalecraft innovations had been made and most had been widely diffused. If
these new techniques had affected productivity favorably, the coefficient
on the variable would be positive.

(j) Competition for Labor
A frequently told story attributes the collapse of the American
whaling fleet to the qualitative deterioration of the vessel crews as the

best labor was bid away by improving onshore opportunities. Real wage
rates ashore certainly were rising through a substantial part of this
period and our preliminary analysis of whaling lays suggests that the

return to whalemen may not have been keeping pace. The pool of seamen
available to man the whalers may very well have deteriorated, with

unfavorable consequences for whaling productivity. With measures of labor
quality this proposition could be tested directly, and we hope to be able

to do so in future. At present, however, we must settle for an indirect
test, employing wage rate data, alone. We first entered wage indexes of
common and skilled labor on shore as independent variables.32 Since the

28

two proved to be collinear, we re-ran the regression, using only one wage

series at a time. The choice between the two mattered little: The results
are virtually identical, whether the common or the skilled index is

employed. The coefficient should be negative if the New Bedford whaling
industry really did have a labor problem.

(k) Time at Sea
As the fleet moved into more distant waters, the organization of
hunting was revised to cope with the problems raised by the greater

distances. Resupply and transshipment points were developed; by using
these bases, a vessel could hunt for longer periods and catch more than it

could bring home itself. Organized resupply and transshipment were
important institutional innovations. To capture their influence on
productivity, the interval at sea (actually, the square of the interval)
was entered as an independent variable in the regression equation.
Unfortunately, the variable also picks up other influences, including, for
example, the bad luck (or poor performance) that kept a vessel long at sea

before an adequate cargo was obtained. If the first influence - -

the

innovation of the transshipment point -- predominated, the coefficient on

this variable should have a positive sign; otherwise, it should have a
negative sign.

(1) Measurement Errors
The "tonnage" for most vessels in the data set refers to old
admeasurement tonnage; in a few cases, however, it

refers

to new

adnieasurement tonnage (see footnote 16). A dummy was introduced to deal

with the problem. The coefficient of this dummy should have a negative

29

sign.

(m) Time
Finally, time was entered as an independent variable. As will be
evident, the technology variable - -

which

is a time dunmy - -

leaves

something to be desired and might pick up any of a variety of time-

dependent processes other than technical change. While the
comprehensiveness of the model, both theoretically and empirically reduces

the chances of such an eventuality, we decided to reduce them further by
entering time as a device for detrending (the issue is taken up further

below). The analysis is limited to voyages leaving New Bedford in 1820 or
later. The time variable is, therefore, the year the vessel sailed from
New Bedford minus 1820.

(6) Statistical Results
(a) General Considerations
The general New Bedford data set contains evidence on over 4100

whaling voyages in the period 1790-1906, but this paper is concerned with

only some of them. First, since the industry was unduly affected by
political and military events during the early period, the years before
1820 have been excluded (reducing the universe to fewer than 3,900

voyages). Second, a number of incomplete observations were dropped. As a
result, the regression analysis is based on fewer than 2400 observations,

confined to the period 1820-1896. The sample is a very large one, but is
it representative? If it is representative, of what is it representative?

of New Bedford voyages? of east coast voyages? Unlike many other
Northeastern ports, New Bedford engaged in diversified whaling. It sent

30

vessels to every hunting ground, and the port was regarded as

representative of the east coast ports taken together. The sample,
however, was certainly not randomly drawn from all of the east coast

voyages. Indeed, it was not even randomly drawn from the list of New
Bedford voyages.

To test the extent to which the sample resembles the universe of New
Bedford voyages, 1820-1896, we compared average sample and universe values
for each of the outputs, the data on crew numbers, vessel tonnage, and

average voyage time, by hunting ground. On the whole, we found that the
sample over-represents successful voyages.

To test whether this feature of the sample made the regression results
unrepresentative of the behavior of the entire New Bedford fleet, we re-ran
the regression analysis on the relatively unsuccessful voyages alone, i.e.,

on the 1000 voyages with the lowest levels of productivity. In all but
five cases (intercepts and independent variables), the coefficient signs
were the same for the full sample and for the sample of unsuccessful

voyages. In three of the remaining five cases, the interpretation of the
variable was left essentially unchanged, despite the sign change (e.g., low

significance levels; very small coefficients). We concluded, therefore,
that although some features of the full sample may make it imperfectly
representative for some purposes, nonetheless the regression results do

adequately describe New Bedford whaling. Although we cannot demonstrate
the matter rigorously, we also believe that the regressions capture the
nature of east coast whaling as a whole.

31

(b) The Model
The results of the first regression (#1) appear in Table 10. The
equation explains almost half of the productivity variance, a level of
explanatory power that is excellent for a pooled cross section-time series

data set, particularly given the nature of this industry. It is well known
that the variation between the performances of one vessel and another could
be extremely wide and that whalemen attributed such variations in some

considerable measure to luck. The Dias data also show that certain vessels
--

and probably certain agents and captains --

typically

performed above

standard, and others, typically below. Even in these cases, however,

performance varied from one voyage to the next. No attempt has yet been
made to sort these matters out and to see how far the quality of the
vessels, agents, and captains differed one from the other (although these

are feasible projects). The regression equation leaves luck out of account
and deals only indirectly with the quality of captain and crew. Not all of
the variables conform precisely to the theoretical requirements. With
these matters in mind the degree of explanatory success attained by the
equation seems very high.33

(b-i) Strong Priors

We had strong expectations as to the signs on the coefficients of six

of the variables in the equation. Specifically, we expected positive signs
on the vessel size variable, on the Arctic dummy, and on the technological
date dummy, while we expected negative signs on the wage series and on the

tonnage measurement and last voyage dummies. In every case the signs are
as expected, while the coefficients are large and, in all cases but one,
significantly different from zero at the one percent level.34

32

(b-2) Weak Priors

We had expected productivity in the Indian and Pacific oceans to
exceed productivity in the Atlantic, and the regression confirms our

expectations. The Pacific, the ocean to which most voyages were made,
proves to have been, on average, a more productive hunting ground than the

Indian Ocean, but not by a wide margin. Per our expectations, ships were
more productive, on average, than other vessels.

(b-3) Tests of Hypotheses in the Literature

Contemporary comment and the subsequent literature on whaling suggest
that productivity may have been adversely affected by over-hunting, on the

one hand, and heavy competition among whalers, on the other. Our study of
data on whale stocks, the procreative capacities of whales, and the level
of hunting in the nineteenth century led us to doubt that over-hunting was
a major problem;35 the possibility that competition may have reduced
productivity seemed more likely to us, a priori.

In the cases of the hunting pressure indexes, our guesses are shown to

have been correct. Both indexes carry small coefficients of the wrong
sign, one not significantly different from zero at conventional levels of

significance. The coefficient of the competition variable has the sign
that a reading of the literature would lead one to expect, but it is very
small, as is the t

value

associated with it.36

(b-4) Complex Variables

Three sets of variables capture the effects of more than one
influence, which made the signs and values of the coefficients of the

variables difficult to predict. The favorable influence of the

33

transshipment innovation was apparently overborne by the unfavorable
influence of long, unsuccessful hunts (the coefficient on voyage length is

negative). The large catches associated with the opening of the Arctic
appear to have formed the measured effect of mode of entry on productivity.

The regression shows no significant productivity difference between

transfers and vessels built for the fleet. Rerigged vessels, however,
exhibit a modest but significant advantage, an advantage that presumably
reflects as much the date of their entry to the fleet as any underlying
technical superiority.

Finally, the age variables no doubt reflect the experience of
successful survivors, but it is clear that the unfavorable effects of aging

also figure in the results. The measured level of productivity turns down
at about the age of fifty, if the coefficients on age and age squared are

to be believed. That figure would probably not have surprised whaling men
of the nineteenth century, who were accustomed to vessels that lasted much

longer than this in the whaling trade.37 It may be that, properly
refitted, an old vessel was, indeed, only very modestly inferior to what it

had been when new. Certainly there is some suggestion of this idea in the
literature, and these results appear to add additional support.

(b-5) No Priors

Time was entered as a detrending variable, while the specialization
indexes were incorporated in our effort to cope with an undesirable feature

of the productivity index. The coefficient on time is very small - allowing for the nuniber of years covered by the equation --

and

even

is not

significantly different from zero (the t value is very small). There is
the suggestion here that the equation is comprehensive, leaving no role for

34

time, but we return to this point below.

Both of the specialization dummies carry negative coefficients, the

one for sperm whalers a very large one. Since there is no good reason to
believe that sperm whalers were, indeed, at so dramatic a disadvantage, the
strong suggestion is that the productivity index, even with missing values
supplied (see above), understates the productivity of specialist vessels.

The specialist variables correct for this feature of the index, however, so
that the regression results should not be unduly influenced by the problem.

(c) Interaction Terms
In two respects it appeared before the fact that the model could be

improved by introducing interaction terms. Specifically, the advantages of
the bark were said to be pronounced only in the Arctic, while ships were
believed to have important advantages in the Indian and Pacific oceans.
The matter could be explored by interacting the vessel type and hunting

ground dummy variables. Furthermore, the institutional advantage of the
refitting and transshipment port were exploited only by vessels sailing to
the Indian, Pacific, and Arctic Oceans. Interacting voyage length and
hunting ground might, then, reveal the favorable consequences of this
institutional innovation, consequences that are not exhibited in the
coefficient of the voyage duration variable of the first equation.

In fact, these procedures throw no new light on the problem of whaling

productivity. The signs on the voyage duration -

hunting

ground

interactions are all negative. We are unable to separate out the favorable
effects of the institutional innovations. The vessel type-hunting ground
interactions have the correct signs, but the differences among them are not

large. Little additional is learned from them.

35

(d) Technical Changes and Labor Quality: Some Further Thoughts
While

the

regression analysis unfolds reasonably and seems to reveal

important aspects of forces at work on U.S. whaling productivity, some of

the variables are less than perfect and pose interpretive problems. Two
sets of these variables -- measuring technical changes and labor quality - -

deserve further attention.
New technology did diffuse very rapidly, so that the use of a time

dummy to proxy technical changes is certainly reasonable. (See Appendix
2.) The fact remains, however, that the dummy is only an indirect
indicator of technical change, and could be picking up the effects of some

other time-dependent process. It would be helpful to have direct evidence
of the tools and methods employed by the whalers in our sample.
Most whalers had an outfitting book that listed the gear aboard the

vessel at the beginning of each voyage. One part of the book was devoted
to ttwhalecraft,tt the implements used to capture the whale. As we have

indicated, among the three sets of technical changes those that appear to
have had the greatest impacts on productivity were innovations in

whalecraft. Whales were frequently lost because a harpoon failed to hold
or because the whale smashed the attacking boat before the boatheader was

able to dispatch it. Innovations were devised to make the harpoon more

secure and the lance, more deadly. The two-flued harpoon was partly
replaced by the more secure one-flued harpoon, and that device was, in

turn, replaced by the toggle iron. Boatheaders shifted from common lances,
to steel lances, to bomb lances shot from guns, to the deadly darting gun.
(See Appendix 2.)

Some outfitting lists have survived and we have managed to assemble
seventy-five that can be used to establish the gear that was actually

36

aboard the vessels in the sample. Unfortunately, however, the range of
experience depicted in these lists is very narrow: there is, for example,

little usable evidence on the darting gun. Thus the comparisons that can
be drawn depend on very little hard evidence:

Average
Productivity Index
vessels with toggle irons
vessels w/o toggle irons

69

vessels with bomb lances
vessels w/o bomb lances

68

6

7

.655
.481

.649
.567

The mean productivity of the voyages using advanced gear was greater than
the mean productivity of the rest, but the sample sizes are small and the

differences between the sample means are not significant (student's t). We
also ran various regressions in which the technological date dummy was
replaced by dummies relating to the use of toggle irons and whale guns.

Not surprisingly, none was very illuminating. The regression in Table 11
is characteristic.

It will be observed that only one of the technological variables has
the right sign, and neither carries a coefficient significantly different

from zero at a conventionally acceptable level. In view of the very
limited number of vessels outfitted with the earlier technology, and in the
absence of evidence on the darting gun, the regression results cannot be
taken to be a very serious challenge to the view that improved whalecraft

technology did, indeed, raise whaling productivity. Settling the matter
definitively will require the acquisition of more outfitting books; but if,

as we believe, the new technology did diffuse very rapidly, even more
outfitting evidence may not make it possible to distinguish the effects of
technical change from other time-dependent processes.38

37

The wage variables were introduced into the regressions to test an

hypothesis drawn from the whaling literature: as wage rates ashore went
up, the best men were bid out of whaling, the quality of crews

deteriorated, and productivity fell. Our modeling of this hypothesis seems
straight-forward enough, linking, as it does, the underlying cause (higher
wage rates ashore) with the ultimate consequence (lower productivity). We
also believe, as we indicated above, that wage rates ashore rose relative

to the earnings of whalemen. The middle step in the argument, however, is

by-passed: the deterioration of the quality of crews. Did crews really
decline in quality? We are presently exploring this question by collecting
signatures and marks as well as stations from the crew lists. While this
task is as yet incomplete, the data assembled so far strongly suggest that
both literacy and the skill level among crewmen fell markedly, in the

1840's and 1850's. If the analysis confirms these conjectures we should be
able to conclude that the testimony of the whaling literature and of the

coefficients on the wage variables in the regressions is correct: the
quality of whaling crews did decline, as time passed.

The wage series pose a second problem. We know that the productivity
index for the fleet as a whole declined from 1820 to the 1860's, while the

wage rate ashore rose. The strong negative association between the wage
series and the vessel productivity series may, therefore, describe only the
numerical relations between two trends that, in fact, have no true

theoretical connection. The latter proposition could be tested by
differencing or detrending the data. Such a procedure is not appropriate
in the present case, however. The hypothesis in the literature is, in
fact, an hypothesis relating to trends. That is, the argument is not that
a rise in wages ashore in year 1 reduced the quality of whaling seaman in

38

year 1, and that a decline in wages ashore in year 2 raised the quality of

seamen in that year. The argument is that a persistent, strong increase in
the wage rate ashore led to the deterioration of whaling crews.

Nonetheless, we did attempt a species of detrending, above and beyond

that attempted in equation #1. First, we restricted the regression to
voyages departing after 1833 - -

a

period that saw productivity first fall

and then rise, finally re-achieving in the 1890's the levels attained sixty

years before. Second, in order to allow for the remaining long-term
variations in productivity, we entered time and time squared variables.
The regression appears in Table 12.

It will be observed that the common wage coefficient retains a large
negative value and is significantly different from zero at better than the

one percent level. The correlations between the coefficients of the two
time variables and the common wage coefficient are also very small (- .082

and -.035). The wage series appears to be capturing something other than
time. The suggestion that the quality of whalemen deteriorated, as
opportunities ashore improved, and that the decline in the quality of crews
tended to lower productivity, ceteris paribus, is strengthened.39

Two other features of the regression are worthy of notice. First, the
signs, coefficient values, and significance levels of most of the variables
are very similar to those in Table 10, which is reassuring, since it

suggests that we have identified stable relationships. The significance
levels are also very high, across the board.

Second, one might have supposed, before the fact, that the
introduction of time squared might displace the technological dummy - -

a

dummy that divides the observations at January 1, 1870. The reason for
this expectation is that productivity turned up late in the period (see the

39

chart), so that one could expect time squared to carry a positive

coefficient, which it does. Notice, however, that the technological dummy
retains a large coefficient, significantly different from zero at the one

percent level. The correlation matrix also shows clearly that the
technological dummy is not simply a version of time squared. The
correlation between the coefficients on the technological dummy and time
squared is only 0.0144.

(7) Conclusions

After 1820 a series of changes in the economic environment pressured

whaling agents to change their ways. The rapid growth of the demand for
lubricants and illuminants led agents to send their captains farther and

farther from home in search of whale and sperm oil. The whalemen opened
rich grounds in the South Atlantic, the Indian Ocean, and the Pacific. The
subsequent change in the structure of demand for whaling products -- a
change that favored whale bone over sperm and whale oil -- sent captains to

the North Pacific in search of right whales. One of them was venturesome
enough to push through the Bering Strait into the Bering Sea, where he

found a profusion of the greatest of the bone whales, the bowhead. He was
quickly followed by many other captains.

These shifts in demand and in hunting grounds, coupled with emerging

labor problems, led the agents to re-organize the industry. In place of
the fourteen-month voyage to Davis Strait and the Atlantic, typical of the
early nineteenth century, voyages of two, three, and even four or more
years to the Indian Ocean, the Pacific and the Western Arctic had become

common by mid-century. Different vessel types (ships in the Pacific; barks
in the Arctic) and new designs of each type (clipper style, with heavy use

40

of power winches) were adopted. The new designs came in part from
unspecialized builders for the merchant marine, and in part from ship

architects specializing in whalers. Longer voyages meant the adoption of
larger vessels of each type and the development of re-supply and trans-

shipment points in Hawaii and Panama. In the whale boats, the whaling gun
replaced the hand-held lance, and toward the end, the darting gun, the most

effective American whalecraft innovation, was widely adopted. The agents
responded to the economic and technical stimuli. They reacted quickly and
effectively. For example, when the writing was on the wall - - when the
Arctic had become the most profitable hunting ground, when steamers proved
the most effective whalers, and when the transcontinental rail lines were
in place - -

they

abandoned New Bedford and reberthed their vessels in San

Francisco.

These changes in environment and the reactions to them by the agents
affected productivity in ways nicely captured in the regression appearing

in Table 10. The clearest and most powerful environmental change was the
deterioration in the quality of labor, occasioned by competition ashore.

According to the coefficient on the common wage variable, productivity fell

.006 points for every point the real wage ashore went up. Since the real
common wage ashore rose by 52 points between 1820 and 1860 and another 34

points between 1860 and 1895, the effect was a strong one. Thus, if we
press these results as far as we can - --

perhaps harder than they should be

the common wage variable ttaccountstt for a decline of .504 in the

productivity index across the full period. Given a dependent mean of .733,
this is a very powerful effect, indeed.

The changing quality of labor may also be hidden in a second variable,

the one concerned with voyage length. This paper had been completed to

41

this point in its present form when we encountered Charles Nordhoff's

little book, Whaling and Fishing.4° Nordhoff's account strongly suggests
that the quality of crews deteriorated as voyage length went up. Except
when whales were actually under attack, whaling was immensely boring,

particularly for seamen accustomed to the constant activity of a

merchantman, or a naval vessel, or even a fishing smack. As voyages
increased in length, the boredom became unbearable and the rate of
desertion increased dramatically, a point made by many students of the

industry. Nordhoff claims that the problem became so serious that
recruiters began to by-pass seamen and recruit the greenest of green hands.
These hands, since they had not had the experience of merchant service,

might be less likely to be unfavorably affected by the tedium of the

voyage, but also their prospects on desertion were dim. A seaman could
desert and easily pick up another vessel. Not so a green hand who had
nothing but his brief whaling experience.

Whether or not Nordhoff is right as to the recruitment practices of
agents, the variable "voyage length" may pick up the unfavorable
consequence of the rising desertion rate, in addition to the factors

previously discussed. Indeed, it may well be that this factor is the most
important one influencing the coefficient on the variable "voyage length."
The reactions of agents to these - -

and

other - -

environmental

changes

are also captured nicely in the regression. There are, first, the shifts
in hunting ground, the movement first into the Pacific, with its vast
supplies of sperm whales, and then into the Western Arctic, in pursuit of

the bowhead. These changes can be though of as the results of a persistent
search for better hunting grounds, the agents adjusting activities in ways

that raised productivity. There is also, however, another aspect of them:

42

they reflect the changing structure of demand. The drive into the Pacific
in the 20's, 30's and 40's was motivated by the high price of sperm oil;
the drive into the Western Arctic after 1848, by the market for baleen.

All of the preceding discussion of the regression, while it is
concerned with productivity change, leaves technical considerations aside.

This point is an important one. The principal environmental influences on
productivity and some of the chief actions taken by agents to raise

productivity had nothing to do with technology. That point is worth
stressing. Nonetheless, agents also manipulated technological variables
and the results they obtained show up in the coefficients of the regression
in Table 10.

Thus the adoption of ships, as opposed to other rig types, increased
productivity (ceteris paribus) by a substantial amount (coefficient of
+0.11, as compared with a dependent mean of +0.733), presumably reflecting
the advantage of ships in the Indian and Pacific Ocean hunting grounds, the

grounds that were most important throughout the full period. The choice to
re-rig to bark specification with the opening of the Arctic also is shown
to have been an important factor promoting higher productivity (coefficient
of +0.09), while the adoption of improved vessel design and, perhaps more
important, better whale craft, had an enormous effect, according to the

regression (+0.310). The change in vessel size was also favorable,
although of a smaller order of importance. For example, the rise in
average ship size between 1821-35 and 1871-75 improved productivity only
+0.006, according to the regression coefficient.
The regression, then, effectively describes the chief influences

bearing on whaling productivity, including the activities of agents. A
substantial part -- a little over half --

of

the variance is left

43

unexplained, however. The place to seek for further enlightenment is
surely among the human actors in this drama. How far did the identity of

the agent matter? Presumably there were good agents and bad ones. How far
did the quality of the agent determine the result of the voyage? The same

question may be asked with respect to the captain. Did crews regularly
break up after each voyage, or were some crews kept together to sail a

second and a third time? If so, were such crews more effective? All of
these queries can be treated with the data set detailed in this paper and
all will be the subject of our attention in the months ahead.

44
Footnotes

1. For a criticism of this approach, see Edward Ames and Nathan
Rosenberg, "The Enfield Arsenal in Theory and History," The Economic
Journal, Vol LXXVIII, No. 312, Dec. 1968.

See, for example, the papers of Matthew Howland, held by
2.
Baker Library of the Graduate School of Business, Harvard University.
Howland was an agent who kept a particularly firm
grip on the activities of his captains.

3. Robert Owen Decker, Whaling Industry of New London (York,
1973), 119.

4. Ibid., 19.

5. Alexander Starbuck, History of the American Whale Fishery (Waltham, MA,
1878), 57. Starbuck's History was first published in Part IV of the Report
of the U.S. Commission on Fish and Fisheries (Washington, D.C., 1878).

6. Walter S. Tower, A History of the American Whale Fishery (Philadelphia,
1907), Table I, 129. For the first year for which he has tonnage
statistics, Tower lists the tonnage of the U.S. fleet at 4,129. At the end
of the war it was 1,168. The maximum value reached during this period was
12,339 (1804).

7. Edgar Winfield Martin, The Standard of Living in 1860 (Chicago, 1942),
95.

8. Louis S. Russell, A Heritage of Light (Toronto, 1968), 58.

9.

Tower, .

cit.,

126, Table III.

10. Ibid., 127, Table IV. Until 1862 Tower's whale oil statistics include
data on "other fish oil."

11. Ibid., 126, 127, Tables III and IV.

12. Ralph S. Kuykendall, The Hawaiian Kingdom, Vol. I, 1778-1854,
Foundation and Transformation (Honolulu, 1968), 309.

45

13. Joseph Dias, MSS. The New Bedford Whaling Fleet, 1790-1906, on deposit
at Baker Library, Graduate School of Business, Harvard University. See
Anonymous, "The New Bedford Whaling Fleet, 1790-1906," Bulletin of the
Business History Society 6 (December 1932), 9-14, for a discussion of the
manuscript. A.B.C. Whipple (Tall Ships and Great Captains (New York,
1951), 179-185) says that Joseph Diaz (sic), Jr. (then only twenty-eight
years old) was captain of the Pocahontas in 1850, when that vessel was
rammed and nearly sunk by a large whale in the south Atlantic.

cit.;

Hegarty, Returns of Whaling Vessels Sailing from
14. Starbuck, .
American Ports (New Bedford, 1959).

15. Federal Writers' Project, Works Progress Administration of
Massachusetts, Whaling Masters (New Bedford, 1938). Where Dias disagrees
with Starbuck pr Hegarty or Whaling Masters, we accepted Dias, unless there
was very good reason to prefer the other. Hegarty's records for the late
nineteenth century and early twentieth century are more complete than
Dias's; we therefore filled out our data set with Hegarty's data. The Dias
records for the period before 1876 are also probably incomplete (perhaps
ten to fifteen percent) but less seriously so, and we made no effort to
complete them. It should be said that matters of completeness are not
easily settled. The ports of Dartmouth, Fairhaven, Mattapoisett, and New
Bedford were within a few miles of each other and whether a vessel belonged
to one or the other of these ports on any given voyage was not always
easily settled. For example, Dias lists some voyages as beginning from New
Bedford, which Whaling Masters attributes to Fairhaven, across the Acushnet
River from New Bedford, and vice versa. This type of disagreement appears
to be of a random nature and should have absolutely no importance to the
statistical estimates described in this paper.

16. The official procedure for measuring vessels changed in 1865. In most
cases Dias recorded the tonnage of the vessel when it entered the fleet,
and, since most entered before 1865, the tonnages of most of the vessels in
our data set are ttoldlt tonnages. In virtually every one of those few cases
where Dias chose to report "new" tonnage, we were able to adjust to the
"old" standard by consulting Starbuck. A few cases remain, however, of
vessels that were built or transferred from the merchant marine into the
whaling fleet after 1865. The "old" tonnages of these vessels are unknown,
and while we have developed formulae for translating "new" into "old"
tonnages that work quite well for many purposes (Davis, Gallman, and
footnote 10), we decided that they
Hutchins, "The Structure... ,"
are not sufficiently exact for the purposes of this paper. We therefore
left the capacities of these few vessels expressed in "new" tons and
recognized the problem in the regression analysis by entering a dummy

. cit.,

variable.

46

17. Rough estimates derived from Elmo Paul Hohman, The American Whalemen
(New York, London, Toronto, 1928), 315 and 325, assuming that the
provisioning described on p. 325 for sperm whalers was to cover twenty-nine
months, and for right whalers, twenty-three months (see p. 327, 1843). The
estimates were carried to other years than 1844 on the basis of the Warren
and Pearson food price index (Historical Statistics of the United States.
1789-1945).

18. We took our data from port records, held by the National Archives, and
from the New Bedford Public Library's collection of the Whalemen's Shipping
Papers. The two sources overlap. Where they gave contradictory accounts,
we used the larger of the two values. We did not make use of the records
of the New Bedford Port Society, since they appear to be less comprehensive
than the records of the other two sources.

19. We thank Douglas W. Caves, V. Kerry Smith, Richard Hydell, and David
Guilkey, all of whom discussed these indexes with us.

20. Douglas W. Caves, Laurits R. Christensen, and W. Erwin Diewert,
"Multilateral Comparisons of Output, Input, and Productivity Using
Superlative Index Numbers," The Economic Journal, 92 (March 1982), 73-86.

21. The possibilities for specialization were greater than this statement
suggests. Among baleens, bowheads were taken in the Arctic; grays and
humpbacks, in temperate and tropical waters. Bowheads produced large
amounts of high quality baleen (whale bone); grays and humpbacks, much
less, per whale, and of lower quality.

22. Nonetheless, the possible significance of output mix -- degrees of
specialization explored in the regression analysis described below.

- is

23. Davis, Gallman, and Hutchins, "The Structure...," .
24. Whale oil includes oil taken from blackfish and walruses.

25. Davis, Gallman, and Hutchins, "The Decline of U.S. Whaling: Was the
Stock of Whales Running Out?" Manuscript.

47

26. See L.E. Davis, R.E. Galiman, and T.D. Hutchins, "Technology,
Productivity, and Profit: British-American Whaling Competition in the North
Atlantic, 1819-1848," presented to the Congress of the International
Economic History Association, Berne, August 1986. Since the productivity
formula assumes no scale economies, this point is an important one. It
should be said that, while the size of whalers increased, the range through
which the increase occurred was quite limited. The typical ship, for
example, ran between 300 and 350 tons, although some were as much as 500
tons.

27. Howard I. Chapelle, The Search for Speed Under Sail: 1700-1850 (New
York: W.W. Norton, 1967), P. 279.

28. Gordon Grant, Ships Under Sail: An Outline of the Development of the
Sailing Vessel (New York: Garden City Publishing Company, 1930), p. 24.

29. B.W. Bath, "The Clipper's Day," in Joseph Jobe (ed.), The Great Age of
Sail (London: Patrick Stephens, Ltd., 1967), 205-206.

30. Howard I. Chapelle, The History of American Sailing Ships (New York:
W.W. Norton, 1935).

31. Thomas G. Lytle, Harpoons and Other Whalecraft (New Bedford, 1984).

32. The wage rate indexes entered the regression with a lag. That is, a
voyage beginning in year n was associated with wage rate index numbers for
year n-i. The common wage rate series was computed from Paul A. David and
Peter Solar, "A Bicentenary Contribution to the History of the Cost of
Living in America," Research Economic History, vol. 2, 1977, data on p. 59
divided by data on p. 16. The skilled wage rate index was derived by
multiplying the series on p. 59 of David and Solar by the skill ratios on
p. 307 of Jeffrey G. Williamson and Peter H. Lindert, American Inequality
(New York, London, Toronto, Sydney, San Francisco, 1980) and then dividing
by the price index on p. 16 of David and Solar.

33. The superlative index is said to represent outliers badly, which could
distort our results. To test to see how large were the effects of
outliers, we dropped the 240 voyages (about 10 percent of all voyages) with
the highest productivities, and the 240 voyages with the lowest
productivities and ran the regression on this restricted data set. The
results were not markedly different.

48

34. As to size, compare the coefficients to the dependent mean. Bear in
mind that the vessel size variable is the square of vessel tonnage and the
coefficient on the common wage rate variable refers to each point of the
index number. The concluding section of the paper treats these issues in
more detail.

35. Davis, Gallman, and Hutchins, "The Decline of U.S. Whaling... ,"

cit.

.

36. The possibility that the variable, voyage length, was capturing overhunting and competition led us to drop the variable in one run, to see if
the signs, coefficients, and significance levels of the pressure and
competition indexes changed dramatically. They did not.

37. For example, the Charles Morgan served eighty years as a whaler, the
Rousseau, eighty-seven, the Maria, ninety. The Canton was lost in its
seventy-sixth year. Albert Cook Church, Whale Ships and Whaling (New York,
1938, reissued in 1960), 19, 20.

38. Unfortunately, there may be little more evidence to exploit. We have
collected data from virtually all the outfitting books at the New Bedford
Public Library, the New Bedford Whaling Museum, and the G.W. Blunt White
Library at Mystic. There may be more evidence in vessel logs and agents'
papers.

39. The t value on the ratio of the skilled to common wage indexes drops
to a low value, however, and the correlations between this coefficient and
the time coefficients become large. These are quite unimportant matters,
however, compared with the results with respect to the common wage series.

40. New York, 1895.

49

Appendix 1
Whale Stock Pressure Indexes

General Procedures

We began by assembling Frost's data on the initial stock of mature
female sperm whales for each of the oceans in which sperm whales are found:

the Atlantic (Frost's Divisions 1 and 2), Indian (Divisions 3-5), and

Pacific (Divisions 69).1 We then used the parameters from Frost's sperm
whale model (pp. 254-256, especially 257-260) to estimate the maximum

sustainable yield in each ocean. Next we distributed the U.S. catch of
sperm oil among the three oceans on the basis of the New Bedford catch,

which we derived from the Dias-Hegarty data set, described in the text. We
converted the catch into numbers of whales killed, following Starbuck's

procedure, and computed four-year moving averages.2 These averages, dated
to the year following (e.g., 1816-19 = 1820). were expressed as ratios of
the maximum sustainable yield relevant to the particular hunting ground.

The ratios, which reflect relative pressures on whale stocks (differing by

year and by ground), were then associated with the voyage data. Thus, a
vessel leaving New Bedford in 1820 to hunt in the Pacific would have an
associated "pressure index" of 1820 (reflecting average hunting 1816-19)

for the Pacific Ocean. We used four-year averages so that the indexes
would reflect the hunting pressures over an extended period, but there is

nothing sacrosanct about the number four. It could easily have been a
larger or a smaller number.

There are many things wrong with the sperm hunting "pressure index,"

but it is clearly the best option open to us, and we think that it is a
satisfactory proxy for the relative degree of sperm population depletion,

50

by hunting ground and by year.3 Similar procedures were followed in the
case of baleens.

Maximum Sustainable Yield
In order to produce indexes of the pressure placed on whale stocks by
U.S. hunting in the nineteenth century, we were obliged to estimate the
maximum sustainable yields of the sperm whale populations inhabiting the
Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans (a separate estimate for each
population) and the baleen whale populations inhabiting the Bering Strait
and Okhotsk Sea (taken together), and the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian

oceans (taken together). The absolute levels of these estimates matter not
at all; all that matter are the relative levels among hunting grounds and
years for each of the two broad whale types.

(Even relative levels between

the two broad whale types do not matter.) Since the initial population
numbers establish these relative differences, we could have adopted
procedures producing only rough estimates of the true maximum sustainable

yields. Our actual methods, while entirely adequate, were probably too
elaborate for the purpose.

According to Frost, the natural rate of mortality of sperm whales is
about 0.133 for the first two years of life and 0.05 thereafter (p. 257 --

but

see, also, Allen, pp. 9, lO). We assumed a static population with an

unchanging number of births each year. Given Frost's death rate data, and
the assumption of numerical equality between the sexes at each age, we were

able to estimate the age-sex structure of the population. Frost says that
the sperm whale population models assume females reach the age of sexual

maturity at between 8.5 and 10 years (p. 257). We chose 10 years, which
implies an average pregnancy rate of .22 in the stationary population (a

51

figure .03 higher than the one used by Frost). Since the maximum pregnancy
rate is .25, according to Frost, the implied ratio of net increase to the
sexually mature female population is .03 (assuming that the structures of
the stationary and maximum yield populations are the same).

The maximum sustainable yield is achieved at various female population
levels, depending upon the form in which the yield is to be obtained (i.e.
in females alone, or in males alone, or in females and males combined, or

in weight) (Frost, p. 260). We assumed that the yield was to be taken in
females alone, and therefore computed the yield against a mature female
population 60 percent of the original level (Frost, p. 260).

Without any doubt, our sperm M.S,Y. estimates are too low. One could
make a good case that the Frost "net pregnancy rate" of 0.06 should have
been used in place of our derived 0.03, and that we should have computed
the yield on the assumption that it was to be taken disproportionately in

the form of males. Moving to these assumptions would have produced much
larger M.S.Y. estimates and much lower indexes of hunting pressure on the

sperm whale stocks. But it would not have altered the relative levels of
the indexes from year to year or from hunting ground to hunting ground.

The regression requires that there be a pressure index for each

hunting ground for each type of whale. Since there are virtually no sperm
whales in the Arctic, we were obliged to produce a synthetic value for this

type of whale for this ocean. We used the average value of the indexes for
all other oceans. The coefficient on this index for the Arctic has no
substantive meaning.

We used the same mortality rates and population structure in the

estimating procedures for baleens. We assumed a maximum pregnancy rate of
.50 (e.g., Burton, p. 86) and an age of sexual maturity of 10.5. Both

52

these estimates may be too high (e.g., see Matthews, p. 84), but the errors

tend to offset and, in the event, they seem to have offset very well.5 At
least it is true that the crude birth rate implied by our simple model is
almost identical with the crude birth rate observed by D. W. Rice and A. A.

Wolman among the California gray whales during the recovery of this group

from over-hunting.6 The implied crude death rate, however, while at the
level of the average for sperm whales (Allen, p. 10), is about two
percentage points below the death rate found by Rice and Wolman among the

grays. The difference may reflect the fact that smaller whales, such as
the grays, have higher mortality rates than larger ones (Allen, p. 9),

presumably in part because they suffer the depredations of the killer

whales, while the larger types do not. It is also possible that our
mortality estimate is too low and that, as a result, our estimated M.S.Y.

level is too high. Once again it is worth remarking that for our purposes
such an error matters not at all, as long as the relative levels of the
hunting pressure index numbers among years and hunting grounds are correct.
Whether they are depends not on the M.S.Y. estimates but on the estimates
of the initial population levels.

Estimates of Whales Killed
The estimates of the numbers of whales killed were based on the
quantity of sperm and baleen oil brought back by hunters, following

procedures established by Alexander Starbuck. That technique works well
for sperm whales, and for baleen whales through the 1870's. After 1880 the
ratio of oil to baleen brought back drops sharply. Whalers were probably
abandoning blubber, a rational response to the dramatically changing

relative prices of baleen and oil. For the years after 1878, therefore,

53

the estimate of the number of whales killed was based on the amount of

baleen brought back. To produce the estimate it was necessary to infer
from the baleen returned the amount of oil that could have been obtained

from the whales that produced the baleen. This estimate (3.49 gallons per
pound of bone) was derived from the returns of U.S. hunting in the period
immediately preceding the 1880's.

Competition Index
The number of exploitable sperm whales in each hunting ground

(Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian) was taken from Frost. We defined the
Atlantic as Frost's divisions 1 and 2, the Indian, 3, 4, and 5, and the

Pacific, 6, 7, 8, and 9. We then converted exploitable whale stocks to
total whale stocks, per James Scharff.7 Gray whales were allocated to the
Pacific, bowheads, to the western Arctic and to the North Atlantic, per

Frost (pp. 266-267). We accepted Allen's estimates (p. 19) of the number
of humpbacks and rights in the North Pacific, and the latter were allocated

to the Arctic.8 Frost's estimates of the number of humpbacks and rights in
the Southern Hemisphere (converted from exploitable to total numbers, per
Scharff) were divided among the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans in
proportion to the number of sperm whales in these oceans.

Whales are not of equal size or equal value, but we made no attempt to

adjust for these matters. On the whole, baleens were bigger, but yielded
less valuable output, ton for ton, than sperm whales. Summing up without
weighting is a reasonable enough procedure.

Hunting voyages differed in duration, from time to time, hunting

ground to hunting ground, and voyage to voyage. Again, we made no effort
to introduce these subtleties into our index numbers. We assumed that a

54

vessel arriving in New Bedford from the Pacific, in, say, 1830 was affected
during its whaling voyage by the amount of competition from vessels leaving

for the Pacific in 1828. Thus if the vessel had hunted in the Pacific and
had returned to New Bedford in 1830, it was assigned the "competition index
numbert' for 1828. We were unable to allow for competition offered by
vessels other than those sailing from New Bedford.

We assumed that the western Arctic encompassed about 2.17 million

square miles (one-ninth of the Arctic Sea - --

the

representing

the Chukchi Sea

Bering Sea, the Sea of Okhotsk, and the Bering Strait); the

Atlantic, about 10 million square miles (roughly one-third of the area of
the Atlantic); the Pacific, about 22 million square miles (roughly one-

third of the area of the Pacific); the Indian, about 7 million square miles

(roughly one-quarter of the area of the Indian Ocean). These estimates
rest on data from the Columbia Gazeteer of the World (New York, 1962) and
maps showing whale migration routes in The Times Atlas of the World,
Comprehensive Edition (New York, 1980).

55

Notes to Appendix 1

1.
Sir Sydney Frost, The Whaling question (San Francisco, 1979), 266-267.
For a discussion of these estimates see Davis, Galiman, and Hutchins, "The
Decline of U.S. Whaling...," op. cit.

2. Starbuck, op. cit., 661. The procedure leads to overestimates of the
number of whales killed. See Davis, Gallman, and Hutchins "The Decline of
U.S. Whaling...," op. cit.

3. The short-comings of the index:
(1) A more subtle index would allow the whale stock of each ground to
decline, with hunting, and the fertility rate gradually to rise. But to
carry through with such a model would require judgments as to the identity
of the whales (by age and sex) captured each year. We opted for a simpler,
more straight-forward calculation, which calls for fewer judgments about
the nature of whale hunting.
(2) The procedure implicitly assumes that each ocean contains a single
population group, whereas each contains more than one. But our hunting
ground data do not permit us to draw distinctions so narrow.
(3) The division of the U.S. catch among hunting grounds on the basis
of the New Bedford catch involves the assumption that New Bedford was
typical of U.S. sperm whaling. It probably was, but we are unable to
demonstrate that. If we had the data to do so, we would be able to work
out a better method of division. Our procedure here is less than perfect,
but it is the best we could produce.
(4) The use of an average annual catch in the index is readily
defended, but there is no good defense for the selection of four years as
against other possibilities, a point already made in the text.
(5) Vessels sailing, e.g., to the Pacific might kill whales in the
Atlantic and the Indian Ocean, on the way to and from the Pacific. Thus
New Bedford "Pacific" catches probably include whales from other oceans.
(6) Only U.S. hunting is accounted for. While the U.S. was far and
away the leading hunter, other nations also participated in the hunt and
accounted for between 20 and 25 percent of the total catch.

4. K. Radway Allen, Conservation and Management of Whales (Seattle and
London, 1980).
5. Robert Burton, The Life and Death of Whales (Second Edition, New York,
1980); and L. Harrison Matthews, The Natural History of the Whale (New
York, 1978).

6. Life History and Ecology of the Gray Whale, American Society of
Mammologists, Special Publication 3, 1977.

56

7. James E. Scharff, "The International Management of Whales, Dolphins,
and Porpoises: An Interdisciplinary Assessment," Part One, Ecology Law
Ouarterlv. Vol. 6, 1977, 323. Scharff asserts that the ratio of the total
population to the exploitable population was 2 to 1, in the case of sperm
whales, and 1.5 to 1, in the case of baleens. Scharff uses these ratios to
convert both current (i.e., disequilibrium) and initial (i.e., equilibrium)
figures. One would expect the ratios to vary, from the first to the second
case, but for present purposes the coefficients are adequate.

The geographic definition of the Arctic used here -- including all of
probably somewhat too
the Bering Sea, as well as the Bering Strait broad. To compensate, we included in the region the North Pacific right
whales, whose migration route takes them through the Bering Sea.
8.

- is

57

Appendix 2

The Diffusion of Whalecraft Innovations

"There has been as great a revolution in the mode of killing whales
during the past twenty years, as there has been in the art of naval
warfare; were it not for this, but few whalers would now be afloat. .

Charles M. Scammon, The Marine Mammals of the North-Western Coast of
America (San Francisco, 1874), p. 226.

Scammon refers to whalecraft innovations, which he believes produced
effects in 20 years roughly equivalent to the changes in vessel design and
other aspects of outfitting that took place in the period between the 17th

and late 19th centuries. This appendix describes the principal innovations
and investigates the speed of their adoption)
The American style of whaling involved (1) a sailing vessel (later in
the period some had auxiliary steam power) and (2) several small (28 to 30
feet by 6 feet), light whaling boats, from which the attack on the whale

was made. The equipment in the boat and the attack on the whale depended
somewhat on the type of whale involved and the place of the attack. Gray
whales and humpbacks were typically taken in bays in shallow water, which
required certain types of equipment (e.g., humpbacks sank when killed, so
that boats had to carry gear to mark them and hold their bodies in place
until, eventually, they rose again; bay hunting called for the use of
anchors, useless in the open sea, where most hunting went on) and permitted
the use of other gear that was not very effective in the rougher waters

outside the bays (the Greener swivel harpoon gun, for example). Sperm
whales were regarded as much more ferocious than rights, requiring special

caution in the attack. Bowheads posed peculiar problems, since they could

58
-

- and

did - -

seek

escape from the hunters under the Arctic ice.

Despite these variations the fundamental character of the American

system is clear. It can be described best if we consider the case of, say,
a large bark hunting the Pacific. Slung from davits above the decks of the
bark are four whaling boats; two or three spares are stored elsewhere. Men
are in the cross-trees on watch for whales. When whales are sighted, the

boats are lowered to give chase. Each boat carries six men, five oarsmen
(three starboard and two port) and a steersman, called a boatheader. The
boatheader of each boat is normally a mate. With all four boats on the
sea, there are typically five or six men left to sail the vessel, keep
lookout, and signal the movements of the whales to the boats.

Whale boats were sailed and sometimes rowed. If there was danger that
the sounds of the oars would frighten the whale, they were paddled. The
boat crew attempted to approach the whale closely; if possible, they would
run the boat onto the whale's back, when the forward starboard oarsman --

known as the boatsteerer or harpooner -- would rise and thrust two harpoons
into the whale. Boatsteerer and boatheader would then change places in the
boat and, in the early days of whaling, the latter would slash at the whale
with a sharp implement called a spade, in an effort to sever the tendons in

the whale's flukes (tail) and to cripple him. This dangerous practice was
later generally abandoned.

The purpose of the harpoon was to hook the whale and attach it by a

line to the whaleboat. The weight of the line and the whaleboat were
intended to tire the whale and permit him to be approached once again. The
dispatching of the whale was then left to the boatheader, who killed it
with a tool called a lance, originally a long, hand-held stabbing
implement.

59

While the technique remained essentially unchanged, the implements

were improved in important respects. The principal innovations were
introduced between the late 1840's and the mid 1860's and they diffused
during the period of decline of the American fleet.

The most important innovations in harpoons (called "irons" by
whalemen) centered on the mode by which the implement was conveyed from the
boat to the whale, and on the features of the head of the harpoon that
affected its ability to hook the whale.

Most American harpoons were thrust or thrown - said - -

by

darted,

the whalers

hand. The harpoon was attached to a cut sapling, with bark left

on to improve the grip. The harpooner then thrust or threw the pole. If
he was successful, the harpoon hooked the whale and the pole was detached
and floated away.

Harpoon poles could not be thrown very far; thus attempts were made to
shoot the harpoon from swivel guns and from rocket launchers that closely

resembled the World War II bazooka. The swivel gun was invented at a very
early date and figured importantly in the Scotch and English fisheries, but
it never established itself in the American fisheries, except in the hunt

for gray whales in the California bays. Success with the swivel depended
upon calm seas (otherwise aim was thrown off) and sturdy boats, neither
common in the American fisheries.2

The rocket launcher would seem to have been a more promising line. It
was light and it did not have the kick of a swivel gun, an important matter
for American whalemen, in view of the small, light boats in which they

hunted. According to Lytle, notable whalemen from Scoresby to Rotch to
Roys reported great success with various rocket launchers. Yet there
appears to have been no rush among American whalemen to adopt this

60

innovation and its general impact seems to have been negligible.

Innovations respecting the head of the harpoon were numerous and some

were widely and rather quickly diffused. Although the variations on each
style were great, there appear to have been only three basic styles of

harpoon head: the two-flued, the one-flued, and the toggle. The terms are
descriptive. The head of a two-flued harpoon was shaped like an arrow
head, with sharp leading edges and dull following edges, the latter

intended to lodge in the flesh of the whale. Sometimes, however, the two-

flued harpoon pulled out. The one-flued harpoon --

with

only one following

edge -- was designed to minimize the chances that would happen, and was

widely regarded as superior to its predecessor. The toggle iron had a head
that turned on a pivet. When the harpoon was being thrown, the head was
held in a fixed position - -

sharp

edges forward - -

by

a small, light piece

of wood. When the head entered the whale, the wood broke, the head turned,
and the whale was securely hooked.
The crucial innovation - -

dated

to 1848 - -

appears to have been the

toggle iron.3 James Durfee, a leading New Bedford manufacturer of
whalecraft, produced 22,133 harpoons between May 15, 1830, and October 29,

1844, all two-flued. Between October 29, 1844, and May 9, 1850, only two
years after the invention of the toggle, he produced 7,526 two-flued
harpoons and 265 toggle irons, while between May 9, 1850, and October 27,

1862, the numbers were almost equal: 20,462 two-flued versus 20,191
toggle. The outfitting books of the bark Ospray list 190 "common" irons
and 50 toggle, in 1854; 40 two-flued, 10 one-flued, and 60 toggle, in 1866;

and 10 two-flued, 11 one-flued, and 90 toggle, in 188O. The bark Louisa
carried all common irons in 1850; 130 common and 50 toggle, in 1853; 42
each of the one- and two-flued and 100 of the toggle, in 1856; 36 two-

61

flued, 20 one-flued, and 100 toggle, in 1865; 10 two-flued, 3 one-flued,

and 120 toggle, in l874. The bark Globe listed 36 toggle in 1869.6
Scammon says that a first class whale ship on a Cape Horn voyage in the
early 1870's should carry 15 two-flued and 150 toggle harpoons.7

The examples could readily be multiplied. The lessons seem clear.
According to these records, the two-flued and toggle irons were the
important designs, the one-flued having limited transitional significance.
A clearer and firmer finding is that the toggle iron was adopted quickly,

achieved equal importance with the two-flued iron in the 1850's, but did
not clearly dominate the other forms until the 1870's, a quarter of a

century after its innovation. Even then, outfit books typically called for
a few common irons, in addition to the toggles.

Harpoons were made of iron, the shank of soft iron, to allow it to
bend under pressure and, thus, to reduce the likelihood that the head would

pull out of the whale. Hand lances, however, were to serve not as hooks,
but as stabbing devices, easily thrust into the whale and easily withdrawn,

so that subsequent thrusts could be made. The lance was typically made of
tough wrought iron, mounted on a pole, but the head was frequently of

steel. Lytle says steel was preferred -it completely displaced wrought iron,

for

obvious reasons -

- and that

.once steel was produced in

quantity in this country... ," a development presumably associated with a

decline in the relative price of steel.8 In fact, the timing is almost

right. Relative steel prices fell particularly sharply after 1867. If the
ratio of steel to wrought iron prices in 1867 is taken as the base of an

index number series (100) the index fell to 71, in 1870, and 59, in 1875.
Outfitting lists immediately reflected the change: the lists for the Emily
Morgan, 1842-1845, and the ships Julius Caesar, 1837, Magnolia, 1842, and

62

Francis Henrietta, 1843, mention no steel-headed lances, while those for
the barks Globe, 1869, and Mary Frazier, 1876, mention no iron-headed hand

lances.1° Scammon's list for the early 1870's also contains no hand lances
with iron heads.11 The Ospray carried half common and half steel-headed
lances in 1854, but its outfit had changed to all steel-headed lances by
1868.

There were other proposals to make the lance deadlier: heat it,
electrify it, poison it. None of these plans came to much, for fairly
obvious reasons: for example, crewmen reasoned (correctly) that if the
poison killed the whale, it might kill them, too, when they handled their

victim. The proposal to make the lance explosive, however, did come to
something. Explosive devices were commonly innovated with new modes of
delivering the lance to the whale, guns of various kinds.
The first set of guns consisted of shoulder guns, similar to shotguns,

and they were intended to be managed by the boatheader. Unfortunately they
produced a substantial kick, that frequently threw the boatheader to the
bottom of the boat, sometimes broke his collar bone, and occasionally

capsized the boat. Much inventive effort was directed toward dealing with
these problems, and eventually the Allen gun --

usually

called the Brand

gun because C.C. Brand developed and promoted it -- achieved a wide

acceptance. The progress of the shoulder gun is exhibited nicely in the
outfitting lists of the bark Ospray: The lists for 1851 and 1854 show no
whale guns, while those for 1866 and 1868 refer to three (fewer than one

per boat), presumably all shoulder guns. The number rises to six at the
end of the 1860's and the beginning of the 1870's, and remains at six in

1880, one per boat plus two spares. The bark Globe carried four in 1869,
Scammon (early 1870's) calls for four on his Cape Horn whaler, and John

63

Williams, Ca. 1880, allowed one gun per boat. The Lottie Beard, a resupply
vessel, Carried eight boxes of guns and lances, in 1886, while the order
books of Frank E. Brown, a New Bedford seller of whaling implements, show
the sale of 1,906 feathered lances --

i.e.,

lances for shoulder guns -- and

only 921 long lances and unspecified lances - -

presumably hand lances - -

in

1877 and 1878. By the fall of 1899 and the spring of 1900, Brown listed
only feathered lances and lances for darting guns (discussed below).12
The final whalecraft innovation of note combined in one instrument

most of the important characteristics of harpoon and whaling gun. It
consisted of a gun - -

called

a darting gun, or a Pierce gun, for its

inventor -- mounted on the staff of a harpoon. When the harpoon was darted

into the whale, a lever was depressed. The gun was fired and an explosive

lance was driven deep into the whale. The Pierce gun could deliver an
explosive lance more accurately than a shoulder gun. The location of the
gun - -

close

to the whale when it went off - -

meant that the lance was

delivered with great power, without conveying a "kick" to harpooner or

boat. Finally, the apparatus usually stopped the whale, preventing the
long struggles common when a standard harpoon was placed. In the Arctic,
where there was always danger that a harpooned whale would dive under the
ice, this feature was particularly important.

The darting gun was probably the most effective piece of whalecraft

introduced in the American fishery in the nineteenth century. It developed
late, however. It was invented in 1865 and its diffusion did not begin on
a large scale until the 1870's. The outfitting books of the bark Ospray in
the late 1860's and early 1870's make no mention of darting guns, but two

of them plus fifteen lances appear in 1880. None are on John Williams's
list for Ca. 1882, despite the fact that Williams had in mind an Arctic

64

voyage, but Scammon (early 1870's) called for four --

one

per boat -- and

50 darting gun bomb-lances. Clearly Scammon saw important uses for the
darting gun, but did not conceive of its replacing all its predecessors:

his list includes 35 steel-headed hand lances, four whaling guns, other

than the darting guns, and 150 shoulder gun bomb-lances. The Frank E.
Brown order books show a steady increase in the relative importance of the

darting gun: the fraction of the total lances supplied by Brown that fit
the darting gun rose from 7 percent, in 1877, to 9 per cent, in 1878, to 14
per cent, in 1879, to 41 per cent, in the fall of 1899 and the spring of

1900. A clearer indication of the change under way is that Brown sold only
eight Brand shoulder guns in the period 1877 through 1879, while he
disposed of 81 Pierce darting guns in the same years.13
In summary, the important whalecraft innovations were made in the
period between 1848 and 1865, and they diffused in the 1850's through at

least the 1880's. The order of adoption ran about as follows: toggle iron
(1848-1870), steel-head lance (1845?-l870), shoulder gun (1855?-1880),

darting gun (l865?-1885?). From the time when the diffusion of the toggle
iron was clearly well under way to the time when the darting gun had made a

substantial impact is an interval of about 30 years. The process began at
about mid century and was over in the early 1880's.

65

Notes to Appendix 2

1. Much of the information on the innovations comes from Thomas C. Lytle,
Harpoons and Other Whalecraft (New Bedford, 1984).

2.
Ibid., Ch. 4, Ch. 6. The Florida was outfitted with a Greener Swivel
gun and 20 irons in 1858 and Mrs. Williams describes the first mate
shooting the gun from time to time, chiefly at fin whales and always from
the deck of the Florida. She does not report that he hit anything with it.
Harold Williams (ed), One Whaling Family (Boston, 1964). The book consists
chiefly of the diary of Mrs. Williams, who went whaling with her husband
and raised a family at sea.

p.

3. Lytle, .

33.

4. New Bedford Whaling Museum, James Durfee, Mss. 56, Box 22, Series D,
Sub-Series 13; Swift and Allen, Mss. 5, Box 37, Volume 85. Lytle (.
p. 11) calls Durfee a typical New Bedford whalecraft maker.

5.

Ibid., p. 16.

G. W. Blunt White Library, Mystic Seaport, Inc., Outfit Book of bark
6.
Globe, 3rd Voyage, 1869, New Bedford, VFM 425.

7.

Scammon, .

8. Lytle, .

cit.,

cit.,

p. 316.

p. 133.

9. James M. Swank, History of the Manufacture of Iron in All Ages
(Philadelphia, 1892), p. 514.

10. G. W. Blunt White Library, op.cit., Charles W. Morgan Papers, 17981861, Account book, 1842-1848, Coll. 27, Vol. 35 Emily Morgan, vol. 24,
ship Magnolia, December 1842, ship Francis Henrietta, November 1843; Mary
Frazier (bark), Memorandum of Whaler's Outfits, 1876, VFM 1461; Julius
Caesar (ship) Papers, New London, coll. 167, Box 1/8.

11. Scammon, .

66

12. Swift and Allen, . cit.; outfit book of bark Globe, . cit.;
G.W. Blunt White Library, Mystic Seaport, Inc., John L.
Scammon, .
Williams, List Ca. 1882 of Provisions Needed to Outfit a Whaling/Sealing

t.;

Vessel for Sea, VFM 1430; Harvard University, Graduate School of Business
Administration, George F. Baker Foundation, 1878-1886, schooner Lottie
Beard, New Bedford, Mss. 252, and Order Book, Frank E. Brown, New Bedford
Whaling Implements, 1877-1922, Mss. 252, Vol. I.

13. Swift and Allen, .
Frank E. Brown, .

cit.;

cit.;
cit.

John L. Williams, .

cit.;

Scammon,

.

TABLE 1
ANNUAL AVERAGE VESSEL TONNAGE:
USA AND NEW BEDFORD WHALING FLEETS
(1816-1905)

Years

USA

Tonnage
New Bedford

Percent
New Bedford
of USA

1816-1825
1826-1835
1836-1845
1846-1855
1856-1865
1866-1875
1876-1885
1886-1895
1896-1905

27775
70352
159788
202143
156129
67602
42967
28380
14311

9906
35272
64796
94382
93770
53074
33934
7838
3143

35.7
50.1
40.6
46.7
60.1
78.5
79.0
27.6
22.0

1816-1845
1846-1875
1876-1905

85971
144719
27968

36665
80408
14972

42.6
55.6
53.5

1816-1905

86694

44046

50.8

Sources

USA: Walter S. Tower, History of the American Whale Fishery
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1907).
New Bedford: Davis, Gailman, Hutchins tape (see text).

TABLE 2

NEW BEDFORD WHALING FLEET
AVERAGE ANNUAL CATCH
(18 16-1905)

Years

Whale Oil
Sperm Oil
(1000's of Gallons)

1816-1825
1826-1835
1836-1845
1846-1855
1856-1865
1866-1875
1876-1885
1886-1895
1896-1905

352
1209
1867
1404
1421
968
844
344
224

1816-1845
1846-1875
1876-1905

1143
1264
471

1816-1905

959

466

1200
2087
3322
2483
1320
773
87
11

Whale Bone
(1000 lbs.)
11
80
299

1377
828
440
233

Real Value*
($l000s)

360
1340
2591
4256
4159
2236
1797

78
10

632
195

1251
2375
290

130
882
107

1430
3550

1305

373

1952

*Real value expressed in $'s of 1880.

Source: Davis, Galiman, Hutchins tape. See text.

875

TABLE 3

VESSEL TONNAGE RETURNING BY GROUND
3369 NEW BEDFORD VOYAGES

Percentage of Returning Tonnage
Pacific

Arctic

Years

Atlantic

Indian

1816-1825
1826-1835
1836-1845
1846-1855
1856-1865
1866-1875
1876-1885
1886-1895
1896-1905

55.5
51.7
22.7
3.6
10.8
25.3
41.3
45.5
100.0

0.3
2.4
20.9
21.6
13.1
10.0
6.6
6.3
0.0

43.2
46.0
56.0
65.0
58.2
37.7
36.5
48.3
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.2
9.7
18.0
15.9
15.7
0.0
0.0

1816-1845
1846-1875
1876-1905

43.6
13.9
62.2

7.9
14.9
4.3

48.4
53.6
28.3

0.1
14.5
5.2

1816-1905

24.2

14.3

52.0

9.4

Source: Davis, Gailman, Hutchins tape. See text.

TABLE 4
AVERAGE VOYAGE LENGTHS IN MONTHS BY GROUND
NEW BEDFORD SHIPS AND BARKS

Atlantic

Years

Indian

Pacific

Arctic

Panel A: Ships

1816-1825

1826-1835
1836-1845
1846-1855
1856-1865
1866-1875
1876-1885
1886-1895

1896-1905
1816-1905

12.2
12.2
20.7
26.9
20.5
22.0
36.3
37.6
-

-

17.0

--

24.2

14.8
24.9
33.7
41.0
42.0
40.5

33.3
36.3
37.5
43.6
47.2
37.6

21.0
34.8
41.3
46.9

--

33.6

--

-32.1

---

8.8

--

--

37.6

38.9

Panel B: Barks
--

32.0

--

23.0
22.4
34.0
40.3
41.4
38.8
35.7

30.3
35.5
37.6
44.4
45.2
33.4
34.7

21.0
38.1
42.4
52.1
16.2

1896-1905

12.3
12.6
18.7
24.0
23.7
27.6
32.9
32.6
28.3

--

--

1815-1905

26.4

36.1

39.8

36.2

1816-1825

1826-1835
1836-1845
1846-1855
1856-1865
1866-1875
1876-1885
1886-1895

Source: Davis, Gailman, Hutchins tape. See text.

--

--

--

TABLE 5
VESSEL RIGGING TYPES
ANNUAL AVERAGES OF PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION
NEW BEDFORD FLEET

Percentage of Total Tonnage

Years

Ships

Barks

1816-1825
1826-1835
1836-1845
1846-1855
1856-1865
1866-1875
1876-1885
1886-1895
1896-1905

87.0
87.5
83.4
75.2
56.5
34.3
25.6
23.1
0.0

5.2
9.8
15.0
23.9
42.8
64.0
67.6
65.0
73.3

11.9
26.6

1816-1845
1846-1875
1876-1905

85.1
59.0
23.4

12.4
40.1
67.5

2.5
0.9
9.1

1816-1905

62.2

35.5

2.4

Source: Davis, Galiman, Hutchins tape. See text.

Other
7.8

2.8
1.6
0.1
0.6
1.8
6.8

Table 6
Annual Loss Ratea
New Bedford Fleet
Ships

Barks

Other

1816—25

3.0

0.0

3.1

1826—35

1.5

2.7

17.4

1836—45

1.7

0.8

11.2

1846—55

3.0

3.8

7.9

1856—65

2.7

3.7

27.3

1866—75

3.5

5.4

8.0

1876—85

3.8

2.6

10.4

1886—95

0.0

0.5

1.8

1896—1905

———

3.1

4.7

Avg.b

2.6

3.5

8.7

Avg.C

2.4

2.8

10.2

Source: L.E. Davis, R.E. Gallman, T.D. Hutchins, 'The Structure
of the Capital Stock in Economic Growth and Decline," in
Peter Kilby (ed.), Quantity and Quidity (}4iddletown, CT:
1987), p. 382.
8Number of vessels lost per vessel year of voyaging x 100.
bvessel weights.
CDecade weights.

TABLE 7

AVERAGE CREW SIZE
NEW BEDFORD FLEET

Average Crew Size

Years

Ships

Barks

Other

1816-1825
1826-1835
1836-1845
1846-1855
1856-1865
1866-1875
1876-1885
1886-1895
1896-1905

20.9
23.4
26.3
29.1
30.0
30.9
31.1
33.0

14.3
19.8
22.7
25.8
27.1
27.4
27.8
28.4
26.4

14.0
14.8
16.8
18.3
20.1
17.7
18.3
16.5
17.0

1816-1905

27.5

26.5

17.1

Source: Davis, Galiman, Hutchins tape. See text.

TABLE 8

AVERAGE CATCH PER TON YEAR OF HUNTING
PHYSICAL QUANTITIES
NEW BEDFORD FLEET

Years

Sperm Oil (BBLS)
Barks
Other
Ships

Whale Oil (BBLS)
Other
Barks
Ships

1816-1825
1826-1835
1836-1845
1846-1855
1856-1865
1866-1875
1876-1885
1886-1895
1896-1905

1.2

2.1

1.7

4.3

0.1

3.2

1.4

1.8

1.1

3.2
1.8
1.7
1.1
1.1
1.0
0.3

1.8
1.7

0.4

1.1
0.6
0.5
0.7
0.9
1.0

3.6

2.2
1.7
0.5
1.3
1.3
1.6
2.9
3.5

--

0.4
0.1

0.2
0.1

1816-1845
1846-1875
1876-1905

1.2
0.6
1.0

1.7
0.8
2.0

1.9
1.0
2.7

3.1
1.3
0.7

1.2
0.8
0.7

1.3
0.5
0.2

1816-1905

0.9

1.0

2.0

1.9

1.0

0.5

--

0.8
0.8
0.9

1.0
1.4

Bone (LBS)

Years

Ships Barks

1816-1825
1826-1835

3.0
6.3
7.0
17.0
11.3
11.8
9.1
2.8

1836- 1845
1846- 1855

1856-1865
1866-1875
1876-1885
1886-1895
1896-1905

Other

0.5
10.3
6.4
9.8
7.8
5.8
13.4
2.4
0.6

0.0
0.9
0.9
0.0
8.0
2.6
3.2

0.6
3.9

1816-1845
1846-1875
1876-1905

5.4
13.4
6.0

5.7
7.8
5.5

0.6
3.5
2.6

1816- 1905

10.6

8.2

2.1

Source: Davis, Gailman, Hutchins tape. See text.

1.0
0.7
0.7
1.5

0.3
0.2
0.7
11.8

0.4

TABLE 9
AVERAGE PROFITS RATES (PERCENT)
NEW BEDFORD FLEET

Years

Ships

Barks

Other

1816-1825
1826-1835
1836-1845
1846-1855
1856-1865
1866-1875
1876-1885
1886-1895
1896-1905

40.5
54.8
39.7
38.3
45.4
51.9
70.2
33.5

22.6
54.1
34.5
32.1
46.8
42.2
92.5
38.3
70.9

30.5
28.9
21.1
LOSS
68.7
44.7
50.2
57.5
69.2

1816-1905

43.7

48.7

39.6

Source: L.E. Davis, R.E. Galiman, T.D. Hutchins, "The Structure of the
Capital Stock in Economic Growth and Decline," in Peter Kilby
(ed.), Quantity and Quiddity (Middleton, CT, 1987), data
underlying Table 10.22.

TABLE 10
PRODUCTIVITY IN NEW BEFORD WHALING, 1820-1896
Regression #1

= 103.1
Adj. R =

.478

Dependent Mean =
. 733
Observations = 2343
Productivity Depends on:

Variable

Parameter
Estimate

Intercept

+2.2091

Vessel type: ships compared with
all other vessels

+0.1055

Hunting ground:
Atlantic
Indian
Western Arctic (compared with Pacific)

+0.1704

Time

-0.00039

Mode of entry into the fleet:
Built for fleet
Rerigged (compared with vessels
transferred into the fleet)

-0.0298
+0.0942

Hunting pressures:
on baleens
on sperms

+0.1070
+0.0539

Competition among whalers

-0.0037

Technological dummy

+0.3103

Vessel size (tons squared)

+0.0000015

Voyage length (months squared)

-0.00029

Vessel age

+0.00421

Vessel age squared

-0.000089

Last voyage

-0.0762

Real common wage rate ashore

-0.0060

Ratio, skilled wage to real common wage

-0.5732

Specialization:
in baleens
in sperms

-0.0948
-0.7005

Measurement dummy

-0.0314

Significance
Level

-0.1544
-0.0638

***

***

Notes to Table 10:

*** Significantly different from zero at the 1 percent level

Durbin-Watson D
1st order autocorrelation

1.823
0.086

Source: See text.
(a) The t statistics were adjusted to allow for the large size of the
sample:
Adjusted t =

coefficient/adjusted

Adjusted s.e. =

s.e.x

i

standard error

Population

Sample Size

Population

-

1

(b) The equation was also run in natural logs. The fit was poorer,
while the results did not change substantially.
(c) A priori there is no strong reason to expect heteroskedasticity
or, if it exists, to anticipate serious problems with it, in view of the
enormous size of the sample compared with the universe. Nonetheless, since
the data are panel data we tested for heteroskedasticity by regressing the
variances of the error terms against the continuous explanatory variables,
and the test turned up evidence of heteroskedasticity. We made corrections
by dividing the dependent and independent variables by the standard errors
of the residuals and ran the regression again. The significance levels did
not deteriorate and the results did not change substantively.

TABLE 11
PRODUCTIVITY IN NEW BEDFORD WHALING, 1820-1896
Regression #2

= 3.115
Adj R =
.3519
Dep Mean = 0.641431
Observations = 75
Productivity depends on:

Variable

Parameter
Estimate

704420

Intercept

+1 .

Vessel type: ships compared with
all other vessels

+0.198935

Hunting ground:
Atlantic
Indian
Western Arctic
Time

Mode of entry into the fleet:
Built for fleet
Rerigged (compared with vessels
transferred into the fleet)

-0.741689
+0. 241176

+0.120425

+0.042115

-0. 275912

+0.228511

Hunting pressures:
on baleens
on sperms

+0.464618
-0.209942

Competition among whalers

+0.003333

Whaling guns dummy

-0. 141948

Toggle irons dummy

+0.032362

Vessel size (tons squared)

+0.00000145

Voyage length (months squared)

-0.0005028

Vessel age

-0.016567

Vesssel age squared

+0.000425

Last voyage

-0.154950

Real common wage ashore

-0.027653

Measurement dummy

+0.467091

***Significant at the 1 percent level
** Significant at the 5 percent level

Source: See text.

Significance
Level

**

**

TABLE 12
PRODUCTIVITY IN NEW BEDFORD WHALING, 1833-1896
Regression #3
85.6

AdjR =

.465

Dependent Mean =
. 686
Obervations = 2144
Productivity depends on:
Var jab le

Parameter
Estimate

Intercept

+1.7694

Vessel type: Ships compared
with all other vessels

+0.1021

Hunting Ground:
Atlantic
Indian
Western Arctic (compared with Pacific)

+0.1069

Time
Time squared

-0.00821
+0.000259

Mode of entry into the fleet:
Built for fleet
Rerigged (compared with vessels
transferred into the fleet)

-0.02708
+0.0999

Hunting pressures:
On baleens
On sperms

+0.1915
+0.1555

Competition among whalers

+0.00112

Technological dummy

+0.1485

Vessel size (tons squared)

+0.00000153

Voyage length (months squared)

-0.000278

Vessel age
Vessel age squared

+0.00628
-0.000120

Last voyage

-0.0981

Real common wage ashore
Ratio, real skilled wage ashore to
real common wage ashore

-0.0058
-0.2111

Significance
Level

-0.1968
-0.0276

Specialization:
In baleens
In sperms

-0.0805
-0.7044

Measurement dummy

-0.0338

***

*

Notes to Table 12:
***
**
*

Significantly
Significantly
Significantly

different from zero at 1 percent level.
different from zero at 5 percent level.
different from zero at 10 percent level.

Durbin-Watson D
1st order autocorrelation
See Table 10, note (a).

Source: See text.

1.862
0.067

