                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




FAMILY INCOME AND THE INTERGENERATIONAL TRANSMISSION OF VOTING BEHAVIOR:
                 EVIDENCE FROM AN INCOME INTERVENTION

                                             Randall Akee
                                           William Copeland
                                            E. Jane Costello
                                            John B. Holbein
                                           Emilia Simeonova

                                          Working Paper 24770
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w24770


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        June 2018




   We wish to thank Gordon Keeler and Jurgen Henn for their assistance with accessing the GSMS
   data. Holbein wishes to thank the National Science Foundation for funding support (SES
   #1416816 and SES #1657821). We also wish to thank Vanessa Williamson, Lidia Farre, and
   audiences at Tulane University, Brigham Young University, Brookings Institution, the
   Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management (2017), the Midwest Political Science
   Association (2018), the Children’s Health, Well-being, and Human Capital Formation workshop
   at the Barcelona GSE Summer Forum (2018), the NBER’s children’s Program and Economics of
   Education Program (2018), and the Society for Political Methodology (POLMETH, 2018) for
   their invaluable feedback. We also wish to thank Kevin Collins for the encouragement to start
   this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
   views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
   peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
   official NBER publications.

   © 2018 by Randall Akee, William Copeland, E. Jane Costello, John B. Holbein, and Emilia
   Simeonova. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
   quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
   source.
Family Income and the Intergenerational Transmission of Voting Behavior: Evidence from
an Income Intervention
Randall Akee, William Copeland, E. Jane Costello, John B. Holbein, and Emilia Simeonova
NBER Working Paper No. 24770
June 2018
JEL No. D31,D72,H53,H75,I38,J15

                                           ABSTRACT

Despite clear evidence of an income gradient in political participation, research has not been able
to isolate the effects of income on voting from other household characteristics. We investigate
how exogenous unconditional cash transfers affected voting in US elections across two
generations from the same household. The results confirm that there is strong inter-generational
correlation in voting across parents and their children. We also show—consistent with theory—
that household receipt of unconditional cash transfers has heterogeneous effects on the civic
participation of children coming from different socio-economic backgrounds. It increases
children’s voting propensity in adulthood among those raised in initially poorer families.
However, income transfers have no effect on parents, regardless of initial income levels. These
results suggest that family circumstance during childhood—income in particular—plays a role in
influencing levels of political participation in the United States. Further, in the absence of outside
shocks, income differences are transmitted across generations and likely contribute to the
intergenerational transmission of social and political inequality.

Randall Akee                                      John B. Holbein
Department of Public Policy                       Department of Political Science
University of California, Los Angeles             Brigham Young University
3250 Public Policy Building                       Provo, UT 84602
Los Angeles, CA 90095                             john_holbein@byu.edu
and NBER
rakee@ucla.edu                                    Emilia Simeonova
                                                  JHU Carey School of Business
William Copeland                                  100 International Drive
Department of Psychiatry and                      Baltimore, MD 21202
Behavioral Science                                and NBER
Duke University Medical Center                    emilia.simeonova@gmail.com
905 W Main St, Ste 22
Durham, NC 27701
william.copeland@duke.edu

E. Jane Costello
Duke University
Brightleaf Sq Ste 22
905 W Main St
Durham, NC 27701
elizabeth.costello@duke.edu
1       Introduction
Voting is the foundational act of democracy. Philosophers, theorists, and other important public
figures have long argued that in order for democracies to survive, citizens need to be actively
engaged in the political process (Green and Gerber 2008; Leighley and Nagler 2013; Verba,
Schlozman, and Brady 1995; Verba and Nie 1987; Wolfinger and Rosenstone 1980). Greater
levels of citizen participation allow for a better aggregation of citizen interest, enhance social
connectivity, and help achieve the foundational values underlying democracy. Despite this fact,
in many contemporary democracies voter turnout is perpetually low and vastly unequal. In par-
ticular, in the United States, levels of turnout hover around 60 percent in presidential elections,
40 percent in midterm elections, and much lower still in local elections, putting the U.S. in the
bottom third of worldwide voter turnout.
        Inequality in voter turnout is ubiquitous and perhaps even more troubling. Comparing
those who vote to those who do not reveals a particularly large inequality in citizen participation;
simply put, people who are more affluent are much more likely to participate in politics than
those who are less affluent (Blais 2006; Frey 1971; Leighley and Nagler 2013; Smets and van
Ham 2013; Verba, Schlozman, and Brady 1995; Verba and Nie 1987; Schlozman, Brady, Verba
2018). This form of social inequality is troubling on a number of levels. In practical terms,
this pattern appears to have distortionary downstream effects on representative government—
reinforcing patterns that bias public policy towards the wealthy (Schlozman, Verba, Brady 2012;
Griffin and Newman 2005; Gilens 2012; Bartels 2009; Schlozman, Brady, Verba 2018). The most
compelling empirical research on this topic tends to show that who participates affects who gets
elected and the policies they implement (Anzia 2013; Berry et al. 2011; Bertocchi et al. 2017;
Fowler 2013; Griffin and Newman 2005; Lee et al. 2004; Leighley and Nagler 2013; Madestam
et al. 2013; Verba and Nie 1972). Brunner, Ross and Washington (2013) show evidence that
politicians vote in line with their constituents’ preference in about 75 percent of cases. These
results lend critical support to the importance of increasing voter participation, in particular
among groups that stand to be most affected by social policies.
        While the presence of a participatory gap between high and low-income individuals is
well established, scholars know less about whether income is the driving force behind these gaps,
or instead, income gradients reflect some other unobserved social or contextual factor.1 As a
result, there is little understanding of how to address this form of social inequality. We do
not know whether increasing household income would actually improve overall levels of civic
engagement and narrow the gaps in voting behavior. This question is inherently difficult to
answer, as incomes are (typically) not exogenously distributed. Moreover, there has been little
research into how income interacts with the life course and whether children’s propensities to vote
    1Brunner, Ross and Washington (2011) have shown that exogenous increases in income due to
exogenous labor demand shocks tend to decrease the support for redistributive policies at the census-
tract levels in California. They do not identify whether these positive economic shocks affect the
probability of voting as they are not examining individual-level data.



                                                 1
are affected by the family environment, by family income, or both. This would be particularly
important if political participation is transmitted across generations, similarly to socio-economic
status (SES).
        In this paper, we explore whether income has an effect on civic participation and whether
the intergenerational transmission of political participation can be affected by changes in family
income. To do so, we investigate the effects of a quasi-experimental unconditional cash transfer
program. Specifically, we examine data from the Great Smoky Mountains Study (GSMS), a
longitudinal study of children in rural western North Carolina, which began in 1993 and consisted
of both American Indian (AI) and non-American Indian families in the area. Halfway through the
initial 8-year survey time frame, a casino opened on the Eastern Cherokee reservation located
in this region. Upon its opening, a portion of the profits were distributed to all adult tribal
members independent of employment status, income, or other characteristics relevant to political
engagement. Non-Indian households residing in the same geographic area were not eligible
for these cash disbursements. This exogenous unconditional income transfer, along with the
unique longitudinal nature of the data, allow us to use various panel techniques to explore the
effects of exogenously increasing household incomes on the political participation of parents
and children from the same household. The children were aged 13-17 at the time when the
AI households started receiving the income transfers and so we study their voting behavior as
adults. These identification strategies build on research using the GSMS data, showing that
these casino transfers are, indeed, exogenously disbursed.2
        We match the GSMS parents and children to public-use voter files based on their iden-
tifying information.3 We find strong positive correlation between parents’ and children’s voter
turnout in U.S. Presidential and Midterm elections. We also find that the additional unearned
income has long-term civic benefits in terms of voting; however, these gains are not uniformly
distributed across all recipients. Consistent with theory, income transfers substantially increase
the turnout levels of children in the initially poorer families, but have no effects on children
from better-off households, in effect closing the participatory gap between high and low-income
individuals of this rising generation. Average annual unconditional transfers of approximately
$4,700 (in 2000 dollars) increase the initially poorer group’s voter turnout by about 8-20 per-
centage points, depending on the age of the recipients and the type of measures of voting one
considers.
        We also find that unconditional income transfers have precisely–estimated null effects on
parental voting turnout—regardless of their starting income levels. This result suggests that
adults voting patterns may be locked-in and unresponsive to changes in income later in life;
perhaps as a result of political socialization and voting habituation (Fujiwara, Meng, and Vogl
   2 Akee et al. 2010, Akee et al. 2013, Akee et al. 2018; Copeland et al. 2011; Costello et al. 2010;
Foley et al. 2006
   3 The information included is name, date of birth, and location, the standard inputs to match

individuals to voter files, see Ansolabehere and Hersh 2012, 2016.




                                                  2
2016; Gerber, Green, and Shachar 2003; Coppock and Green 2015; Meredith 2009; Plutzer 2002;
Holbein 2017; Mullainathan and Washington 2009).
        We explore a host of potential mechanisms for the effect among children, concluding that
it is unlikely to be driven by the transmission of voting from parents to children, changes in
mother’s education and employment, or movement to new locations out of state. We provide
some suggestive evidence that the results may be driven by an increased likelihood of children
completing high school on time and the dynamics of social capital and social skill acquisition over
the life course. Regardless of the exact mechanisms, the exogenous income transfers narrowed
the turnout gap between children coming from disadvantaged families and their better-off peers.
This effect is important given the large and persistent income-based gaps in voter participation
the perpetuate in the U.S.
        Our work makes several important contributions. Conceptually, our study helps answer
the question of whether income contributes to underlying levels of voter participation. In so
doing, it adds nuance to the foundational resource model of voting (RMV) developed by Verba,
Schlozman, and Brady (1995). Our findings suggest a more nuanced model that would allow
for childhood circumstance to affect future civic participation, in a manner consistent with the
human capital formation literature (Almond and Currie, 2011).
        Second, given the intergenerational element to our analyses, the results also contribute to
our understanding of political socialization. In seeking to understand why some people develop
into active citizens, while others do not, social scientists have tended to focus almost exclusively
on adulthood experiences—when citizens are just coming of age or are already eligible to vote—
rather than on those that occur in childhood or early adolescence. Political socialization research
once focused on childhood in hopes of discovering the roots of political participation (e.g. Dawson
and Prewitt 1968; Langton 1969; Searing, Schwartz, and Lind 1973), with early research arguing
that “the more important a political orientation is in the behavior of adults, the earlier it will
be found in the learning of the child” (Greenstein 1965, p. 12). Though various theoretical
models have postulated that resources allocated earlier in the life course may matter more than
those delivered later, little to no contemporary research has explored this possibility.4,5 The
conceptual framework that we put forth helps draw attention back on the life course dynamics
   4  We are not the first to identify this gap in scholarly research. Some have lamented the “aban-
donment” of studies exploring the role of childhood experience for voting (Sapiro 2004, 1). Others
have readily acknowledged that political behavior studies in recent years have “eschew[ed] ... young
children” and have instead “focus[ed] on the political learning years [of early adulthood]” (Niemi and
Hepburn 1995, 7), justifying this focus by arguing that “the degree of activity or involvement in politics
... seem[s] to be best explained in terms of [adult] experiences” (Verba and Almond 1987, 267-268).
    5 Plutzer (2002, 41) argues that from the resource model we are left without “a good sense of ...

when [in the life course] ... variables will matter most.” While the habitual model of voting presented
by Plutzer (2002) allows for resources to vary in salience over time, we argue that this model starts too
late in the life course—only starting the examination of political development “when a cohort of young
citizens becomes eligible to vote for the first time.” Our argument is that experiences that far predate
the voting experience play an under-appreciated role.




                                                    3
associated with political participation. Our research provides compelling evidence that early life
experiences—in this case, the receipt of additional income—have a greater effect on participation
than the same experiences among members of the same family later in life. This implies that
voting propensities are not etched in stone at birth, like a heritable trait, but, instead, can be
influenced by the household environment during childhood.
        Third, our paper draws attention to a minority group that has been largely ignored in
previous voting research. There are very few studies of voter turnout among Native Americans
(Frymer 2016). Existing studies have shown that turnout rates among this group are low, with
scholars speculating that this is the case as a result of low socioeconomic status, distrust in
the federal government, exposure to demobilizing electoral rules, and a lack of contact from
mobilization campaigns (De Rooij and Green 2017; Peterson 1997; Schroedel and Hart 2015;
Schroedel et al. 2017). However, we have little sense of patterns of validated voting among this
population, much less how to increase their levels of participation. Our work is a step forward
in closing this gap in the literature.
        Finally, our results have implications for both policy and practice. Discussions about the
merits of various income distribution schemes are at the heart of a multitude of policy reforms:
from debates over progressive taxation, various forms of social welfare, minimum wages, to more
recent discussions of unconditional cash transfer programs and those surrounding universal ba-
sic income (UBI). Our results suggest that unconditional income transfers may have broader
effects than previously realized. Not only may these transfers affect individuals labor, health,
and schooling outcomes (e.g. Akee et al. 2010 and 2013; Aguero, Carter, and Woolard 2006;
Baird et al. 2012; Baird, De Hoop, and zler 2013; Blattman, Fiala, and Martinez 2013; Cunha
2010; De Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff 2012; Paxson and Shady 2010; Haushofer and Shapiro
2016), but they may also affect levels of civic engagement or social capital. Given that civic
participation plays a vital role in preserving democratic values and institutions, connects indi-
viduals in communities to one another, and promotes democratic accountability, such a finding
is vitally important.
        Our results suggest that income-inequality may contribute to stubborn voting participa-
tion gaps. From a practical perspective, millions of dollars are expended each election cycle by
political campaigns and nonpartisan entities to increase turnout (Gerber and Green 2008, 2015;
Bedola and Michelson 2012). However, meta-analyses show that many of these get-out-the-vote
(GOTV) efforts fail to have noticeable effects, with some even making participatory gaps worse
(Green, McGrath, and Aronow 2013; Enos, Fowler, and Vavreck 2013). Our analysis also shows
that the effects of the cash transfers on voting outcomes are concentrated for those below the
median household income in this community; suggesting that income augmentation programs
for those at the bottom of the income distribution might be an effective means of closing the
voting gap.




                                                4
2     Background and Conceptual Framework
What drives people to participate in politics? Various theories have been put forth to answer this
question. These include rational choice models—wherein citizens consider the various costs and
benefits of voting—psychological models—wherein citizens’ voting decisions are shaped by their
internal motivational attachments—and sociological models—wherein citizens voting decisions
are shaped by their social networks (Downs 1957; Riker and Ordeshook 1968; Campbell et al.
1960; Fiorina 1976; Rosenstone and Hansen 1993; Gerber, Green, and Larimer 2008; Washington
2006; DellaVigna et al. 2017).
        Regardless of the framework used, each of these models typically starts from the point that
voting is costly. To vote, citizens face a number of obstacles: registering before pre-set deadlines,
locating and traveling to polling locations, waiting in line at the ballot box, navigating inclement
weather on Election Day, and (hopefully) learning about the candidates and issues in advance of
the election (Cascio and Washington 2013; Corvalan and Cox 2013; Leighley and Nagler 2013;
Wolfinger and Rosenstone 1980; Holbein and Hillygus 2016;Brady and McNulty 2011; Pettigrew
2016; Fujiwara, Meng, and Vogl 2016; Gomez, Hansford, and Krause 2007; Lassen 2005; Fujiwara
2015). Together, these obstacles exert a non-trivial strain on citizens’ time, energy, and cognitive
resources.
        One theory that stands out as explaining why some citizens, but not others, overcome
these voting costs is the resource model of voting (RMV). The RMV states that because voting
is costly, the resources that individuals possess play a key role in determining who votes and who
stays home—simply put, resources help people overcome voting obstacles (Almond and Verba
1963; Verba and Nie 1972; Verba, Schlozmann, and Brady 1995; Schlozman, Brady, Verba
2018). Resources theorized to be important for voting include education, health, information,
skills, time, and income (Sondheimer and Green 2010; Burden et al. 2017; Adena et al. 2015;
DellaVigna and Kaplan 2007; Enikolopov, Petrova, and Zhuravskaya 2011; Gentzkow 2006;
Holbein 2016; Lassen 2005; Kendall, Nannicini, and Trebbi 2014; Martin and Yurukoglu 2017;
Holbein 2017; Holbein and Schafer 2017). Under the RMV, these resources act to increase the
chances one turns out and votes, regardless of the timing of their accumulation in the life course.


2.1    Income and Political Participation
Among voting resources, income has been thought to play an especially important role. Indeed,
foundational models of voting behavior place income as a core resource—along with time and
skills (Verba, Schlozman, and Brady 1995; Schlozman, Brady, Verba 2018). At first glance this
relationship yields a puzzle: despite having a higher opportunity cost for engaging in acts like
voting, affluent citizens are much more likely to vote than the less affluent (Frey 1971; Leighley
and Nagler 2013; Milbrath 1965; Verba and Nie 1987; Schlozman, Brady, Verba 2018). Many
attempts have been made to provide a theoretical rationale for this positive relationship. These




                                                 5
revolve around two primary channels: human capital acquisition and social norms.6
        Some have argued that income increases individual investments in education, skills, and
health that make it easier for one to participate in politics.7 These skills may include cognitive
abilities such as the ability to read and write, which make consuming political information easier
(Denny and Doyle 2008; Verba, Schlozman, and Brady 1995; Schlozman, Brady, Verba 2018), the
so-called non-cognitive abilities that help citizens follow-through on their intention to participate
in politics (Hillygus, Holbein, and Snell 2016; Holbein 2017), and the personality traits thought
to be important for voting (Akee et al. 2018; Mondak 2010; Gerber et al. 2011).
        Alternatively, some have argued that income increases the likelihood of voting by en-
hancing citizens’ social status and social connections. Under this framework, income makes
it more likely that citizens are socialized to a norm of voting. For example, in their seminal
work on voting, Wolfinger and Rosenstone (1980, p. 21) argue that “income determines ones
neighborhood and, perhaps, avocational companions and thus exposure to a variety of norms
and pressures.” Income enhances social capital: helping build connections that did not exist be-
fore. In this way, income increases political motivation and inculcates values that orient citizens
toward participating in politics.
        Importantly, the voting literature makes clear predictions that income will exhibit dimin-
ishing returns—that is, that income may only matter up to a point (Wolfinger and Rosentstone
1980, 21; Leighley and Nagler 2013; Verba and Nie 1987; Verba, Schlozman, and Brady 1995).
For those who are poor, income may matter a great deal for voting; for those who are well-off
already, additional income may matter very little. While this prediction has some face validity
and some observational empirical support, this theoretical prediction has yet to be fully tested.
We attempt to help fill this gap below—with this clear theoretical prediction helping to motivate
some of our modeling decisions related to heterogeneity tests.


2.2    Empirical Evidence Linking Income and Political Participation
At first glance, empirics support the theoretical prediction that income increases voter turnout.
Virtually all data sources that have measures of income and voting indicate that there is a
positive relationship between the two. This is validated in the data we use as well. Figure 1
shows how the propensity to vote varies by baseline income levels using data from the American
National Election Study (ANES) and the Great Smoky Mountains Study of Youth (GSMS),
   6 Ojeda  (Forthcoming) argues that the theoretical channels linking income and voting can be grouped
into four likely mechanisms, which include: resources, recruitment, mobilization, and psychology.
   7 For example, Frey argues that “citizens with high paying jobs are more used to deal with political

questions which are in principle of the same character as their daily work, and which are therefore done
much more efficiently” (1971, 104-105). Consistent with this view, Wolfinger and Rosentsone (1980,
20) argue, “well-to-do people are likely to acquire in their jobs the interests and skills that lead to
political involvement and voting.” Wolfinger and Rosenstone (1980, 20) further argue, “Desperately
poor people are preoccupied by the struggle to keep body and soul together ... They have no time or
emotional energy for nonessentials such as voting.”




                                                   6
which is the survey instrument we use in this study.8 In the figure, respondents are separated
into three income bins—lowest, middle, and highest. For the ANES, these bins are based on how
respondents self-identify in the income distribution, not on any actual income amounts. For the
GSMS, the income bins are based on the actual income amounts reported by the respondents.
       The first set of columns provides the parental voting probability for the GSMS data
from the baseline period across the three income bins. The second and third sets of columns
provide a similar set of data for rural African Americans and rural Americans respectively using
data from the ANES. We use these two groups as benchmarks to give context to our GSMS
sample because their financial and social circumstance are the closest to the GSMS population
in nationally representative data that report actual income levels, such as the Census.9 As Figure
1 demonstrates, there is a positive relationship between income and voting probabilities in all
three groups. Within the GSMS sample, the gap between the top and bottom of the income
distribution is 20.1 percentage points; in the other two similar ANES subsamples the gap is
similar, at 20.6 percentage points (for all rural) and 26.8 percentage points for rural African
Americans. We note that average participation in voting across income levels differs across
these groups, which may in part be due to the differences in how the income bins are formed.
However, the relationship across income bins holds within each subsample and is of a similar
magnitude.
       While there is clearly an income gradient in voting, this does not mean that there is
a causal relationship between income and voting. Indeed, this relationship could be spurious.
Acknowledging this possibility, a host of researchers have dug deeper than the bivariate rela-
tionship we show in Figure 1. These studies condition on observable individual and contextual
characteristics. From this group of studies, the evidence of the relationship between income and
participation is decidedly mixed. A recent meta-analysis of 90 studies shows that about half of
studies find that income is an important predictor for voting, while the other half do not (Smets
and Van Ham 2013).10
       Overall, the research on income and civic participation is inconclusive. Here we argue that
these mixed findings occur, in large part, because of lack of good identification. In systematically
reviewing the studies included in Smets and Van Ham’s (2013) meta-analysis, it is clear that
none leverages exogenous variation in income. One strand of research gets close to so doing:
studies exploring the political consequences of conditional cash transfers (CCT). This body
of work leverages random (or as-if random) variation in exposure to CCT programs—linking
   8  The American National Election Study (ANES) is one of longest running and most respected
nationally representative surveys of voters in the United States. It has been conducted around Federal
Elections ever two years since 1948. For more information on the ANES sampling framework and
measures, see www.electionstudies.org.
    9 If we look across the entire population in the ANES, the income gradient is 22.3 percentage points

from the bottom tercile to the top tercile (p <0.001).
   10 As a reference, Smets and Van Ham (2013) report that educational attainment and age showed signs

of being significant predictors in about 70% of studies/tests. For another overview of the conditional
on observables relationship between income and voting, see Ojeda (Forthcoming).



                                                   7
Figure 1: Income Gradient for Voting Average for Different Groups and Income Terciles

                   0.80000

                   0.70000

                   0.60000
   Voter Turnout




                   0.50000

                   0.40000

                   0.30000

                   0.20000

                   0.10000

                   0.00000
                             GSMS                   Rural African American        Rural
                                              Racial and Socioeconomic Groups

                                    Lower Third    Middle Third     Upper Third




Notes: The data for the GSMS is restricted only to the subject parents for the years 1992-1996 (before
the casino transfers began). Data for the other two groups are drawn from the American National Elec-
tion Study (ANES) Time Series Cumulative Data File (1948-2012) In both sources, income measured
using a question where individuals are asked to label where they fall in the income distribution. In
the ANES, voter turnout measured using self-reports of voting in national elections in the given year
(available in all years excepting 2002). The same pattern holds with validated voting in the limited
years that it is available.




                                                       8
participants (or heavily exposed geographic areas) to political outcomes data (e.g. Baez et al.
2012; De La O 2013, 2015; Galiani et al. 2016; Imai, King, and Rivera 2017; Linos 2013; Pop-
Eleches and Pop-Eleches 2012; Zucco 2011). While these studies speak to an important topic,
this approach may not be ideally situated to answer the question of whether income has an
effect on voter turnout. On a very basic level, this program of study has faced data challenges in
linking CCT participants and voting outcomes. In the largest and most comprehensive work on
this topic, De La O (2013, 2015) provides evidence that suggests that CCT exposure increases
turnout substantially (by about 5-15 percentage points, depending on the subsample used).
However, the conclusions in this work have been strongly challenged (Imai, King, and Rivera,
2017).
        More generally, CCT programs face two fundamental difficulties in using their design to
examine the pure effects of income. First, CCT programs may come with source or demand
effects because there are “ample opportunities for incumbents to claim the credit for positive
program results” (De La O 2013, 1). Indeed, for this reason, scholars have tended to study
whether CCTs have persuasive effects rather than mobilizing effects. Hence, any effect CCTs
have on voter turnout may actually be the result of credit-claiming campaigns on the part
of highly motivated politicians, rather than of income per-se. Second, many CCT programs
require that before receiving the income transfers recipients make changes to their behavior
that may actually be driving any effect on voter turnout. For example, Progressa required
that participants enroll their children in school, ensure that they show up to school, and make a
certain number of visits to healthcare providers (De La O 2013, p. 3). These behavioral changes,
rather than income, may be the primary mover in any effect on turnout (Sondheimer and Green
2010; Burden et al. 2017). Overall, though CCT studies deliver important findings about
political participation, it is unclear whether income is indeed the driving force in any voting
gains; the unique components of CCT programs contaminate this instrument from eliciting the
pure downstream effects of income.11
        To our knowledge, there is only one study of the effects of unconditional cash transfers
on voting. Using an innovative approach that leverages data from the annual Spanish Lottery,
Bagues and Esteve-Volart (2016) show that areas that realize an exogenous increase in lottery
income substantially shift their incumbent voting patterns, but do not change their levels of
voter turnout. While this unique work clearly speaks to the topic at hand, it remains unclear
whether this null effect holds in the U.S. Further, winning the lottery is a rare occurrence and
the behavioral responses to such an event are likely different than how individual would react
to a permanent change in future income, which is the nature of the exogenous income change
that we study here. Moreover, any resource gains individual winners achieve may be muted by
a decreased likelihood of retrospective voting. That is, in providing a huge transfer of wealth,
the Spanish lottery not only enhanced citizen income at a micro level, but it fundamentally
  11 To be clear, we are not arguing that education and health are not potential mechanisms. We are
arguing, instead, that in using CCTs these are likely not mechanisms, but primary movers.




                                                9
improved local economic conditions (a point Bagues and Esteve-Volart readily admit). Abundant
research has shown that voters respond to a poorly performing economy (e.g. Brunner, Ross, and
Washington 2011; Feigenbaum and Hall 2015; Healy and Malhotra 2013; Healy and Lenz 2014;
Healy and Lenz 2017; Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier 2007). Hence, while the income effects may
increase voters’ capacity to vote, it may decrease their incentive to do so as a means of holding low
performing public officials accountable, thus resulting in a null effect on turnout. An important
difference between our research and their paper is that the unconditional income transfers we
study are disbursed by the tribal government, while the voter participation is measured in
federal and local elections. The tribal elections, which may have been impacted by the cash
transfers, are held in different years and different months from the elections we analyze. Finally,
Bagues and Esteve-Volart (2016) do not explore potentially important dynamics in incomes
effect on turnout—including across socioeconomic status and the life course. Their work focuses
exclusively on effects on adults, but there are strong reasons to suspect that income obtained in
childhood may matter a great deal.


2.3    A Human Capital-Based Framework of Voting
The RMV predicts that resources, like income, matter regardless of when they are acquired in
the life course. This approach stands in contrast to a host of work on how childhood investments
and experiences affect adult behaviors, including an entire body of research on critical periods
in childhood development (Currie, 2011; Becker and Tomes 1986; Chetty et al. 2011; Currie and
Thomas 1995; Heckman 2007, Heckman et al 2013, Cunha and Heckman 2008; Cunha, Heckman
and Schennach 2010; Gertler et al 2014). While it is common to see models of human capital
acquisition applied to education, labor, and health outcomes, we are not aware of any work that
links human capital formation concepts to civic or social behavior like voting and participation
in the political process. Though not explicitly studying the effects of income, Giuliano and
Spilimbergo (2013) show that people exposed to a recession in childhood are more likely to
believe that success in life depends more on luck than effort, they support more government
redistribution, and are more likely to vote for left-wing parties. Here we briefly articulate what
a human capital framework of voting (HCFV) would imply about this fundamental form of
democratic participation.
        There are compelling reasons to suspect that early life resource investments may be more
important for voting than later life investments. Income is likely to matter for voting because it
encourages investments in skills that affect civic participation and socializes people towards the
norm of voting. If the norms, skills, and attitudes required to engage in the political process lock-
in at a certain point in the life course, then later investments may not affect voting behaviors.
Indeed, according to what some have termed the “impressionable years hypothesis”, young
people’s political behavior may be more malleable because they have yet to form a hardened
set of attitudes and identities that govern that behavior (Krosnick and Alwin 1989; Sears and




                                                 10
Funk 1999; Greenstein 1965). Early adolescence may be especially critical, as young people are
making decisions about their future (such as how long they should stay in school) that have
clear implications for whether they will become active voters (Sondheimer and Green 2010).
        There is some suggestive evidence that the attitudes, skills, and identities that govern
political behavior harden by late adolescence. For example, Prior (2010, 2017) shows that after
late adolescence (i.e. when one turns 18), one’s interest in politics—one of the strongest pre-
dictors of whether one votes (Veba, Schlozman, and Brady 1995)—tends to exhibit remarkable
levels of intertemporal stability and rigidity to targeted intervention. Furthermore, the cogni-
tive and non-cognitive skills important for voting may solidify over time (Holbein 2017); as a
result, resource investments designed to target these skills may have less of an effect on voter
turnout than earlier investments. Consistent with this view, some research has shown that vot-
ing patterns tend to be persistent over time (Fujiwara, Meng, and Vogl 2016; Gerber, Green, and
Shachar 2003; Coppock and Green 2015). However, this habitual model of voting only considers
adulthood—once individuals are eligible to vote—and only explores the role of voting in one
period on voting in the next. It has little to say about what gets people to vote the first time,
or about the effect of resources accumulated before individuals are eligible to register and vote.
        Consistent with human capital models of other adult behaviors, one might expect that
if income does matter for voting it may matter more-so for income accumulated earlier in the
life course rather than later. Alternatively, financial resources may matter only when voters
see themselves as pivotal in very close elections. Many get-out-the-vote interventions occur
in elections where two candidates hold similar shares of predicted vote share; these programs
bestow citizens with resources (such as information) in order to increase voter turnout for a
particular candidate.
        In this paper we can empirically test how these two broader competing conceptual models
of voting perform in actual data by exploring the impact of exogenous income transfers across two
generations. The older generations received these investments for the first time in adulthood
and the younger generation received these for the first time in late childhood. Further, we
present evidence that the timing of when income changes happen during the formative years
likely matters as well, by exploring the effects of the unconditional income transfers across birth
cohorts within eligible children.


3         Data
To test the effect of income on voter turnout across generations, we use data from a unique quasi-
experiment from Western North Carolina. Specifically, we employ survey data from the Great
Smoky Mountain Study (GSMS)—a longitudinal study of 1,420 children and their parents that
began in 1993—matched to administrative data records on voting.12 The survey was originally
    12   For the counties covered in the GSMS survey, see Appendix Figure A1 in the Online Appendix.




                                                   11
designed as a means of studying the mental health and well-being of children; however, this
sample has been used in a number of different contexts (Akee et al. 2010, Akee et al. 2013, Akee
et al. 2018; Copeland et al. 2011; Costello et al. 2010; Foley et al. 2006).
        At the beginning of the survey, the children of the three participating cohorts were 9, 11,
and 13 years old. The sample was designed to be representative of the school-aged population
of children in the region studied. Families were recruited from 11 counties with an oversample
of children from the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians.13 In the original sample, 25% of the
children were American Indians living on the Eastern Cherokee Reservation or in the rest of the
11 counties. Children and parents have been followed over time, with attrition and non-response
rates being statistically the same across ethnic and income groups as well as across the exogenous
variation we leverage in this study (Akee et al. 2010). The survey is still ongoing and follows
the original subjects, with the latest survey wave completed in 2015.14
        The GSMS contains information on a host of baseline characteristics for parents and
children, including name, current location, date of birth, poverty status, educational attainment,
race/ethnicity, marital status and labor force participation. Parents and children are linked by a
common, de-identified, number. We include descriptive summary statistics for the GSMS sample
in Table 1.
        The first three variables presented in Table 1 show that the survey selection was balanced
across the cohorts by American Indian race. The survey was also balanced along gender lines.
There is a statistically significant difference in levels of average household incomes prior to
the intervention; American Indian households earned incomes of approximately $23,000 while
non-Indian households earned incomes that were almost nine thousand dollars higher for an
average of $32,000. Marital status also appears to be well balanced across the groups. There is
a difference in mother’s educational attainment by race. In general, non-Indian mothers tend
to have higher educational attainment (more than a high-school degree) than American Indian
mothers prior to the start of the intervention. Mothers appear to work in similar proportions
across the two groups. American Indian parents are less likely to vote as compared to non-
American Indian parents over the entire time period by about thirty percentage points. Our
identification strategy accounts for these initial differences in voting probabilities and other
differences in starting characteristics.




  13 For more details on the sampling framework, see Costello et al. 1996 and Costello et al. 1997
  14Children were interviewed at the same time as their parents (but in separate interviews) until they
turned 16. After that, only children were surveyed. For an overview of the survey wave structure, see
Figure A2 in the Online Appendix.



                                                  12
                                      Table 1: Table of Means for Outcomes at Initial Survey Wave

                                                 American Indian Non Indian    Test of Equality of Means
        Variable                                 Mean Std. Dev. Mean Std. Dev. Diff in means SE of Diff T-Statistic
        Age cohort initially 9-year olds         0.370 0.484     0.355 0.479   0.015           0.032       0.471
        Age cohort initially 11-year olds        0.357 0.480     0.345 0.476   0.012           0.032       0.382
        Age cohort initially 13-year olds        0.273 0.446     0.300 0.458   -0.027          0.030      -0.914
        Age                                      10.80 1.595     10.89 1.616   -0.084          0.105      -0.797
        Male child indicator                     0.532 0.500     0.563 0.496   -0.031          0.033      -0.942
        Average Household Income Over            23156 15217     32361 16907   -9204           1035        -8.90
        First 3 Years
        Parents are Married                      0.503   0.501       0.486   0.500       0.017           0.033           0.514
        Mother has a high school degree/GED      0.357   0.480       0.282   0.450       0.074           0.031          2.391
        Mother has more than a                   0.391   0.489       0.484   0.500       -0.094          0.032          -2.896
        high school degree
        Mother Employed Full Time?               0.852   0.356       0.857   0.351       -0.005          0.023          -0.206
        Parents’ Voting                          0.216   0.412       0.492   0.500       -0.276          0.028          -9.697
Notes: Table shows sample summary statistics broken by American Indian, Non American-Indian. Table shows means (columns 2 and 4) and
standard deviations (columns 3 and 5). Difference of means columns shows the results from a simple t-test. The number of observations for
non-Indians ranges between 1028-1041 except for Mother Employed Full Time which is 879. The number of observations for American Indians
ranges between 292-297 except for Mother Employed Full Time which is 270.
        After the fourth wave of the survey in 1996, a casino opened on the Eastern Cherokee reser-
vation.15 Upon the casino’s opening, all adult enrolled tribal members—regardless of whether
they were living on the reservation or not—were eligible to receive bi-annual cash transfers from
casino revenues. These unconditional cash transfers were sizable and gradually increased during
the first years of casino operation. Comparing the estimated change in household income to the
average incomes in the affected group before the casino opened reveals an increase in income of
about 20-25%. (We will discuss this in more depth in the Methods section below.) Based on the
experiences of other tribes and the regulatory framework, tribal members had strong reasons to
believe that the transfers would continue in perpetuity and their size would depend in part on
the success of the casino.


3.1    Match of GSMS Participants to Voter Files
To explore the effect of casino transfers on voter turnout, we matched GSMS participants to
public use voter files. This approach involved scraping voter registration and voter history
information off publicly available statewide voter portals.16 To do so, we followed common best
practice and matched parents and children based on their name (first and last), date of birth,
and, in some instances, their current location. We looked for subjects in North Carolina voting
records and, for those who had moved, in the state of their current address (overall, only a small
minority had moved out of state: with about 80% of participants remaining in state even 20
years later). This matching technique mirrors that used in matching other survey data (e.g.
Pew, CCES, ANES), academic work (Ansolabehere and Hersh 2012), and social interventions to
voter records (Sondheimer and Green 2010; Holbein 2017). When all of these matching inputs
are available, duplicate matches and matching errors are very rare.
       This match was possible, in part, because the GSMS data has been actively maintained
over time, being continuously updated to incorporate new information on subjects who have
changed their names, moved, died, or gotten married. As a result of the quality of this dataset,
the GSMS has been successfully matched to other public records before (for example, Akee et al.
2010 used a match to crime records). The GSMS benefits from having all of the matching inputs
available for all children in the dataset. The availability of matching inputs did vary somewhat
across parents, with some of these not having date of birth.17 Fortunately, however, the number
  15 The process for approving the casino started in 1988, with the federal passage of the Indian
Gaming Regulatory Act, which (among other things) clarified the sovereignty of Native tribes to open
and operate casinos. For more information on the context of the casino’s opening, see Johnson, Kasarda,
and Appold (2011).
  16 We could not use nationwide voter file vendors like Catalist, L2, or the Data Trust because of

privacy and data security concerns from the guardians of the GSMS data. Given that we only had
access to the North Carolina voter file and the online registration voter portal in other states (which
forces an exact match) we did exact matching to be consistent across states. This decision is consistent
with other work in this area (e.g. Holbein 2017) and will not bias our results.
  17 For these individuals, we added a search condition to include county of residence.




                                                  14
of matching inputs available was balanced across the treatment and the control samples.18
        Overall, our match reveals that 47.2% of children and 45.4% of parents were registered to
vote. This difference in match rates across generations is not statistically significant (p=0.28)—
suggesting that our match found about the same number of children and parents in the voter
files. Comfortingly, this registration rate is similar for individuals in the general population of
a similar demographic profile.19 As we would expect given the (somewhat limited) evidence in
other studies of transmission of votes (or non-votes) from one generation to the next, the bivariate
correlation between parents’ voting and children’s voting is high (r=0.8; β=0.76, p <0.001).20
Following previous best practice, the participants who we could not locate in the voter records
were coded as having not registered nor voted (Sondheimer and Green 2010; Holbein 2017;
Ansolabehere and Hersh 2012).
        Robustness checks provided in the Appendix reveal that match quality is similar across
our identifying variation (Appendix Table A.1). We find little evidence that those exposed to
the casino transfers for a longer period of time as minors are different in terms of the propensity
of parents to move out of the state or to change their last name, or to have missing residential
information in any of the survey waves—all measures that could substantially hinder match
quality from being similar across our identifying variation. This suggests that our results are
unlikely to be biased by the match procedure itself.
  18  Tests for balance across the number of matching inputs available across the child cohorts and
casino eligibility (our identification strategy for the children and parents respectively) are provided in
Appendix Table A.1. Our approach avoids many of the issues that come with matching to administrative
records. For example, in seeking to match to other data files, the Census struggles with questions like:
“should you clean names using NYSIIS or use exact spelling?” and “should you allow some lenience
on age or require exact age match?” (These issues frequently come up in matches to voter records,
see Ansolabehere and Hersh (2012) and Berent, Krosnick, and Lupia (2016).) We avoid the problems
associated with the first question by having actual, validated first names among our entire sample; and
we avoid the problems associated with the second by having exact date of births rather than age.
   19 According to data from the Current Population Survey November Supplement, the self-reported

registration rate from 2000-2012 among citizens with incomes of less than $25,000 is 54.7%. This rate
is likely artificially inflated because of the social desirability of social acts like registering to vote that
arises in survey-based measures of registration.
   20 Theory predicts a strong transmission of voting from parent to child (Dawson and Prewitt 1968;

Langton 1969; Searing, Schwartz, and Lind 1973; Plutzer 2002). However, few credible datasets exist
to estimate this transmission. The most-commonly used exception—the Youth-Parent Socialization
Panel Study (Jennings et al. 2005)—comes from a select cohort that came of age in the 1960s. As
many have noted (e.g. Plutzer 2002), this sample has its limitations. For example, this cohort had
especially high rates of self-reported voter turnout (children’s voter turnout rate: 84% and parents’
voter turnout rate: 87%). Among this group where ceiling effects are clearly in play, there still remains
a strong bivariate relationship between parents’ voting and children’s voting (r=0.3; β=0.22, p<0.001),
but one that is clearly muted by the sample composition and the voting measure being self-reported,
rather than validated.




                                                      15
4        Methods
Our identification strategy relies on techniques that make use of the individual panel nature of
the data for parents and the cohort design of the survey for children. For the GSMS children,
we run a difference-in-difference specification that leverages two differences—the first difference
is between American Indian (eligible for the transfer) and non-American Indian children (not
eligible) and the second difference is across age cohorts of AI children who were exposed to
the income transfers at different points in the life course. Our empirical analysis is designed
to compare outcomes across age cohorts and race; this design is necessary since there are no
pre-treatment observations for the children as none of them were eligible to vote prior to the
casino transfers.
        This approach leverages the fact that children from different cohorts were of different
ages when their parents first started receiving the transfers. Specifically, the transfers for the
younger cohorts started when they were 13 (cohort 1) or 15 (cohort 2). Compared to individuals
who were in cohort 3 (17 at the time of first receipt), these younger individuals were exposed at
younger ages and for a longer time period to the income intervention as minors in their parents’
households and this may have had had a differential effect on their voting attitudes, skills,
and identities discussed earlier. Our hypothesis, consistent with a human capital framework of
voting, is that income transfers will have larger effects on the younger children in the survey.
        Equation 1 formalizes the difference-in-difference model that we estimate using data on
the children in the GSMS sample:
Yi = α + β1 Y oungestCohorti + β2 M iddleCohorti + δ1 AmericanIndiani + γ1 Y oungestCohorti
     × AmericanIndiani + γ2 M iddleCohort × AmericanIndiani + X 0 θ + i
                                                                                        (1)

       Following previous practice (Holbein 2017; Sondheimer and Green 2010), in equation 1,
we specify the outcome variable in two ways—first, as a binary variable indicating whether an
individual has ever voted in a Federal or State election (in adulthood over the period 2002-2014)
and second, as a continuous variable measuring the proportion of eligible Federal elections that
a person voted in.21 We also look at effects in specific elections in supplementary models. In
equation 1, YoungestCohort i is an indicator variable for the child belonging to the youngest
    21Whereas individuals typically only register once, they are free to vote multiple times. Hence,
voting propensity is more appealing as an outcome, being more precisely estimated than registering.
Increasing precision also motivates our decision to look beyond individual elections. Additionally, in
North Carolina, Gubernatorial elections occur in the same year as US Presidential elections. According
to North Carolina State Board of Elections website (https://www.ncsbe.gov/Voters/Registering-to-
Vote), requirements to vote in North Carolina are that the person: “Must be a U.S. citizen; must be
a resident of the county, and prior to voting in an election, must have resided at his or her residential
address for at least 30 days prior to the date of the election; must be at least 18 years old, or will be at
the time of the next general election, or be at least 16 years old and understand that you must be at
least 18 years old on Election Day of the general election in order to vote; must not be serving a sentence
for a felony conviction (including probation or on parole); must rescind any previous registration in
another county or state.” The individual must meet all of these requirements, turn in an application by



                                                    16
cohort (age 9 at intake, age 13 at first cash transfer), MiddleCohort i is an indicator that the
child belongs to the second youngest cohort (age 11 at intake, age 15 at first cash transfer).
The omitted group is the third (oldest) cohort, so all coefficients are interpretable as differences
from that cohort. The variable AmericanIndian i is a dummy equal to one for American Indians
and zero otherwise. The vector X is a set of baseline covariates that include the parents’
voter turnout rate before the casino opened, child age, number of children below age six in the
household and gender. The identification relies on differences between the three cohorts and
across American Indian race. The coefficients β1 and β2 identify differences in the propensity
to vote between the youngest two cohorts and the oldest cohort. The coefficients of interest
are γ1 and γ2 , which capture the difference-in-difference results. It is important to note that as
specified these coefficients may potentially capture differences in voting propensities arising from
the differences at the age of first transfer treatment or differences in the duration of treatment
before reaching maturity. We offer further discussion and some additional analysis aimed at
disentangling these two potential channels in the Results section.
        There are several reasons to expect heterogeneities in the estimated effects by income lev-
els in our analyses. First, there is the high correlation of voting and household incomes displayed
in Figure 1. Second, existing theory predicts additional income will have diminishing returns
(Frey 1971; Wolfinger and Rosentstone (1980); Leighley and Nagler 2013; Verba and Nie 1987;
Veba, Schlozman, and Brady 1995). Third, previous work in this unconditional cash transfer
context has shown important heterogeneities by initial income levels. Therefore, we specifically
examine whether there are heterogeneities in the effect of the unconditional cash transfers across
the initial household income distribution. We interact initial household income with the transfer
treatment dummy variable and show in a regression framework that the additional income is
positively associated with a higher propensity to vote but at a diminishing rate with respect
to initial (pre-trasfer) income. We follow up with additional analysis aimed to identify possi-
bly heterogeneous effects of the additional income across the initial income distribution. We
find evidence of such heterogeneities roughly below and above the median of initial income, as
measured before the transfers began (about $27,000). To ease interpretation, we conduct the
analysis separately on the subsamples of individuals below and above the median in the initial
household distribution. We then supplement all our empirical analyses with separate estimations
for these two sub-groups throughout the rest of the analysis. This allows to us to explore not
only whether income transfers help to raise overall turnout, but also the complementary (per-
haps more normatively interesting) question of whether positive income changes help narrow
mail and then an accepted registration notification will be mailed to the persons mailing address when
they are successfully registered to vote in North Carolina. This is a substantially different process than
what is required for tribal election. Registration for tribal elections requires that a person (according
to Chapter 161: Elections Code of Ordinances for the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians): “Be an
enrolled member of the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians; and be at least 18 years of age on the date
of the applicable election; and be registered with the Cherokee Board of Elections as set forth in Section
161-11 prior to the applicable election.” Registration can occur at tribal offices or by mail.




                                                   17
income-based participatory gaps in political participation.
        For the parents, we employ a difference-in-difference analysis that uses observations from
before and after the income intervention and differences across AI (eligible) and non-AI (non-
eligible) parents. The parents in our analysis were eligible to vote prior to the income transfers
and can be found in the voter file in the pre-transfer election years 1992, 1994 and 1996. We are
thus able to use a standard difference-in-difference analysis for the parents as we have “before”
observations and “after” observations for the same individual as well as a well-specified set of
treatment and control groups.
        Our identification strategy for the parents is also based on the exogenous nature of the
income transfer. Equation [2] formalizes this model—with γ being the coefficient of interest. In
this case, the treatment of interest is an indicator for being exposed to the casino transfer in
the time period after the start of the casino intervention. We include a control for American
Indian status and a binary variable for whether the observation is drawn from the time period
after the intervention. The variable AmericanIndian i × AfterCasino i is simply the interaction
between those two binary indicator variables. We also include an individual fixed-effect α since
we observe the same individual over multiple periods in our strongly-balanced panel; note that
this implies that we will not be able to separately identify the level effect of American Indian in
the regression equation as it will be captured in the individual fixed-effect. Finally, we include
voting year fixed-effects to account for potentially different average voter turnout for Presidential
versus Congressional-only elections θt and an error term. Our estimation equation is given below:

             Yit = αi + γ1 AmericanIndiani × Af terCasinot + δ1 AmericanIndiani                        (2)
                   + λ1 Af terCasinot + θt + it

       Identification in equation [2] is based on the assumption that the parallel trends assump-
tion holds. We show pre-treatment trends for parents across age cohorts by race and year in
Figure 4 below.22 In this figure we interact the treatment variable (eligible for the cash transfer)
with a year dummy variable and plot the estimated coefficient in the figure. Voting data for the
years 1992 and 1994 serve as the pre-treatment observations. We find no substantial differences
between the two groups. This is reassuring that there were no differential time trends prior to
the treatment. It is not possible to test a similar pre-trends analysis for the children since none
of them were eligible to vote in the pre-treatment time period.
       To further check for pre-treatment differences across the two groups, Appendix Table A.2
provides checks of variable means for a variety of baseline characteristics across the three age
cohorts of children broken by race prior to the start of the unconditional cash transfer. As can
be seen, there are very few statistically significant differences across the various cohorts by race.
  22 The rationale behind this test is that if treatment were truly orthogonal to other factors influencing
voting, we would not expect to see treatment effects before the cash transfers began. If our identification
strategy were able to isolate the effect of unconditional cash transfers from other factors, we would
expect to see balanced rates of voter turnout across the different cohorts and American Indian tribal
status before the transfers began.



                                                    18
Out of the 36 statistical tests run, only 4 show signs of imbalance. Moreover, if we include these
pre-treatment measures in the regressions, they do not affect the results. This indicates that
the different age cohorts can serve as appropriate controls for estimating the effect of the casino
transfer.23
        We estimate the parental models both with the entire sample and then separated by
above and below the median household income measured in the first three survey waves. We
also provide results from sensitivity analyses which weight the parent observations based on the
uniqueness of their match in the North Carolina voting registration data. There are potential
duplicate matches for parents given incomplete information on parental birthdate in the GSMS
records. This missing information is balanced across our identifying variation.24 This is not
an issue for matching of the children, since their data is much more complete. Finally, for
completeness and direct comparability, we also show results for the parents using the cohort
comparison framework that we use for the children in equation [1].


5        Results
5.1      Casino Transfers and Household Income
We start out by demonstrating that the casino transfers increased household income for Amer-
ican Indian families substantially. In Table 2, we show how household income was affected by
eligibility for casino transfer payments in a regression framework. The first two columns provide
the pooled ordinary least squares results and the estimates from models incorporating house-
hold fixed-effects regressions respectively. The dollar amounts are all converted to year 2000
dollar values and indicate that, on average, annual incomes increased by approximately $4,700
per recipient household, which accords with unofficial reports. In the next two columns, we
interact the variable for casino transfer eligibility with survey wave (with the intervention year
    23Appendix Table A.3 also provides a comparison of characteristics of the GSMS American Indian
population to that of other American Indian populations and rural African American groups; we show
that there is similarity across these groups in several important categories. Appendix Table A.4 provides
a correlation of voting and education for rural Americans, African Americans and our GSMS sample.
The results show that the education gradient, similar to the income gradient, for the GSMS population
is largely in line with that of these other groups as well.
   24 Fortunately, the rate of missing observations of this matching information is balanced across our

identifying information (Cohort 1, β=-0.34 (matches), p <0.369; Cohort 2, β=0.11 (matches), p <0.795.
For parents, the median number of matches is 0; conditional on matching at all, the median is 1 match.).
This makes it unlikely that these matches are biasing our results. To go one step further, however, we
assign lower weights to those observations that have multiple matches using the inverse of the number
of matches as weights and repeat the analysis using these weights. Intuitively, this approach places less
emphasis on observations that have many matches, and, thus, less certainty of whether the match is
right. As can be seen below, when we conduct these checks, the results do not change substantially.
Fortunately, the potential bias that Solon, Haider, and Wooldrige (2015) explain appears to be of little
concern in our application, as these weights do little to change our effect estimates.




                                                   19
omitted) for the ordinary least squares regression and the individual fixed-effects regression. We
use the estimated coefficients from column 3 to produce the event-analysis plot in Figure 2. The
figure shows that there was no statistically significant change in household income prior to the
income intervention (in survey waves 1-3) and a large and statistically significant increase in
household incomes for American Indian households subsequent to the transfer initiation.25 26
The coefficients plotted in Figure 2 are based on the following triple difference equation


            Yit = α + β1 Y oungestCohortsi + β2 Af terCasinot + β3 AmericanIndiani
                   + γ1 Y oungestCohortsi × Af terCasinot +
                γ2 Y oungestCohorts × AmericanIndani +                                               (3)
                XT
                     λt × Y oungestCohortsi × AmericanIndiani × Y eart + X 0 θ + it
                  t

  25 The  GSMS contains information on household income in total and does not have information on
the size of the various components of income flows, such as earnings from labor, child support, pensions,
and others. As a result, we cannot pinpoint the change in incomes to a source such as tribal government
transfers, as it should be recorded. We are able to estimate the overall change in total income, as we
report below as well as rule out changes in employment and marital status as potential channels.
  26 Note that the cash transfers are disbursed to adult members of the tribe only; children’s cash

transfers are banked for them until age 18 so the family receives no additional money for the children
during our study period.




                                                   20
Table 2: The Effect of the Casino Transfer on Household Income For Children Up to the Age of 18




                                     (1)         (2)              (3)                  (4)
    VARIABLES                                     Household Income in 2000 US $
    Receipt of Cash Transfer?     4,690***     4,730***
                                   (998.5)     (950.2)
    Survey Wave 1 Interaction                                    1,753                910.2
                                                                (1,517)              (1,416)
    Survey Wave 2 Interaction                                    504.5                35.61
                                                                (1,408)              (1,314)
    Survey Wave 3 Interaction                                    641.3                105.4
                                                                (1,255)              (1,138)
    Survey Wave 4 Interaction                             Omitted Category     Omitted Category


    Survey Wave 5 Interaction                                    2,446                2,023
                                                                (1,617)              (1,511)
    Survey Wave 6 Interaction                                   2,998*               2,731*
                                                                (1,695)              (1,466)
    Survey Wave 7 Interaction                                  5,682***             5,033***
                                                                (1,949)              (1,884)
    Survey Wave 8 Interaction                                  11,045***            10,431***
                                                                (1,980)              (1,939)
    Constant                      35,012***   34,914***        34,969***            34,738***
                                   (1,024)     (286.0)          (1,044)              (414.9)


    Fixed-Effects?                    N           Y                N                    Y
    Total N                         6,674       6,674            6,674                6,674
    Number of GSMS children         1,420       1,420            1,420                1,420

Notes: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1. Receipt of Cash Transfer is the triple difference coefficient
from our empirical specification. It is an interaction of race * age cohort* wave. Casino payments
began after wave 4 for only American Indian children (the baseline category). All regressions include
all secondary interactions and level variables. Standard Errors clustered at the individual level. In
columns 3 and 4, Survey Wave Interaction variables are the Receipt of Cash Transfer variable interacted
with each wave dummy variable and the fourth survey wave interaction is omitted. Coefficients are in
2000 US $.




                                                  21
Figure 2: Effect of Cash Transfers on Household Income around Start of Casino Opera-
          tions



                                             15000
Estimated Coefficient ($ Household Income)




                                                                                                                ●
                                             10000




                                                                                                          ●
                                              5000

                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                       ●
                                                     ●

                                                           ●        ●
                                                0                             ●




                                                     −3   −2        −1        0        1         2        3     4
                                                          Survey Waves Centered at Start of Casino Operations


Notes: Receipt of Cash Transfer is the triple difference coefficient from our empirical specification. It
is an interaction of race * age cohort * wave. Casino payments began after wave 4 for only American
Indian children. All regressions include all secondary interactions and level variables. Standard Errors
clustered at the individual level. In columns 3 and 4, Survey Wave Interaction variables are the
Receipt of Cash Transfer variable interacted with each wave dummy variable and the fourth survey
wave interaction is omitted. Figure shows point estimates (dots) and corresponding 95% confidence
intervals (bars).




                                                                              22
5.2    Children’s Voting Outcomes
Table 3 shows our first set of voting results which estimate the effect of casino transfers on the
voter turnout of children using equation [1].27 The identification for this analysis comes from
differences in the propensity to vote between AIs and non-AIs in the oldest cohort, which was
treated for the shortest amount of time at the latest age, versus the younger two cohorts, which
were treated for 2 and 4 years longer, respectively. In columns 1 and 2 of Panel A, we present the
results for the full sample. The estimated interaction coefficients in rows one and two provide
the difference-in-difference coefficients as shown in equation [1]. The two outcome variables are
measures of child voting behavior over the time period when all three cohorts were eligible to
vote (2002-2014). The outcomes measure whether children ever voted in a State or Federal
election and the proportion of elections that they voted, respectively.28 We find in row three
that parents’ prior voting probability is strongly correlated with children’s voting probability in
the future. A one percentage point increase in parental prior voting probability increases own-
child’s voting by 0.11-0.16 percentage points. The coefficients in row six demonstrate that initial
household income is correlated with children’s voting probabilities as well. Here we include a
control for household income in $5,000 bins. Children raised in households with incomes that
are $5,000 higher are 1-2 percentage points more likely to vote.
        The estimated difference-in-difference coefficients in the two pooled regression equations
in columns 1 and 2 are both positive but they are not statistically significant. Given the strong
income gradient found in both national and the GSMS parental data (Figure 1), the clear theo-
retical predictions from voter turnout theories, as well as the positive and statistically significant
estimated coefficients in the regression, we next examine in columns 3 and 4 whether there is
a differential impact of the cash transfers on child voting by initial household income (prior to
the cash transfers). The regressions in columns 3 and 4 include initial household income, all
relevant double interactions, and the triple interaction of initial household income with cohort
and American Indian race. The interaction effects in the first two rows are now larger and
statistically significant indicating that the effects differ across initial household income. In rows
4 and 5 of columns 3 and 4 we present the triple interaction coefficients. The estimated coeffi-
cients are negative and statistically significant. These negative coefficients indicate that a child
from the same race and birth cohort but who resides in a household with $5,000 lower income
would realize an 8.7 percentage point increase in having ever voted over the 2002-2014 election
cycles relative to another child from the same cohort and race coming from a richer household.
  27 Our final analysis sample is around 1,300 individuals due to missing baseline characteristics.
  28  Our analysis does not focus on voting in tribal elections, given the sporadic data that
is available. Tribal elections do not line up with State or Federal elections. According to
the “Charter And Governing Document Of The Eastern Band Of Cherokee Indians” (https :
//library.municode.com/nc/cherokeei ndianse asternb and/codes/codeo fo rdinances? nodeId             =
T HCHCO), the tribal elections generally take place every two years on odd-numbered years.
Tribal council members hold terms for two years while the Principal and Vice Chief hold office for four
years. Tribal elections are held on the first Thursday in September.




                                                  23
A similar result is found for the second triple interaction in row 5 but it is smaller in size and
statistical significance. We note that parents’ prior voting probability remains approximately
similar in size and statistical significance as in the previous two columns.
        It is not immediately clear how to interpret the heterogeneity in outcomes across the initial
income distribution; in particular the linear extrapolation of the triple interaction coefficients
to the entire income distribution may be problematic. To aide in interpreting these results,
we present additional analyses in the appendix and in Panel B of Table 3. First, in Appendix
Figure A3 we plot the coefficients for the effect of the cash transfer on our voting outcomes in
four separate partitions of the data by initial household income quartiles. Our intention here is
to identify whether and where potential non-linearities in the effect may exist across the initial
income distribution. Examining the results, there appears to be much larger effects for those
observations from initially poorer households. In fact, we see some evidence that there is a
break in the estimated effects on both of the outcome variables around the median of initial
household income. The estimated coefficients are positive and statistically significant in the first
and second income quartiles at the 90% level and approach zero and are slightly negative (but
not statistically significant) in the third and top quartiles. In a second analysis provided in
Appendix Table A.5 we present the results from models in which we interact the percent change
in initial household income due to the cash transfers with AI race and cohort variables. These
regression estimates tell a complementary story to those found in Appendix Figure A3 that the
initially poorest households experience the biggest impact of the casino transfer on the observed
voting outcomes.
        Based on these findings we test for differential effects of the transfers on households below
and above the median initial household income. Panel B of Table 3 separates the observations
by individuals from households initially below and initially above the median household income
(which is approximately $26,000). In the first two columns, we present similar analysis to that
in Panel A columns 1 and 2 except the observations are restricted to those households that
were initially below the median household income. The estimated coefficients on the interaction
variables are all positive and statistically significant. These results indicate that a child from a
below median income household who is exposed to exogenously higher incomes during adoles-
cence for 2 or 4 years has about 23-29 percentage point increase in their likelihood of ever voting
as compared to the control group of children who were not treated to the additional income as
minors; it increases their proportions of elections voted by 12-13 percentage points (shown in
column 2 of Panel B).
        The next two columns in Panel B provide similar analysis for the observations that were
above the median household income level prior to the income intervention. The estimated coeffi-
cients of interest are negative, smaller in absolute size than the estimated coefficients in columns
1 and 2, and not statistically significant. As predicted by the regressions in columns 3 and 4 in
Panel A above, there are heterogeneous effects of extra income depending on the households pre-
casino financial standing. Income transfers in early adolescence appear to narrow participatory



                                                 24
gaps considerably helping to shrink the pre-treatment gap in voting for the youngest cohorts.29
We also note that for children from above median household incomes the estimated coefficient
on parental prior voting is still positive and statistically significant while it was not as strongly
significant in the first two columns of Panel B.
        Figure 3 provides a graphical depiction of the differences in the probability of voting
across all elections. Here we combine cohorts 1 and 2 for readability, so the plotted coefficients
represent the average effect of the transfers on the voting propensities of these two cohorts
relative to the oldest cohort. The estimation setup is exactly the same as in equation [3], except
for the combined cohorts 1 and 2. We have no pre-treatment voting outcomes as the children
were not eligible to vote in that time period. In the top panel, we plot the estimated coefficients
for observations below the baseline median household income. The effect the casino transfers on
the younger cohorts is positive, substantively large, and (in virtually all elections) statistically
significant. In the bottom panel, we provide the same analysis for individuals from above the
baseline median household income level. The effect among this group of children is smaller and
not statistically significant.30
        These results are remarkably robust to various alternative specifications. In Appendix
Table A.7 we conduct a difference-in-difference analysis where we combine the youngest two age
cohorts and compare them to the oldest age cohort in exactly the same specification as in Table
3. Our results largely mirror the results found in Table 3. (For additional robustness checks, see
Section 5.4 below.)
        These results are consistent with the predictions that we described in the conceptual
framework based on a human capital perspective of voting. They suggest that income transfers
in early life narrow participatory gaps considerably. For young people who are in their forma-
tive years and who have yet to finish high school, household incomes matter a great deal in
determining whether they become active voters or fail to do so—with these effects concentrated
among those who have the lowest initial household incomes. This suggests that for nontrivial
portions of the population voting rates are not locked-in at birth or rigidly transferred from
one generation to the next. Elevating families out of poverty has potentially sizable effects on
children’s levels of civic participation.
        Because the younger cohorts were treated at younger ages, but were also treated for a
longer period of time while in their parent’s households (we assume at least up to age 18), we
cannot categorically say whether the effects of the additional income are stronger in those cohorts
because of the former or the latter differences. One fact that should be emphasized is that we
only consider elections starting in 2002, in which all cohorts were eligible to vote. Because the
income transfers started in 1996, the duration of the transfers is identical across cohorts at every
  29  As a reference, recall that Figure 1 shows that the income gradient between GSMS (and similar
individuals in the ANES) is around 20-26 percentage points.
  30 Appendix Table A.6 provides the regression coefficients for Figure 3. Here we pool across all

potential election years. Appendix Table A.6 also provides the analysis in a simple difference-in-
difference setup.



                                                 25
      Table 3: The Effect of Casino Transfer on Children’s Voter Turnout (Years 2002-2014)

    Panel A: Pooled and                    Pooled                           Pooled
    Initial HH Income                (1)            (2)               (3)           (4)
    Independent Variables       Ever Voted Prop Voted             Ever Voted Prop Voted
    Interaction 1: Age Cohort 1    0.0828         0.0428           0.575***      0.317***
    ×AmericanIndian               (0.0741)       (0.0401)           (0.128)      (0.0698)
    Interaction 2: Age Cohort 2    0.0743         0.0451            0.321**      0.228***
    ×AmericanIndian               (0.0720)       (0.0398)           (0.126)      (0.0697)
    Parents Prior Voting         0.162***       0.107***           0.172***      0.112***
                                  (0.0419)       (0.0250)          (0.0417)      (0.0249)
    Triple Interaction Cohort 1                                   -0.0878***    -0.0486***
    (Age Group 1 x AI                                              (0.0243)      (0.0145)
    x Initial Income)
    Triple Interaction Cohort 2                                    -0.0398*       -0.0311**
    (Age Group 2 x AI                                              (0.0241)        (0.0136)
    x Initial Income)
    Initial Household Income    0.0214***       0.0135***           -0.00158      -0.000460
                                 (0.00406)      (0.00230)          (0.00845)      (0.00463)

    Mean of Dep Variable               0.3273        0.1541         0.3273         0.1541
    Observations                        1,332         1,332          1,332         1,332
    R-squared                           0.051         0.063          0.066          0.077

    Panel B: By Median          Below Median HH Income Above Median HH Income
    HH Income                       (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)
    Independent Variables       Ever Voted Prop Voted Ever Voted Prop Voted
    Interaction 1: Age Cohort 1  0.289***    0.128***     -0.115     -0.0233
    ×AmericanIndian              (0.0817)     (0.0409)   (0.142)    (0.0857)
    Interaction 2: Age Cohort 2  0.231***    0.124***    -0.0382     -0.0219
    ×AmericanIndian              (0.0792)     (0.0433)   (0.141)    (0.0785)
    Parents Prior Voting          0.125*       0.0609   0.185***    0.131***
                                 (0.0659)     (0.0373)  (0.0538)    (0.0327)

    Mean of Dep Variable               0.2412        0.0974         0.4097         0.2083
    Observations                         651           651            681            681
    R-squared                           0.049         0.041          0.033          0.041
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Regressions include parents’ voter turnout rate before the
transfer as a control, American Indian indicator, gender, average household income prior to casino
operation, age cohort indicator variables, age, number of children in the household below age 6 and
a constant. Robust standard errors employed, but the significance thresholds remain the same if we
cluster by family or use the small-N clusters approach shown by Cameron, Gelbach, Miller (2008):
available upon request.




                                                26
Figure 3: Effect of Casino Transfers on Child Voting by Initial Household Income Status


                                                          Initial Income Below Median
Estimated Coefficient (Prob. Vote)




                                      0.3

                                      0.2                                                    ●
                                                                             ●
                                                    ●                                               ●
                                      0.1                      ●                      ●


                                      0.0    ●


                                     −0.1

                                     −0.2

                                     −0.3
                                            2002   2004       2006          2008     2010   2012   2014
                                                                     Election Year


                                                          Initial Income Above Median
Estimated Coefficient (Prob. Vote)




                                      0.3

                                      0.2

                                      0.1
                                                               ●
                                                                             ●
                                      0.0    ●                                                      ●
                                                                                             ●
                                                    ●                                 ●
                                     −0.1

                                     −0.2

                                     −0.3
                                            2002   2004       2006          2008     2010   2012   2014
                                                                     Election Year


Notes: Figure displays coefficients from event analysis model for children’s voter turnout in the 2004-
2014 elections. The estimates are split by median family income levels at baseline. To make visualization
easier, cohorts 1 and 2 are collapsed together and compared to cohort 3. Standard errors are clustered
at the individual level. Top panel N = 4,557 (651 GSMS individuals); Bottom panel N = 4,767 (681
GSMS individuals)




                                                                       27
election. The age at which they were first treated is not. This lends some credibility to the
hypothesis that the income effects are different across cohorts due to the differences in initial
age of treatment.
        We perform one more set of analyses to provide additional evidence. In Appendix Table
A.8 we consider the difference in the propensity to vote in the 2002 election. The empirical
specification here is the same as in equation 1, but we change the outcome variable to be the
probability of voting in the first election in which all children are above 18 and eligible to vote.
Again, at this point everyone in the AI population had been treated for 6 years of transfers in
2002, and so we hold duration of treatment constant. Still, there are differences in the age across
cohorts, but we have no reason to believe these differences to be different across AIs and non-
AIs. In any case, in this setup we see that the younger cohorts AI are more likely to participate
relative to the non-AIs and relative to the oldest cohort.
        Finally, we restrict individuals to be of a comparable age and compare their voting behav-
ior in different elections. Specifically, we compare individuals from the oldest and the youngest
cohort voting in US Congressional elections in 2002 and 2006, respectively; each of those cohorts
were approximately 21-22 years of age during those elections. We omit the middle age cohort
since they were 21 years of age in 2004 which was a US Presidential election which typically has
a higher voter turnout than Congressional elections. The results provided in Appendix Table
A.8 show that the results are qualitatively similar to our main results. Taken together, these
findings provide some evidence in favor of the age at first treatment mechanism over the duration
of treatment channel.


5.3    Parents’ Voting Outcomes
We next turn our attention to the effects of the casino transfer on parents’ voting rates. In
Table 4 we estimate equation [2], which focuses on parents’ voting. As we mentioned earlier, for
the parents we are able to compare the period before and after the casino opened for the same
person as we have voter participation data starting in 1992. Given this additional flexibility, we
examine the impact of the exogenous change in household income among parents in several ways.
First, we compare them in a simple difference-in-difference setting, then we compare across the
age cohorts (of their children) as a robustness check and a direct comparison to the children’s
estimation setup.
        The first three columns of Table 4 provide the results from the difference-in-difference
specification that leverages pre- and post-casino difference by transfer eligibility status. Here
the coefficient of interest is the interaction coefficient between American Indian race and a
binary variable indicating the time period after the casino operations began. Column 1 provides
the results for the pooled sample. Here we find that the increase in household income has no
economically substantive or statistically significant effect of on parents’ voting probabilities. This
null effect is precise: with our 95% confidence intervals allowing us to confidently rule out effects




                                                 28
    as large or small as 2.5 percentage points (a small effect based on the voting literature, and also
    relative to the mean in the GSMS parents’ sample). Given the heterogeneity in the effect on
    children’s voting by initial household income, we run separate analyses on the samples below and
    above initial median household income in columns 2 and 3. There are no large or statistically
    significant effects on parental voting probabilities in either subsample, contrary to our findings
    about the children. The next three columns in Table 4 provide similar difference-in-difference
    models with probability weights based on the inverse number of matches to public records. We
    find no statistically or substantively meaningful differences. Our results mirror those of Bagues
    and Esteve-Volart (2016) where they find little impact of winning the Spanish Christmas lottery
    on voter turnout.
            Figure 4 provides the event analysis for parents for the pooled sample and separately by
    initial household income. We plot the coefficient on the AI dummy for all elections starting
    in 1992, which is before the income transfers began in 1996 (Appendix Table A.9 provides the
    regression results used for this figure.) The figure confirms the findings in Table 4 for the
    parents voting probabilities and also shows that there were no significant differences in the
    trends in voting probabilities before the transfers started. Regardless of how we specify the
    model, unconditional cash transfers have no effect on parents’ voting.

         Table 4: The Effect of Casino Transfer on Parents’ Voter Turnout (Probability of Voting)

                      Pooled    Below Median     Above Median      Pooled     Below Median     Above Median
                                 HH Income        HH Income                    HH Income        HH Income
                                 at Baseline      at Baseline                  at Baseline      at Baseline

                        (1)           (2)               (3)           (4)           (5)              (6)
Variables             Voted          Voted            Voted         Voted          Voted           Voted
AI × AfterCasino     -0.00492       -0.0250          0.00673       -0.00501       -0.0203         0.000564
                     (0.0148)      (0.0201)          (0.0217)      (0.0147)      (0.0201)         (0.0207)

Mean of               0.4346        0.3285            0.5361        0.4346        0.3285           0.5361
Dependent Variable
Year FE                 Y              Y                Y              Y            Y                Y
Weighted ?              N              N                N              Y            Y                Y
N (parent-years)      15,984         7,812            8,172         15,984        7,812            8,172
R-squared             0.097          0.057            0.044          0.104        0.050            0.042

    Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10. Models include individual fixed effects, age fixed effects,
    year fixed effects and a constant. 95% confidence intervals based on cluster robust standard errors
    (family level) are given in brackets below the estimated coefficients.


            These results are consistent with a conceptual model of voting in which individual propen-
    sity to participate in civic society is set by the adult years. An important implication is that
    efforts in adulthood to change woefully low, unequal, and (by some accounts) declining rates
    of civic participation are not likely to succeed (a fact corroborated by the overwhelming small



                                                      29
Figure 4: Effect of Casino Transfers on Parental Voting by Initial Household Income Sta-
          tus around the Start of Casino Operations
,
                                                                           Pooled Parents Estimates

                                      0.15
Estimated Coefficient (Prob. Vote)




                                      0.10


                                      0.05
                                                     ●                              ●
                                                                     ●                               ●                           ●
                                      0.00    ●             ●                ●                                     ●
                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                              ●
                                     −0.05


                                     −0.10


                                     −0.15
                                             1992   1994   1996     1998    2000   2002      2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014
                                                                                    Election Year



                                                                  Parents Above Median Income at Baseline

                                      0.15
Estimated Coefficient (Prob. Vote)




                                      0.10


                                      0.05           ●                              ●                ●
                                                                     ●       ●                                                   ●
                                                                                              ●                    ●
                                      0.00    ●             ●                                                             ●
                                                                                                            ●

                                     −0.05


                                     −0.10


                                     −0.15
                                             1992   1994   1996     1998    2000   2002      2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014
                                                                                    Election Year



                                                                  Parents Below Median Income at Baseline

                                      0.15
Estimated Coefficient (Prob. Vote)




                                      0.10


                                      0.05           ●                              ●                ●
                                                                     ●       ●                                                   ●
                                                                                              ●                    ●
                                      0.00    ●             ●                                                             ●
                                                                                                            ●

                                     −0.05


                                     −0.10


                                     −0.15
                                             1992   1994   1996     1998    2000   2002      2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014
                                                                                    Election Year



Notes: Figure displays coefficients from event analysis model for parents’ voter turnout in the 1992-
2014 elections. The estimates are split by median family income levels at baseline. Standard errors are
clustered at the individual level. Top panel N = 15,984 (1,332 GSMS individuals); Middle panel N =
8,172 (681 GSMS individuals); Bottom panel N = 7,812 (651 GSMS individuals).




                                                                                        30
effects of adult-targeted get-out-vote campaigns; see Green, McGrath, and Aronow 2013).


5.4    Robustness Checks
The results presented are remarkably robust to alternate specifications. For example, in Ap-
pendix Table A.10 we estimate the same cohort based difference-in-difference specification for
parents that we used for children (see equation 1). Our intention here is to compare whether
parents of different cohorts were more likely to vote. For example, if the parents of a single
cohort had greater voting preferences or were differentially affected themselves somehow, they
may have been more likely to transmit this habit to their children. We are exploring whether
some of the effects that we observed in Table 3 are attributable to cohort-based differences that
emerge already across parents. In part, this is also helpful to explore potential mechanisms
driving our effect among children.
       We present this difference-in-difference in Appendix Table A.10. Figure A4 provides the
event analysis for these same results and Appendix Table A.11 provides the regressions used in
the figure. Again, we estimate the model among the pooled sample as well as split by initial
median household incomes. The difference-in-difference results are presented in Panel A of
Appendix Table A.11 and the weighted models are presented in Panel B. As can be seen, there
are no statistically significant results in these analyses, which accords with our earlier findings
in Table 4. This suggests that the effect on children that we observe probably has very little
to do with parents’ directly socializing their children to the norm of voting through their own
example.


6     Potential Mechanisms
Our analysis up to now has investigated the effect of an increase in household income on both
parental and child voting probabilities. The results indicate that children from households with
incomes initially below the median are most likely to increase their voting as adults. There is
no evidence that voting is affected for parents at all.
        As we outlined in the conceptual framework portion of our paper, there are several reasons
to suspect why unconditional cash transfers had such a noticeable effect on the voting outcomes
of recipients from disadvantaged childhood backgrounds. Our results are consistent with founda-
tional voter turnout theories, which predict that income will have diminishing returns (Wolfinger
and Rosenstone 1980). These individuals could have seen higher levels of human capital (educa-
tion, cognitive ability, non-cognitive ability) due to the income transfers, that acted as additional
resources down the road that encouraged them to vote; or they could have experienced enhanced
social networks that help mobilize them through the social component of voting. Both of these
indirect channels are consistent with a model of voting based in the human capital formation
framework.



                                                 31
        Unfortunately, eliciting compelling causal mechanisms is virtually impossible for reasons
discussed in the literature on this topic (Bullock, Green, and Ha 2010; Montgomery, Nyhan, and
Torres 2017; Imai, Keele, and Tingley 2010; Acharya, Blackwell, and Sen 2016). In short, with
mechanism testing it is hard to 1.) incorporate post-treatment variables (as mediation models
all require) without introducing bias, 2.) know whether unobserved mediators are actually
doing the heavy lifting, and 3.) understand the complex relationship between interconnected
mechanisms. For these reasons, documenting exact mechanisms is hard. Still, we can provide
suggestive evidence regarding a few of the potential mechanisms driving the effects we observe.
        One important mechanism that could explain the effects on disadvantaged children’s
eventual voting probabilities is their parent’s pattern of voting (Plutzer 2002). Our analyses in
Table 3 included parental voting probability prior to the start of the cash transfer payments and
we observe that this probability does not substantially impact the results. Moreover, we found
that the unconditional cash transfers had precisely estimated null effects on parents; thus making
it unlikely that the change in voting among children is the result of (non-existent) changes in
voting among parents.
        In theory, the cash transfers may have also increased parental education or changed their
employment levels, which may play a role in affecting children’s voting probability after the
casino payments began. In Appendix Table A.13 we show mother’s educational attainment and
full time employment status when the child is 16 years of age (the last survey wave that contains
data about the parents). The estimating equation is the same as equation 1. There do not
appear to be any statistically significant or substantively meaningful changes either in mother’s
educational attainment or her employment status as full time employed. We also decompose our
analysis for mother’s employment and educational attainment by below and above the median
initial household income; we find no significant results in this analysis either.31
        Moving household locations may also play an important role in changing child voting
behavior in the long run. Research shows that moving negatively affects who votes, especially
among young people (Ansolabehere, Hersh, and Shepsle 2012). However, the effects of income
on moving in our context are unclear. On the one hand, a parent may, as a result of the increased
casino transfers, move to a better community and the resulting change in peers who are more
likely to vote may lead directly to the increase in child voting behavior. Or, on the other hand,
those who stay in a single location over time may build up social connections that promote voting
that people who move do not receive—a fact corroborated by studies that show the negative
effect Moving to Opportunity had on voter participation (Gay 2012). Given previous research,
we dedicate substantial effort to test if our effects are driven by movers or non-movers.
        First, in Appendix Table A.12, we use data on the households geographic location to
show that there is are no systematic differences (by receipt of the income transfer) on whether
  31 We do not provide a similar analysis for fathers as there is a substantial amount of missing
observations for these characteristics.




                                               32
a child’s parents ever moved during their childhood.32 In Table 5 the first two columns divide
the observations to households that moved and didn’t move during childhood, respectively.
The regression results indicate that there is no difference in the effects of cash transfers on
the propensity to vote. In columns 3-6 we further separate the observations into below and
above initial median household. We find that the impact of the casino payment only for those
households that were initially below the median income and did not move during childhood
(column 4). This is consistent with a social capital formation mechanism, wherein individuals
who stay in their current community build stronger connections that reinforce the importance
of voting.
       In the next four columns (7-10) we investigate whether the child moves as an adult is
related to the observed effects on their own voting outcomes. We separate the data by whether
an individual resides outside of North Carolina or within North Carolina currently (as an adult)
and by their initial household income status. The results are driven by those individuals that
did not leave North Carolina and who come from households that were below the median initial
household incomes, which is again consistent with a social capital formation mechanism.33




  32  The GSMS data contain household location data in longitude and latitude and we used that to
identify the household (and subsequently the child) location of residence.
   33 In unreported results, we find similar outcomes for whether an individual lives in a different

county in North Carolina (as an adult) than the one that they grew up in during childhood. Again,
the results indicate that the effects are strongest for those who remain in the same county and come
from households that were below the median initial household incomes.



                                                33
                                               Table 5: Probability of Moving During Childhood and Adulthood

                                                                            Initial HH Income                                      Initial HH Income
                                                                 Below Median               Above Median                Below Median               Above Median
                               Moved in    Did not move     Moved in   Did not move    Moved in   Did not move   Lives Outside Lives in NC Lives Outside Lives in NC
                              Childhood?   in Childhood?   Childhood? in Childhood? Childhood? in Childhood?     NC Currently Currently NC Currently Currently

                                 (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)             (7)          (8)          (9)          (10)
VARIABLES                     Ever Vote?    Ever Vote?     Ever Vote?   Ever Vote?   Ever Vote?   Ever Vote?      Ever Vote?   Ever Vote?   Ever Vote?   Ever Vote?

Interaction 1: Age Cohort 1    0.0253          0.119         0.149       0.390***     -0.00661       -0.169         0.111       0.298***       -0.263       -0.101
×AmericanIndian                (0.111)       (0.0948)       (0.111)       (0.113)      (0.292)      (0.161)        (0.103)      (0.0897)      (0.213)      (0.154)
Interaction 2: Age Cohort 2     0.101         0.0584         0.158        0.245**      -0.0213      -0.0199        -0.0193      0.295***        0.506       -0.137
×AmericanIndian                (0.109)       (0.0918)       (0.113)       (0.105)      (0.271)      (0.173)        (0.108)      (0.0892)      (0.357)      (0.153)
Constant                       1.618*          0.204         -0.418        -0.531      3.850**       0.151          0.980         -0.650       -0.162      1.461*
                               (0.886)        (0.633)       (1.015)       (0.906)      (1.545)      (0.888)        (1.408)       (0.765)      (1.434)      (0.863)

Mean of Dep Var                 0.287          0.347         0.198         0.265        0.420        0.410          0.126         0.265        0.199        0.467
Observations                     422            900           253           393          169          507            111           540          146          535
R-squared                       0.080          0.048         0.060         0.057        0.070        0.035          0.152         0.060        0.050        0.034

   Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10. The first two columns separate all observations by whether the household moved during childhood or
   not. The next four columns add an additional separation as to whether the household was initially below or above the median household income.
   The next set of columns separates the observations by the initial household income and whether the individual currently lives outside of North
   Carolina (in adulthood). The outcome variable is a measure of whether the individual ever voted in their adulthood. Robust standard errors in
   parentheses
        Overall, these results indicate that the effect of the cash transfers is found primarily
among children from households below the median initial household income level that did not
residentially relocate during childhood or as adults. This is consistent with a social capital
story, where individuals who received the cash transfers and stayed in their communities were
much more likely to form the social bonds that mobilized them to vote. Thus, we have little
evidence to suggest that moving to a new community that may have different voting patterns
is an important mechanism for explaining the improvement in voting probability for the study
subjects as adults.
        It is also plausible that as adults the subject children have higher levels of education and
this could be an important determinant of adult voting behavior. In previous work, Akee et al.
(2010) show that the casino transfer increased the probability of graduating high school on time
(by the time one was 19) substantially, with these effects being centered among those previously
in poverty prior to the cash transfer. Hence, educational attainment may be a likely mediator
(especially given its strong connection to voting in previous research; e.g. Sondheimer and Green
2010).
        In Table 6 we show the effect of the cash transfer on whether an individual has a high
school degree by age 19. The first column provides the pooled analysis and indicates the children
from the two treated cohorts have positive estimated coefficients and the effect is large and
statistically significant for the youngest cohort. In columns 2 and 3 we separate out the analysis
by initial household income above and below the median as in our previous analysis. The
results in column 1 appear to be driven by those who receive the cash transfer from the initially
poorer households. We believe that this high school completion measure is a useful indicator
of a potential mechanism for the voting results. High school completion is the highest level of
education one can achieve before they are first eligible to vote, and so differences in the rate of
high school completion that mirror the differences in voting probability may suggest a mediating
effect of education on voting.
        A final mechanism that we investigate is whether the child is investing more in developing
pro-social skills and associations while in adolescence. Given the findings that the largest effects
of the cash transfer are concentrated among those who did not move during childhood (or
adulthood), it seems reasonable to examine the social connections of the children. There are
several variables that exist in the GSMS survey which indicate some measures of affability or
social connectivity. We provide the results in Table 7. Each set of regressions are based on
the empirical model in our main analysis and are separated by initial household income at the
median. We explore three variables and take the combined reporting from both the parent and
the child for these characteristics; the characteristics are binary indicator variables indicating
whether the characteristic is ever present in either report or not. We also note that these
characteristics are measured while the child is still residing in the household at ages 15 and 16
and both parent and child are interviewed separately.
        The first outcome we explore is whether a child is reported as having difficulty making



                                                35
                         Table 6: Child’s High School Completion at Age 19

                                                              Household Income
                                              Pooled     Below Median Above Median

                                                (1)          (2)            (3)
            VARIABLES                            High School Graduate at Age 19?

            Interaction 1: Age Cohort 1      0.326***       0.435***            0.124
             American Indian                 (0.0852)        (0.118)           (0.130)
            Interaction 2: Age Cohort 2       0.0979          0.122            0.0653
             American Indian                 (0.0882)        (0.120)           (0.136)
            Constant                           0.698          0.592             1.003
                                              (0.584)        (0.938)           (0.750)

            Observations                       1,014           482               532
            R-squared                          0.138          0.075             0.026
Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10. Regressions include American Indian indicator, gender,
age cohort indicator variables, age, number of children in the household below age 6 and a constant.
Columns 1 controls for initial average household income in the first three survey waves. Robust standard
errors in parentheses.



friends due to aggressive behavior. None of the coefficients are statistically significant in these
results whether we divide the data to above or below the median of initial household income.
        The second outcome we explore is whether a child is reported as having difficulty making
friends due to failure to approach other children; this is reported in columns 3 and 4. We view
this outcome as complementary to the previous one and explaining an additional dimension of
social connections and interactions with peers. The estimated coefficients in columns 3 and 4 are
negative indicating that children in households receiving the transfers are less likely to report
difficulty making friends due to shyness. The magnitudes of the estimated coefficients are larger
for children from households initially below the median income level.
        Finally, we test whether a child is considered to be a rule breaker in columns 5 and 6.
This measure is coded as one if the child violates rules at school or elsewhere in society; this
variable explicitly excludes rule breaking in the home and is meant to measure rule breaking in
society as a whole. The first estimated coefficient in column 5 is large, negative and statistically
significant. The estimated coefficients in column 6 are small in magnitude and do not reach
statistical significance at conventional levels.
        The results presented in Table 7 provide some suggestive evidence that social connections
may be marginally stronger for children who resided in households receiving the cash transfer
and from initially lower income households. There is some evidence that these children exhibit
slightly stronger societal connections (less difficulty making friends) and are less likely to be con-
sidered anti-social (less of a rule breaker) relative to the control groups. These connections may




                                                  36
translate into the civic domain, given the strong connection between social skills and networks
in adolescence and participation in adulthood (McFarland and Thomas 2006; Holbein 2017).
We do acknowledge, however, that the results are not nearly as precise as we would like in order
to be able to determine the channel through which additional household income affects child
voting behavior.




                                              37
                                              Table 7: Child’s Social Characteristics At Age 15 or 16

                                            Initial HH Income                    Initial HH Income                    Initial HH Income
                                      Below Median Above Median            Below Median Above Median            Below Median Above Median

                                           (1)              (2)                  (3)              (4)                 (5)               (6)
                                         Difficulty making friends             Refuses or Unable to be             Violates rules at school or
    VARIABLES                           due to aggressive behavior?          involved or talk with peers?         elsewhere outside the home?

    Interaction 1: Age Cohort 1           -0.0357            -0.0321            -0.114*           -0.0284           -0.290**           0.0211
     American Indian                     (0.0476)           (0.0504)           (0.0588)          (0.0612)            (0.120)           (0.128)
    Interaction 2: Age Cohort 2           0.0674             -0.0300            -0.0631           -0.0669            -0.0750           0.0532
     American Indian                     (0.0549)           (0.0493)           (0.0599)          (0.0625)            (0.116)           (0.143)
    Constant                               0.688              0.244              -0.378            0.542            -1.813**            0.243
                                          (0.466)            (0.417)            (0.535)           (0.393)            (0.879)           (0.846)

    Mean of Dep Variable                   0.058              0.052             0.087              0.054             0.563              0.455
    Observations                            481                541               482                541               474                539
    R-squared                              0.022              0.014             0.028              0.021             0.155              0.100
Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10. Outcome variables combine both parental and child reporting for these characteristics. The outcomes
are binary indicator variables at ages 15 or 16 for the children. Regressions include American Indian indicator, gender, age cohort indicator variables,
age, number of children in the household below age 6 and a constant. Columns 1 controls for initial average household income in the first three
survey waves. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
       While we do not claim to be able to identify definitive mechanisms for how the increased
household income affects the long-run voting probability for low income children, we have pro-
vided some evidence against several potential channels and some tentative evidence in favor
of other channels. Initial parental voting probabilities and changes to parental education or
employment do not appear to be driving the results.
       The child’s own high school completion rates by age 19 does suggest a potential channel via
human capital accumulation as an important mechanism. We do find some suggestive evidence
that children report more connection to their friends and peers as adolescents as a result of
the cash transfers. These relationships in conjunction with remaining in place over a longer
time period may increase the social capital for these individuals and thus drive the higher voting
probabilities as adults. While this clearly may not explain the whole effect, it is likely an integral
part of the story.




                                                 39
7    Conclusion
Decades of social science research has established that there is an income gradient in voter
turnout and that such patterns may have distortionary effects on representative democracy. In
this paper we explore whether the receipt of unconditional income transfers increased turnout
and narrowed participatory gaps. The results suggest that increasing household income does,
indeed, have a substantial impact on participatory inequality. Cash transfers help disadvantaged
children catch up with their more advantaged peers. However, the unconditional cash transfers
have little to no effect on parents’ generation nor on the children raised in initially better-off
households.
       Our results contribute to a broader framework for understanding what drives people to
participate in politics. The Resource Model of Voting predicts that resources uniformly increase
participation, but our results suggest that a model of voting formation that is more closely
aligned with existing models of human capital formation may be more accurate. Consistent
with the implications of such a framework, our results show that additional resources’ impact
on civic participation depends on the lifecourse. Resources, such as income, appear to be more
beneficial for children than for adults.
       From a practical perspective, our results suggest that unconditional cash transfer pro-
grams may have broader effects than previously realized. Not only do they affect individuals
labor, health, and schooling outcomes, but may also influence citizens’ levels of civic engagement
or social capital. Inasmuch as voting participation determines representation and policy, addi-
tional resources may affect the perpetuation of the intergenerational transmission of economic
inequality.
       Many efforts have been made to increase voter participation among low SES families.
They usually provide citizens with various information or social nudges. Sadly, most of these in-
terventions have negligible effects on disadvantaged populations or have even backfired and made
participatory gaps worse. Our results suggest that social policies aimed at reducing economic
disadvantage may have the additional benefit of increasing voter turnout in the next generation.
Future additional research on this important issue is very much warranted.




                                               40
8     References
    1. Adena, Maja, Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, Veronica Santarosa, and Ekaterina Zhu-
       ravskaya. “Radio and the Rise of the Nazis in Prewar Germany.” The Quarterly Journal
       of Economics 130, no. 4 (2015): 1885-1939.

    2. Aguero, Jorge, Michael Carter, and Ingrid Woolard. “The impact of unconditional cash
       transfers on nutrition: The South African Child Support Grant.” Technical Report (2006)

    3. Akee, Randall KQ, William E. Copeland, Gordon Keeler, Adrian Angold, and E. Jane
       Costello. “Parents’ incomes and children’s outcomes: a quasi-experiment using transfer
       payments from casino profits.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2, no. 1
       (2010): 86-115.

    4. Akee, Randall, Emilia Simeonova, William Copeland, Adrian Angold, and E. Jane Costello.
       “Young adult obesity and household income: Effects of unconditional cash transfers.”
       American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5, no. 2 (2013): 1-28.

    5. Akee, Randall, William Copeland, E. Jane Costello, and Emilia Simeonova. “How does
       household income affect child personality traits and behaviors?” American Economic Re-
       view 108, no. 3 (2018): 775-827.

    6. Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie ”Human Capital Development Before Age 5” Handbook
       of Labor Economics, Volume 4, Part B, pp 1315-1486

    7. Andolina, Molly W., Krista Jenkins, Cliff Zukin, and Scott Keeter. “Habits from home,
       lessons from school: Influences on youth civic engagement.” PS: Political Science & Politics
       36, no. 2 (2003): 275-280.

    8. Angrist, Joshua D., and Jrn-Steffen Pischke. Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiri-
       cist’s companion. Princeton university press, 2008.

    9. Ansolabehere, Stephen, and Eitan Hersh. “Validation: What big data reveal about survey
       misreporting and the real electorate.” Political Analysis 20, no. 4 (2012): 437-459.

10. Ansolabehere, Stephen, and Eitan D. Hersh. “ADGN: An Algorithm for Record Linkage
    Using Address, Date of Birth, Gender and Name.” Working Paper (2016).

11. Ansolabehere, Stephen, Eitan Hersh, and Kenneth Shepsle. “Movers, Stayers, and Regis-
    tration: Why Age is Correlated with Registration in the US.” Quarterly Journal of Political
    Science 7, no. 4 (2012): 333-363.

12. Anzia, Sarah F. Timing and turnout: How off-cycle elections favor organized groups.
    University of Chicago Press, 2013.



                                                41
13. Anzia, Sarah F. “Election timing and the electoral influence of interest groups.” The
    Journal of Politics 73, no. 2 (2011): 412-427.

14. Baez, Javier E., Adriana Camacho, Emily Conover, and Romn Andrs Zrate. Conditional
    Cash Transfers, Political Participation, and Voting Behavior. No. 6870. Institute for the
    Study of Labor (IZA), 2012.

15. Baird, Sarah J., Richard S. Garfein, Craig T. McIntosh, and Berk zler. “Effect of a
    cash transfer programme for schooling on prevalence of HIV and herpes simplex type 2 in
    Malawi: a cluster randomised trial.” The Lancet379, no. 9823 (2012): 1320-1329.

16. Baird, Sarah, Jacobus De Hoop, and Berk zler. “Income shocks and adolescent mental
    health.” Journal of Human Resources 48, no. 2 (2013): 370-403.

17. Bagues, Manuel, and Berta Esteve-Volart. ”Politicians luck of the draw: Evidence from
    the Spanish Christmas lottery.” Journal of Political Economy 124, no. 5 (2016): 1269-1294.

18. Bartels, Larry M. Unequal democracy: The political economy of the new gilded age.
    Princeton University Press, 2009.

19. Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. “Human capital and the rise and fall of families.”
    Journal of labor economics 4, no. 3, Part 2 (1986): S1-S39.

20. Bedolla, Lisa Garcia, and Melissa R. Michelson. Mobilizing inclusion: Transforming the
    electorate through get-out-the-vote campaigns. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
    2012.

21. Berent, M. K., Krosnick, J. A., and Lupia, A. (2016). Measuring Voter Registration and
    Turnout in Surveys Do Official Government Records Yield More Accurate Assessments?
    Public Opinion Quarterly, 80(3), 597-621.

22. Berry, Christopher R., and Jacob E. Gersen. “Election Timing and Public Policy.” Quar-
    terly Journal of Political Science 6, no. 2 (2011): 103-135.

23. Bertocchi, Graziella, Arcangelo Dimico, Francesco Lancia, and Alessia Russo. “Youth
    Enfranchisement, Political Responsiveness, and Education Expenditure: Evidence from
    the US.” CEPR Discussion Papers, No. 12332 (2017).

24. Blais, Andr. “What affects voter turnout¿‘ Annual Review of Political Science 9 (2006):
    111-125.

25. Blattman, Christopher, Nathan Fiala, and Sebastian Martinez. “The economic and social
    returns to cash transfers: evidence from a Ugandan aid program.” Columbia University,
    Departments of Political Science and International and Public Affairs(2013).




                                             42
26. Brady, Henry E., and John E. McNulty. “Turning out to vote: The costs of finding and
    getting to the polling place.” American Political Science Review 105, no. 01 (2011):
    115-134.

27. Brunner, Eric, Stephen L. Ross, and Ebonya Washington. “Does Less Income Mean Less
    Representation?.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5, no. 2 (2013): 53-76.

28. Brunner, Eric, Stephen L. Ross, and Ebonya Washington. “Economics and policy prefer-
    ences: causal evidence of the impact of economic conditions on support for redistribution
    and other ballot proposals.” Review of Economics and Statistics93, no. 3 (2011): 888-906.

29. Bullock, John G., Donald P. Green, and Shang E. Ha. “Yes, but whats the mecha-
    nism?(dont expect an easy answer).” Journal of personality and social psychology98, no.
    4 (2010): 550-558.

30. Burden, Barry C., Jason M. Fletcher, Pamela Herd, Donald P. Moynihan, and Bradley M.
    Jones. “How different forms of health matter to political participation.” The Journal of
    Politics 79, no. 1 (2017).

31. Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. “Bootstrap-based improve-
    ments for inference with clustered errors.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 90,
    no. 3 (2008): 414-427.

32. Campbell, David E. Why we vote: How schools and communities shape our civic life.
    Princeton University Press, 2006.

33. Campbell, Angus, Philip E Converse, Warren E Miller and Donald E Stokes. 1960. The
    American Voter. Chicago, IL: University Of Chicago Press.

34. Cascio, Elizabeth U., and Ebonya Washington. “Valuing the vote: The redistribution
    of voting rights and state funds following the voting rights act of 1965.” The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 129, no. 1 (2013): 379-433.

35. Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore
    Schanzenbach, and Danny Yagan. “How does your kindergarten classroom affect your
    earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, no. 4
    (2011): 1593-1660. Harvard

36. Coppock, Alexander, and Donald P. Green. “Is voting habit forming? New evidence from
    experiments and regression discontinuities.” American Journal of Political Science (2015).

37. Copeland, William, Lilly Shanahan, E. Jane Costello, and Adrian Angold. “Cumulative
    prevalence of psychiatric disorders by young adulthood: a prospective cohort analysis
    from the Great Smoky Mountains Study.” Journal of the American Academy of Child and
    Adolescent Psychiatry50, no. 3 (2011): 252-261.



                                             43
38. Corvalan, Alejandro, and Paulo Cox. “The Impact of Procedural Information Costs on
    Voting: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Chile.” Political Behavior(2017): 1-17.

39. Costello, E. Jane, Adrian Angold, Barbara J. Burns, Dalene K. Stangl, Dan L. Tweed,
    Alaattin Erkanli, and Carol M. Worthman. “The Great Smoky Mountains Study of Youth:
    goals, design, methods, and the prevalence of DSM-III-R disorders.” Archives of general
    psychiatry53, no. 12 (1996): 1129-1136.

40. Costello, E. Jane, Alaattin Erkanli, William Copeland, and Adrian Angold. “Association
    of family income supplements in adolescence with development of psychiatric and substance
    use disorders in adulthood among an American Indian population.” JAMA 303, no. 19
    (2010): 1954-1960.

41. Costello, E. Jane, E. M. Farmer, Adrian Angold, Barbara J. Burns, and Alaattin Erkanli.
    “Psychiatric disorders among American Indian and white youth in Appalachia: the Great
    Smoky Mountains Study.” American journal of public health87, no. 5 (1997): 827-832.

42. Cunha, Jesse M. “Testing Paternalism: Cash vs. In-kind Transfers in Rural Mexico.”
    Working Paper 2010).

43. Cunha, F., and Heckman, J. J. (2007): The Technology of Skill Formation, American
    Economic Review, 97(2), 3147.

44. Cunha, F., and Heckman, J. J. (2008). Formulating, identifying and estimating the tech-
    nology of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Journal of Human Resources, 43(4),
    738782.

45. Cunha, Flavio, James Heckman, and Susanne Schennach (2010): Estimating the Technol-
    ogy of Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skill Formation, Econometrica, 78(3):883-931.

46. Currie, Janet, and Duncan Thomas. “Does Head Start Make a Difference¿‘ The American
    Economic Review 85, no. 3 (1995): 341.

47. Currie, Janet (2011) “Healthy, Wealthy and Wise” Journal of Economic Literature, 2011

48. Dahlgard, Jens O. “Trickle-up Political Socialization: The Causal Effect on Turnout of
    Parenting a Newly Enfranchised Voter.” Working Paper (2017).

49. Dawson, Richard E., and Kenneth Prewitt. Political socialization: an analytic study.
    Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 1968.

50. Dee, Thomas S. “Are there civic returns to education¿‘ Journal of Public Economics 88,
    no. 9 (2004): 1697-1720.




                                            44
51. De La O, Ana L. “Do conditional cash transfers affect electoral behavior? Evidence from
    a randomized experiment in Mexico.” American Journal of Political Science 57, no. 1
    (2013): 1-14.

52. De La O, Ana L. Crafting Policies to End Poverty in Latin America. Cambridge, MA:
    Cambridge University Press, 2015.

53. DellaVigna, Stefano, John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao. ”Voting to tell
    others.” The Review of Economic Studies 84, no. 1 (2016): 143-181.

54. De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. “One-time transfers of cash
    or capital have long-lasting effects on microenterprises in Sri Lanka.” Science 335, no.
    6071 (2012): 962-966.

55. De Rooij, Eline A., and Donald P. Green. “Radio Public Service Announcements and
    Voter Participation Among Native Americans: Evidence from Two Field Experiments.”
    Political Behavior 39, no. 2 (2017): 327-346.

56. DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ethan Kaplan. “The Fox News effect: Media bias and voting.”
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, no. 3 (2007): 1187-1234.

57. Denny, Kevin, and Orla Doyle. “Political interest, cognitive ability and personality: De-
    terminants of voter turnout in Britain.” British Journal of Political Science 38, no. 2
    (2008): 291-310.

58. Downs, Anthony. “An economic theory of political action in a democracy.” The Journal
    of Political Economy (1957): 135-150.

59. Enikolopov, Ruben, Maria Petrova, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. “Media and political
    persuasion: Evidence from Russia.” The American Economic Review 101, no. 7 (2011):
    3253-3285. Harvard

60. Enos, Ryan D., Anthony Fowler, and Lynn Vavreck. “Increasing inequality: The effect of
    GOTV mobilization on the composition of the electorate.” The Journal of Politics 76, no.
    1 (2013): 273-288.

61. Feigenbaum, James J., and Andrew B. Hall. “How legislators respond to localized economic
    shocks: Evidence from Chinese import competition.” The Journal of Politics 77, no. 4
    (2015): 1012-1030.

62. Fiorina, Morris P. “The voting decision: instrumental and expressive aspects.” The Journal
    of Politics 38, no. 2 (1976): 390-413. Harvard




                                             45
63. Foley, Debra L., David B. Goldston, E. Jane Costello, and Adrian Angold. “Proximal psy-
    chiatric risk factors for suicidality in youth: the Great Smoky Mountains Study.” Archives
    of general psychiatry 63, no. 9 (2006): 1017-1024.

64. Fowler, Anthony. “Electoral and Policy Consequences of Voter Turnout: Evidence from
    Compulsory Voting in Australia.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 8, no. 2 (2013):
    159-182.

65. Frey, Bruno S. “Why do high income people participate more in politics¿‘Public Choice11,
    no. 1 (1971): 101-105.

66. Fujiwara, Thomas. “Voting technology, political responsiveness, and infant health: Evi-
    dence from Brazil.” Econometrica 83, no. 2 (2015): 423-464.

67. Fujiwara, Thomas, Kyle Meng, and Tom Vogl. “Habit Formation in Voting: Evidence
    from Rainy Elections.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8, no. 4 (2016):
    160-188.

68. Galiani, Sebastian, Nadya Hajj, Pablo Ibarraran, Nandita Krishnaswamy, and Patrick J.
    McEwan. Electoral reciprocity in programmatic redistribution: Experimental Evidence.
    No. w22588. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2016.

69. Gay, Claudine. “Moving to opportunity: The political effects of a housing mobility exper-
    iment.” Urban Affairs Review 48, no. 2 (2012): 147-179.

70. Gentzkow, M. (2006). Television and voter turnout. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    121(3), 931-97

71. Gerber, Alan S., Donald P. Green, and Ron Shachar. “Voting may be habitforming:
    evidence from a randomized field experiment.” American Journal of Political Science 47,
    no. 3 (2003): 540-550.

72. Gerber, Alan S., Donald P. Green, and Christopher W. Larimer. “Social pressure and
    voter turnout: Evidence from a large-scale field experiment.” American Political Science
    Review 102, no. 01 (2008): 33-48.

73. Gerber, Alan S., Gregory A. Huber, David Doherty, Conor M. Dowling, Connor Raso, and
    Shang E. Ha. “Personality traits and participation in political processes.” The Journal of
    Politics 73, no. 3 (2011): 692-706.

74. Gertler, Paul and James Heckman, Rodrigo Pinto, Arianna Zanolini, Christel Vermeersch,
    Susan Walker, Suan Change , Sally Grantham-McGregor. 2014. Labor Market Returns To
    Early Childhood Stimulation in Jamaica. Science, May, Vol. 344 no. 6187 pp. 998-1001.




                                             46
75. Gilens, Martin. Affluence and influence: Economic inequality and political power in Amer-
    ica. Princeton University Press, 2012.

76. Giuliano, Paola, and Antonio Spilimbergo. ”Growing up in a Recession.” Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies 81, no. 2 (2013): 787-817.

77. Gomez, Brad T., Thomas G. Hansford, and George A. Krause. “The Republicans should
    pray for rain: Weather, turnout, and voting in US presidential elections.” Journal of
    Politics 69, no. 3 (2007): 649-663.

78. Green, Donald P., Mary C. McGrath, and Peter M. Aronow. “Field experiments and the
    study of voter turnout.” Journal of Elections, Public Opinion & Parties 23, no. 1 (2013):
    27-48.

79. Green, Donald P., and Alan S. Gerber. Get out the vote: How to increase voter turnout.
    Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2008/2015.

80. Greenstein, Fred Irwin. Children and politics. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
    1965.

81. Griffin, John D., and Brian Newman. “Are voters better represented¿‘ The Journal of
    Politics 67, no. 4 (2005): 1206-1227.

82. Haushofer, Johannes, and Jeremy Shapiro. “The short-term impact of unconditional cash
    transfers to the poor: Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 131, no. 4 (2016): 1973-2042.

83. Healy, Andrew, and Neil Malhotra. “Retrospective voting reconsidered.” Annual Review
    of Political Science16 (2013): 285-306.

84. Healy, Andrew, and Gabriel S. Lenz. “Substituting the End for the Whole: Why Voters
    Respond Primarily to the ElectionYear Economy.” American Journal of Political Science
    58, no. 1 (2014): 31-47.

85. Healy, Andrew, and Gabriel S. Lenz. “Presidential Voting and the Local Economy: Evi-
    dence from Two Population-Based Data Sets.” The Journal of Politics 79, no. 4 (2017).

86. Heckman, James J. “Policies to foster human capital.” Research in economics54, no. 1
    (2000): 3-56.

87. Heckman, James, 2007. The economics, technology, and neuroscience of human capability
    formation. PNAS 104 (33), 1325013255.

88. Heckman, James and Rodrigo Pinto and Peter Savelyev. 2013. Understanding the Mecha-
    nisms through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes,).
    American Economic Review, 103(6): 20522086.



                                            47
 89. Holbein, John B. “Childhood Skill Development and Adult Political Participation.” Amer-
     ican Political Science Review(2017): 572-583.

 90. Holbein, John. “Left behind? Citizen responsiveness to government performance informa-
     tion.” American Political Science Review 110, no. 2 (2016): 353-368.

 91. Holbein, John B., and D. Sunshine Hillygus. “Making young voters: the impact of pre-
     registration on youth turnout.” American Journal of Political Science 60, no. 2 (2016):
     364-382.

 92. Holbein, John B., and Jerome P. Schafer. “Time Zones, Tiredness, and Turnout: A Natural
     Experiment on the Effect of Sleep Deprivation on Voter Turnout and Election Results.”
     SSRN Working Paper no. 2881452 (2017).

 93. Hillygus, D. Sunshine, John B. Holbein, and Steven Snell. “The Nitty Gritty: The Un-
     explored Role of Grit and Perseverance in Voter Turnout.” SSRN Working Paper, no.
     2675326 (2016).

 94. Imai, Kosuke, Luke Keele, and Dustin Tingley. “A general approach to causal mediation
     analysis.” Psychological methods 15, no. 4 (2010): 309-334.

 95. Jennings, M. Kent, Gregory B. Markus, Richard G. Niemi, and Laura Stoker. “Youth-
     parent socialization panel Study, 19651997: Four waves combined. ICPSR04037-v1.” Ann
     Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor] 11
     (2005).

 96. Johnson, James H., John D. Kasarda, and Stephen J. Appold. “Assessing the Economic
     and Non-Economic Impacts of Harrahs Cherokee Casino, North Carolina.” Frank Hawkins
     Kenan Institute of Private Enterprise Technical Report (2011).

 97. Kahne, Joseph E., and Susan E. Sporte. “Developing citizens: The impact of civic learn-
     ing opportunities on students commitment to civic participation.” American Educational
     Research Journal 45.3 (2008): 738-766.

 98. Kahne, Joseph, and Ellen Middaugh. “High quality civic education: What is it and who
     gets it?.” Social Education 72.1 (2008): 34.

 99. Kendall, Chad, Tommaso Nannicini, and Francesco Trebbi. “How do voters respond to
     information? Evidence from a randomized campaign.” The American Economic Review
     105, no. 1 (2014): 322-353.

100. Krosnick, Jon A., and Duane F. Alwin. “Aging and susceptibility to attitude change.”
     Journal of personality and social psychology 57, no. 3 (1989): 416.




                                             48
101. Langton, Kenneth P. 1969. Political Socialization. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
     Press.

102. Lassen, D. D. (2005). The effect of information on voter turnout: Evidence from a natural
     experiment. American Journal of political science, 49(1), 103-118.

103. Lee, David S., Enrico Moretti, and Matthew J. Butler. “Do voters affect or elect policies?
     Evidence from the US House.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, no. 3 (2004):
     807-859.

104. Leighley, Jan E., and Jonathan Nagler. Who votes now?: Demographics, issues, inequality,
     and turnout in the United States. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2013.

105. Lewis-Beck, Michael S. and Mary Stegmaier. 2007. “Economic Models of Voting,” in
     Russell Dalton and Hans-Dieter Klingemann (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Political
     Behavior. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 518-37.

106. Linos, Elizabeth. “Do conditional cash transfer programs shift votes? Evidence from the
     Honduran PRAF.” Electoral studies32, no. 4 (2013): 864-874.

107. Madestam, Andreas, Daniel Shoag, Stan Veuger, and David Yanagizawa-Drott. “Do Po-
     litical Protests Matter? Evidence from the Tea Party Movement.” The Quarterly journal
     of economics 128, no. 4 (2013): 1633-1685.

108. Martin, Gregory J., and Ali Yurukoglu. “Bias in cable news: Persuasion and polarization.”
     American Economic Review 107, no. 9 (2017): 2565-2599.

109. Meredith, Marc. “Persistence in political participation.” Quarterly Journal of Political
     Science 4, no. 3 (2009): 187-209.

110. Milbrath, Lester W. “Political participation: How and why do people get involved in
     politics¿‘ (1965).

111. Mondak, Jeffery J. Personality and the foundations of political behavior. Cambridge, MA:
     Cambridge University Press, 2010.

112. Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Ebonya Washington. “Sticking with your vote: Cognitive
     dissonance and political attitudes.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1,
     no. 1 (2009): 86-111.

113. Nie, Norman H., Jane Junn, and Kenneth Stehlik-Barry. Education and democratic citi-
     zenship in America. University of Chicago Press, 1996.

114. Ojeda, Christopher. “The Two Income-Participation Gaps.” American Journal of Political
     Science (Forthcoming).



                                              49
115. Paxson, Christina, and Norbert Schady. “Does money matter? The effects of cash transfers
     on child development in rural Ecuador.” Economic development and cultural change59,
     no. 1 (2010): 187-229.

116. Peterson, Geoff. “Native American turnout in the 1990 and 1992 elections.” American
     Indian Quarterly 21, no. 2 (1997): 321-331.

117. Pettigrew, Stephen. 2016. “The Downstream Effects of Long Lines: How Long Waits at
     the Precinct Depress Future Turnout.” Working Paper, Presented at the 2016 Annual
     Meeting of the Midwest Political Science Association; Chicago IL.

118. Plutzer, Eric. “Becoming a habitual voter: Inertia, resources, and growth in young adult-
     hood.” American political science review 96, no. 01 (2002): 41-56.

119. Pop-Eleches, Cristian, and Grigore Pop-Eleches. “Targeted government spending and
     political preferences.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 7, no. 3 (2012): 285-320.
     Harvard

120. Prior, Markus. “Youve either got it or you dont? The stability of political interest over
     the life cycle.” The Journal of Politics 72, no. 3 (2010): 747-766.

121. Prior, Markus. Hooked: How Political Interest Fuels Our Democracy. Book Manuscript,
     2017.

122. Riker, William H., and Peter C. Ordeshook. “A Theory of the Calculus of Voting.” Amer-
     ican political science review 62, no. 01 (1968): 25-42.

123. Rosenstone, Steven, and John M. Hansen. Mobilization, participation and democracy in
     America. Pearson, 1993.

124. Schlozman, Kay Lehman, Sidney Verba, and Henry E. Brady. The Unheavenly chorus:
     Unequal Political Voice and the Broken Promise of American Democracy. Princeton Uni-
     versity Press, 2012.

125. Searing, Donald D., Joel J. Schwartz, and Alden E. Lind. “The structuring principle:
     Political socialization and belief systems.” American Political Science Review 67, no. 02
     (1973): 415-432.

126. Sears, David O., and Carolyn L. Funk. “Evidence of the long-term persistence of adults’
     political predispositions.” The Journal of Politics 61, no. 1 (1999): 1-28.

127. Schlozman, Kay Lehman, Henry E Brady and Sidney Verba. 2018. Unequal and Unrep-
     resented: Political Inequality and the Peoples Voice in the New Gilded Age. Princeton
     University Press.




                                             50
128. Schroedel, Jean, and Ryan Hart. “Vote Dilution and Suppression in Indian Country.”
     Studies in American Political Development 29, no. 1 (2015): 40-67.

129. Schroedel, Jean, Melissa Rogers, Joseph Dietrich, and Savannah Johnston. “Assessing
     the Efficacy of Early Voting Access on Indian Reservations: Evidence from a Natural
     Experiment in Nevada.” Working Paper (2017).

130. Smets, Kaat, and Carolien Van Ham. “The embarrassment of riches? A meta-analysis of
     individual-level research on voter turnout.” Electoral Studies 32, no. 2 (2013): 344-359.

131. Solon, Gary, Steven J. Haider, and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. “What are we weighting for¿‘
     Journal of Human resources 50, no. 2 (2015): 301-316.

132. Sondheimer, Rachel Milstein, and Donald P. Green. “Using experiments to estimate the
     effects of education on voter turnout.” American Journal of Political Science 54, no. 1
     (2010): 174-189.

133. Verba, Sidney, Kay Lehman Schlozman, and Henry E. Brady. Voice and equality: Civic
     voluntarism in American politics. Harvard University Press, 1995.

134. Verba, Sidney, and Norman H. Nie. Participation in America: Political democracy and
     social equality. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1987.

135. Washington, Ebonya. “How black candidates affect voter turnout.” The Quarterly Journal
     of Economics 121, no. 3 (2006): 973-998.

136. Wolfinger, Raymond E., and Steven J. Rosenstone. Who votes? New Haven, CT: Yale
     University Press, 1980.

137. Zucco, Cesar. “Conditional cash transfers and voting behavior: Redistribution and clien-
     telism in developing democracies.” Working Paper (2011).




                                             51
A   Appendix Tables




                      52
                              Table A.1: Differences in Characteristics Affecting Matching Rates for Parents

                                     Initial HH Income                 Initial HH Income                    Initial HH Income
                                Pooled <Median >Median            Pooled    <Median >Median       Pooled    <Median        >Median

                                 (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)      (5)        (6)         (7)       (8)           (9)
VARIABLES                       Moved Out of North Carolina        Ever Changed Last Name         Number of Matching Inputs Available

Interaction 1: Age Cohort 1    -0.00471    -0.0629      0.118     0.0220     -0.0218    0.0882     -0.046       -0.069     -0.016
×AmericanIndian                (0.0561)   (0.0771)    (0.0914)   (0.0373)   (0.0517)   (0.0581)   (0.042)      (0.059)    (0.062)
Interaction 2: Age Cohort 2    -0.00891    -0.0248     -0.0168   0.0949**     0.0731    0.122*     -0.067       -0.050     -0.038
×AmericanIndian                (0.0577)   (0.0836)    (0.0726)   (0.0407)   (0.0560)   (0.0641)   (0.043)      (0.062)    (0.057)

Observations                  1,328       648         680      1,332        651         681      1,233      595             638
R-squared                     0.014      0.030       0.020     0.012       0.013       0.015     0.074     0.066           0.106
   Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10. The outcomes are binary indicator variables. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
       Table A.2: Mean Differences by Age Cohort and American Indian Parent Status at Survey Wave 1

Differences Between Cohort 1 and Cohort 2    Cohort 1 Mean      Cohort 2 Mean   Difference   SE of Difference
Number of American Indian Parents                N/A                N/A
American Indian Indicator                        0.019              0.036         -0.017         0.012
Male Child Indicator                             0.562              0.596         -0.034         0.037
Mother Has a High School Degree/GED              0.297               0.27          0.027          0.033
Father Has a High School Degree/GED              0.184              0.184            0            0.029
Mother Has More than a High School Degree        0.462              0.518         -0.056          0.037
Father Has More than a High School Degree        0.281              0.309         -0.028         0.034
Initial Household Income                       29367.98           32652.17      -3284.19*       1331.824

Differences Between Cohort 2 and Cohort 3    Cohort 2 Mean      Cohort 3 Mean   Difference   SE of Difference
Number of American Indian Parents                N/A                N/A
American Indian Indicator                        0.036              0.071        -0.034*         0.017
Male Child Indicator                             0.596              0.526          0.07          0.038
Mother Has a High School Degree/GED               0.27              0.279         -0.009          0.035
Father Has a High School Degree/GED              0.184              0.141          0.043          0.029
Mother Has More than a High School Degree        0.518              0.471          0.047          0.039
Father Has More than a High School Degree        0.309              0.292          0.018          0.036
Initial Household Income                       32652.17           32154.88        497.29        1399.523

Differences Between Cohort 1 and Cohort 3    Cohort 1 Mean      Cohort 3 Mean   Difference   SE of Difference
Number of American Indian Parents                N/A                N/A
American Indian Indicator                        0.019              0.071       -0.052**         0.015
Male Child Indicator                             0.562              0.526         0.037          0.038
Mother Has a High School Degree/GED              0.297              0.279         0.018           0.035
Father Has a High School Degree/GED              0.184              0.141         0.043           0.028
Mother Has More than a High School Degree        0.462              0.471        -0.009           0.038
Father Has More than a High School Degree        0.281              0.292        -0.011           0.035
Initial Household Income                        29367.9           32154.88      -2786.9*        1364.668

                                Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10.
       Table A.3: Comparison of Economic Characteristics with other American Indian Tribes and relevant demographic groups

  Data Source:              1990 Census for
                           American Indians    Social Explorer                            IPUMS 1990
  Group:                        Eastern          All 11 NC       All Native   Rural Native Rural African    All
                               Cherokee           Counties       Americans     Americans     Americans    of US Rural US
  Rural status                   99%*               65%             54%          100%          100%        32%    100%
  Median Family Income          $17,778            $27,275        $20,000       $18,000       $17,000    $32,030 $29,400
  Family size                     2.95                              3.86          4.17          4.11       3.28    3.4
  Own house                      70%                75%             58%          68%           70%         69%    80%
  Married                        50%                60%             47%          49%           41%         58%    66%
  % of Age 25+                   70%                69%             69%          64%           53%         79%    75%
  HS Degree
  Unem Rate                     12%*                 6%            15%           18%             12%          6%         6%
  Per Capita Income             $6,543             $11,691        $11,362       $9,905          $9,165      $17,922    $15,677
Source: *Taylor and Akee (2014); 1990 Census Report on American Indians; Social Explorer, 1990 County Data; IPUMS 1990, 1% Sample.
                           Table A.4: Correlation of Education and Voting

                                  Rural:                          0.2153
                                  Rural African American:         0.1801
                                  GSMS                            0.2014




Table A.5: The Effect of Casino Transfer as a Percent of Initial Household Income on Children’s Voter
           Turnout (Years 2000-2014)

                                                           (1)               (2)
                                                                        Proportion
                  VARIABLES                             Ever Voted    Elections Voted

                  Interaction 1: Age Cohort 1            0.353**            0.145**
                  Transfer as % of Initial Income         (0.154)           (0.0730)
                  Interaction 2: Age Cohort 2            0.339**            0.156**
                  Transfer as % of Initial Income         (0.154)           (0.0763)
                  Initial Household                     0.0201***          0.0131***
                  Income                                (0.00423)          (0.00240)
                  Parents Prior                          0.160***          0.105***
                  Voting                                 (0.0414)           (0.0247)

                  Observations                            1,330              1,330
                  R-squared                               0.053              0.064
Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10. Parent’s prior voting is the probability of the parents voting
in the period prior to the casino operations; initial household income refers to the average household
income in the period prior to the casino operations. Regressions include American Indian indicator,
gender, age cohort indicator variables, age, number of children in the household below age 6 and a
constant. Robust standard errors employed.




                                                   56
               Table A.6: Children’s Voting Probability Pooled by Initial Household Income

                                                                Initial HH Income
                               Pooled    Below Median     Above Median Below Median          Above Median
                                (1)           (2)              (3)             (4)               (5)
VARIABLES                      Voted         Voted           Voted            Voted             Voted

Interaction 1: Age Cohort 1 0.0440          0.131***          -0.0268
×AmericanIndian             (0.0400)        (0.0409)         (0.0857)
Interaction 2: Age Cohort 2 0.0452          0.124***          -0.0253
×AmericanIndian             (0.0395)        (0.0401)         (0.0802)
Interaction 1: Age Group                                                      Omitted          Omitted
×AI x 2002                                                                    Category         Category
Interaction 2: Age Group                                                      0.131***          -0.0644
×AI x 2004                                                                    (0.0505)          (0.110)
Interaction 3: Age Group                                                       0.0921*           0.0487
×AI x 2006                                                                    (0.0487)         (0.0835)
Interaction 4: Age Group                                                      0.161***           0.0193
×AI x 2008                                                                    (0.0601)          (0.116)
Interaction 5: Age Group                                                       0.103**          -0.0750
×AI x 2010                                                                    (0.0505)         (0.0952)
Interaction 6: Age Group                                                      0.202***          -0.0380
×AI x 2012                                                                    (0.0576)          (0.114)
Interaction 7: Age Group                                                      0.126***          -0.0124
×AI x 2014                                                                    (0.0469)         (0.0953)
Parents Prior Voting        0.108***         0.0660*         0.139***         0.0652*           -0.0124
                            (0.0250)         -0.0376          -0.033          (0.0377)         (0.0953)

Observations                    9,324         4,557            4,767            4,557           4,767
R-squared                       0.064         0.040            0.054            0.043           0.056

    Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10. The outcomes are binary indicator variables. Robust
    standard errors in parentheses.




                                                   57
               Table A.7: Children’s Voting Probability by Combined Cohorts (1 and 2) Relative to Cohort 3

                                                 Pooled            Below Median HH Income        Above Median HH Income

                                          (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)
VARIABLES                              Ever Voted   Prop Voted     Ever Voted    Prop Voted      Ever Voted   Prop Voted

Interaction 1: Age (Cohorts 1 or 2 )     0.0789        0.0437       0.259***       0.126***        -0.0813      -0.0245
x American Indian                       (0.0648)      (0.0348)      (0.0701)       (0.0368)        (0.125)     (0.0710)
Parent Prior Voting                     0.162***      0.107***       0.128*         0.0633*       0.193***     0.135***
                                        (0.0418)      (0.0250)      (0.0660)       (0.0378)       (0.0535)     (0.0326)

Observations                             1,332            1,332        651            651            681         681
R-squared                                0.051            0.064       0.042          0.034          0.029       0.038
                    Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                Table A.8: Children’s Voting Probabilities at Similar Ages and in 2002 Election

                                     Initial HH Income                             Initial HH Income
                    Pooled     Below Median Above Median          Pooled     Below Median Above Median

                      (1)           (2)               (3)           (4)            (5)              (6)
VARIABLES                       Voted at Age 21?                            Voted in 2002 Election?

Age Cohort 1 or 2    -0.0109      0.0747*           -0.101        0.0173       0.0792***           -0.0528
x American Indian   (0.0444)      (0.0382)         (0.0999)      (0.0355)       (0.0272)          (0.0819)

Observations          864           424               440          1,332           651                681
R-squared            0.037         0.013             0.039         0.027          0.018              0.027

               Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
              Table A.9: Parents Event Analysis Regression Tables

                                                   Initial HH Income
                                   Pooled    Below Median Above Median

                                    (1)            (2)              (3)
    VARIABLES                      Voted          Voted            Voted

    Interaction 1: AI x 1992     -0.00164        0.00895         -0.00110
                                 (0.0192)        (0.0228)        (0.0392)
    Interaction 2: AI x 1994     0.0331*           0.0177         0.0485
                                 (0.0198)        (0.0255)        (0.0342)
    Interaction 3: AI x 1996     Omitted         Omitted         Omitted
                                 Category       Category         Category
    Interaction 4: AI x 1998       0.0200        0.00667          0.0372
                                 (0.0185)        (0.0217)        (0.0378)
    Interaction 5: AI x 2000     -0.00405         -0.0324         0.0319
                                 (0.0180)        (0.0242)        (0.0286)
    Interaction 6: AI x 2002     0.0399*           0.0269         0.0489
                                 (0.0213)        (0.0265)        (0.0397)
    Interaction 7: AI x 2004      -0.0279       -0.0538**         0.00712
                                 (0.0206)        (0.0271)        (0.0332)
    Interaction 8: AI x 2006       0.0256       -0.000942         0.0528
                                 (0.0202)        (0.0264)        (0.0324)
    Interaction 9: AI x 20008     -0.0179         -0.0416        -0.00977
                                 (0.0218)        (0.0297)        (0.0332)
    Interaction 10: AI x 2010     0.00232         -0.0127         0.0112
                                 (0.0215)        (0.0290)        (0.0311)
    Interaction 11: AI x 2012    -0.00997         -0.0358        -0.00471
                                 (0.0241)        (0.0331)        (0.0336)
    Interaction 12: AI x 2014      0.0221        -0.00110         0.0281
                                 (0.0232)        (0.0298)        (0.0386)

    Observations                   15,984         7,812             8,172
    R-squared                      0.097          0.059             0.044
Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                        60
                      Table A.10: The Effect of Casino Transfer on Parents’ Voter Turnout (Probability of Voting)

Panel A: Unweighted                       Initial HH Income               Unweighted                         Initial HH Income
                          Pooled    Below Median Above Median                                Pooled    Below Median Above Median

                            (1)            (2)             (3)                                 (4)            (5)        (6)
Independent Variables      Voted         Voted            Voted                              Voted           Voted     Voted
Age cohort 1              -0.0447        -0.125          0.0595       Age cohort 1 or 2     -0.00653        -0.0235   0.00110
x American Indian        (0.0631)      (0.0787)          (0.114)      x American Indian     (0.0331)       (0.0464)   (0.0465)
Age cohort 2              -0.0132       -0.0509          -0.0249
x American Indian        (0.0664)      (0.0851)          (0.114)

Year FE                     Y             Y                 Y              Year FE              Y             Y           Y
N (families)              1332           651               681            N (families)        1332           651         681
R-squared                 0.097         0.061             0.045           R-squared           0.097         0.059       0.044

Panel B: Weighted                         Initial HH Income                Weighted                          Initial HH Income
                          Pooled    Below Median Above Median                                Pooled    Below Median Above Median

                            (1)           (2)              (3)                                 (4)            (5)        (6)
Independent Variables      Voted         Voted            Voted                              Voted           Voted     Voted
Age cohort 1             -0.00813       -0.0707          0.0565       Age cohort 1 or 2     -0.00480        -0.0173   -0.00696
x American Indian        (0.0580)      (0.0683)          (0.110)      x American Indian     (0.0333)       (0.0465)   (0.0462)
Age cohort 2              -0.0125       -0.0430          -0.0428
x American Indian        (0.0601)      (0.0728)          (0.107)

Year FE                     Y             Y                 Y              Year FE              Y             Y           Y
N (families)              1332           651               681            N (families)        1332           651         681
R-squared                 0.104         0.052             0.043           R-squared           0.104         0.052       0.043
                          Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
  Table A.11: Parents Event Analysis Regression Tables by Age Combined Age Cohorts

                                                            Initial HH Income
                                   Pooled            Below Median       Above Median

                                     (1)                  (2)                   (3)
VARIABLES                           Voted                Voted                 Voted

Interaction 1: Age Group        -0.000278               0.0856               -0.114
×AI x 1992                       (0.0485)              (0.0582)             (0.0872)
Interaction 2: Age Group         0.0780*               0.0976*               0.0881
×AI x 1994                       (0.0410)              (0.0533)             (0.0695)
Interaction 3: Age Group     Omitted Category      Omitted Category     Omitted Category
×AI x 1996
Interaction 4: Age Group            0.0295               0.0924*              -0.0452
×AI x 1998                        (0.0458)              (0.0473)             (0.0921)
Interaction 5: Age Group            0.0126                0.0461              -0.0103
×AI x 2000                        (0.0408)              (0.0566)             (0.0625)
Interaction 6: Age Group            0.0344                0.0673              -0.0251
×AI x 2002                        (0.0475)              (0.0586)             (0.0881)
Interaction 7: Age Group          -0.00513              0.00776               -0.0198
×AI x 2004                        (0.0475)              (0.0625)             (0.0748)
Interaction 8: Age Group            0.0551                0.115*              -0.0193
×AI x 2006                        (0.0440)              (0.0589)             (0.0679)
Interaction 9: Age Group          0.00508               -0.00639             -0.00503
×AI x 2008                        (0.0482)              (0.0654)             (0.0748)
Interaction 10: Age Group          0.0493                0.0605                0.0351
×AI x 2010                        (0.0476)              (0.0695)             (0.0605)
Interaction 11: Age Group          -0.0263               -0.0477              -0.0134
×AI x 2012                        (0.0593)              (0.0863)             (0.0753)
Interaction 12: Age Group          0.0201                0.00383               0.0361
×AI x 2014                        (0.0554)              (0.0752)             (0.0827)

Observations                       15,984                7,812                 8,172
R-squared                           0.097                0.060                 0.045
    Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                             62
                  Table A.12: Moving across Counties During Adolescent Years

                                                             Initial HH Income
                                            Pooled     Below Median Above Median

                                            (1)          (2)             (3)
            VARIABLES                           Change County of Residence
            Interaction 1: Age Cohort 1 0.0157         0.0303         -0.0386
             American Indian            (0.0770)      (0.106)         (0.116)
            Interaction 2: Age Cohort 2 -0.0587        -0.133          0.0828
             American Indian            (0.0798)      (0.108)         (0.129)
            Constant                      -0.219        0.242          -0.590
                                         (0.512)      (0.795)         (0.666)

            Mean of Dep Var                  0.328         0.238             0.413
            Observations                     1,322          646               676
            R-squared                        0.059         0.041             0.045
Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Outcome variable
measures whether a household changes their county of residence during the child’s adolescent years.




                                                63
                                       Table A.13: Mother’s Educational Attainment and Employment

                                           Pooled     Below Median     Above Median       Pooled     Below Median     Above Median
                                                       HH Income        HH Income                     HH Income        HH Income

                                             (1)         (2)            (3)                 (4)           (5)            (6)
          VARIABLES                         High School Diploma or Some College                    Mother Works Full Time?

          Interaction 1: Age Cohort 1 0.0679              0.0963            0.108         0.00582        0.155             -0.169
          × American Indian           (0.0830)            (0.110)          (0.135)       (0.0890)       (0.128)           (0.123)
          Interaction 2: Age Cohort 2  0.104               0.122           0.0169        -0.00885       0.0468            -0.0643
          × American Indian           (0.0844)            (0.112)          (0.138)       (0.0854)       (0.123)           (0.117)

          Mean of Dep Variable              0.403          0.442            0.366          0.660         0.597             0.715
          Observations                      1,331           650              681            972           449               523
          R-squared                         0.020          0.028            0.009          0.043         0.036             0.024
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Regressions include parents’ voter turnout rate before the transfer as a control, American Indian indicator,
gender, average household income prior to casino operation, age cohort indicator variables, age, number of children in the household below age 6
and a constant. Outcomes measured when children are 16 years old. Robust standard errors employed.
B   Appendix Figures




                       65
                                         Figure A1: Location of the GSMS Study Participants




Note: Figure displays the counties included in the GSMS study. The Eastern Cherokee reservation (where the casino is located)is in Cherokee, NC
(which is split between Swain and Jackson County, NC).
                                          Figure A2: Design of Follow up Surveys of the GSMS




Note: Figure displays the structure of the GSMS data. C1=cohort 1, C2=cohort 2, C3=cohort 3. On the vertical access are children’s ages. On the
horizontal access are survey wave and year. Survey data collection began in 1993, with the three age cohorts all being interviewed. These interviews
continued until the 4th wave (1996) right before the casino was opened. Following the casino opening, cohorts were interviewed in a staggered
manner (for reasons unrelated to the casino opening; see Costello et al. 1996 and Costello et al. 1997.). Contact information is continuously
maintained and updated up until the present.
             Figure A3: Impact of Cash Transfer on Voting by Initial Household Income Quartiles

                                                     Ever Voted


                         0.4
Estimated Coefficient




                         0.2    ●              ●



                         0.0                                              ●

                                                                                         ●
                        −0.2


                        −0.4


                               0−25          26−50                      51−75          76−100
                                           Initial Household Income in Quartiles
                                         Proportion of Elections Voting


                         0.4
Estimated Coefficient




                         0.2

                                ●              ●                          ●

                         0.0


                                                                                         ●
                        −0.2


                        −0.4


                               0−25          26−50                      51−75          76−100
                                           Initial Household Income in Quartiles
Notes: Figure displays the impact of the casino transfers on our two voting outcomes for children
by the family’s initial household income at baseline in quartiles. Each coefficient is estimated on a
separate partition of the data set and thus we are able to estimate coefficients for each quartile in the
analysis. We combine the two youngest age cohorts together for this presentation. Robust standard
errors employed and confidence intervals are given at the 90% level.




                                                        68
                                                   Figure A4: Effects of Casino on Parents Voting, Event Analysis

                                                                              Pooled Parents Estimates


                                      0.2
Estimated Coefficient (Prob. Vote)




                                      0.1
                                                       ●
                                                                                                         ●            ●
                                                                        ●               ●
                                                                                 ●                                                  ●
                                      0.0    ●                ●                                                ●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                             ●


                                     −0.1



                                     −0.2
                                            1992      1994   1996      1998     2000   2002    2004    2006   2008   2010   2012   2014
                                                                                       Election Year
                                                                    Parents Below Median Income at Baseline


                                      0.3
Estimated Coefficient (Prob. Vote)




                                      0.2

                                                                                                         ●
                                      0.1    ●         ●                ●
                                                                                        ●                             ●
                                                                                 ●
                                      0.0                     ●                                  ●             ●                    ●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                     −0.1


                                     −0.2


                                     −0.3
                                            1992      1994   1996      1998     2000   2002    2004    2006   2008   2010   2012   2014
                                                                                       Election Year
                                                                    Parents Above Median Income at Baseline


                                      0.3
Estimated Coefficient (Prob. Vote)




                                      0.2


                                      0.1              ●
                                                                                                                      ●             ●
                                      0.0                     ●                  ●                             ●             ●
                                                                                        ●        ●       ●
                                                                        ●
                                     −0.1    ●


                                     −0.2


                                     −0.3
                                            1992      1994   1996      1998     2000   2002    2004    2006   2008   2010   2012   2014
                                                                                       Election Year


Notes: Figure displays coefficients from event analysis model for parents’ voter turnout in the 1992-
2014 elections. The estimates are split by median family income levels at baseline. Standard errors are
clustered at the individual level.




                                                                                        69
