NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRM PERFORMANCE AND MACRO FORECAST ACCURACY
Mari Tanaka
Nicholas Bloom
Joel M. David
Maiko Koga
Working Paper 24776
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24776

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018

We thank the Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) of the Cabinet Office of Japan for
providing us with microdata from the Annual Survey of Corporate Behavior. Permission for
using microdata is given under the agreement between ESRI and the Bank of Japan. We are also
grateful to Steve Davis, Jose Barrero, Naoko Hara, Hibiki Ichiue, Sohei Kaihatsu, Toshitaka
Sekine, and Toshinao Yoshiba for their valuable comments and suggestions. We also thank
Haruko Kato for her invaluable research assistant. Mari Tanaka is ordered first as the lead author,
with the other three authors then ordered alphabetically. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24776.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Mari Tanaka, Nicholas Bloom, Joel M. David, and Maiko Koga. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Firm Performance and Macro Forecast Accuracy
Mari Tanaka, Nicholas Bloom, Joel M. David, and Maiko Koga
NBER Working Paper No. 24776
June 2018
JEL No. E0,M0
ABSTRACT
Ever since Keynes’ famous quote about animal spirits, there has been an interest in linking firms’
expectations and actions. However, empirical evidence has been limited due to a lack of firmlevel panel data on expectations and outcomes. In this paper, we build such a dataset by
combining a unique survey of Japanese firms’ GDP forecasts with company accounting data for
25 years for over 1,000 large Japanese firms. We find four main results. First, firms’ GDP
forecasts are positively associated with their employment, investment, and output growth in the
subsequent year. Second, both optimistic and pessimistic forecast errors lower profitability.
Third, while over-optimistic forecasts lower measured productivity, over-pessimistic forecasts do
not tend to have an effect on productivity. Overall, these results are stronger for firms whose
performance is more sensitive to the state of macroeconomy. We show that a simple model of
firm input choice under uncertainty and costly adjustment can rationalize there results. Finally,
larger and more cyclically sensitive firms make more accurate forecasts, presumably reflecting a
higher return to accuracy for these firms. More productive, older, and bank-owned firms also
make more accurate forecasts, suggesting that forecasting ability is also linked to management
ability, experience, and governance. Collectively, our results highlight the importance of firms’
forecasting ability for micro and macro performance.
Mari Tanaka
Hitotsubashi University
Graduate School of Economics
2-1 Naka, Kunitachi, Tokyo, Japan
mari.tanaka@r.hit-u.ac.jp
Nicholas Bloom
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu

Joel M. David
Department of Economics
University of Southern California
3620 South Vermont Ave. Kaprielian Hall, 300
Los Angeles, CA 90089
joeldavi@usc.edu
Maiko Koga
Bank of Japan
Research and Statistics Department
Tokyo, Japan
Japan
maiko.koga@boj.or.jp

1

Introduction

There has been a longstanding interest in the importance of firm expectations for business outcomes.
For example, Keynes (1936) talked about animal spirits to highlight the importance of (potentially
irrational) expectations, while Tobin’s Q-theory of investment hinges on firms’ future expectations
of demand. More recently, almost all stochastic models of firm dynamics assume forward looking
agents who develop beliefs about future micro and macroeconomic conditions. Central – and still
outstanding – questions in this literature include: how much do these forecasts ultimately matter
for economic outcomes, under what circumstances, and to what extent does their level and accuracy
vary across firms?1
This paper investigates these questions by matching data on firms’ forecasts of GDP growth
from the Japanese Annual Survey of Corporate Behavior (ASCB) to company accounting data.
This survey was run by the Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) within the Cabinet
Office over the period 1989–2015 and achieved a response rate of about 40% from all publicly
listed firms in Japan, generating a panel sample of around 1,000 firms. The survey asks firms for
a quantitative estimate of future GDP growth and appears to be of relatively high quality - for
example, the typical respondent was in management, planning or strategy departments.
Analyzing these data, we find four main results. First, firms’ GDP forecasts are positively and
significantly associated with their subsequent input choices, such as investment and employment, as
well as sales growth, even after controlling for year and firm fixed effects. Second, forecast accuracy
appears to be tightly related to profitability. Prior year forecast accuracy has significant predictive
power for profits, even after controlling for time fixed effects, longer-run forecast accuracy, and firm
fixed effects. This is true both for over-optimistic firms (positive forecast errors) as well as overpessimistic ones (negative forecast errors). Third, measured productivity (TFPR) is negatively
affected by excessively optimistic forecasts, but excessively pessimistic forecasts do not seem to
affect productivity. For all of these results, the effects are strongest in firms whose performance
is more sensitive to the state of the business cycle. We provide a simple model of firm input
choice in the face of uncertainty and costly adjustment that rationalizes each of these findings –
larger forecast errors lead to a greater over/under accumulation of inputs and lower profitability,
1

See, for example, classic works including Nickell (1978), Abel and Blanchard (1986), Caballero (1997), Chirinko
(1993) or Dixit and Pindyck (1994).

2

and the interaction of pricing effects with costs of adjustment can generate asymmetric effects of
optimism/pessimism (e.g., positive/negative forecast errors) on measured productivity.
Finally, we find significant variation in forecast accuracy across firms. Larger and more cyclically
sensitive firms have the most accurate forecasts, presumably because their returns from accuracy
are largest. Interestingly, we also see that more productive, older, and bank-owned firms tend to
be more accurate, suggesting that experience, management ability, and governance may also play
an important role in forecast accuracy. The results are similar when we measure firms’ forecast
accuracy alternatively by the distance to professionals’ forecasts.
Our work connects to several branches of literature. First is the literature on macroeconomics
and firm forecasts. Macroeconomic theories have long shown that explicitly incorporating heterogeneous beliefs can help explain important features of economic dynamics (for example, Lucas 1972;
Mankiw and Reis 2002). More recently, David, Hopenhayn, and Venkateswaran (2016) provide and
estimate a model in which imperfect information at the firm-level lowers aggregate productivity
through resource misallocation. In addition, a growing number of studies have demonstrated that
forecasts of economic agents have a key role in driving business cycles (Beaudry and Portier 2004;
Schmitt- Grohé and Uribe 2012; Ilut and Schneider 2014).
Second, this paper builds on a growing empirical literature investigating expectations formation. Mankiw, Reis, and Wolfers (2003) analyze consumers’ inflation forecasts and find larger
disagreements among the general public compared to professional forecasters. Studies examining
the patterns of macroeconomic forecasts have found that they tend to be consistent with models
featuring information rigidity (Carroll 2003; Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2012, 2015). Coibion,
Gorodnichenko, and Kumar (2015) document substantial heterogeneity in firms’ macroeconomic
forecasts in a firm survey in New Zealand and find that firms with higher incentives to predict
(e.g. facing higher competition) are more accurate than others. Bachmann and Elstner (2015)
and Massenot and Pettinicchi (2018) use a German manufacturing survey that asked about predictions about own-firm performance and find that at most one third of firms systematically overor under-predict their performance, and that the degree of forecasting errors are smaller for larger
and older firms. Bloom et al. (2018) use US Census data and look at whether more productive and
better managed firms have improved forecast accuracy. Using the same firm survey in Japan as
in this study, Shiraki and Kaihatsu (2016) examine the heterogeneity of firms’ inflation forecasts,

3

and Koga and Kato (2017) document systematic pattern of optimism and pessimism of industry
demand forecasts by firms. We argue that our analysis of firms forecasts for a common important
outcome – GDP growth – is valuable for measuring forecasting ability across firms. Most datasets
collect forecast information about the manager’s own firm performance, which makes it hard to say
if, for example, larger firms are better at forecasting their own sales, or if their own sales are more
stable and so easier to forecast. Since we analyze the forecasts on a common object – GDP growth
– the second source of variation is not present.
Third, some recent works provide evidence related to ours about the relationship between firms’
expectations and outcomes. Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2015) examine rationality of CFOs’ expectations, and as a part of their exercises, they show that investment plans and realizations are well
explained by expectations of earning growth. In a related effort, Massenot and Pettinicchi (2018)
use a German survey data containing firms’ qualitative assessment of their business conditions
and show that over–optimistic firms subsequently report lower profits and that over–pessimistic
firms report higher profits. Overall, our study is unique in that we use a long panel data of firms’
quantitative GDP forecasts matched with their accounting data, which enables us to quantitatively
examine the effects of firms’ forecasts on their input choices and performance.
Finally, our study is closely related to the literature on management and productivity. Growing
empirical evidence suggests that managers’ abilities and practices are important determinants of
firm productivity and other measures of performance (for example, Bertrand and Schoar 2003
and Bloom and Van Reenen 2007). In this paper, we view forecast ability as one component of
management ability.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out a simple theory of firm dynamics in the face
of uncertainty to guide our empirical investigation. Section 3 explains the data, section 4 discusses
our main results on firm forecasts and performance, and section 5 reports results on forecast quality
by firm characteristics. Section 6 provides concluding remarks.

2

The model

This section outlines a parsimonious model of firm input choice under uncertainty. The framework
provides sharp guidance on the relationship between firm expectations, i.e., optimism/pessimism,
input choices, and outcomes, e.g., measured TFP and profitability. We use these results to guide
4

our empirical investigations below. All derivations not explicitly shown are in the Appendix.

2.1

Predictions under imperfect information

A continuum of firms, indexed by i, produce differentiated goods using capital (Kit ) and labor (Nit )
according to a constant returns to scale Cobb-Douglas production function:
Yit = Kitα Nit1−α .
Demand for each good takes a standard constant elasticity of substitution form
Qit = Aσit Pit−σ ,
where Ait represents a demand shifter, Pit is the price of the good, and σ>1 denotes the elasticity
of substitution across goods. Firm revenues are then given by
Pit Yit = Ait Kitα̂1 N α̂2 ,
where
α̂1 = α

σ−1
σ−1
σ−1
, α̂2 = (1 − α)
, α̂1 + α̂2 =
.
σ
σ
σ

Input markets work as follows. The firm accumulates capital internally. In each period, the firm
can purchase capital at a price normalized to one and hires labor in a competitive labor market at
wage Wt . The firm produces, accrues revenues and sells its undepreciated capital at the end of the
period. Capital depreciates at rate δ. The firm discounts time at rate β.
We assume, first, that the firm chooses capital and labor to maximize profits under imperfect
information regarding the fundamental Ait and that there is no further adjustment of inputs after
the realization of the fundamental. Specifically, the firm solves
max Eit [Πit ] = Eit [Ait ] Kitα̂1 Nitα̂2 − RKit − Wt Nit .

Kit ,Nit

(1)

where R = 1 − β(1 − δ) is the user cost of capital.2 Fundamentals and expectations are distributed
2

Notice that the setup is equivalent to one with a rental market for capital where the rental rate is equal to R.

5

jointly log-normal. Without loss of generality, we normalize the unconditional mean of Ait to one.
We can derive the following expressions for the optimal choices of capital and labor
Kit = C1t Eit [Ait ]σ

(2)

Nit = C2t Eit [Ait ]σ ,
where C1t and C2t are time varying terms that are common across firms, which reflect the wage
and cost of capital. Expression (2) shows that the firm’s input choices are monotonically increasing
in its expectations of fundamentals. Revenues and profits are given by
Pit Yit = C3t Ait Eit [Ait ]σ−1


Πit = C3t Ait Eit [Ait ]σ−1 −

(3)
σ−1
Eit [Ait ]σ
σ



,

(4)

where C3t is constant across firms. Expression (3) shows that, conditional on the realization of
fundamentals, the firm’s revenues are increasing in its expectations. We can use expression (4)
to prove that profits are decreasing in the absolute value of the forecast error. In other words,
profits are maximized where Eit [Ait ] = Ait and are declining in the difference between actual and
realized fundamentals. Finally, measured productivity is calculated as revenues divided by inputs
taken to the powers of their respective elasticities in production. Importantly, this is a measure of
revenue-based productivity, i.e., TFPR, rather than quantity-based productivity (TFPQ). We can
derive TFPR as


T F P Rit = C4t

Eit [Ait ]
Ait

−1

,

(5)

where C4t is again a constant across firms. In other words, TFPR varies inversely with the firm’s
forecast error, which is the term in parentheses (the ratio of expected fundamentals to actual).
Intuitively, when the firm is overly optimistic, it over-accumulates inputs relative to its true fundamental, reducing the marginal revenue productivity of those inputs. The opposite occurs when the
firm is overly pessimistic. We can summarize the key predictions of this simple framework as follows:

Prediction 1: Input choices are increasing in the firm’s expectations.

6

Prediction 2: Revenues are increasing in the firm’s expectations.

Prediction 3: Profits are decreasing in the absolute value of the forecast error.

Prediction 4: TFPR is decreasing in the forecast error.

2.2

Predictions with additional adjustment and disruption costs

Next, we extend the environment to allow the firm to further adjust its input choices after the
realization of the fundamental, but where these latter adjustments are subject to disruption costs.
These costs directly reduce output. To obtain clear analytical results, we focus on a special case
with only one input, which we call capital, but can alternatively be thought of as a composite input.
The key result from this extension is that TFPR is no longer monotonic in the forecast error for
pessimistic firms – while optimistic firms always have lower TFPR, because of the disruption cost,
the relationship is ambiguous for pessimistic firms.3
There are two stages within each period. In the first, the firm forms expectations and chooses
a level of capital, Kit0 , paying only the explicit cost of new capital. In the second stage, the firm
observes the realization of the fundamental and can re-adjust its stock of capital. To perform
this additional adjustment, the firm must pay the explicit cost of any new capital as well as the
additional disruption costs. We assume that these costs take the form

Φ



Kit , Kit0



ξ
=
2

!2

Kit
−1
Kit0

Kit0 ,

ξ ∈ (0, ∞) ,

where Kit denotes the final amount of capital used in production and ξ expresses the degree of the
disruption costs. Similar specifications are commonly used to describe settings where firms find it
harder to work efficiently with excessive or inadequate inputs.4
3

In the Appendix, we show that the logic of this case extends to a setting where we explicitly model labor
separately from capital. Specifically, we show that when capital and labor are chosen simultaneously and subject to
the same cost functions, labor is linear in capital, i.e, Nit = ηt Kit , where ηt is a function of period t wages, and can
be substituted out, leading to a production function that is linear in capital, which is the example here. For other
cases, we can no longer analytically characterize the sign of the derivative of TFPR with respect to the forecast error,
but simulations show generally similar patterns to the ones here.
4
One reason may be fixed costs of operations and diminishing returns to scale - see, for example, Bartelsman,
Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2013).

7

With these assumptions, the output of the firm is given by:


Yit = Kit − Φ Kit , Kit0



.

We set up and solve the firm’s problem in the Appendix. The firm’s final choice of capital is
given by
Kit = C5t Aφit1 Eit [Ait ]σφ2 ,
where
φ1 =

σ
,
1 + σξ

φ2 =

σξ
.
1 + σξ

Capital now depends both on the firm’s initial expectations, as well as the realization of the fundamental, with weights determined by the exponents φ1 and φ2 . If the disruption cost, ξ, approaches
infinity, φ1 approaches zero and φ2 one, i.e., the firm will not adjust to the realization of the
shock and capital is only determined by initial expectations, as in the simpler model above. If ξ
approaches zero, the firm can respond fully to the true fundamental, e.g., φ2 goes to zero.
We can then derive the following expression for TFPR:


T F P Rit = C6t (1 +
where Zit ∝

Eit [Ait ]
Ait

− σ (1−φ1 )−φ1
ξ) Zit σ−1

σ
(1−φ1 )
ξ − σ (1−φ1 )−2φ1 ξ − σ−1
− Zit σ−1
− Zit
2
2

 σ−1
σ

,

(6)

captures the firm’s forecast error. Similar to equation (5), expression (6) shows

that even in this more complicated setting, TFPR depends only on the firm’s forecast error. We
can use expression (6) to prove that TFPR is strictly decreasing in the forecast error when Zit > 1,
i.e., when the firm is overly optimistic. However, there is a value of Zit , Ẑ < 1 such that TFPR is
increasing in Zit when Zit < Ẑ. Thus, the effect of expectational errors on TFPR is ambiguous for
pessimistic firms.
Intuitively, there are two effects of forecast errors on TFPR: the first is the same as in the
simpler environment above – optimistic firms over-accumulate inputs relative to actual fundamentals, reducing the measured productivity of those inputs. The opposite occurs for pessimistic firms,
which together lead to a universal negative relationship between TFPR and forecast errors. The
second effect comes from the disruption costs – the larger the firm’s forecast error, the greater
will be its within period adjustment and so the larger the disruption cost to output. These costs

8

will reduce measured TFPR, since output will be lower for the same level of inputs. This holds
whether the firm is optimistic or pessimistic. Notice that for optimistic firms, the two effects work
in the same direction, i.e., they both serve to reduce measured TFPR. Thus, for these firms, TFPR
is unambiguously decreasing in the forecast error. For pessimistic firms, the two effects work in
opposite directions – the first increases TFPR, the second reduces it. Thus, for these firms, the
relationship between TFPR and forecast error is ambiguous. We summarize this result in the following prediction:

Prediction 5: When the firm can adjust its input choices upon realization of the fundamental
but subject to disruption costs, TFPR is decreasing in the forecast error for optimistic firms but
the effect is ambiguous for pessimistic firms.

3

Data

The survey data we use is the “Annual Survey of Corporate Behavior” (ASCB hereafter) conducted
by the Economic and Social Research Institute, in the Cabinet Office of Japan. We use data during
the period from 1989 to 2015, as individual firm identifies are available only after 1989. In each year,
the survey questionnaire was sent to all listed firms at the Tokyo and Nagoya Stock Exchange that
consist of approximately 2500 firms. Among them around 40% of firms respond to the survey (see
Appendix Figure A.1 for the number of responses in each year). The survey is conducted annually
between mid-December and mid-January. Respondents are required to answer business outlook
for GDP and industry demand, and their business plans regarding investment, employment, and
pricing. The items we use are forecasts of real GDP growth rate of Japan in the following fiscal
year that starts from April. The forecasts are made for three horizons: growth rate of upcoming
fiscal year; average growth rate over next three years; and average growth rate over next five years.
For example, the questions asked in December 2004 were phrased the following way5 :

Please enter a figure up to one decimal place in each of the boxes below as your
rough forecast of Japan’s nominal and real economic growth rates and the nominal and
5

Appendix Figure A.2 shows the corresponding part of the questionnaire

9

real growth rates of demand in your industry for FY 2005, the next 3 years (average of
FY 2005-2007) and the next 5 years (average of FY 2005-2009).

The left hand side of Figure 1 shows the distribution of “firm i ’s forecasts for fiscal year t + 1 real
economic growth rate answered in fiscal year t" (denote by fi,t (t + 1) hereafter). The right hand
side of Figure 1 shows the distribution of the absolute value of forecast errors in each year, namely
|ei,t−1 (t)| ≡ |fi,t−1 (t) − g(t)|, where g(t) is the realized GDP growth rate of the year t.6
A potential concern on this survey measure is whether the answers truly reflect the firms’
forecasts of future macro economic growth that are used for their decision making. We conduct
several checks for this issue. First, while the survey does not obtain positions of respondents, it
collects information on the respondent’s department since 2006. 66% of the respondents belong to
departments responsible for corporate planning and strategy, general management, and CEO office
(see Appendix Table A.1 for details). The rest of the answers are from departments of finance
(12%), general affairs (12 %) and IR and public relations (7%). Second, we find that annual sales
growth rates of the firms in our sample are strongly positively correlated with realized Japanese
GDP growth,7 suggesting that the sample of firms in this study, which consists of relatively larger
firms in Japan, would have incentive to obtain accurate GDP growth forecasts. Third, looking
at the autocorrelations of forecasts and forecast errors with and without firm fixed effects, it is
neither the case that the firms are repeating the same forecasts over and over, nor that they are
answering the current year GDP growth (for the results, see Appendix Table A.4). Fourth, on
average, the GDP forecasts provided by firms align well with that of professional forecasts overtime
(see Appendix Figure A.4). These observations suggest that most of the respondents are answering
some meaningful numbers that are on average following professionals’ forecasts. Even so, there
may be some outliers that answer unrealistic forecasts and affect our analysis. Therefore, in order
to reduce the effects of outliers, we exclude the observations with growth forecasts of more than
±3σ with ±3σ, where σ is the standard deviation, and also firms that answered the survey less
than three times within the sample period. These procedures drop about 8.8% of the original
observations. In the following section, we further test and confirm the firms’ input choices are
6

In this study, we assume that the survey respondents interpreted “the real economic growth rate” as the real
GDP growth rate.
7
In the Appendix, Figure A.3 shows this by a binned scatter plot.

10

indeed significantly correlated with their macro forecasts even after controlling for firm fixed effects
and year fixed effects.
As additional checks of the survey data, in Figure 2, we plot time-series of the mean of fi,t (t + 1)
and g(t) . The two lines roughly correspond in terms of ranges, implying that the forecasts for next
year tend to reflect the realization of the growth rates in the current year. Mean of the forecasts
tend to be correlated more with the contemporaneous GDP growth than with the targeted GDP
growth.8 In Figure 3, we show the yearly average of “absolute value of forecast errors in each year",
namely |ei,t−1 (t)| ≡ |fi,t−1 (t) − g(t)|. The same figure also plots annual daily stock volatility based
on TOPIX and the average of monthly Economic and Policy Uncertainty Index for Japan (see
Baker, Bloom, and Davis 2016) for each fiscal year.9 All time series are standardized by the yearlevel observations. The three lines share the peaks around mid 1990s, 2000, and 2007, suggesting
the periods with larger forecast errors correspond to those with larger macro uncertainty.
In addition to the forecasts on GDP growth rates, the survey asks about the firm’s forecasts of
its investment and employment growth over the next three years. The respondents were asked to
mark one of the bins with 5% intervals, for example, “5% to 10%”.10 We approximate continuous
variables of investment and employment growth forecasts by the middle values of these intervals.11
We match the responses in the survey with other data at the firm level. We use the Development Bank of Japan’s “Financial data of Listed Firms” (DBJ data hereafter) to capture financial
conditions of firms, and Nikkei Needs Financial Quest for information on stock price, firm age, and
ownership structure. In addition to firm data, we use “Consensus Forecasts” published by Consensus Economics to compare firm forecasts with professional forecasts. In our baseline specification,
we use their forecasts made in December about Japan’s real GDP growth rate of the next calendar
year. As for actual values of Japan’s real GDP growth, we use the GDP estimates of FY 1990–FY
2015 from the Cabinet Office in June 2016. Appendix Table A.2 shows the basic sample statistics
for our main variables. To mitigate the effect of outliers, we winsorize 1 % of samples in each tail
in respect to investment, employment, and sales growth.
It is possible that the response rates to the ASCB are correlated with certain firm characteristics.
8

Also see the binned scatter plots in Appendix Figure A.6.
http://www.policyuncertainty.com
10
Figure A.5 in the Appendix shows this part of the questionnaire.
11
For the top codes, we use + or − 5% of the base value. For example, for investment growth forecast of “25% or
more”, we approximate the continuous version of forecast by 30%.
9

11

Indeed, a probit model estimation of response rates using the sample of DBJ data shows that firms
with higher TFP, larger employment size, and older firms were more likely to have responded to
the survey (see Appendix Table A.3 for the results). The magnitude of the response differences are
small - for example, a 10% increase in productivity or size induces a 2% and 0.2% increase in the
response rate respectively (on a 40% bases). Nevertheless, this sample selection might potentially
bias our results, so we also re-estimate our main equations by weighting samples by inverse of
response rates as robustness checks and find qualitatively the same results.
On calculating firm-level TFP, we follow Syversson (2011) and assume Cobb-Douglas production
L ln L − S K ln K − S M ln M ,
function in which TFP is derived as follows: T F Pit = ln Yit − Sjt
it
it
it
jt
jt
k represents cost share of factor k for industry j in year t, and Y , L , K , and M denote
where Sjt
it
it
it
it

gross output measured by sales revenue, labor, capital, and other intermediate inputs of firm i in
year t, respectively.12 Cost shares are defined as the industry level to reduce the impact of firmlevel measurement error, as is standard in the literature. Cost share for each industry is obtained
from the “Japan Industrial Productivity Database 2015” (JIP database hereafter) published by
Research Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry. Gross output is defined as sales divided by
output industry-level deflator from JIP database. Labor input is calculated as a product of number
of workers and average hours worked in the industry. Capital is defined as tangible asset excluding
land, and computed using the perpetual inventory method. Data source for gross output and factors
is described in Appendix in detail.
In order to measure cyclicality of firms with respect to Japanese macro economy, we estimate
the degree to which the firm’s stock prices react to a surprise in quarterly GDP announcements. In
each quarter, at pre-specified date and time, the Cabinet Office announces a quarterly real GDP
estimate for the preceding quarter for the first time. We estimate the following regression:
pait
Ln
pbit

!

= βi LnGDPt +

3
X

φk LnGDPt−k + φq F Ct−1 + Fi + Fy + Fq + uit .

(7)

k=1

pait and pbit are the average of three business days’ closing prices before the announcement and
after the announcement including the announcement date, respectively. LnGDPt is log of quarterly
12
Investment hereafter refers to investment in physical assets such as machinery, vehicles, buildings, and structures.
Due to limited data availability, the data are on a non-consolidated basis. For calculating real investment and capital
stock, we first divide nominal gross investment by the corresponding price indices, and then apply the perpetual
inventory method to three types of capital stocks: buildings and structures; machinery and equipment; and vessels
and vehicles, following Hayashi and Inoue (1991). For price indices, we use the Bank of Japan’s Producer Price Index.

12

real GDP preliminary earliest announcement (seasonality unadjusted). The rest of the terms in
the equation control as much as possible for the pre-announcement information set that would
affect general trends of stock prices. This set includes log of GDP in preceding three quarters,
and the average of forecasts about GDP growth rate of the following calendar year by professional
forecasters made in the last 90 days before the announcement at t. The coefficient of the professional
forecast φq is allowed to differ by quarters due to the fact that the professional forecasts are always
made for the coming calendar year (so their forecast horizon varies by quarter). Firm fixed effects
Fi , fiscal year fixed effects Fy , and quarter fixed effects Fq (for q = 1, 2, 3) are also controlled.
Hence, βi is firm i specific response to the announced GDP, which is a measure of firm cyclicality
for our study.13 The estimated coefficients of βi is distributed around a mean of 0.12 with standard
deviation 0.14 (see Figure 4 for the resulting distribution), which means that, for example, the
average firm sees an 1.2% larger increase in stock prices when the announced quarterly GDP was
higher than the common expectation by 10%.

4

Forecasts and firm performance

In this section, we empirically investigate a possibility that firms’ GDP forecasts influence their
input choices and firm performance.

4.1

Firm input choices and sales

First, we estimate the following empirical equation:
Yit = ρfi,t−1 (t) + γi + λt + ηit

(8)

where Yit is either growth of employment, investment, or sales of firm i in fiscal year t from fiscal
year t − 1 measured by the difference in logarithm.14 fi,t−1 (t) is the forecast of GDP growth rate
in fiscal year t answered by firm i in year t − 1. The growth rates are all measured in decimal
points. We include firm fixed effects (γi ) to control for unobserved time-invariant characteristics
13
For the possibility of outliers’ existence in the estimates of βi , we winsorized the variable by replacing observations
with the value of more than µ ± 3σ with µ ± 3σ, where µ and σ are the mean and standard deviation, respectively.
14
Only 2% of the sample had 0 investment values, which were dropped when we estimate the equation for investment growth. As a robustness check, we employed an alternative measure of investment growth by adding value 1
(i.e. ln(investmentt + 1) − ln(investmentt−1 + 1)) and found that qualitative results were unchanged.

13

of the firms. We also control for realizations of macro economic shocks by controlling for year
fixed effects (λt ).15 Since some firms responded the survey sporadically within 25 years, making
the identification of within-effects harder, we further limit our samples to observations that have
non-missing GDP forecasts in the last two consecutive years (i.e. both fi,t−1 (t) and fi,t−2 (t − 1)
are observed).
A primarily purpose of estimating equation (8) is to test the quality of the survey. Since the
survey targeted all stock listed firms, the firms in the sample are relatively large firms. Because of
this, there is a possibility that the respondent’s forecast does not reflect the forecast actually used
for the company’s decision making. If the firm’s survey response reflects a certain belief shared
among the firm’s organizers and actually used for its decision making, then we would expect to see
positive associations between in a firm’s forecasts and its input choice decisions such as investment
and employment.
The specification of one-year lag between forecast and firm outcomes is considered to be reasonable for the following reasons. First, Japanese firms commonly adjust their employment levels
by hiring fresh college graduates. Interviews and employment offers for hiring these workers in year
t are the most concentrated around the period from April to June of year t − 1 due to customs
of Japanese freshmen labor market. Similarly, it is natural to assume that firms need to make
arrangements (e.g. financing) at least in a year before for raising investment in year t.
Panel A of Figure 5 graphically shows the relationship of equation (8) by binned scatterplots.
The horizontal axis shows residual values of fi,t−1 (t) after regressing on year fixed effects and firm
fixed effects. The residual values is grouped into equal-sized 15 bins, and for each bin, the vertical
axis shows the mean of residual values of Yit after regressing on year fixed effects and firm fixed
effects. The results suggest clear positive associations between firm’s reported forecasts and their
input choices and resulting outputs.
Table 1 shows the estimates for the equation (8) by OLS. Columns (1) and (2) estimate the
equations for employment and investment growth including year fixed effect and firm fixed effects.
The estimated coefficients of forecast is positive and statistically significant. The estimates suggest
15

Interestingly, not controlling for year fixed effects result in the larger estimates of ρ for employment, investment,
and sales growth than the ones with baseline specification shown bellow. Assuming that forecasts and realizations
of aggregate shocks are positively correlated, this result is consistent with our second model in section 2.2 where
firms make costly readjustments of inputs after observing the realizations of the shocks. This point highlights the
importance of controlling for realizations of the shocks in order to separately examine the effect of forecasts.

14

that having 1 percent higher GDP growth rate forecast is associated with around 0.2 percentage
points higher employment growth rate and 2.5 percentage points higher investment growth rate on
average.16 Considering the fact that the average employment and investment growth rates in this
period were around -1.8 and -4.5 percentage points, respectively, the effects of forecast seems to
be economically large, presumably reflecting the importance of GDP growth for employment and
investment in large Japanese firms.
Column (3) estimates the equation (8) for sales growth measured by changes in the log of
sales. The estimated coefficients suggest that having 1 percentage point higher GDP growth rate
forecast predicts an increase of sales growth rate by 0.3 percentage points. Overall, the results imply
that firm’s reported forecasts of GDP growth are significantly correlated with its input choice as
predicted by the baseline model (Prediction1). As a robustness check, we also estimate Table 1
controlling for the lagged forecast of GDP growth as this specification is more consistent with our
model, and confirm the results are qualitatively the same (for the results, see Table A.5 in the
Appendix).
A natural conjecture is that macro forecasts affect firms’ realized inputs through affecting
their initial plans of employment and investment. Using the data on the firms’ forecasts of own
investment and employment, we find consistent evidence for this. Specifically, in columns (4) and
(5), we regress the firm’s forecast of investment or employment growth for the next three years on
its GDP growth forecast for the next year, which are all answered in year t − 1. The estimated
coefficients are large, positive, and significant at 1 percent level, implying that 1 percentage point
change in GDP growth rate forecast corresponds to 0.258 and 0.669 percentage points changes in
employment and investment growth forecasts. We then examine the relationship between forecasts
and realizations of employment and investment growths. In columns (6) and (7), the dependent
variables are realized growth of employment and investment over the corresponding three years
measured by the changes in log of employment and investment from year t − 1 to t + 2. The results
show that the input growth forecasts are highly significantly correlated with their realization even
after controlling for firm and year fixed effects.
16

If we look at R&D, we get similar significant results. For example, in a specification like column (4) with firm
fixed-effects the coefficient (and standard error) on the Ln(1+R&D) is 0.014 (0.060).

15

4.2

Profit and productivity

Next, we explore relationships between firms’ forecast errors and performance by estimating the
following equation:
Vit = θ|ei,t−1 (t)| + γi + λt + ωit

(9)

where Vit is either profit or TFP of firm i in year t. |ei,t−1 (t)| is the absolute value of firm i’s
GDP growth forecast error defined by ei,t−1 (t) = fi,t−1 (t) − gt , in which gt is the realized GDP
growth rate in fiscal year t. We control for time-invariant firm characteristics and realizations of
macro-level shocks by including firm fixed effect (γi ) and year fixed effect (λt ). As before, we limit
our samples to observations with non-missing forecasts in the last two consecutive years.
Panel B of Figure 5 graphically illustrates the results by binned scatterplots. In the upper two
figures, the horizontal axis shows residual values of |ei,t−1 (t)| after regressing on year fixed effects
and firm fixed effects. As before, the residual values are grouped into equal-sized 15 bins, and
the vertical axis plots the mean of residual values of Vit in each bin, after regressing on year fixed
effects and firm fixed effects. The results show negative associations of forecast errors with profit
and productivity. In the lower two figures, we change only the horizontal axis to the raw value
of ei,t−1 (t) without taking absolute value nor residualizing this. The figures show higher values of
profit and TFP around the locations where the raw value of error is close to zero. In particular,
as for profit (left figure), the relationship appears to be symmetric around zero. As for TFP, the
positive forecast errors seem to be associated with lower TFP, while the relationship in the negative
side of forecast errors is less clear.
Table 2 shows the estimates for regressions of the equation (9). Column (1) reports the results
for profit. The estimated coefficient is negative and statistically significant at 1 percent significance
level. The estimate implies sizable effect of forecast error on profit: having 1 percent higher or lower
GDP growth rate forecast error tends to lower the level of profit by around 8 percent. Column
(2) shows the result for TFP. The coefficient estimate of absolute forecast error is negative and
statistically significant at 5 percent level. The result implies that having 1 percent forecast error
is associated with 0.54 percent lower TFP. We also examined robustness against possible sampling
selection effects by estimating the equation (9) by weighting observations by inverse of response
rates and found similar results as in the main specification (Table A.6 in the Appendix show the

16

results).17 Also, we observe qualitatively the same results when we regress the growth rate of TFP
(i.e. the first difference in the logarithm of TFP) instead of the level of TFP on absolute forecast
errors (the estimated coefficient is -0.0037 and the standard error is 0.0012).
Next, we estimate the same equation (9) by allowing the coefficients of under-forecast error
(|ei,t−1 (t)| · 1{ei,t−1 (t) < 0}) and over-forecast error (|ei,t−1 (t)| · 1{ei,t−1 (t) > 0}) to differ. Columns
(3) and (4) of Table 2 estimate such equations for profit and TFP. The results indicate that
both pessimistic and optimistic errors are negatively and significantly related with profit in the
subsequent year. For TFP, the coefficient estimate of optimistic errors is negative and significant,
while the coefficient of pessimistic error is estimated to be negative and insignificant.
Our results on profit are consistent with Prediction 3 derived based on a standard dynamic
model of firms. That is, firms’ profit would be maximized when firms make investment with perfect
information about its future productivity. Profit declines because firms over- or under- invest by
mis-forecasting growth rate.
The results on TFP are consistent with Prediction 5 obtained based on a model where firms
adjust input choices subject to disruption costs. In the model, this result arises in combination of
two effects. First, as depicted in the baseline model of section 2.1, if firms are over-optimistic and
expand, and thus lower prices, this will cut TFPR18 as in Prediction 4. The other mechanism is
“true TFP” effects, as described in the model of section 2.2, whereby having too few or too many
inputs reduces TFP through disruption costs. This would lead to lower TFP for both positive and
negative forecast errors.
Another explanation is that over-optimistic firms excessively invest and hire, which reduces
capacity utilization (such as working hours and capital utilization), and so does measured TFP
because we do not observe capacity utilization at firm level. In reverse, over-pessimistic forecasts
lead to higher utilization and higher measured TFP. Therefore, this capacity utilization effect goes
to the same direction as the price effect. To examine this channel, we employ an alternative TFP
measure where labor input is measured by the total wage bill, which includes overtime pay, and
17

Additionally, we examined a different specification using a squared loss function (i.e. (ei,t−1 (t))2 ) in stead of
using the absolute loss function. The results are shown in the Table A.6 in the Appendix. We find that profit is
still negatively and significantly associated with the squared error, while the coefficient of squared error for TFP is
insignificantly estimated (possibly due to the offsetting two possible mechanisms for the influence of forecasts on TFP
discussed in the theory section).
18
We use industry level price deflators to calculate TFP, but not firm level prices. Thus, the measured TFP is
interpreted as TFPR.

17

thus would reflect total hours worked.19 The result for this TFP measure is shown in column (5).
The estimated coefficient of optimistic forecast errors is muted compared to that of column (4)
as expected, but it is still significant at 10 percent level. On the other hand, the coefficient of
pessimistic forecast errors is slightly lowered but remains insignificant.
An alternative explanation of the results in the above is not that forecast errors shape performance, but that both forecast errors and performance are correlated with some firm-level unobservable like management quality. Firms with high-ability managers may be more capable of making
accurate forecasts, while such high-ability managers are more likely to employ high-performing
management practices. To explore this possibility, we add in the estimation equation a historical
average of firm’s forecast errors for five years preceding the year t − 1 (i.e. t − 2, ..., t − 6). Our
intuition behind this test is as follows. Manager’s ability and its effect on firm performance are
considered to persist for relatively long periods. Therefore, historical average of past forecast errors
are likely to be the more accurate proxy of firm’s managerial ability than the prior year forecast
error. Hence, if forecast errors proxy for managers’ ability, then its long-run effect of historical
average should dominate short-run effect. To test this hypothesis, columns (6) and (7) of Table 2
show the results of adding historical average of forecast errors. Overall, only the coefficients of 1
year lagged forecast errors are negative and significant. Finally, in columns (8) and (9), we also
estimate the specification where the forecast errors are those of the next year (|ei,t (t + 1)|) rather
than the current year (|ei,t−1 (t)|) and find insignificant results, ruling out basic reverse causality
mechanisms.20

4.3

Results by firm cyclicality and export status

Standard models of firms as in section 2 would also imply that firms whose performance are more
sensitive to the macro economy would be more responsive to their GDP growth rates forecasts.
We explore this possibility by dividing the sample into high and low cyclicality firms using the
firm cyclicality measure (as described in the data section). In addition, since firms selling in
foreign markets may be less influenced by Japanese GDP growth, we further divide the sample
19

A caution of this exercise is that the total wage bill also includes bonus payment, so this can be influenced by
firm performance.
20
We also examined similar specifications using forecast errors of 2–5 years ahead (|ei,t+1 (t + 2)|, |ei,t+2 (t + 3)|,
|ei,t+3 (t + 4)|, and, |ei,t+4 (t + 5)|) and find insignificant results.

18

into exporting and non-exporting firms.21 Table 3 shows the results. Columns (1), (4), (7), (10),
and (13) show the estimates for non-exporting firms with above median cyclicality index, the next
columns show the results for non-exporting firms with bellow median cyclicality index, and the
rest of the columns show the results for exporting firms. Overall, we find strong evidence that
non-exporting and more cyclical firms see a tighter correlation between GDP forecasts and firm
outcomes than the other firms.22

5

Forecast quality by firm characteristics

In this section, we identify the types of firms whose forecast errors tend to be more accurate.
Contrary to the analysis in the previous section where we employ within-firm variations in forecast
errors by including firm fixed effects, we focus on across-firm variations in firm characteristics in this
section. We examine determinants of firms’ forecasts quality that is measured in two alternative
ways.
One measure of forecast quality is its difference from realization. As its natural counterpart
in data, we use |ei,t (t + 1)|, the absolute value of firm i’s forecast error made in year t defined
by |fi,t (t + 1) − gt+1 |, in which gt+1 is the realized GDP growth rate in fiscal year t + 1. Table 4
shows the results of regressing absolute forecast errors |ei,t (t + 1)| on various contemporaneous firm
characteristics in year t.23 All of the estimated equations include year fixed effects and 30 sector
fixed effects.
First, the results show that the coefficients of the log of employment size are negative and
statistically significant, implying that firm size is a strong predictor of lower forecast errors. This
evidence is consistent with Bachmann and Elstner (2015) and Bloom et al. (2018) who find similar
evidence for firms’ forecasts and forecast uncertainty about own production performance in German
and US firm data.24 Secondly, we examine whether more productive firms make the more accurate
21

There is a question in ASCB asked only to exporting firms. We identify exporting companies based on whether
the firm answered this question.
22
We also test alternative specifications and find qualitatively similar results. One of these is to use only the
cyclicality measure to divide the sample by taking the stance that the cyclicality measure already takes into account
for the firm’s foreign operation that are less correlated with Japanese GDP growth. Another specification is to
include an interaction terms of cyclicality and forecasts. Table A.7 in the appendix shows these results, which are
qualitatively similar to the results in Table 3.
23
As a robustness check we also try restricting the sample to respondents in either management, strategy, or
planning departments, and the results remain qualitatively the same.
24
One important difference from their results is that in our case we are evaluating firms’ forecasts on a common

19

forecasts. Columns (2) and (3) show the results regressing forecast errors on the firm’s average
TFP in the preceding three years, measuring historical productivity of the firm. The estimated
coefficients of historical TFP are negative and statistically significant, and the coefficient remains
after controlling for the firm size. This result implies firm productivity is an important determinant
of forecast accuracy.
Third, we test whether firm age matters for forecast errors. Columns (4) and (5) indicate that
older firms tend to make smaller absolute errors, even after controlling for the firm size. This result
suggest longer business experience may help firms make accurate forecasts.25 Fourth, we test the
hypothesis that firms whose performance are responsive to the macro economy have higher incentive
to predict accurately due to larger cost of misforecasting and make more accurate forecasts. The
results in columns (6) and (7) are consistent with this hypothesis: firms with higher cyclicality
index tend to make more accurate forecasts. The results are consistent with the evidence shown
by Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Kumar (2015) that firms with higher incentive to predict inflation
(due to facing higher competitions) make more accurate forecasts than the others.
Finally, we examine differences in forecast accuracy by firms’ ownership types. We use the names
of the top 25 largest stock owners of each firm to construct the measures of stock share owned by
banks and financial institutions (“bank share”). As shown in columns (8) and (9), the coefficients
of bank share are negative and statistically significant. This result remains qualitatively the same
in the last column where we include all variables in one regression. These results suggest that
governance may also play an important role in forecast accuracy. Historically speaking, Japanese
banks tended to be heavily involved in management and business planing of their client firms in
the post-war period (Hoshi and Kashap 2001). Therefore, given that banks are likely to have
professional forecasters26 , it is not surprising that banks’ share predicts firms’ forecast accuracies.
The other way to measure the forecast quality is to take its difference from the average forecasts
of professional forecasters. The idea behind construction of this measure is that professionals’
forecasts are likely to be the best available forecasts in each period of time.27 Hence, it should strip
outcome - GDP - rather than the firm’s own performance. Prior results may be because larger firms have more
predictable sales. In this sense, our result may be more striking since we find that larger firms are more accurate
even for the common outcome.
25
Another interpretation of this result is that firms that have ability make the more accurate forecasts tend to
survive longer.
26
Most of the professional forecasters in the Consensus Forecast are banks and financial institutions.
27
There is a large empirical literature on the accuracy of professional forecast. Among them, for example, Keane
and Runkle (1990) support the rationality of professional forecasts using panel data.

20

out unavoidable forecast errors - for example, due to disasters like the Tohoku earthquakes - and
try to measure firms deviations from best-practice forecasts.
To start this analysis, we first examine whether professional forecasts from the Consensus Forecasts data are more accurate than firms’ forecast on average. Time-trends of professional forecasts’
mean and firm forecasts’ mean look quite similar (see Appendix Figure A.4). To see the differences,
we regressed forecasts and forecast errors on a dummy variable indicating professional forecasters
using dataset pooling both professional and firm forecasts.28 We find that professional forecasts
are on average marginally more optimistic and make smaller absolute error than firm forecasts,
although the difference is statistically insignificant. However, we find that squared forecast errors
(i.e. (ei,t (t + 1))2 ) are significantly smaller for professional forecasts. The results indicate that
professional forecasts tend to make fewer extreme forecast errors than firms.29
Table 5 shows the results of regressing the absolute value of distance to the mean of professional
forecasts on firm characteristics. The results are similar to the ones before in terms of the signs
of the coefficients, although the levels of statistical significance vary when we control for firm size.
Overall, as before, firm size, productivity, age, cyclicality, and bank ownership share predict firms
having forecasts closer to professional forecasters. Interestingly, in column (8), if we split out the
non-bank share into family owned and non-family owned, we find family owned have significantly
larger gaps versus professional forecasters (point estimate and standard-errors are 0.336 and 0.130,
respectively).30 As another robustness check, we also tested an alternative specification using the
professional forecasts in November (rather than December in case firms had not examined the latest
professional forecasts), and the results are very similar (see Table A.8 in the Appendix).

6

Concluding remarks

Economists have long been interested in how firms’ expectations affect business outcomes. For
example, most recent stochastic models of firm dynamics assume forward looking firm managers.
Key questions are to what extent do these firms’ forecasts matter to their input choices and performance and what are the factors that explain the heterogeneity of forecast accuracy across firms.
28

There were in total 635 professional forecasts in the observed period.
Distributions of the forecast errors by professionals and firms show that firms’ forecast errors have longer tails
(see Appendix Figure A.7 Panel B).
30
Family owned share is calculated as the total share owned by the top 25 shareholders whose family names are
the same as the firm’s representative.
29

21

However, micro-level evidence on these questions has been rarely provided due to lack of firm-level
panel data tracking both firms’ forecasts and performance.
This paper matches panel data on firms’ forecasts of GDP growth from the Japanese Annual
Survey of Corporate Behavior (ASCB) to company accounting data to provide new evidence on
these questions. We find four main results. First, firms’ GDP forecasts are positively associated
with firms’ input choices such as investment, employment, and output. Second, forecast accuracy
is strongly related with profitability. A higher forecast error (of either sign) significantly predicts
lower profits. Third, we find that measured productivity is negatively associated with excessively
optimistic forecasts, while no effect was found for excessively pessimistic forecasts. For all of these
results, we find the strongest effects for firms whose performance is more sensitive to the state of
the business cycle. We show that a simple model of firm input choice under uncertainty and costly
adjustment can rationalize these results. Finally, we find that larger and more cyclically sensitive
firms have the most accurate forecasts, presumably because their returns from accuracy are largest.
We also see that more productive, older, and bank owned firms tend to be more accurate, suggesting
that experience, management ability, and governance may also play an important role in forecast
accuracy.

22

Figure 1: Forecasts and forecast errors

Notes: Left figure shows the histogram of fi,t−1 (t), the forecast of fiscal year t GDP growth rate answered by firm i in fiscal year
t − 1 in the ASCB, for the entire sample periods. The right figure shows the histogram of |ei,t−1 (t)|, the absolute forecast errors
which are the absolute values of the forecasts less their realized values.

23

Figure 2: First moments of forecasts

Notes: The horizontal axis indicates fiscal year t. The solid line shows the average of fi,t (t + 1), forecast of fiscal year t + 1 GDP
growth rate answered by firm i in fiscal year t in the ACSB. The dashed line shows the realized GDP growth rate in fiscal year t.

Figure 3: Second moments of forecasts

Notes: The horizontal axis indicates fiscal year t. The solid line shows the average of |ei,t (t + 1)|, absolute forecast error of fiscal
year t + 1 GDP growth rate made by firm i in fiscal year t in the ACSB. The dashed line shows the Japanese stock volatility based
on TOPIX in fiscal year t. The long-short dashed line is the average of monthly Economic and Policy Uncertainty Index in Japan
(Baker, Bloom, and Davis 2016). All variables are standardized to mean 0 and standard deviation 1.

24

Figure 4: Distribution of cyclicality index

Notes: The distribution of the coefficient estimates for βi in equation (1). The distribution is drawn after winsorizing the variable
by replacing observations with more than µ ± 3σ, where µ and σ denote for the mean and the standard deviation of the estimates
of βi .

25

Figure 5: Binscatter plots
Panel A

Panel B

Notes: Panel A shows the relationship between forecasts and firms’ input choices by binned scatterplots. The x-axis shows residual
values of fi,t−1 (t) after regressing on year fixed effects and firm fixed effects. The residual value is grouped into equal-sized 15
bins, and for each bin, the y-axis plots the average of the residual value of Yi,t (either employment growth, investment growth, or
sales growth) after regressing it on year fixed effects and firm fixed effects. Panel B shows the relationship between forecast errors
and firm’s profit and TFP by binned scatterplots. In the upper figures, the x-axis shows residual values of |ei,t−1 (t)| after
regressing on year fixed effects and firm fixed effects. In the lower figures, the x-axis shows the raw value of ei,t−1 (t) without
residualizing this variable. In both upper and lower figures, the y-axis shows the average of the residual value of Vi,t (either profit
increase from t to t + 1 or TFP growth) for each equal-sized bins of x-axis. The number of bins is 15 for the upper figures and 30
for the lower figures. Sample is restricted to observations with non-missing GDP forecasts in the last two consecutive years (that
is, ft−1 (t) and ft−2 (t − 1) are observed).

26

Table 1. Forecasts of GDP, employment, and investment growth and realizations of employment, investment, and sales growth

ft−1 (t)

(1)
D ln(Emp)

(2)
D ln(Inv)

(3)
D ln(Sales)

(4)
E
ft−1
(t + 2)

(5)
I
ft−1
(t + 2)

0.241**
(0.0955)

2.443*
(1.432)

0.321*
(0.165)

0.258***
(0.0741)

0.668***
(0.145)

E
ft−1
(t + 2)

(6)
g.Empt−1,t+2

0.162***
(0.0202)

I
ft−1
(t + 2)

Year FE
Firm FE
Observations
Number of firms
Mean dep var

(7)
g.Invt−1,t+2

0.461***
(0.0402)
Yes
Yes
15,617
2,080
-0.0179

Yes
Yes
15,618
2,081
-0.0477

Yes
Yes
15,618
2,081
-0.00367

Yes
Yes
12,728
2,006
-0.469

Yes
Yes
14,864
2,067
3.024

Yes
Yes
11,755
1,693
-2.686

Yes
Yes
9,511
1,771
-3.953

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at firm levels. ft−1 (t) is the firm’s forecast of GDP growth in year t answered in year t − 1.
D ln(Emp) = ln(employmentt ) - ln(employmentt−1 ), D log(Inv) = log (investmentt ) - log (investmentt−1 ), and D ln(Sales) =
E
I
ln(salest ) - ln(salest−1 ). ft−1
(t+2) and ft−1
(t+2) are the firm’s forecasts of its employment and investment growth, respectively,
over the next three years answered in year t−1. g.Empt−1,t+2 and g.Invt−1,t+2 are the firm’s realized employment and investment
growth, respectively, from year t − 1 to t + 2 measured by the changes in log employment and investment +1. Sample is restricted
to observations with non-missing GDP forecasts in the last two consecutive years (that is, ft−1 (t) and ft−2 (t − 1) are observed).

27

Table 2. GDP forecast errors and firm performance

|ei,t−1 (t)|

(1)
Profit

(2)
TFP

-80.2***
(20.4)

-0.691**
(0.276)

ei,t−1 (t)(+)

-97.3***
(29.3)
-58.6**
(27)

ei,t−1 (t)(−)
1
5

Pt−1
k=t−5

(3)
Profit

(4)
TFP

-1.05***
(0.366)
-0.231
(0.390)

(5)
TFP (WB)

(6)
Profit

(7)
TFP

-129.1**
(53.3)

-1.19**
(0.479)

263.2
(291.8)

-2.05
(2.48)

|ei,t (t + 1)|

Yes
Yes
15,618
2,081
9.825

Yes
Yes
12,663
1,733
1.285

Yes
Yes
15,618
2,081
9.825

Yes
Yes
12,663
1,733
1.285

(9)
TFP

-32.23
(36.53)

-0.0502
(0.273)

Yes
Yes
14,175
1,744
9.825

Yes
Yes
11,157
1,445
1.285

-0.668*
(0.362)
-0.303
(0.372)

|ei,k−1 (k)|

Year FE
Firm FE
Observations
Number of firms
Mean dep var

(8)
Profit

Yes
Yes
12,639
1,733
0.072

Yes
Yes
5,114
935
9.825

Yes
Yes
4,237
784
1.285

28

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at firm levels. |ei,t−1 (t)| is a measure of forecast error defined by the absolute value of difference between firm’s forecast of GDP growth
in fiscal year t answered in year t−1 and the realized GDP growth in fiscal year t. ei,t−1 (t)(+) ≡ |ei,t−1 (t)|∗1{ei,t−1 (t) > 0]} and ei,t−1 (t)(−) ≡ |ei,t−1 (t)|∗1{ei,t−1 (t) < 0]},
where ei,t−1 (t) is a measure of forecast error defined by the firm’s forecast of GDP growth in fiscal year t answered in year t − 1 minus the realized GDP growth in fiscal
year t. Profit and TFP are the measures of fiscal year t. Unit of profit is million
Pt−1JPY. TFP (WB) is an alternative measure of TFP using the same method described in
section 3 but replacing the labor input by the total wage bill of the firm. 51 k=t−5 |ei,k−1 (k)| is the average absolute forecast errors in the last 5 years of firm i. Sample
is restricted to observations with non-missing GDP forecasts in the last two consecutive years (that is, ft−1 (t) and ft−2 (t − 1) are observed).

Table 3. GDP forecasts and firm performance by export status and cyclicality
Export status
Firm cyclicality
fi,t−1 (t)

Year FE
Firm FE
Observations
N firms

(1)
D ln(Emp)
Non-exporter
High

(2)
D ln(Emp)
Non-exporter
Low

(3)
D ln(Emp)
Exporter
All

(4)
D ln(Inv)
Non-exporter
High

(5)
D ln(Inv)
Non-exporter
Low

(6)
D ln(Inv)
Exporter
All

(7)
D ln(Sales)
Non-exporter
High

(8)
D ln(Sales)
Non-exporter
Low

(9)
D ln(Sales)
Exporter
All

0.439*
(0.249)

0.285
(0.213)

0.0120
(0.131)

7.28**
(3.46)

-2.03
(3.19)

1.82
(2.13)

0.889**
(0.390)

0.288
(0.328)

-0.225
(0.275)

Yes
Yes
3,130
504

Yes
Yes
3,344
588

Yes
Yes
6,671
1,063

Yes
Yes
2,891
482

Yes
Yes
3,201
579

Yes
Yes
6,628
1,054

Yes
Yes
3,130
504

Yes
Yes
3,345
589

Yes
Yes
6,671
1,063

Export status
Firm cyclicality
|ei,t−1 (t)|

29

Year FE
Firm FE
Observations
N firms

(10)
Profit
Non-exporter
High

(11)
Profit
Non-exporter
Low

(12)
Profit
Exporter
All

(13)
TFP
Non-exporter
High

(14)
TFP
Non-exporter
Low

(15)
TFP
Exporter
All

-160.4**
(63.9)

-55.0*
(32.6)

-51.1**
(25.2)

-1.94***
(0.605)

-0.159
(0.648)

-0.451
(0.412)

Yes
Yes
3,130
504

Yes
Yes
3,345
589

Yes
Yes
6,671
1,063

Yes
Yes
2,288
391

Yes
Yes
2,437
451

Yes
Yes
5,808
948

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at firm levels. The sample is divided into exporting and non-exporting firms and into high and low cyclicality firms. Cyclicality
is measured by the index constructed based on stock price responses to quarterly GDP announcements as described in section 3. Firms in high cyclicality sample have
cyclicality index above the median. fi,t−1 (t) is firm i’s forecast of GDP growth in fiscal year t answered in year t − 1. |ei,t−1 (t)| is a measure of forecast error defined by
the absolute value of difference between firm’s forecast of GDP growth in fiscal year t answered in year t − 1 and the realized GDP growth in fiscal year t. D ln(Emp) =
ln(employmentt ) – ln(employmentt−1 ), D ln(Inv) = ln(investmentt ) – ln(investmentt−1 ), and D ln(Sales) = ln(salest ) – ln(salest−1 ). Profit and TFP are the measures
of fiscal year t. Unit of profit is million JPY. Sample is restricted to observations with non-missing GDP forecasts in the last two consecutive years (that is, ft−1 (t) and
ft−2 (t − 1) are observed).

Table 4. Forecast accuracy with respect to GDP growth realization
(1)
|ei,t (t + 1)|
ln(Employment)

(2)
|ei,t (t + 1)|

(3)
|ei,t (t + 1)|

-0.0490***
(0.0186)

-0.0288***
(0.00483)
-0.0398**
(0.0183)

-0.0190***
(0.00325)

TFP (past 3 years)
Firm age

(4)
|ei,t (t + 1)|

(5)
|ei,t (t + 1)|

(6)
|ei,t (t + 1)|

-0.0239***
(0.00384)

-0.00102***
(0.00027)

(7)
|ei,t (t + 1)|
-0.0250***
(0.00380)

-0.219**
(0.0958)

Yes
Yes
10,852

Yes
Yes
10,827

Yes
Yes
19,788

(10)
|ei,t (t + 1)|

-0.0375***
(0.00589)

-0.639***
(0.0878)

-0.454***
(0.0918)

-0.0509***
(0.00856)
-0.0272
(0.0362)
-0.000976
(0.000597)
-0.115
(0.208)
-0.336***
(0.127)

Yes
Yes
9,383

Yes
Yes
9,367

Yes
Yes
3,981

-0.170*
(0.0938)

Banks share

Yes
Yes
25,923

(9)
|ei,t (t + 1)|

-0.000668**
(0.000272)

Cyclicality

Year FEs
Sector FEs
Observations

(8)
|ei,t (t + 1)|

Yes
Yes
19,771

Yes
Yes
19,542

Yes
Yes
19,525

30

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at firm levels. TFP (past 3 years) is the average TFP of the firm in the preceding three years. Cyclicality is measured by the index
constructed based on stock price responses to quarterly GDP announcements as described in section 3. Bank share is defined by the stock share owned banks and other
financial institutions among the firm’s top 30 stock holders. |ei,t (t + 1)| is a measure of forecast error defined by the absolute value of difference between firm i’s forecast
of GDP growth in fiscal year t + 1 answered in year t and the realized GDP growth in fiscal year t + 1. The unit of |ei,t (t + 1)| is percent (i.e. decimal points multiplied
by 100).

Table 5. Forecast accuracy with respect to professional forecasts
(1)
|epi,t (t + 1)|
ln(Employment)

(2)
|epi,t (t + 1)|

(3)
|epi,t (t + 1)|

-0.0483**
(0.0201)

-0.0657***
(0.00457)
-0.0271
(0.0190)

-0.0583***
(0.00328)

TFP (past 3 years)
Firm age

(4)
|epi,t (t + 1)|

(5)
|epi,t (t + 1)|

(6)
|epi,t (t + 1)|

-0.0539***
(0.00391)

-0.00186***
(0.000279)

(7)
|epi,t (t + 1)|
-0.0567***
(0.00386)

-0.171*
(0.102)

Yes
Yes
10,852

Yes
Yes
10,827

Yes
Yes
19,788

(10)
|epi,t (t + 1)|

-0.0509***
(0.00580)

-0.764***
(0.0862)

-0.512***
(0.0889)

-0.0665***
(0.00894)
-0.0165
(0.0362)
-0.00122**
(0.000584)
0.285
(0.211)
-0.340**
(0.132)

Yes
Yes
9,383

Yes
Yes
9,367

Yes
Yes
3,981

-0.0642
(0.0948)

Banks share

Yes
Yes
25,923

(9)
|epi,t (t + 1)|

-0.00106***
(0.000267)

Cyclicality

Year FEs
Sector FEs
Observations

(8)
|epi,t (t + 1)|

Yes
Yes
19,771

Yes
Yes
19,542

Yes
Yes
19,525

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at firm levels. TFP (past 3 years) is the average TFP of the firm in the preceding three years. Bank share is defined by the stock
share owned banks and other financial institutions among the firm’s top 30 stock holders. |ept (t + 1)| is a measure of forecast error defined by the absolute value of
difference between firm i’s forecast for GDP growth in fiscal year t + 1 answered in the December of year t and the average forecasts by professionals in the December of
year t. The unit of |epi,t (t + 1)|is percent (i.e. decimal points multiplied by 100).

31

References
[1] Abel, Andrew B. and Blanchard, Oliver. (1986). “The Present Value of Profit and Cyclical Movements in
Investment” Econometrica, 54(2): 249-273.
[2] Beaudry, Paul, and Franck Portier (2004). “Exploring Pigou’s Theory of Cycles” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 51(6): 1183–1216.
[3] Bachmann, Rüdiger, and Steffen Elstner. (2015). “Firm Optimism and Pessimism” European Economic
Review, 79: 297-325
[4] Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. (2016). “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4): 1593-1636.
[5] Bartelsman, Erik, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta. (2013). “Cross Country Differences in Productivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection” American Economic Review, 103(1): 305-334.
[6] Beaudry, Paul, and Franck Portier (2004). “An exploration into pigou’s theory of cycles” Journal of Monetary Economics 51(6): 1183-1216.
[7] Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar. (2003). “Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on
Firm Policies” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4):1169-1208.
[8] Bloom, Nicholas, Davis, Steve, Foster, Lucia, Lucking, Brian, Ohlmacher, Scott and Saporta-Eckstein,
Itay. (2018). “Business Level Expectations and Uncertainty”, Stanford mimeo.
[9] Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. (2007). “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices across
Firms and Countries” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4): 1351-1408.
[10] Caballero, Ricardo. (1997). “Aggregate investment”, NBER working paper 6264.
[11] Carroll, Christopher D. (2003). “Macroeconomic Expectations of Households and Professional Forecasters.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 269-298.
[12] Chirinko, Robert. (1993). “Business Fixed Investment Spending: A Critical Survey of Modeling Strategies,
Empirical Results and Policy Implications” Journal of Economic Literature, December 1993: 1875-1911.
[13] Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. (2012). “What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about Information
Rigidities?” Journal of Political Economy, 120(1): 116-159.
[14] Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. (2015). “Information Rigidity and the Expectations Formation
Process: A Simple Framework and New Facts” American Economic Review, 105(8): 2644–2678.
[15] Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Saten Kumar. (2015). “How Do Firms Form Their Expectations? New Survey Evidence.” NBER Working Paper 21092.
[16] David, Joel M, Hugo Hopenhayn, and Venky Venkateswaran. (2016). “Information, Misallocation, and
Aggregate Productivity.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(2): 943-1005.
[17] David, Joel M and Venky Venkateswaran. (2017). “The Sources of Capital Misallocation.” NBER Working
Paper 23129.
[18] Dixit, Avinash and Robert Pindyck. (1994). Investment under uncertainty. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
[19] Gennaioli, Nicola, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer. (2015) “Expectations and Investment” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume 30. University of Chicago Press.
32

[20] Hayashi, Fumio, and Tohru Inoue (1991) “The Relation Between Firm Growth and Q with Multiple Capital
Goods: Theory and Evidence from Panel Data on Japanese Firms” Econometrica, 59(3): 731–753.
[21] Hoshi, Takeo and Anil Kashyap. (2001). Corporate Financing and Governance in Japan: The Road to the
Future. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[22] Ilut, Cosmin L, and Martin Schneider (2014). “Ambiguous Business Cycles” The American Economic
Review 104(8): 2368-2399.
[23] Kaihatsu, Sohei, and Noriyuki Shiraki. (2016). “Firms’ Inflation Expectations and Wage-setting Behaviors”
Bank of Japan Working Paper Series 16-E-10.
[24] Keane, Michael P. and David E. Runkle. (1990) “Testing the Rationality of Price Forecasts: New Evidence
from Panel Data” American Economic Review 80: 714-35
[25] Keynes, John Maynard. (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. New York:
Harcourt, Brace.
[26] Koga, Maiko, and Haruko Kato. (2017). “Behavioral Biases in Firms’ Growth Expectations” Bank of Japan
Working Paper Series 17-E-9 .
[27] Lucas, Robert E. Jr.. (1972). “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money” Journal of Economic Theory,
4:103-124.
[28] Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis. (2002). “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to
Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4): 1295-1328.
[29] Mankiw, N. Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers. (2003). “Disagreement about Inflation Expectations” NBER Working Paper 9796.
[30] Massenot, Baptiste, and Yuri Pettinicchi. (2018). “Can Firms See into the Future? Survey Evidence from
Germany” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 145: 66-79.
[31] Nickell, Stephen. (1978). The Investment Decisions of Firms. Cambridge University Press.
[32] Syverson, Chad. (2011). “What Determines Productivity?” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(2): 326365.
[33] Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martı́n Uribe. (2012). “What’s News in Business Cycles” Econometrica
80(6): 2733-2764
[34] Tobin, James. (1982). “On the Efficiency of the Financial System” Lloyds Bank Review, 153: 1-15.

33

7

Appendix

Model derivations

Predictions under imperfect information. The first order conditions from (1) give
α̂1 Eit [Ait ] Kitα̂1 −1 Nitα̂2

= R

α̂2 Eit [Ait ] Kitα̂1 Nitα̂2 −1

= Wt ,

which imply
Nit =

α̂2 R
Kit .
α̂1 Wt

Substituting into the first order condition for Kit , we can solve for
Kit = C1t Eit [Ait ]σ
Nit = C2t Eit [Ait ]σ ,
where


α̂1
R



1−α̂2
1−α̂1 −α̂2



α̂2
Wt



α̂2
1−α̂1 −α̂2



α̂1
R



α̂1
1−α̂1 −α̂2



α̂2
Wt



1−α̂1
1−α̂1 −α̂2

C1t =
C2t =

.

Then, revenues are equal to
α̂1 +α̂2

α̂1 α̂2
Pit Yit = Ait Kitα̂1 Nitα̂2 = C1t
C2t Ait Eit [Ait ] 1−α̂1 −α̂2 = C3t Ait Eit [Ait ]σ−1 ,

and profits are equal to


σ−1

Πit = C3t Ait Eit [Ait ]

σ−1
−
Eit [Ait ]σ
σ



and finally, TFPR:
Pit Yit
Kitα Nit1−α

C3t Ait Eit [Ait ]σ−1
α C 1−α
Eit [Ait ]σ
C1t
2t
Ait
= C4t
.
Eit [Ait ]
=

Predictions 1, 2 and 4 are immediate. Turning to prediction 3, the first derivative of expression (4) can
be shown to be positive if Eit [Ait ] < Ait and otherwise is negative. Then, since the profit function is globally
concave in the expectation of Ait , it is maximized at Eit [Ait ] = Ait . This proves prediction 3.
Predictions with additional adjustment and disruption costs. We work with a more general version
of the framework than in the text that explicitly includes both capital and labor. We then specialize to the case
described in the text to prove prediction 5. This case is always nested where α = 1. For purposes of tractability,
we assume that the disruption costs due to labor adjustments are denominated in labor units with the same

34

cost parameter, ξ. With these assumptions, the output of the firm is given by:






Yit = Kitα Nit1−α − Φ Kit , Kit0 − Wt Φ Nit , Nit0



.

In this setup, the firm makes a one-time payment to hire incremental labor so the cost of labor, Wt should
interpreted as the present discounted value of wages. A related setup is in David and Venkateswaran (2017).
Second stage. In the second stage of time t, the firm observes the realization of the fundamental and chooses
inputs for production, Kit and Nit , taking as given its initial choices, Kit0 and Nit0 in the first stage of period t.
The firm’s second stage problem takes the form:


max

Kit ,Nit

Ait Kitα Nit1−α −

ξ
2

!2

Kit
−1
Kit0



ξ
2

Kit0 − Wt

Nit
−1
Nit0



 σ−1

!2

σ

Nit0 



+ β (1 − δ) Kit − Kit − Kit0 + Wt β (1 − δ) Nit − W Nit − Nit0

(10)


.

In this setup, the firm makes a one-time payment to hire incremental labor so the cost of labor Wt should be
interpreted as the present discounted value of wages. See DV for a related setup.
The first order conditions give:
σ−1
−1
Ait Yit σ
σ
σ−1
−1
Ait Yit σ
σ

!!

αKitα−1 Nit1−α

−ξ

(1 − α) Kitα Nit−α − Wt ξ

Kit
−1
Kit0

Nit
−1
Nit0

−R = 0

!!

− RWt = 0 ,

where, as in the text, R = 1 − β (1 − δ).
To simplify the problem, we prove that there exists an ηt such that Nit = ηt Kit and Nit0 = ηt Kit0 , i.e., the
labor choice is proportional to the the capital choice. The factor of proportionality is common across firms
within a period, but is potentially time-varying.
Under this conjecture, we can rewrite the firm’s problem in (10) as


max
Kit

ξ
Ait ηt1−α Kit −
2


!2

Kit
−1
Kit0

ξ
Kit0 − Wt
2

Kit
−1
Kit0



 σ−1

!2

σ

ηt Kit0 


+ β (1 − δ) Kit − Kit − Kit0 + Wt β (1 − δ) ηt Kit − Wt ηt Kit − Kit0



.

The first order condition gives:
σ−1
−1
Ait Yit σ
σ

ηt1−α
−ξ
1 + ηt Wt

!!

Kit
−1
Kit0

−R = 0.

(11)

Now, substitute the conjecture that Nit = ηt Kit and Nit0 = ηt Kit0 into the labor first order condition from the
original problem and rearrange to get:
σ−1
−1
Ait Yit σ
σ
If ηt satisfies:

(1 − α) ηt1−α
−ξ
ηt Wt

Kit
−1
Kit0

!!

−R = 0.

1
1−α
1−α 1
=
⇒ ηt =
,
1 + ηt Wt
ηt Wt
α Wt

(12)

(13)

then (11) is identical to (12), so that the solution under our conjecture satisfies the optimality condition for
35

labor from the original problem. It is straightforward to verify that the capital choice under our conjecture also
satisfies the optimality condition for capital from the original problem.
To obtain an analytic expression for the choice of Kit , we log-linearize the first order condition (11) around
the non-stochastic steady state, where Kit = Kit0 = K̄ solves
σ − 1 (1−α) σ−1 − 1
σ K̄ σ = R
Āη̄
σ
This gives the choice of capital (in logs) as
0
kit = φ1 ait + φ2 kit
+ φ3 ηt + φ1 ln

where
φ1 =

σ

,
1 + σ ξˆ

φ2 =

and

σ ξˆ

,
1 + σ ξˆ



φ3 =

σ−1 1
σ R



,

(1 − α) (σ − 1)
,
1 + σ ξˆ

1 + ηt Wt
ξ
ξˆ =
ξ=
η̄ 1−α
αη̄ 1−α

is a transformation of the disruption cost parameter that captures the severity of these costs. In levels, we have


Kit =

σ−1 1
σ R

 φ1



Aφit1 Kit0

φ 2

ηtφ3 ,

(14)

where, from (13), ηt captures the effect of fluctuations in wages.
First stage. In the first stage, the firm makes its initial choices of inputs, Kit0 and Nit0 , under imperfect
information regarding the fundamental, Ait and taking into account its choices in the second stage. The firm’s
problem takes the form:


max

0 ,N 0
Kit
it



ξ

Eit Ait Kitα Nit1−α −
2

Kit
−1
Kit0



!2

ξ
Kit0 − Wt
2

Nit
−1
Nit0



!2



 σ−1
σ

Nit0 

+β (1 − δ) Kit − Kit − Kit0 + Wt β (1 − δ) Nit − Wt Nit − Nit0

i

(15)
− Kit0 − Wt Nit0

s.t.
σ−1 1
σ R
Nit = ηt Kit .


 φ1

Kit =



Aφit1 Kit0

φ2

ηtφ3

The first order condition for capital, Kit0 , gives
 

0 =

 ∂ A
it



Eit 




Kitα Nit1−α −



σ−1
−1
Ait Yit σ ξ
+ Eit 
σ
=

−1
Eit Ait Yit σ

Kit
0
Kit

2

−1

Kit0 − Wt 2ξ



Nit
0
Nit

2

−1

∂Kit





ξ
2




ξ

!

Kit
Kit ξ
−1
−
0
2
Kit
Kit0
!

Kit
Kit ξ
−1
−
0
2
Kit
Kit0

!2 


Kit
−1
Kit0

Kit
−1
Kit0

!2 

36

 .

! σ−1
σ

Nit0





− (1 − β (1 − δ)) Kit 



∂Kit 


∂Kit0 



Similar steps give the first order condition for labor, Nit0 :




!

Nit
Nit ξ
−1
−
0
2
Nit
Nit0

− σ1

0 = Eit Ait Yit Wt ξ

Nit
−1
Nit0

!2 
 .

(16)

To prove our conjecture that Nit0 = ηt Kit0 , substitute the conjecture into the original problem (15):




ξ

Eit Ait ηt1−α Kit −
2

max
Kit

+

Kit
−1
Kit0



!2

 σ−1

!2

ξ
Kit0 − Wt
2

Kit
−1
Kit0



σ

ηt Kit0 



β (1 − δ) Kit − Kit − Kit0 + Wt β (1 − δ) ηt Kit − Wt η Kit − Kit0

i

− Kit0 − ηt Wt Kit0

s.t.


Kit =

σ−1 1
σ R

 φ1



Aφit1 Kit0

φ 2

ηtφ3 .

The first order condition gives:
 

0 =

 ∂ A
it



Eit 





+ Eit 

η 1−α Kit − (1 + ηWt ) 2ξ

σ−1
Ait Yit
σ

− σ1

= Eit Ait Yit

2

Kit
0
Kit

−1





− (1 + ηWt ) (1 − β (1 − δ)) Kit 



∂Kit 


∂Kit0 



! σ−1
σ

Kit0

∂Kit

− σ1





ξ



!

(1 + ηWt ) ξ

Kit
Kit ξ
−1
−
2
Kit0
Kit0

!

Kit
Kit ξ
−1
−
2
Kit0
Kit0

Kit
Kit0

Kit
−1
Kit0

!2 


!2 
− 1  .

(17)

Now substitute the conjecture into the labor first order condition from the original problem (16):




0 =

−1
Eit Ait Yit σ Wt ξ

!

Kit
Kit ξ
−1
−
0
2
Kit
Kit0

Kit
−1
Kit0

Dividing through by Wt shows that (17) and (18) are the same.
We can rearrange the first order condition (17) as:


0=



−1
Eit Ait Yit σ

or


− σ1

Eit Ait Yit



Kit

Kit0

!2


− σ1

= Eit Ait Yit

37



− 1 ,

!2 
Kit 
,
0

Kit

!2 
 .

(18)

or
1
1
1
yit + vart ait − yit
σ
2
σ





h
i 1


1
1
0
0
exp Eit ait − yit + 2Eit kit − kit + vart ait − yit + 2vart kit − kit
σ
2
σ


1
0
2covt ait − yit , kit − kit
σ




h
i
1
0
0
0
Eit kit − kit + vart kit − kit + covt ait − yit , kit − kit
σ




1 2
σ−1 1
0
2
φ1 Eit [ait ] + (φ2 − 1) kit + φ3 ηt + φ1 + φ1 − φ1 vart (ait ) + φ1 ln
σ
σ R
!


σ−1
2
φ1 σ
φ1
φ3
φ1
φ1
σ−1 1
Eit [ait ] +
ηt +
+
vart (ait ) +
ln
1 − φ2
1 − φ2
1 − φ2 1 − φ2
1 − φ2
σ R


σ−1 1
σEit [ait ] + (1 − α) (σ − 1) ηt + (φ1 (σ − 1) + σ) vart (ait ) + σ ln
σ R




1
σ−1
σ−1 1
σ−1 1
Eit [ait ] + vart (ait ) + (1 − α)
ηt + φ1
+
vart (ait ) + ln
,
2
σ
σ
2
σ R










exp Eit ait −

=
+
⇒0 =
=
0
⇒ kit
=

=
⇒

1 0
k
=
σ it

φ1
1−φ2

where we have used the relationships
distribution. In levels,
Kit0

σ

=Ω

= σ and


σ−1 1
σ R

φ3
1−φ2

σ

where
Ω = e [ φ1

= (1 − α) (σ − 1) and the properties of the log-normal
(1−α)(σ−1)

(Eit [Ait ])σ ηt

σ−1
+ 12
σ

,

]vart (ait )

captures a precautionary savings term. This term is strictly greater than one for ξ ∈ (0, ∞) and for small values
of the conditional variance, varit (ait ), it is close to one. To ease notation, we define the “precautionary-savings
adjusted expectation” as
Ẽit [Ait ] = ΩEit [Ait ] ,
so that
Kit0 =



σ−1 1
σ R

σ 

σ

Ẽit [Ait ]

(1−α)(σ−1)

ηt

.

(19)

Combining (14) and (19), we can express the final choice of Kit as a function of Ait and Eit [Ait ]:


Kit =
Calculating TFPR.

σ−1 1
σ R

σ



σφ2

Aφit1 Ẽit [Ait ]

(1−α)(σ−1)

ηt

.

To summarize, we have:
σ
σ−1 1 σ
(1−α)(σ−1)
Ẽit [Ait ] ηt
σ R


σφ2
σ − 1 1 σ φ1 
(1−α)(σ−1)
=
Ait Ẽit [Ait ]
ηt
σ R

Kit0 =
Kit
Kit
Kit0





= Aφit1 Ẽit [Ait ]−φ1 .

38

TFPR is then:
σ−1

T F P Rit =

Pit Yit
Ait Yit σ
=
Kitα Nit1−α
Kitα Nit1−α


=

ξ
Ait
K α N 1−α −
it it
1−α
α
2
Kit Nit

Kit
−1
Kit0

=

Ait  1−α
ξ
ηt Kit − (1 + Wt ηt )
1−α
2
ηt Kit

=

Ait  1−α
1ξ
ηt Kit −
1−α
α2
ηt Kit

!2





=
α

Kit
−1
Kit0



1
σ−1
σ

Ait  1−α
ξ
αηt Kit −
1−α
2
ηt Kit

Nit
−1
Nit0

σ

Nit0 

 σ−1

!2

Kit
−1
Kit0

 σ−1

!2

ξ
Kit0 − Wt
2

σ

Kit0 

 σ−1

!2

σ

Kit0 

Kit
−1
Kit0

 σ−1

!2

σ

Kit0 

,

and substituting,
T F P Rit = α


×

1−σ
σ



σ−1 1
σ R

−σ

−(1−α)(σ−1)

−σφ2
1
Ait ηtα−1 A−φ
ηt
it Ẽit [Ait ]
(1−α)(σ−1)

αηt1−α Aφit1 Ẽit [Ait ]σφ2 ηt



2 σ − 1 1
ξ  φ1
Ait Ẽit [Ait ]−φ1 − 1
2
σ R


−



σ−1 1
σ R

−1

= α

1−σ
σ

1−σ
σ



σ−1 1
σ R

−1

= α

1−σ
σ



σ−1 1
σ R

−1

= α

= C6t



αηt1−α



(1−α)( σ1 −2)



(1−α)( σ1 −2)



+ξ

ηt


σ

σ

σ

Ẽit [Ait ]

(1−α)(σ−1)
ηt

− σ (1−φ1 )−φ1
αηt1−α Zit σ−1

(1−α)( σ1 −2)
ηt

ηt

σ−1 1
σ R

−

σ

αηt1−α Zit σ−1

− σ (1−φ1 )−φ1
Zit σ−1



(1−φ1 )−φ1

−

σ

αηt1−α + ξ Zit σ−1

 σ−1
σ

2 − σ (1−φ1 )
ξ  −φ1
Zit − 1 Zit σ−1
−
2

−

 σ−1
σ

 − σ (1−φ1 )
ξ  −2φ1
Zit
− 2Zit−φ1 + 1 Zit σ−1
2

(1−φ1 )−φ1

 σ−1

σ
(1−φ1 )
ξ − σ (1−φ1 )−2φ1 ξ − σ−1
− Zit σ−1
− Zit
2
2

σ
(1−φ1 )
ξ − σ (1−φ1 )−2φ1 ξ − σ−1
− Zit σ−1
− Zit
2
2

 σ−1
σ

.

Taking the derivative with respect to Zit gives
∂T F P Rit
∂Zit

σ
−(1−φ1 ) σ−1
−2φ1 −1
Zit



σ
= C6t (· · ·)
− (1 − φ1 )
− φ1 αηt1−α + ξ Zitφ1
σ−1



σ
ξ
σ
ξ 2φ1
+
(1 − φ1 ) + 2φ1
+
(1 − φ1 ) Zit
σ−1
2 σ−1
2
− σ1



Because the common term is positive, the sign of the derivative is determined by the sign of


− (1 − φ1 )





σ
σ
ξ
σ
ξ
− φ1 αηt1−α + ξ Zitφ1 +
(1 − φ1 ) + 2φ1
+
(1 − φ1 ) Zit2φ1 ,
σ−1
σ−1
2 σ−1
2

which, after simplifying, is equal to
σ
σ
σ
ξ
(1 − φ1 ) Zit2φ1 − 1−α φ1 ηt1−α +
Zitφ1 + (1 − φ1 ) + φ1 (σ − 1) ,
2
η̄
α
2




39

σ

(20)

 σ−1
σ

where we used

σ
σ ˆ
(1 − φ1 ) + φ1 =
ξφ1
σ−1
σ−1

ˆ Expression (20) is a quadratic equation in Z φ1 .
and the definition of ξ.
it
Prediction 5. To prove prediction 5, we now specialize to the case where α = 1. We can rewrite expression
(20) as
1 σ
(1 − φ1 ) Zit2φ1 −
2σ−1



σ
+ φ1 Zitφ1 +
σ−1




1 σ
(1 − φ1 ) + φ1
2σ−1



,

and derive the roots as:
Z1φ1

=

Z2φ1

=

σ + φ1 (σ − 1) −

q

σ + φ1 (σ − 1) +

q

σ 2 + 2φ21 (σ 2 − σ) + φ21 (σ − 1)2 − σ 2 (1 − φ1 )2
σ (1 − φ1 )
σ 2 + 2φ21 (σ 2 − σ) + φ21 (σ − 1)2 − σ 2 (1 − φ1 )2
σ (1 − φ1 )

,

where the expression in the square root is non-negative.
The properties of the roots depend on φ1 , which can be greater or less than one. Assume first that φ1 > 1.
Then Z2φ1 is negative and we can ignore it. We can prove Z1φ1 < 1:
Z1φ1

<

1

⇒ σ + φ1 (σ − 1) −

q

σ 2 + 2φ21 (σ 2 − σ) + φ21 (σ − 1)2 − σ 2 (1 − φ1 )2 > σ (1 − φ1 ) ,

and rearranging, squaring both sides and simplifying shows that this condition holds whenever φ1 > 1, which
was our original assumption. Since φ1 > 1, this also implies Z1 < 1.
Now assume φ1 < 1. Then Z2 is positive, but it is very large, e.g., it is greater than


σ − 1 φ1
1
+
1 − φ1
σ 1 − φ1



1
φ1

This clearly goes to infinity as φ1 goes to one from below. Ignoring the second term, Z2 is greater than


1
1 − φ1



1
φ1

1
= 1+
n


n

where n = − φ11 . This term approaches e ≈ 2.72 as φ1 goes to zero, so the firm would have to be more than
172% overoptimistic, which we will assume is outside the relevant range. Thus, Z2 is safely ignored. Following
the same steps as above, we can show Z1 < 1 whenever φ1 < 1.
Finally, evaluating the quadratic at Zit = 1 shows it is strictly negative, (equal to −σφ1 ). So we know the
derivative is negative when Zit > 1 and when Zit > Z1 and is positive for Zit < Z1 . This proves prediction 5.
Similar logic should go through in the general case when α 6= 1; deriving the quadratic equation, (20), did
not depend on this assumption.

Notes on TFP calculation
Output is measured by the firm’s sales from DBJ data divided by the industry-level output deflator from JIP
database. Labor input is measured by the number of workers from DBJ data multiplied by the industry-level
average hours worked from JIP database. As for capital input measure, we use the book value of tangible asset
excluding land from DBJ data deflated by corresponding item-level deflator from Corporate Goods Price Index
of the Bank of Japan. Intermediary input cost is measured by the sum of total production cost and cost of
40

sales and general management subtracting wages and depreciation. We use industry-level intermediate goods
deflator from JIP database to deflate the intermediary input cost. As for the cost share parameters, we use
industry-level labor cost share, capital input share, and intermediate input shares from JIP database.

41

Figure A.1: Number of observations by year

Notes: The number of firms that responded to the ASCB by year.

Figure A.2: Survey question on GDP growth forecasts

Notes: The part of ASCB questionnaire that asked firms about GDP growth rate forecasts.

42

Figure A.3: Binscatter plot of sales growth and GDP growth

Figure A.4: Comparison of the yearly means of firm forecasts and professional forecasts

Notes: The figure shows the average firm forecasts from ASCB and the average professionals’ forecasts from Consensus Forecasts
for the following year’s GDP growth rates.

43

Figure A.5: Survey question on employment and investment growth forecasts

44

Figure A.6 Binned scatter plots of mean forecasts and realization by year

Figure A.7: Comparison of the distributions of firm forecasts and professional forecasts

Notes: The figure shows the distribution firm forecasts from ASCB and the distribution of professional forecasts from Consensus
Forecasts for the following year’s GDP growth rates.

45

Table A.1: Departments of the survey respondents
54%
12%
12%
12%
7%
3%

Departments (in English)
Corporate planning and strategy
Management, CEO office
Finance
General affairs
IR, Public relations
Others

Departments (in Japanese)
"Kikaku", "Keikaku", "Senryaku"
"Keiei", "Kanri", "Syacho", "Torishimariyaku"
"Zaimu", "Keiri", "Zaikei", "Kansa", "Kaikei"
"Soumu", "Gyoumu"
"IR", "Koho"

Notes: ASCB collected the name of department that answered the questionnaire in the respondent firms. We classified department names in Japanese to six categories corresponding to the above terms. The first column shows the fraction of firms in
which the responding department correspond to each category.

46

Table A.2: Basic sample statistics
Variable
Forecast of GDP growth in t+1 (in percent)
Forecast of GDP growth in t+1 - realization (in percent)
|Forecast of GDP growth in t+1 - realization| (in percent)
|Forecast of GDP growth in t+1 - professional forecast*| (in percent)
Employment
Ln(Employment)
Employment growth
Investment (1 mill JPY)
Ln(Investment +1)
Investment growth
Sales (1 mill JPY)
Sales growth
Profit (1 mill JPY)
Firm age
Share of stock owned by banks

Mean
1.483
0.409
1.536
0.549
2567
6.901
-0.015
6,963
13.896
-0.033
253
0.001
8.6
58.232
0.131

SD
1.305
1.88
1.16
0.546
6517
1.315
0.077
27,223
2.049
1.05
966
0.118
37.7
18.958
0.09

Min
-2.8
-6.263
0.008
0
1
0
-0.362
0
2.554
-3.235
0.139
-0.461
-378
0
0

Max
5.5
7.244
7.244
5.571
257627
12.459
0.254
1,010,000
20.733
3.3
21,404
0.371
2125
129
0.568

N
25864
25864
25864
25864
25864
25864
20061
25864
25250
19483
25923
20063
25922
19714
9315

Notes: *Professional forecast is measured by the yearly average of professional forecasts in the Consensus forecast.

47

Table A.3: Response probit
(1)
VARIABLES
Sample
TFP

(2)

(3)

(4)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Respond
All

All

All

All

All

0.207***
(0.0346)

ln(labor prod)

All
0.163***
(0.0415)

Restricted sample of firms that are observed at least for 5 years
0.317***
(0.0273)

0.0685***
(0.0189)

Ln(Employment)

0.0241***
(0.00865)

0.00458***
(0.000635)

0.0484***
(0.0166)
-0.0479***
(0.0154)
0.00563***
(0.000890)

20,818
0.854

16,483
0.906

-0.0106
(0.00780)

Firm age

23,412
0.910

23,940
0.909

0.247***
(0.0343)
0.184***
(0.0152)

Ln(capital)

Observations
Mean of dep. var

(5)

27,725
0.901

27,412
0.902

0.184***
(0.00726)

0.0203***
(0.000576)

0.230***
(0.0139)
-0.110***
(0.0128)
0.0206***
(0.000769)

18,427
0.559

14,329
0.568

0.0750***
(0.00638)

18,954
0.568

19,443
0.567

22,877
0.571

22,591
0.571

Notes: Probit model. Respond=1 if the firm responds to the survey in the year. Year fixed effects and sector fixed effects are included in all regressions.

Table A.4: Autocorrelations of forecasts and errors

ft−1 (t)

(1)
ft (t + 1)

(2)
ft (t + 1)

(3)
ft (t + 1)

(4)
ft (t + 1)

0.250***
(0.00797)

0.166***
(0.00844)

0.155***
(0.0125)

0.00701
(0.0129)

et−1 (t)
g(t)

Year FE
Firm FE
Observations
Number of firms

0.303***
(0.00542)

0.305***
(0.00568)

No
No
11,842
1,758

No
Yes
11,842
1,758

Yes
No
11,842
2,054

(5)
et (t + 1)

(6)
et (t + 1)

(7)
et (t + 1)

(8)
et (t + 1)

0.827***
(0.0101)
1.017***
(0.0121)

0.803***
(0.0115)
1.009***
(0.0132)

0.135***
(0.0112)

0.00367
(0.0113)

No
No
11,842
1,758

No
Yes
11,842
1,758

Yes
No
15,061
2,054

Yes
Yes
15,061
2,054

Yes
Yes
11,842
2,054

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at firm levels. et−1 (t) is a measure of forecast error defined by the difference between firm’s
forecast of GDP growth in fiscal year t answered in year t − 1 and the realized GDP growth in fiscal year t. g(t) is the realized
GDP growth in year t.

Table A.5: GDP forecasts, employment, investment, and sales growth controlling for lagged
forecasts

ft−1 (t)
ft−2 (t − 1)

Year FE
Firm FE
Observations
Number of firms
Mean dep var

(1)
D ln(Emp)

(2)
D ln(Inv)

(3)
D ln(Sales)

0.238**
(0.0957)
0.198**
(0.0945)

2.44*
(1.44)
0.0115
(1.52)

0.319*
(0.166)
0.119
(0.145)

Yes
Yes
15,617
2,080
-0.0179

Yes
Yes
15,144
2,038
-0.0443

Yes
Yes
15,618
2,081
-0.00367

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at firm levels. ft−1 (t) is the firm’s forecast of GDP growth in fiscal year t answered in year
t−1, and ft−2 (t−1) is the firm’s forecast of GDP growth in fiscal year t−1 answered in year t−2 . D ln(Emp) = ln(employmentt )
- ln(employmentt−1 ), D log(Inv) = ln(investmentt ) - ln(investmentt−1 ), and D ln(Sales) = ln(salest ) - ln(salest−1 ).

48

Table A.6: Forecast errors and firm performance (response weights and squared forecast
errors)

|et−1 (t)|

(1)
Profit

(2)
TFP

-69.8***
(16.8)

-0.756***
(0.279)

(et−1 (t))2

Year FE
Firm FE
Observations
Number of firms

Yes
Yes
15,618
2,063

Yes
Yes
12,658
1,733

(3)
Profit

(4)
TFP

-21.8***
(6.78)

-0.0484
(0.0737)

Yes
Yes
15,618
2,081

Yes
Yes
12,658
1,732

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at firm levels. In columns (1) and (2), the regressions weigh responses by inverse of estimated
firm’s response probability. We estimate the probability of survey response by estimating a probit model using information of
DBJ data on log of sales, employment, and capital, firm age, a dummy of non-missing information on firm age, sector fixed
effects, and year fixe effects. The firm’s response probability is estimated as an average of the predicted response probability
within each firm. In columns (3) and (4), (et−1 (t))2 is a measure of forecast error defined by the square of difference between
firm’s forecast of GDP growth in fiscal year t answered in year t − 1 and the realized GDP growth in fiscal year t. Sample is
restricted to observations with non-missing GDP forecasts in the last two consecutive years (that is, ft−1 (t) and ft−2 (t − 1) are
observed).

Table A.7: GDP forecasts by cyclicality
Dividing sample
Firm cyclicality
ft−1 (t)

Year FEs
Firm FEs
Observations
Number of firms

(1)
D ln(Emp)
High

(2)
D ln(Emp)
Low

(3)
D ln(Inv)
High

(4)
D ln(Inv)
Low

(5)
D ln(Sales)
High

(6)
D ln(Sales)
Low

0.377**
(0.159)

0.114
(0.151)

4.17*
(2.26)

0.260
(2.30)

0.00537*
(0.00304)

-0.00168
(0.00246)

Yes
Yes
5,892
757

Yes
Yes
5,926
694

Yes
Yes
5,926
694
Interaction

ft−1 (t)
ft−1 (t) × Cyclicality

Year FEs
Firm FEs
Observations
Number of firms

(1)
D ln(Emp)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5,891
5,926
756
694
(2)
(3)
D ln(Inv) D ln(Sales)

0.115
(0.239)
0.926
(1.69)

-3.88
(3.76)
46.3*
(24.5)

-0.143
(0.385)
2.41
(2.68)

Yes
Yes
11,817
1,450

Yes
Yes
11,818
1,451

Yes
Yes
11,818
1,451

Yes
Yes
5,892
757

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at firm levels. Cyclicality index is constructed based on stock price responses to quarterly GDP announcements. ft−1 (t) is firm’s forecast of GDP growth in fiscal year t answered in year t − 1. D ln(Emp)
= ln(employmentt ) - ln(employmentt−1 ), D log(Inv) = ln(investmentt ) - ln(investmentt−1 ), and D ln(Sales) = ln(salest ) ln(salest−1 ). Sample is restricted to observations with non-missing GDP forecasts in the last two consequtive years (that is,
ft−1 (t) and ft−2 (t − 1) are observed).

49

Table A.8: Forecast accuracy with respect to professional forecasts in the preceding month (November)
(1)
|ept (t + 1)|
ln(Employment)

(2)
|ept (t + 1)|

(3)
|ept (t + 1)|

-0.0341*
(0.0198)

-0.0517***
(0.00460)
-0.0172
(0.0195)

-0.0497***
(0.00318)

TFP (past 3 years)
Firm age

(4)
|ept (t + 1)|

(5)
|ept (t + 1)|

(6)
|ept (t + 1)|

-0.0455***
(0.00373)

-0.00166***
(0.000266)

(7)
|ept (t + 1)|
-0.0481***
(0.00367)

-0.174*
(0.0961)

Yes
Yes
10,852

Yes
Yes
10,827

Yes
Yes
19,788

(10)
|ept (t + 1)|

-0.0431***
(0.00550)

-0.571***
(0.0845)

-0.354***
(0.0875)

-0.0520***
(0.00938)
0.00262
(0.0377)
-0.00175***
(0.000578)
0.172
(0.199)
-0.220
(0.137)

Yes
Yes
9,383

Yes
Yes
9,367

Yes
Yes
3,981

-0.0855
(0.0908)

Banks share

Yes
Yes
25,923

(9)
|ept (t + 1)|

-0.000964***
(0.000258)

Cyclicality

Year FEs
Sector FEs
Observations

(8)
|ept (t + 1)|

Yes
Yes
19,771

Yes
Yes
19,542

Yes
Yes
19,525

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at firm levels. TFP (past 3 years) is the average TFP of the firm in the preceding three years. Bank share is defined by the stock
share owned banks and other financial institutions among the firm’s top 30 stock holders. |ept (t + 1)| is a measure of forecast error defined by the absolute value of
difference between firm i’s forecast for GDP growth in fiscal year t + 1 answered in the December of year t and the average forecasts by professionals provided in the
November of year t. The unit of |ept (t + 1)| is percent (i.e. decimal points multiplied by 100).

50

