                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      COMING APART? CULTURAL DISTANCES IN THE UNITED STATES OVER
                                TIME

                                       Marianne Bertrand
                                        Emir Kamenica

                                      Working Paper 24771
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24771


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2018




We thank the University of Chicago Booth School of Business for financial support. Jihoon Sung
provided excellent research assistance. We thank Jann Spiess and Clara Marquardt for their
advice and guidance with the implementation of the machine learning algorithms. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Marianne Bertrand and Emir Kamenica. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Coming Apart? Cultural Distances in the United States over Time
Marianne Bertrand and Emir Kamenica
NBER Working Paper No. 24771
June 2018
JEL No. B55

                                          ABSTRACT

We analyze temporal trends in cultural distance between groups in the US defined by income,
education, gender, race, and political ideology. We measure cultural distance between two groups
as the ability to infer an individual's group based on his or her (i) media consumption, (ii)
consumer behavior, (iii) time use, or (iv) social attitudes. Gender difference in time use decreased
between 1965 and 1995 and has remained constant since. Differences in social attitudes by
political ideology and income have increased over the last four decades. Whites and non-whites
have converged somewhat on attitudes but have diverged in consumer behavior. For all other
demographic divisions and cultural dimensions, cultural distance has been broadly constant over
time.


Marianne Bertrand
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
marianne.bertrand@chicagobooth.edu

Emir Kamenica
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
emir.kamenica@chicagobooth.edu
            What’s great about this country is that America started the tradition where the
        richest consumers buy essentially the same things as the poorest. You can be watching
        TV and see Coca-Cola, and you know that the President drinks Coke, Liz Taylor drinks
        Coke, and just think, you can drink Coke, too. A Coke is a Coke and no amount of
        money can get you a better Coke than the one the bum on the corner is drinking. All
        the Cokes are the same and all the Cokes are good. Liz Taylor knows it, the President
        knows it, the bum knows it, and you know it.
           - Andy Warhol


1       Introduction

While rural America watches Duck Dynasty and goes fishing and hunting, urban America watches
Modern Family and does yoga in the park.1 The economically better-off travel the world and
seek out ethnic restaurants in their neighborhoods, while the less well-off don’t own a passport
and eat at McDonald’s.2 Conservatives give their boys masculine names like Kurt, while liberals
opt for the more feminine-sounding options such as Liam.3 While men play video games and
watch pornography, women browse Pinterest and post pictures on Instagram.4 These are just a
few examples of the cultural distances across groups within America today. The presence of such
cultural divides is not new – in the early 2000s, scholars emphasized racial differences in music
tastes, language use, media consumption, and consumer behavior5 – but there is a perception that
cultural distances are growing,6 with a particular emphasis on increasing political polarization.7
    These cultural distances may have important consequences. A large empirical literature in
political economy documents that high levels of ethno-linguistic fragmentation hinder public good
provision (Alesina et al. 1999; Alesina and La Ferrara 2005), decrease social capital (Alesina and La
Ferrara 2000), and increase the probability of conflict (Montalvo and Reynal-Querol 2005). More-
over, Desmet et al. (2017) suggest that these outcomes especially worsen when cultural differences
    1
       https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/12/26/upshot/duck-dynasty-vs-modern-family-television-
maps.html
     2
       https://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2011/03/americas-great-passport-divide/72399/
     3
       See Oliver, Wood, and Bass (2016).
     4
       http://www.pewinternet.org/2005/08/18/adult-content-online/; https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-
switch/wp/2013/10/10/25-percent-of-men-watch-online-porn-and-other-facts-about-americans-online-video-
habits/?utm term=.450a3dfccb89; http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/08/28/men-catch-up-with-women-
on-overall-social-media-use.
     5
       See Waldfogel (2003), Wolfram and Thomas (2002), and Fryer and Levitt (2004).
     6
       Fryer and Levitt (2004) document an increase in prevalence of distinctively black names over time. Focusing on
differences across socio-economic groups within the white population, Murray (2012) writes, “It is not the existence
of classes that is new, but the emergence of classes that diverge on core behavior and values – classes that barely
recognize their underlying American kinship.”
     7
       See Kaufman (2002) on the increasing gender gap in party affiliation and Gentzkow (2016) on trends in polar-
ization across party lines.


                                                         2
across ethnic groups are greater.
    Sociologists such as Pierre Bourdieu (1984 [1979]) provide some theoretical foundations for the
findings in the political economy literature. Bourdieu was concerned with the concept of cultural
capital, which he associates with the set of tastes, mannerisms, or material belongings that one
holds. Sharing cultural capital with others, Bourdieu argues, creates a sense of having a common
identity. When cultural differences between groups increase, these groups find it more difficult
to interact, communicate, and trust each other. Bourdieu was particularly concerned about how
cultural differences between rich and poor damage social mobility. For example, students from
poorer backgrounds might better integrate into college life if they can connect with better-off
peers (Zimmerman 2017) but having little in common with those peers (e.g., having a different
favorite TV show, different hobbies, different food preferences, etc.) may result in lower chances
of forming new friendships across income lines. The lack of a shared culture may thus reduce the
accumulation of both social and human capital. Bourdieu’s logic also extends to groups not defined
by income. African Americans and women may struggle to succeed in a predominantly white and
male corporate America because of the greater difficulty of connecting with their majority-culture
peers.8
    Why might cultural divides be greater today than in the past? Technological progress could
lead to cultural divergence: when there is only one channel to watch on television and only one
brand of ketchup to buy, all groups are mechanically constrained to share the same culture on these
dimensions. Thus, increased choice sets might have fueled cultural divergence. This, however, is
not a foregone conclusion. First, it is possible that with only two TV shows, each show caters to
one group or the other, but with thousands of shows, idiosyncratic preferences unrelated to group
membership become the predominant driver of cultural choices. Second, universally-adopted new
technologies might wipe out cultural differences; perhaps the rich and the poor used to spend their
time differently from each other, but in the future everyone will just monitor their Facebook feed
all day.
    In this paper, we measure the extent of cultural distance across various groups in the US over
time. In particular, we define groups of Americans based on their income, education, gender, race,
and political ideology.9 We assemble multiple datasets that allow us to capture as many aspects
of people’s cultural lives as possible, for as long as possible. This includes detailed information

   8
     http://fortune.com/2016/08/11/african-american-executives-diversity-racism/
   9
     In our Online Appendix, we also examine cultural distances by urbanicity (cf: Figure A.5) and age (cf: Figure
A.6). Due to data constraints, we analyze cultural distances by urbanicity only in time use and social attitudes.


                                                        3
                                       Figure 1: Cultural distances over time
Note: Figure shows the likelihood, in each year, of correctly guessing an individual’s group membership based on his/her media
diet, consumer behavior, time use, or social attitudes.



on media consumption and consumer behavior (from 1992 onward), attitudes (from 1976 onward),
and time use (from 1965 onward).10 We define cultural distance in media consumption between
the rich and the poor in a given year by our ability to predict whether an individual is rich or poor
based on her media consumption that year.11 We use an analogous definition for the other three
dimensions of culture (consumer behavior, attitudes, and time use) and other group memberships.
We use a machine learning approach to determine how predictable group membership is from a set
of variables in a given year. In particular, we use an ensemble method that combines predictions
from three distinct approaches, namely elastic net, regression tree, and random forest (Mullainathan
and Spiess 2017).
    Figure 1 summarizes our findings. The results overall refute the hypothesis of growing cultural
   10
      As we discuss at greater length in the next section, we use Mediamark Research Intelligence data for media
consumption and consumer behavior, General Social Survey for attitudes, and American Heritage Time Use Study
for time use.
   11
      This is the approach taken by Gentzkow et al. (2017) to measure differences between Democrats and Republicans
in their Congressional speech.


                                                              4
divides. With few exceptions, the extent of cultural distance has been broadly constant over time.
One (unsurprising) exception is that men and women’s time use became more similar from 1965
to 1995; perhaps more surprisingly, there has been no subsequent change in the gender differences
in time use over the last 20 years.12 We also find that differences in social attitudes by political
ideology and income have increased since the 1970s. Finally, whites and non-whites have converged
somewhat on social attitudes but have diverged in consumer behavior. Nevertheless, our headline
result is that for all other demographic divisions and cultural dimensions, cultural distance has
been broadly constant over time.13
    Two papers closest to ours are Alesina et al. (2017) and contemporaneous work by Desmet and
Wacziarg (2018). Alesina et al. (2017) employ the European Value Survey and the General Social
Survey (GSS) and find that, from the early 1980s to 2010, cultural differences across countries in
the EU and across nine large American states have somewhat increased. Desmet and Wacziarg
(2018) define cultural distance between two groups as the share of total heterogeneity in responses
to questions in the GSS that is not attributable to within-group heterogeneity. They examine
eleven demographic divisions, including our five, and also report that cultural distances have been
“remarkably” stable over time. Their results do somewhat contrast with ours as we find steady
cultural divergences in social attitudes based on political ideology and income.14 In contrast to
both Alesina et al. (2017) and Desmet and Wacziarg (2018), we examine other dimensions of
culture besides social attitudes, namely media consumption, consumer behavior, and time use.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We briefly describe our datasets in Section 2.
Section 3 lays out our empirical strategy and provides a discussion of our definition of cultural
distance. The main results are reported in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.




   12
      Both of the aforementioned patterns also hold if we only examine how men and women spend their time when
they are not at work.
   13
      The results are broadly the same if instead of our machine learning approach, we measure cultural distance
simply as the Euclidean distance between average responses across groups (cf: Figure A.7).
   14
      The difference in our findings is presumably due to our different definitions of cultural distance. The most
important way in which our approaches differ is that Desmet and Wacziarg (2018) ignore correlation in answers
across different questions in the GSS, but there are other differences as well. Suppose there are four equally sized
groups, A, B, A’, and B’, who are asked a single binary question. Suppose the share of the individuals giving a specific
response to this question is 0, 5%, 10%, and 20% in the four groups, respectively. Our notion of cultural distance
would indicate that groups A and B are closer together than groups A’ and B’, whereas Desmet and Wacziarg (2018)
would say that A and B exhibit a greater cultural distance than A’ and B’. More generally, their definition allows for
substantial cultural distance to be driven by arbitrarily rare behaviors, whereas our inference approach does not.


                                                           5
2        Short data description

In this section, we provide a short description of the data that we utilize. The Data Appendix
provides a more detailed description of our variables and sample construction. All of our datasets
study individuals in the United States.
     Mediamark Research Intelligence (MRI) data contains two questionnaires conducted each year
between 1992 and 2016.15 Demographic information (including household income) and some data
pertaining to media exposure is obtained in a personal, face-to-face interview. The second ques-
tionnaire is left to be completed by the “principal shopper” of the household. This questionnaire
asks whether the household has purchased, used, or owns a number of brands and products and
services. It also solicits data on which magazines the respondent reads and which TV shows and
recently released movies the respondent has seen. For our media consumption analysis, we use
871 to 1,186 binary (yes/no) answers about consumption of magazines, TV shows, and movies.16
An example of a variable about media consumption is “Have you seen the movie Birdman in the
last 6 months?” For our consumer behavior analysis, we use 7,130 to 9,385 variables on brands
and products or services used, purchased or owned. Variables include questions such as “Has your
household used Grey Poupon Dijon mustard in the last six months?”, “Have you personally used a
lipstick in the last six months?”, “Do you own a dishwasher?”, and “Have you personally used dry
cleaning services in the last six months?”17 For ease of exposition, from here on we will use the
word ‘product’ to refer to ‘products and services.’ We restrict attention to respondents who are
between 20 and 64 years old.18 The sample size of the the MRI annual sample ranges from 15,352
to 22,033.19
    15
      Not all of the variables are available in every year. For example, we use data on magazines from 1992 to 2011,
data on TV shows from 1992 to 2016, and data on movies from 1998 to 2016. That means that when we report
trends in cultural distance based on overall media consumption, we restrict our attention to years when all three of
these subcomponents are available, namely 1998 to 2011.
   16
      The MRI also asks questions about listening to radio and reading newspapers, but its coverage is too sparse to
be useful for our purposes.
   17
      As we discuss in greater length in next section, differences in how the rich and poor answer some of these
questions (such as, “Do you own a dishwasher?”) surely reflect the way that income affects budget sets rather than
some notion of “cultural distance”. We acknowledge the important distinction between income-constrained variables
(such as the dishwasher one) and income-unconstrained ones (such as did you watch this movie or that one).
   18
      The MRI only captures age by 5 year-brackets.
   19
      An alternative dataset to MRI to predict group membership based on consumer behavior is the Kilts-Nielsen
Consumer Panel data (see https://research.chicagobooth.edu/nielsen). The Nielsen data tracks households’ shopping
behavior by asking participating households to scan the barcode of each purchased good after a shopping trip (using
a scanning device provided by Nielsen). Nielsen differs from MRI in that it only covers products bought, not those
used or owned; MRI also includes a broader set of products and services without barcode. The main disadvantage of
Nielsen over MRI for our purpose is a shorter time series: the Nielsen data only starts in 2004. Also, the Nielsen data
has income brackets that are too broad to be able to identify top and bottom quartile of the income distribution.
Furthermore, the Nielsen data does not include information on political ideology. Figures A.8, A.9, A.10 compare


                                                          6
    To measure time use, we use the American Heritage Time Use Study (AHTUS). The AHTUS
is a harmonized collection of diary data on time use in the US from 1965 to 2012. For the early
years, the AHTUS covers roughly one year per decade, but since 2003 it includes annual surveys
conducted by BLS.20 Our harmonized data consists of 78 variables that indicate time spent on a
specific activity (e.g., gardening), and we also include 8 aggregate activities (e.g., non-market work)
from Aguiar and Hurst (2009). We restrict our sample to individuals who are between 18 and 64
years old and are employed full time. The sample size ranges across years from 669 to 10,210.
    We use the General Social Survey (GSS) as our source of data on social attitudes. The GSS
has been conducted annually since 1972. It collects stated attitudes on topics such as civil liberties,
government policies, and morality. An example question is, “Are we spending too much, too little,
or about the right amount on foreign aid?” The GSS also asks some questions about behavior, such
as whether the respondent voted in the most recent Presidential election, which we also include in
our analysis. We exclude questions about the respondent’s assessment of his or her own financial
situation.21 There are many questions that the GSS asks only intermittently, so we drop some years
in order to have a larger number of questions which are asked in every year we consider. This leaves
us with 84 questions and 18 interspersed years between 1976 and 2016. The GSS often presents a
given question to only two thirds of the survey participants. We impute the missing values for the
remaining third based on the marginal distribution of responses in a given group.22 We restrict
attention to respondents who are between 18 and 64 years old. The sample size of the GSS annual
samples ranges from 1,093 to 3,735.




predictability of respondents’ education, gender and race based on consumer behavior in the MRI and Nielsen data.
Note that we restrict the analysis in these figures to single individuals, given Nielsen’s focus on the household and
MRI’s focus on the “principal shopper.” The results for education and race are comparable across both datasets over
the overlapping years. As we discuss in Section 4.3.2, our empirical approach to measuring trends in cultural distance
is not suitable for comparing consumer behavior of men and women in the MRI since we can perfectly predict group
membership in this case. We do not reach this upper bound in the Nielsen data, where we observe convergence
between men and women in consumer behavior. See also footnote 50.
    20
       The AHTUS lacks information on household income in 1985, 1993, and 1995, so we drop those years from our
analysis of cultural distance by income.
    21
       When we examine cultural distance in social attitudes by ideology, we also exclude questions that directly pertain
to ideology, namely political party affiliation and how the respondent voted in a presidential election.
    22
       So when we measure cultural distance by income, we impute the missing data based on the distribution of
responses by the rich and the poor, whereas when we measure cultural distance by education, we impute the missing
data based on the distribution of responses by the more and less educated, etc.


                                                           7
3        Empirical approach

3.1      Compositional changes

Our definition of each group allows for the demographic composition of the groups to change over
time. For example, in the early 1970s, less than 10% of either the rich or the poor were Hispanic,
but these days Hispanic individuals constitute 10% of the rich and 30% of the poor. Consequently,
if Hispanic individuals are culturally distinct, this compositional change could lead to an increase
in cultural distance between the rich and the poor. The same issue applies to other groups and
other demographic characteristics. The share of people who are in our “more educated” group grows
steadily over time and includes an ever-rising share of women. Figure A.11 in the Online Appendix
reports compositional changes in each of our groups. In general, trends in cultural distance that
are due to such compositional changes are something that we wish to capture rather than control
for.23


3.2      Predictability as a measure of cultural distance

In any given year, we say that two groups are further apart in their media consumption (or consumer
behavior or time use or social attitudes) if we can predict more accurately which of the two groups
a given individual belongs to based on his or her media consumption (or consumer behavior or time
use or social attitudes). This approach follows Gentzkow et al. (2017), who measure partisanship
of congressional speech by the ease with which one can infer a congressperson’s party from his or
her speech.
     Given some outcome space X, one could define the distance between two disjoint groups A and
B based on any metric d on ∆ (X) by letting the distance between the groups be equal to d (µA , µB ),
where µA is the distribution of X in group A and µB is the distribution of X in group B.24 Our
predictability-based measure of distance implicitly sets d to be the total variation metric.25

    23
      One exception may be the change in the age distribution of the rich and the poor. To the extent that trends in
cultural distance are driven or hidden by the changes in the relative age between the rich and the poor, we may want to
take those changes out, especially if we think that lifetime rather than contemporaneous income is a more meaningful
way of defining who is rich and who is poor. In Figure A.12 in the Online Appendix, we define an individual as
rich (poor) if he or she is in a household that is in the top (bottom) quartile, in terms of household income, among
individuals in the same 5-year age bracket. We do not use information on household type (cf: discussion of household
types in Section 4.1) since we do not have sufficient sample sizes to construct our groups based on both the age
bracket and the household type. As seen in the figure, the results are mainly unaffected.
   24
      In our setting, X would be the set of all possible vectors of answers to questions about media consumption (or
consumer behavior or time use or social attitudes).
   25
      If A and B are equally sized (as they are by construction in our approach), the ability to predict whether a
person belongs to A or B is equal to 12 + 12 dT V (µA , µB ), where dT V denotes the total variation metric (cf: proof of


                                                           8
    This measure has several features that are worth noting. First, the measure takes no stance on
which elements of X are close to another.26 Suppose X consists of four elements: vodka, Sprite,
7 Up, and water. Suppose there are three equally-sized groups: in group A, 80% of people drink
vodka and 20% drink water; in group B, 80% drink Sprite and 20% drink water; in group C, 80%
drink 7 Up and 20% drink water. Our approach would say that the cultural distance between
A and B is the same as the cultural distance between B and C, despite the fact that one might
argue that B and C are closer since Sprite and 7 Up are more similar to each other than either
is to vodka. Second, our measure of cultural distance has an upper bound that is achieved when
one can perfectly predict group membership. Consequently, if some subset of variables is always
sufficient to reach the upper bound, we would not be able to detect any changes in how similar
the groups are on variables outside of that set. This turns out not to be an issue, however, since
we are always far from the upper bound, except in the case of predicting gender using consumer
behavior.27 Third, a nice feature of our measure is that its units are easily interpretable. Contrast
this with a measure that uses normalized Euclidean distance between µA and µB as the notion of
cultural distance. Formally, letting µxG denote the share
                                                      qP
                                                          of individuals in group G with outcome x,
                                                                 x  x 2
                                                          x∈X (µA −µB )
we could measure the distance between A and B by              |X|       . In Figure A.7 in the Online
Appendix, we replicate our results using this measure and find qualitatively similar patterns, but
with units of cultural distances that are harder to interpret.28
    Finally, note that our predictability-based approach does not allow us to aggregate across cul-
tural dimensions that are not measured in the same dataset. For example, since we do not know
the joint distribution of attitudes, time use, and income, we do not know how well one could predict
income with both attitudes and time use. We do have data on media use and consumer behavior in
the same dataset, so in Figure A.13 in the Online Appendix we report cultural distance over time
for these two aggregated dimensions. Again, we find no trends over time.29




Claim 3.30 in Mossel et al. 2014).
   26
      Formally, this is related to the fact that total variation (unlike say the Prokhorov metric) does not require X to
be a metric space itself.
   27
      Thus, despite panel (c) in Figure 1, it is possible that men and women have become more or less similar over
time in some aspects of their consumption patterns.
   28
      The memetic fractionalization approach by Desmet and Wacziarg (2018) also has interpretable units. In footnote
14 we discuss some differences between our approaches.
   29
      If distance is measured based on the normalized Euclidean distance between µA and µB , it is possible to aggregate
across datasets. The overall trend in cultural distance is then just the (weighted) average of the trends depicted in
Figure A.7.


                                                           9
3.3     Machine learning

We use a machine-learning ensemble method to determine how predictable group membership is
from the variables in each dataset (i.e., time use, social attitudes, media consumption, and consumer
behavior) in each year. The ensemble method consists of running separate prediction algorithms
(we employ elastic net, regression tree, and random forest) and then combining the predictions of
these algorithms with weights chosen by OLS (Mullainathan and Spiess 2017). For each dataset,
year, and group division (e.g., time use data by gender in 2010), we first split the dataset into a
training sample (70% of the data) and a hold-out sample (30% of the data). We empirically tune
each algorithm on the training sample by cross-validation. In particular, we partition the training
data into five folds. For a given fold, we fit the algorithm on the other folds for every value of
the tuning parameter. Through this process, we obtain a prediction (e.g., probability that the
respondent is a woman) for every observation in the training sample for every value of the tuning
parameter. We then average the squared-error loss function for each tuning parameter over the
full training sample and choose the tuning parameter that minimizes the loss. This gives us a
prediction for every observation in the training sample for each of the three algorithms. We regress
(using simple OLS) group membership on the three predictions (from the three algorithms) in the
full training sample. We use the coefficients from this regression to combine the three algorithms
into the ensemble prediction in the next step.
    We then turn to our hold-out sample. For each observation in the hold-out sample, we de-
rive the prediction of each algorithm using the model estimated in the training sample under the
optimal tuning parameter. We then compute the ensemble prediction for that observation using
the aforementioned OLS coefficients. We then guess a respondent’s group affiliation based on the
ensemble prediction: if the probability that a respondent is in a group is above 12 , we guess that
she is in that group; otherwise, we guess that she is in the other group. We define cultural distance
(for each dataset, year, and demographic category) as the predictability of the group membership,
i.e., the share of the guesses in the hold-out sample that are correct.              30




3.4     Data over time

We need to ensure that the “quality” of our datasets – in terms of number of observations and the
availability of relevant variables – is constant over time. Otherwise, our ability to predict group

   30
      All of our results about trends over time are the same if we use any one of the algorithms (elastic net, regression
tree, or random forest) rather than combining them into the ensemble prediction.


                                                           10
membership might change over time for reasons unrelated to any changes in cultural distance. The
solution to time-varying sample sizes is straightforward. For each dataset and demographic group,
we equalize the number of observations in each year and demographic group as follows. Denoting
by n the minimum sample size across years and groups (e.g., when computing the cultural distance
in time use by education, the smallest year-group are the less educated in 1965), we randomly
select n observations for every year-group. This yields a “balanced” dataset with the same number
of observations in each year and with half of the observations in each of the two groups. We then
compute the predictability of group membership – as described in the previous subsection – in this
balanced dataset. We repeat this procedure a number of times,31 drawing a new random sample
each time, and then we take the average predictability of group membership (averaged across the
draws) as our measure of cultural distance. Note that this means that the sample sizes reported in
Section 2 are larger than the balanced sample sizes that we use to make each prediction of group
membership.
    Another important consideration is related to the changes over time in the particular questions
asked to survey participants. When it comes to the GSS and AHTUS data, we insist on having
the same set of variables in each year. When it comes to the time use data, we think the set
of activities that people can spend their time on has not changed that much over time, with the
exception of spending time on a computer. Therefore, if the set of variables in the time use data
expanded over time, this would likely be a reflection of improvement in data collection rather
than a reflection of actual changes in the ways people are spending their time. Therefore, we use
the crosswalk provided by the University of Oxford Center for Time Use research32 to harmonize
time use variables across years.33 With regard to social attitudes, the GSS often asks a particular
question only intermittently, and we do not believe that this is a reflection of the fact that this
question was only relevant in the years the question was asked. Consequently, we limit the set of
GSS variables and years we use in a way that ensures that each variable is available in each year.34

  31
       In the GSS and the AHTUS, we take 500 draws. In the MRI, which has much larger sample sizes, we take only
25 draws for media consumption and only 5 draws for consumer behavior.
    32
       See https://www.timeuse.org/ahtus/documentation.
    33
       The AHTUS asks about computer use only after 1985. We impute zero computer use for all respondents prior to
1985. The AHTUS does not ask about smartphone usage. All activities related to the use of computer and internet
for leisure are aggregated under computer use.
    34
       In contrast to the time use data, we are less confident in our decision to harmonize the set of GSS questions
over time. It might very well be that the GSS changes questions it asks from one year to the next because the
set of most important societal issues is changing, in which case there might be some argument for embracing the
change in variables. Without a more specific model of how the GSS drafts their survey instrument each year, it is
difficult to sign the potential bias induced by our harmonization choice. For example, if the GSS drops questions
once everyone agrees on the answer and keeps only those questions where disagreement remains, our approach might


                                                        11
    When it comes to the MRI data, we embrace the variations in the set of questions asked over
time, both for media consumption and consumer behavior. Our understanding is that the MRI
seeks to include questions about all media items (magazines, TV shows, movies) and consumer
products that are relevant at the time. For example, each year the MRI asks respondents about
whether they had seen a number of newly released movies. While the number of movies that the
MRI asks about is reasonably constant, ranging from 83 to 97 across years, the set of movies they
ask about of course changes completely from year to year, reflecting the new releases. We assume
that the changes in the variables about TV shows, magazines, products, and brands similarly reflect
real changes in consumers’ choice sets. While this assumption surely does not hold perfectly – for
example, there is a big jump in the number of TV shows in the data in 2009 when the MRI added
cable shows to the survey – it provides the most natural approach for measuring cultural distance
when cultural elements are rapidly changing over time.


3.5    Confidence intervals

Throughout, we report our estimates of cultural distances without confidence intervals. One way
to approach inference in our setting would be via subsampling (e.g., Politis et al. 1999), but
our sample sizes are too small for the ensemble algorithm to perform well on partitioned data.
That said, the fact that our measure of cultural distance tends to be pretty similar across years
informally suggests that it is estimated reasonably precisely; otherwise, it would be highly unlikely
for the estimates to fall so close to one another. We have also confirmed that if we add to the data
a synthetically constructed variable whose correlation with group membership increases over time,
we indeed observe a growing cultural distance using our method.


4     Results

We organize the results by group divisions: income, education, gender, race, and political ideology.
For each group division, after a discussion of the overall patterns, we dive in greater detail into the
four broad cultural components. For the media, we investigate the separate cultural influences due
to TV watching, movie watching, and magazine readership. For consumption, we investigate the
separate roles of products vs. brands. For social attitudes, we consider the separate influence of
thematic sub-categories, such as views related to the role of government in society or views related
underestimate cultural convergence over time. Alternatively, if the GSS systematically adds questions that have
become more controversial, our approach might underestimate the increase in cultural distance over time.


                                                      12
to civil liberties. Throughout, we try to enrich the results with a discussion of specific cultural
traits that are most distinctive across groups at a given point in time. Rather than report every
possible result for every group, we highlight the data we find most informative in the text and
report the additional results in the Online Appendix.


4.1    Income

A vast literature in labor economics has documented the rise in income inequality in the US since
the late 1970s. While a large share of this literature in recent years has focused on “top income
inequality” (e.g., the share of total income going to the top 1 percent, or top 0.1 percent), it is
also well understood that technological change and global competitive pressures have contributed
to broader changes in income inequality across individuals and households (e.g., Autor et al. 2008,
Meyer and Sullivan 2017). The causes of the rise in income inequality are now reasonably well
understood, but the consequences are less clear. We are particularly interested in whether greater
income inequality has led to a greater cultural gap between the rich and the poor. Technological
change and a growing supply of goods and services also may have exacerbated or attenuated any
changes in the cultural gap between the rich and the poor.35 As discussed previously, increased
cultural distance between rich and poor could be particularly damaging to social mobility. A high-
income manager may promote the subordinate with whom she has the friendliest interactions around
the water cooler, and that favorite subordinate will likely come from a high-income background if
tastes, views, and experiences are sharply different between income classes.
    We define an individual as rich (poor) if he or she is in a household that is in the the top
(bottom) quartile of household income among households of the same type. We put households
into four types: (i) a single adult with no dependents, (ii) two adults with no dependents, (iii) a
single adult with dependent(s), and (iv) two adults with dependent(s).36,37 We use the Current
  35
      Jaravel (2017) documents that newly developed products in the US tend to target high-income households; this
force could create a new set of goods around which a “culture of being rich” could coalesce. At the same time, other
technological developments, such as certain forms of social media, could lead to cultural convergence between income
groups by providing inexpensive goods that appeal to individuals of all income levels.
   36
      We define a household as having dependents if there are children under 18 or if the household has more than two
adults. This may induce some measurement error, as we would code three roommates as two adults with a dependent
and a single adult taking care of a parent or a sibling as two adults with no dependents.
   37
      An alternative to this approach would be to use an equivalence scale to adjust for the size and the composition
of the household. The downside of the alternative approach is that all standard scales (per-capita income, the Oxford
scale, the OECD-modified scale, and the square root scale) systematically label households with (more) children as
more likely to be poor. Consequently, the ability to predict household income then primarily stems from the ability to
predict whether there is a child in the household: tell-tale signs of “being poor” are watching SpongeBob SquarePants
or buying children’s medications. Under our preferred approach, there is by construction no relationship between
poverty and the presence of children, and the relationship between poverty and the number of children is weaker.


                                                         13
Population Survey to identify the distribution of household income for each household type in each
year. We focus on the top and the bottom quartile (as opposed to, say, the top and the bottom
half or the top and the bottom decile) to balance a desire to make the rich and the poor as different
in their income as possible and the pragmatic need to keep our sample sizes sufficiently large.38
Given our definition of rich and poor and our procedure for equalizing sample sizes described in
Section 3.4, each prediction of income in a given year is based on 6,394 observations in the MRI,
398 observations in the GSS, and 418 observations in the AHTUS.
    We also consider alternative definitions of rich and poor, comparing (i) top half vs. bottom half,
(ii) top quartile vs. everyone else, and (iii) bottom quartile vs. everyone else. Under all of these
alternative definitions, our qualitative results remain the same (cf: Figure A.15). Throughout the
analysis, we use contemporaneous income rather than wealth or lifetime income. While the latter
two measures might seem more closely related to what it means to be rich or poor, we do not have
data on wealth or lifetime income.
    Panel (a) of Figure 1 summarizes our results. There is no evidence of an increasing cultural
gap between the rich and the poor based on media consumption, consumer behavior, or time use.
The patterns regarding media and consumer behavior, where our sample size is the largest, show
that cultural distance is essentially the same in each year. Knowing what TV shows and movies
someone watches and what magazines a person reads allows us to correctly predict the person’s
income group about 80 percent of the time. Knowing what goods and services a person buys,
including particular brands, allows us to correctly predict the person’s income group between 85
to 89 percent of the time, with no apparent time trend. The gap in how rich and poor spend their
time has also been constant; the ability to guess income from time use has been around 60 percent
since 1965. We do observe some divergence of attitudes between income groups, mostly between
the mid 1970s and the late 1980s; while there have been some year-to-year fluctuations since then,
there is no discernible trend over the last quarter-century.


Moreover, if we ignore household types and define rich (poor) as the top (bottom) quartile of household income
divided by the square root of the household size, we observe the same temporal trends in cultural distances between
the rich and the poor (cf: Figure A.14).
   38
      As income variables available in the GSS, the AHTUS, and the MRI are income brackets, the top and bottom
income quartiles obtained from the CPS most often occur within an income bracket rather than at the boundary.
Consequently, using income brackets to define top and bottom income quartiles results in some miscategorization.
We classify respondents into the top and bottom quartiles to minimize miscategorization (please refer to our Data
Appendix for details). The share of miscategorization never exceeds 5 percent, and the extent of miscategorization
does not explain almost any of the variance in measured cultural distance. Specifically, if we regress measured cultural
distance on a linear time trend and the dummy for the cultural dimension (media consumption, consumer behavior,
attitudes, and time use), adding the extent of mismeasurement increases R2 from 0.389 to 0.390.


                                                          14
                   Figure 2: Cultural distance by income over time: media consumption
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size each year is 6,394. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction
and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s
income in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess income in the hold-out sample was repeated 25 times, and
the share of guesses reported is the average of these 25 iterations.



4.1.1     Media Consumption

Figure 2 shows how well one can predict income group over time based on the three separate
components of media consumption: TV programs, movies, and magazine readership. For reference,
we also again report predictability of income based on media consumption overall.
    Figure 2 reveals that there has been no divergence between the rich and the poor in any of
the sub-components of media consumption. These groups watch different TV shows and different
movies and read different magazines, but the extent of that difference has been nearly constant
across the last quarter-century. We also see that income differences in consumption of magazines
and TV shows is somewhat greater than the difference in consumption of movies.39
    It is particularly interesting that predictability of income based on TV shows has been constant
over time given that there have been substantial changes both in the number of TV shows available
and the number of TV shows watched in each income group.40 As we discussed in the introduction,

   39
      This comparison is more meaningful than comparing, say, the cultural distance in TV watching with cultural
distance in time use, since those are measured in datasets with very different sample sizes. Of course, even with equal
sample sizes, there are important differences in measurement across cultural dimensions. As shown in Figure A.17
in the Online Appendix, the average number of TV shows watched is between 20 and 30 (and similar across income
groups), while the average number of movies watched is less than 10 (also similar across income groups).
   40
      Figure A.16 plots the number of TV shows in the data over time. Figure A.17 shows the average number of


                                                               15
there is no mechanical reason that necessitates a relationship between the number of options and
the size of the cultural gap, but it is nonetheless striking that the cultural gap has been constant
even as the number of options has changed substantially.
    Of course, the fact that cultural distance in media consumption has been constant over time
does not imply that the particular magazines, TV shows, and movies that drive this distance have
been the same from year to year. This is most obvious in the case of movies where each year brings
a crop of new releases. Panels (a), (b), and (c) of Table 1 report, respectively, the ten movies,
TV shows, and magazines that are individually most informative of income. We do this for three
separate years spanning the beginning, the middle, and the end of each dataset. Consider movies
for example (Panel (b)). If we could ask a person a single question of the form “Did you see movie
X” and then guess, based on the answer, whether the person is rich or poor, the best question to ask
in 1998 would be “Did you see Jerry Maguire”? Since 35% of rich people and 18% of poor people
saw that movie, guessing the person is rich if and only if they say they saw the movie would lead
us to guess correctly 57% of the time.41 All of the ten most informative movies in 1998 are movies
that are distinctly rich-people movies. By contrast, the three most informative movies in 2007 are
movies whose audiences are distinctly poor. As shown in Panel (a), even though cultural distance
in TV consumption has been constant, the specific TV content that is most predictive of income
has changed over time. In 1992, watching car racing, bicycle racing, and figure skating – and not
watching Roseanne – are most indicative of being rich; in 2004, watching football and tennis – and
not watching Cops – are most indicative of being rich. Panel (c) reveals more stability in the list
of magazines whose readership is most indicative of income group. While the rank ordering varies
somewhat, the top three magazines are the same: Newsweek, Consumer Reports, and Time.




TV shows watched. The jump in 2009 reflects the addition of cable shows to the data. The secular decrease in the
average number of shows watched probably means that consumers increasingly watch a few shows devotedly rather
than watching many shows occasionally; the time use data shows an increase rather than a decrease in the total
amount of time spent watching television from 1998 to 2012.
   41
      It does not matter whether we compute the likelihood of a correct guess using Bayes’ rule or estimate the
frequency of each binary answer in a training sample and then report the share of correct guesses in a hold-out
sample since the sampling variation in the share of people in each group who answer a question a particular way
is negligible. For the Jerry Maguire question, for example, the probability that the person is rich conditional on
                       0.35
seeing the movie is 0.35+0.18 = 0.66. The probability that the person is poor conditional on not seeing the movie is
   0.72
0.72+0.65
          =  0.53. Guessing  that the person is rich in the case they have seen the movie and guessing that they are
poor otherwise leads us to guess correctly 57% of the time.


                                                        16
           Table 1: TV shows, movies, and magazines most indicative of being high-income
                                                                   Panel (a) TV shows

                         1992                                                   2004                                            2016

 Watched Autoworks 200                         57.3%   Watched Super Bowl                         58.5%    Watched Super Bowl                 57.1%

 Watched Busch Clash                           57.1%   Watched NFL Monday Night Football          56.1%    Watched Love It Or List It         55.9%

 Watched Tour du Pont                          56.7%   Watched NFL Regular Season Football        55.9%    Watched Property Brothers          55.7%

 Watched US Figure Skating Championship        56.6%   Watched NFL Regular Season Games           55.8%    Watched House Hunters              55.5%

 Watched Michigan 500                          56.2%   Watched US Open                            54.9%    Watched Academy Awards             55.3%

 Didn’t watch Roseanne                         55.8%   Watched College Football Regular Season    54.9%    Watched NCAA Men’s Final Four      55.9%

 Didn’t watch Sunday Night Movie               55.8%   Didn’t watch Cops                          54.8%    Watched Flip or Flop               54.9%

 Watched Miller Genuine Draft 200              55.7%   Watched Academy Awards                     54.7%    Watched The Masters                54.8%

 Watched Indianapolis 500                      55.5%   Watched Wimbledon                          54.7%    Watched SNL Specials               54.3%

 Watched Fedex St. Jude Classic                55.4%   Watched NCAA Men’s Basketball              54.9%    Watched Grammy Awards              53.9%

                                                                       Panel (b) Movies

                    1998                                                 2007                                                   2016

 Watched Jerry Maguire                 57.3%     Didn’t watch Big Momma’s House               54.0%    Watched Gone Girl                           54.2%

 Watched First Wive’s Club             55.1%     Didn’t watch Final Destination 3             53.5%    Watched The Hunger Games                    52.7%

 Watched The English Patient           54.7%     Didn’t watch Saw II                          53.5%    Didn’t watch Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles   52.7%

 Watched Air Force One                 53.8%     Watched The Devil Wears Prada                53.1%    Watched Interstellar                        52.3%

 Watched Michael                       53.5%     Watched Walk the Line                        53.0%    Didn’t watch Annabelle                      52.3%

 Watched My Best Friend’s Wedding      52.6%     Watched Pirates Of The Caribbean 2           52.6%    Didn’t watch No Good Deed                   52.1%

 Watched The Chamber                   52.4%     Watched The Da Vinci Code                    52.4%    Didn’t watch Oujia                          52.0%

 Watched Evita                         52.4%     Watched Syrianna                             52.3%    Didn’t watch Let’s Be Cops                  51.9%

 Watched Ransom                        52.4%     Didn’t watch The Exorcism Of Emily Rose      52.2%    Watched The Theory Of Everything            51.6%

 Watched One Fine Day                  52.2%     Watched Brokeback Mountain                   52.2%    Watched Kingsman                            51.4%

                                                             Panel (c) Magazines

                                1992                                     2002                                   2011

          Read Newsweek                    61.2%       Read Newsweek                      60.2%   Read Consumer Reports       57.9%

          Read Consumer Reports            60.0%       Read Time                          59.6%   Read Newsweek               57.5%

          Read Time                        59.8%       Read Consumer Reports              58.5%   Read Time                   56.7%

          Read Business Week               59.1%       Read Business Week                 57.4%   Read People                 56.7%

          Read US News & World Report      58.7%       Read US News & World Report        57.2%   Read Sports Illustrated     55.8%

          Read Parade                      58.4%       Read Money                         57.0%   Read Men’s Health           54.8%

          Read Money                       58.1%       Read Forbes                        56.9%   Read Travel & Leisure       54.8%

          Read National Geographic         57.4%       Read Fortune                       56.8%   Read Forbes                 54.7%

          Read Forbes                      57.1%       Read Architectural Digest          55.7%   Read Economist              54.6%

          Read Fortune                     57.0%       Read People                        55.5%   Read Real Simple            54.6%
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size in all panels is 6,394. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most
indicative of being rich in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is rich or
poor based on the answer to the question. For example, in 1992, knowing whether a person watched Autoworks 200 allows us
to guess income correctly 57.3% of the time, whereas knowing whether a person watched Roseanne allows us to guess income
correctly 55.8% of the time. An affirmative answer to “Did you watch Autoworks 200 ?” and a negative answer to “Did you
watch Roseanne?” indicate that the person is rich.




                                                                       17
                   Figure 3: Cultural distance by income over time: consumer behavior
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size each year is 6,394. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction
and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s
income in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess income in the hold-out sample was repeated 5 times, and the
share of guesses reported is the average of these 5 iterations.



4.1.2     Consumer Behavior

Figure 3 reports the predictability of income over time separately based on products and brands
individuals report buying or owning. We also again report the predictability of income based on
the entire consumer behavior data as a benchmark.
    We see that the flat trend line previously reported for consumer behavior extends to these two
subsets of the consumer data: the probability of correctly guessing someone’s income based on the
products or brands consumed is essentially the same over the quarter-century of available data.
Products and brands consumed have very comparable predictive power. Moreover, the aggregation
of the product and brand features does not not change much the predictive power of the model
compared to using products or brands separately.
    Panels (a) and (b) of Table 2 show the variables over time in the product and brand data
respectively that are individually most indicative of income group. As in the previous subsection,
the fact that cultural distance has not changed over time does not imply that the same features
distinguish income groups in each year. Consider panel (a) first. Household goods dominate the
1992 list: owning a dishwasher, a garage door opener, a fireplace, and a telephone answering
machine separate rich and poor. Household goods are again present in the 2004 list (dishwasher,

                                                                  18
                     Table 2: Products and brands most indicative of being high-income
                                                                Panel (a) Products

                       1992                                             2004                                            2016

 Own an automatic dishwasher              71.4%      Bought a new vehicle                   73.6%   Traveled in the continental US       70.9%

 Used dishwasher detergent                70.2%      Used a dishwasher detergent            71.6%   Own a passport                       70.3%

 Traveled domestically                    67.0%      Own a dishwasher                       70.8%   Own Bluetooth on vehicle             70.2%

 Own a garage door opener                 65.8%      Traveled domestically                  70.5%   Own heated/cooled seat on vehicle    69.9%

 Own a fireplace                          65.4%      Own a stereo on vehicle                69.7%   Used dishwasher detergent            69.3%

 Own a telephone answering machine        65.3%      Belong to a frequent flier club        69.0%   Own a dishwasher                     69.1%

 Used dry cleaning services               65.2%      Own a personal computer                68.5%   Belong to a frequent flier club      68.6%

 Used overnight delibery services         64.3%      Own an air bag on passenger side       68.5%   Traveled outside of continental US   67.7%

 Own a garbage disposer                   64.1%      Ordered any item by the Internet       68.4%   Ordered an item by Internet          67.4%

 Traveled internationally                 64.1%      Own a garage door opener               67.6%   Ordered a plane ticket by Internet   67.3%

                                                                    Panel (b) Brands

                         1992                                                  2004                                             2016

 Used Grey Poupon Dijon (mustard)            62.2%      Used Land O’ Lakes Regular (butter)         59.2%    Own an Iphone                   69.1%

 Bought Kodak (film)                         61.6%      Used Kikkoman (soy sauce)                   58.7%    Own an Ipad                     66.9%

 Used Thomas (English muffin)                61.5%      Did not use BIC (lighter)                   58.7%    Used Verizon Wireless           61.0%

 Used Cascade - Lemon (dish. detergent)      59.0%      Used Reynold Wrap (aluminum foil)           58.5%    Own an Android phone            59.5%

 Used Scotch Magic (transparent tape)        58.7%      Used Bertolli (salad/cooking oil)           58.4%    Used Kikkoman (soy sauce)       59.0%

 Used Cut-Rite (waxed paper)                 57.7%      Used Scotch Magic (transparent tape)        58.4%    Own HP (printer/fax machine)    58.2%

 Used Philadelphia (cream cheese)            57.7%      Own Toshiba (TV set)                        58.3%    Used AT&T (cellular network)    58.1%

 Used Kikkoman (soy sauce)                   57.5%      Used AT&T (long distance call service)      57.5%    Own Samsung (TV set)            58.0%

 Used Hellmann’s (mayonnaise)                57.4%      Drank Diet Coke (diet cola)                 57.5%    Used Cascade Complete           57.6%

 Own Sylvania (TV set)                       57.4%      Used Kleenex Regular (facial tissue)        57.4%    Used Ziploc (plastic bag)       57.5%
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size in all panels is 6,394. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most
indicative of being rich in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is rich
or poor based on the answer to the question. For example, in 1992, knowing whether a person owns an automatic dishwasher
allows us to guess income correctly 71.4% of the time, whereas in 2004 knowing whether a person bought a BIC lighter allows us
to guess income correctly 58.7% of the time. An affirmative answer to “Do you own an automatic dishwasher?” and a negative
answer to “Did you buy BIC lighter?” indicate that the person is rich.




                                                                        19
personal computer) as are vehicle-related variables (new car, car stereo, airbags). While travel-
related experiences and services are already present in the list of most indicative variables in 1992
and 2004 (domestic and international travel, frequent flyer programs), these travel-related features
reach the top of the list in 2016. Half of the most indicative variables of top income in 2016 are
related to travel. Beyond this, ownership of car gadgets (bluetooth, heated seats) and dishwashers
remain important income class differentiators in 2016.
    The brand most predictive of top income in 1992 is Grey Poupon Dijon mustard.42 By 2004,
the brand most indicative of the rich is Land O’Lakes butter, followed by Kikkoman soy sauce.
By the end of the sample, ownership of Apple products (iPhone and iPad) tops the list. Knowing
whether someone owns an iPad in 2016 allows us to guess correctly whether the person is in the
top or bottom income quartile 69 percent of the time. Across all years in our data, no individual
brand is as predictive of being high-income as owning an Apple iPhone in 2016.
    We of course acknowledge that some of the differences in consumer behavior between the rich
and the poor reflect differences in budgets rather than differences in anything that we should call
culture. Presumably, the poor do not own dishwashers because they cannot afford them (or have
no space for them) rather than because they have a cultural preference for washing dishes by hand.
That said, many of the brands that distinguish the rich and the poor, such as mustard or soy sauce,
may reflect cultural influence on food choices (cf. Atkin 2016). Also, the differences between the
rich and the poor in other dimensions of culture, such as media consumption and social attitudes,
probably primarily reflect choices rather than opportunities.


4.1.3    Time Use

As panel (a) of Figure 1 shows, the cultural distance in time use between the rich and the poor
has been largely constant since 1965. One may argue that there was a slight uptick in cultural
distance in 2003, but we urge caution in interpreting this apparent change since 2003 is precisely
the year when collection of time use data was taken over by BLS and, while the AHTUS attempts to
best harmonize over time the different time use data sources, it is possible that this uptick reflects

  42
     This fact is particularly interesting given the way Grey Poupon has been marketed. In the 1980s and early
1990s, the so-called “Pardon me” TV advertisements aired: a Rolls-Royce pulls up alongside another Rolls-Royce; a
passenger in the back seat of one asks a passenger in the back seat of the other: “Pardon me, would you have any
Grey Poupon?”; the other passenger responds, “But of course!” Since then, Grey Poupon has often been referenced
in hip-hop lyrics as a symbol of status. For example, FM Static has a song with a verse, “And if I had money, then
I’d only wear Sean John / Eat my cereal with Grey Poupon.” An analysis by vox.com indicates that almost every
year since 1992, at least one hip-hop song has been released referencing Grey Poupon. In 2011, 15 such songs were
released.


                                                       20
superior survey quality starting in 2003.
    As we already mentioned, we focus our analysis of time use on respondents who are employed
full-time, but even if we look at the full sample, we see no trends in cultural distance (cf: Fig-
ure A.18). In contrast to media consumption, consumer behavior, and social attitudes, it is less
straightforward to identify the individually most informative variables in time use. The problem is
that the small sample sizes coupled with a rich potential set of responses (in contrast to the binary
responses to questions about media, consumer behavior, and attitudes) drive a wedge between the
empirical and the true distribution of responses in a given group.43


4.1.4    Social Attitudes

As discussed above, information on how people answer questions in the GSS was increasingly
predictive of income groups until the mid-1980s but with little change for the last 30 years or so. To
better understand these patterns, we also consider trends in cultural distance based only on subsets
of questions in the GSS. In particular, we separate questions related to: law enforcement; marriage,
sex and abortion; life and trust; politics and religion; civil liberties; confidence; and government
spending. The Data Appendix reports the complete list of GSS questions included under each
theme. Table 3 reports cultural distance based on each of these subsets of GSS questions for the
years 1976, 1996, and 2016 (beginning, middle, and end of our sample). We report the full GSS
results at the top for reference. The last two columns of Table 3 report the coefficient (and the
t-statistic) from an estimate of a linear trend in cultural distance (based on that subset of questions)
using all years in the GSS. The topics are listed in order of decreasing estimate of the trend.
    Table 3 reveals that the rich and the poor have diverged the most in their attitudes toward law
enforcement. At the other extreme, there is no indication of any divergence based on confidence in
institutions or views about government spending. Table A.1 in the Online Appendix reports the
ten social attitudes that are single-handedly most predictive of being rich in 1976, 1996, and 2016.
The top of these lists is remarkably stable in each year: voting and trusting people are among the
three most individually predictive variables in all three years. Figure 4 presents a more systematic
analysis of stability of relative predictability over time. We rank order all of the variables based on
  43
     For example, in 1965, some poor respondents spent 5 hours a week on gardening, none spent 7 hours, but some
spent 9; among the rich respondents, some spent 5 hours on gardening, some spent 7, but none spent 9. It would
obviously be mistaken to conclude from this pattern of responses that anyone who spent 7 hours on gardening must
be rich while anyone who spent 9 hours on gardening must be poor. This issue is the primary problem tackled by
Gentzkow et al. (2017) in their analysis of polarization of political speech. We could follow their approach or other
methods for dealing with the finite sample bias here, but for ease of exposition we try to avoid customizing our
analyses for particular groups or dimensions of cultural distance.


                                                         21
                      Table 3: Cultural distance by income over time: social attitudes
                                                    1976      1996      2016      Coefficient    T-statistic
                              All GSS               70.4%     74.0%     76.8%        0.20           3.45
                         Law Enforcement            54.9%     54.9%     63.9%        0.35           3.79
                        Politics & Religion         63.9%     64.8%     67.4%        0.12           2.49
                            Life & Trust            61.2%     61.7%     64.9%        0.11           2.44
                     Marriage, Sex, Abortion        63.1%     60.2%     64.0%        0.10           1.36
                           Civil Liberties          62.9%     60.2%     59.4%        0.09           1.06
                            Confidence              57.7%     61.7%     56.1%        -0.07         -0.83
                      Government Spending           60.1%     59.5%     57.4%        -0.12         -2.45
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size in each year is 398. Rows 2 to 8 present the results of the machine-learning ensemble
method when performed only on the subset of GSS variables in that row. See Data Appendix for the list of GSS questions
included in each row. See text and Data Appendix for details on sample construction and implementation of the ensemble.
Columns 1 to 3 present the share of correct guesses of respondent’s income in the hold-out sample in 1976, 1996, and 2016.
The procedure to guess income in the hold-out sample was repeated 100 times. The remaining columns present results from
a univariate regression of the share of correct guesses between 1976 and 2016 on a linear year trend, including the estimated
coefficient on year (column 4) and the t-statistic associated with that estimated coefficient.



how informative they are about income in 1976. We use this ranking to determine each variable’s
vertical position throughout the graph. We then color-code the relative informativeness of each
variable in each year, with the most informative variables colored dark red, the least informative
ones dark blue, and lighter shades of red and blue in between. If the relative informativeness of
variables were perfectly stable, each horizontal line would be uniformly colored. Figure 4 reveals
that there are substantial changes in the relative importance of specific questions over time, but a
small set of highly predictive variables remain highly predictive each year.


4.2     Education

One concern about the classification of households into rich and poor based on income is that we
only observe current income, while permanent income might be far more relevant. In this section,
we analyze cultural divergence by education, which can be seen as a proxy for permanent income.
Examining cultural divergence across education groups is also informative because of the role that
education has played in the rise of income inequality (Katz and Murphy 1992). We classify people
as less educated if they have at most completed high school, and more educated otherwise.44,45
    Panel (b) of Figure 1 summarizes our results. In short, we find similar patterns as with income

   44
      Given this definition and sample size equalization over time, each prediction of education level in a given year is
based on 9,674 observations in the MRI, 652 observations in the GSS, and 524 observations in the AHTUS.
   45
      The definition of these two groups based on an absolute level of education means that we avoid the issue of
potential miscategorization discussed in footnote 38. The fact that we mostly observe similar temporal trends as with
income gives us confidence that our results on income were not compromised by miscategorization.


                                                               22
                      Figure 4: Stability over time of attitudes most indicative income
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size is 398. Variables are ranked from bottom to top throughout the graph by increasing
order of correctly guessing income in 1976 based on that variable only. Each variable’s relative informativeness in subsequent
years is color-coded, with the most informative variables in each year color-coded dark red and the least informative color-coded
dark blue, and lighter shades of red and blue in between. See Data Appendix for implementation details.




                                                              23
                 Figure 5: Cultural distance by education over time: media consumption
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size each year is 9,674. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction
and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s
education in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess education in the hold-out sample was repeated 25 times,
and the share of guesses reported is the average of these 25 iterations.



with the exception that we see no divergence in social attitudes. The ability to correctly guess
one’s education group based on social attitudes is essentially the same in 2016 as it was in 1976.
Because the results by education mostly match those by income, we do not go through all of them
in detail here. More generally, any result reported for some group but not for another in the body
of the paper is available in the Online Appendix.


4.2.1     Media Consumption

Figure 5 shows that the cultural distance in media consumption by education has been stable both
overall as well as based on any one of the three sub-categories of media (movies, TV shows, and
magazines).
    The figure also shows that we can predict education based on magazine readership about as well
as we can do with the full set of media consumption variables. Table A.2 reports the set of movies,
TV shows, and magazines most indicative of higher education. Magazines that are highly indicative
of being educated are stable over time, with Newsweek and Time topping the list throughout the
sample. Sports-related TV programs, while also indicative of education, appear less important than
they were for income. In 1994, Rescue 911 and Unresolved Mysteries were the two TV shows whose


                                                               24
                 Figure 6: Cultural distance by education over time: consumer behavior
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size each year is 9,674. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction
and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s
education in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess education in the hold-out sample was repeated 5 times,
and the share of guesses reported is the average of these 5 iterations.



viewership was most informative of someone education’s level, with not watching these shows being
indicative of being more educated. In 2005, watching the Super Bowl and not watching Cops were
the most indicative of being educated. By 2016, watching Love It or List It and Property Brothers,
both HGTV shows, were the most indicative of being educated.


4.2.2     Consumer Behavior

As indicated above, our ability to correctly guess one’s education based on consumer behavior has
remained mostly stable, with maybe a slight increase over time. This is also true when we attempt
to predict education using products and brands separately, as shown in Figure 6.
    Products and brands most indicative of having attended college are dominated by technological
goods (cf: Table A.3). The specific goods reflect waves of technological innovation with the more
educated separating themselves from the less educated by being earlier adopters of new technologies.
For example, personal computers and PC-related devices are more dominant in the early years, while
owning a tablet is most indicative of being educated in 2016. For brands, having bought Kodak
film, owning Windows XP, and owning an Apple iPhone are most informative about someone’s
education in 1994, 2005, and 2016, respectively. Across time, the consumption of travel-related


                                                               25
items also separate the more and the less educated.


4.2.3    Time Use

Aguiar and Hurst (2007) find that less-educated individuals have experienced greater increases in
leisure compared to their more-educated counterparts. Given this finding, it might seem surprising
that we do not see an increase in cultural differences in time use by education level. The mean
number of hours per week spent on leisure46 was indeed roughly the same for the two education
groups in 1975, but the less-educated were spending relatively more hours per week on leisure by
2003-2012. That said, the overall distribution of time spent on leisure for the two groups is very
similar, both in 1975 and 2003-2012 (cf: Figure A.19). There is substantial heterogeneity in the
amount of time spent on leisure within each group, and this heterogeneity is much greater than the
mean difference across groups. Moreover, as noted by Aguiar and Hurst (2007), the within-group
heterogeneity has also increased over time.47 Consequently, time use is no more informative about
education now than it was in the past.


4.2.4    Social Attitudes

While we saw some evidence of a growing divide between the rich and the less rich based on their
social views, we fail to detect any such time trend based on education. Table 4 shows that, just
as we observed for income groups, the more- and less-educated have been somewhat diverging over
time in their answers to questions related to law enforcement and life and trust. On the other hand,
it has become more difficult over time to tell the more- and less-educated apart based on views
towards government spending, confidence levels, and views on civil liberties. Aggregating across all
topics, the distance in social attitudes has been constant over time.


4.3     Gender

Much has changed for women over the last half century. Educationally, women turned an educa-
tional deficit relative to men into an educational surplus (Goldin et al. 2006). Women’s labor force
participation rate increased, though it seems to have reached a plateau in the mid-1990s; women’s


   46
      Leisure is defined as time spent watching TV, socializing, playing sports, reading, engaging in hobbies, sleeping,
eating, and engaging in personal care.
   47
      Aguiar and Hurst (2007) write: “We also document a significant dispersion of leisure within educational cate-
gories... while the growing leisure gap between educational groups is substantial, it is more than matched by the
growing within-group dispersion.”


                                                          26
                     Table 4: Culture distance by education over time: social attitudes
                                                    1976      1996      2016      Coefficient    T-statistic
                              All GSS               70.7%     70.2%     71.1%        0.03           0.59
                         Law Enforcement            57.4%     56.8%     59.9%        0.10           1.98
                            Life & Trust            60.7%     60.6%     62.2%        0.07           1.83
                        Politics & Religion         63.7%     61.6%     63.0%        0.03           0.77
                     Marriage, Sex, Abortion        64.8%     60.7%     61.8%        -0.07         -1.20
                           Civil Liberties          66.6%     63.5%     62.8%        -0.10         -1.78
                            Confidence              62.6%     58.8%     57.3%        -0.13         -2.31
                      Government Spending           62.1%     57.0%     57.1%        -0.17         -4.16
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size in each year is 652. Rows 2 to 8 present the results of the ensemble machine-learning
method when performed only on the subset of GSS variables in that row. See Data Appendix for the list of GSS questions
included in each row. See text and Data Appendix for details on sample construction and implementation of the ensemble.
Columns 1 to 3 present the share of correct guesses of respondent’s education in the hold-out sample in 1976, 1996, and 2016.
The procedure to guess education in the hold-out sample was repeated 100 times. The remaining columns present results from
a univariate regression of the share of correct guesses between 1976 and 2016 on a linear year trend, including the estimated
coefficient on year (column 4) and the t-statistic associated with that estimated coefficient.



labor market earnings converged towards those of men, but this convergence also appears to have
slowed down in the most recent decade (Bertrand 2018). While these well-established trends may
a priori suggest shrinking cultural divides between the genders, other forces may have pushed in
the other direction. First, women’s greater financial independence may have allowed them to also
achieve greater cultural independence from their husbands, with the goods, the experiences, and
the media they consume becoming more closely aligned with their own personal preferences. Simi-
larly, the decline in marriage and the rise in divorce may have contributed to a cultural divergence
between men and women as cultural choices became less likely to take place within the confines of
the couple. Moreover, as noted by Edlund and Pande (2002), changes in family structure may have
directly affected women’s social attitudes, by strengthening their redistributive preferences, support
for greater government spending, and overall support for more democratic political platforms.48
    Panel (c) of Figure 1 summarizes our results by gender.49 There is no evidence of an increasing
cultural gap between men and women based on media consumption or social attitudes. Our ability
to predict gender based on consumer behavior is nearly perfect in every period, so this is one
instance where our approach to measuring cultural distance is ill suited: the presence of a few
highly gender-specific goods masks any potential changes in the gender gap in consumption of
other goods. Finally, we see that men and women’s time use became much more similar from 1965

   48
     See also Montgomery and Stuart (1999) and Box-Steffensmeier, Boef, and Lin (2000).
   49
     Given sample size equalization over time, each prediction of gender in a given year is based on 15,036 observations
in the MRI, 1,000 observations in the GSS, and 668 observations in the AHTUS.


                                                               27
                   Figure 7: Cultural distance by gender over time: media consumption
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size each year is 15,036. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction
and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s
gender in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess gender in the hold-out sample was repeated 25 times, and the
share of guesses reported is the average of these 25 iterations.



to the mid-1990s, but there has been no further change in this dimension of cultural distance since
the mid-1990s.


4.3.1     Media Consumption

Figure 7 shows that the cultural distance in media consumption by gender has been broadly stable
in all the three sub-categories of media, with perhaps some mild divergence in consumption of
magazines and mild convergence in consumption of TV shows. The figure also reveals that magazine
readership is most informative about gender, with limited gains in predictive power coming from
adding data on TV shows and movies to the ensemble algorithm.
    Table A.5 in the Online Appendix shows the movies that men and women sort on. Movies
most indicative of males tend to fall into the action, thriller, and sci-fi categories while dramas
and romantic comedies are most indicative of females. Table A.5 also reveals that in the early
years, the most discriminating movies were those watched primarily by women; in 1998, each of
the top ten most predictive movies was more likely to be watched by a woman. In the later years,
gender-specific movies are mostly those watched primarily by men. Yet, despite these changes, the
overall difference in movie-watching by gender has been constant over time.


                                                                   28
                    Figure 8: Cultural distance by gender over time: consumer behavior
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size each year is 15,036. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction
and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s
gender in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess gender in the hold-out sample was repeated 5 times, and the
share of guesses reported is the average of these 5 iterations.



    Table A.5 also shows that, unsurprisingly, fashion and housekeeping magazines are the most
distinctive of a female reader, while Sports Illustrated is the most distinctive of a male reader. In
television, most indicative of a male viewer in all years is watching college and professional American
football, with nearly all TV shows predictive of gender in early and middle parts of the sample
being football-related. Creeping into the list of the top TV shows most indicative of gender in the
final survey year (2016) are 3 HGTV shows, which are disproportionately watched by women.


4.3.2       Consumer Behavior

As indicated above, our approach to measuring cultural distance is not suitable for comparing
consumer behavior of men and women since there are some highly gender-specific products that
collectively allow us to perfectly predict gender based on consumer behavior in every year.
    Table A.6 in the Online Appendix lists the products and brands that are individually most
indicative of gender. In particular, the consumption of personal care and makeup is so common
and so segmented by gender that knowing whether one bought, used, or own these products provides
sufficient information to infer gender nearly perfectly.50

   50
        We could throw out some “overly gender-specific” products from our data and measure the predictability of the


                                                                  29
4.3.3    Time Use

The changes we observe over time in the differences between how men and women spend their time
are most striking. The time pattern we document in panel (c) of Figure 1 is reminiscent of the
well-known time series on women’s labor force participation in the US, with increases in women’s
labor force participation up until the mid-1990s and a subsequent plateau. However, recall that the
sample of men and women we study in the time use data is restricted to the full-time employed, so
the observed pattern cannot be due to changes in women’s likelihood of being employed. In fact,
we observe the same pattern if we predict gender based on shares of non-work time spent on various
non-work-related activities (cf: Figure A.20); ways that men and women spend their time outside
of work became more similar from 1965 to 1995, but this convergence has stopped since then. This
pattern also echoes the fact that attitudes toward gender roles became more egalitarian over time,
but this progress stalled in the mid-1990s (Fortin 2015).


4.3.4    Social Attitudes

As shown in panel (c) of Figure 1, we observe no time trend in one’s ability to predict gender based
on social views and norms.
    Table 5 examines cultural distance by gender based on the seven thematic subsets of GSS
questions. We observe only one topic for which the genders appear more divided today than in
the past, namely marriage, sex, and abortion. The one module over which men and women have
converged over time is views about life and trust. We observe no systematic time trend in cultural
distance for the other five themes covered in the GSS survey. The lack of divergence in views about
government spending and politics and religion stands in contrast with the work which has argued
that women have moved further over time to the political left of men (Edlund and Pande 2002).


4.4     Race

Our motivation for studying racial differences in culture over time is similar to our motivation for
studying differences in culture by income groups over time. Just as growing cultural gaps between


other variables but, as we discuss in footnote 43, for ease of exposition we prefer not to customize our approach for
particular groups or dimensions of culture. In the Nielsen data, where we cannot perfectly predict gender based on
consumer behavior, we observe convergence over time in shopping behavior between men and women (see Figure A.9).
The main explanation for why we can perfectly predict gender in MRI but not Nielsen is because Nielsen collects
products and brands bought, not used or owned. For example, in 2004, 76% of women in MRI reported using lipstick
or lip gloss; in contrast, only 21% of women in Nielsen had bought lipstick.


                                                         30
                       Table 5: Culture distance by gender over time: social attitudes
                                                    1976      1996      2016      Coefficient    T-statistic
                              All GSS               72.8%     70.3%     69.3%        -0.08         -2.25
                     Marriage, Sex, Abortion        57.8%     60.4%     61.7%        0.09           2.61
                         Law Enforcement            57.8%     63.6%     57.8%        0.04           0.73
                            Confidence              55.3%     55.7%     56.4%        0.03           0.74
                        Politics & Religion         56.3%     52.0%     53.4%        -0.02         -0.71
                           Civil Liberties          53.2%     50.9%     51.3%        -0.01         -0.23
                      Government Spending           61.0%     56.4%     60.0%        -0.09         -1.89
                            Life & Trust            68.7%     64.6%     59.8%        -0.28         -7.17
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size in each year is 1,000. Rows 2 to 8 present the results of the ensemble machine-learning
method when performed only on the subset of GSS variables in that row. See Data Appendix for the list of GSS questions
included in each row. See text and Data Appendix for details on sample construction and implementation of the ensemble.
Columns 1 to 3 present the share of correct guesses of respondent’s gender in the hold-out sample in 1976, 1996, and 2016.
The procedure to guess gender in the hold-out sample was repeated 100 times. The remaining columns present results from
a univariate regression of the share of correct guesses between 1976 and 2016 on a linear year trend, including the estimated
coefficient on year (column 4) and the t-statistic associated with that estimated coefficient.



rich and poor may hinder social mobility, a growing cultural divide between whites and non-whites
may cause continued economic struggles for minority groups in the US.
    Given our limited sample sizes, we are unable to conduct our analysis across many racial cat-
egories. Instead, we focus on comparison of whites and non-whites. Given this grouping and our
procedure for equalizing sample sizes described in Section 3.4, each prediction of race in a given
year is based on 4,150 observations in the MRI, 234 observations in the GSS, and 298 observations
in the AHTUS.
    There is a rich literature on cultural differences by race. Fryer and Levitt (2004) discuss some
of the prior work on the black-white cultural divide on dimensions such as musical tastes and
linguistic patterns. Fryer and Levitt (2004) also highlight anecdotal evidence of racial differences in
consumer behavior (e.g., the sharp racial differences in the popularity of different cigarette brands)
and media consumption (e.g., Seinfeld ’s huge following among whites and limited appeal among
blacks). However, a systematic documentation of changes over time in cultural differences by race
is missing. One important exception is Fryer and Levitt’s (2004) analysis of trends over time in the
names whites and blacks give to their children. They show that differences in name choices were
relatively small in the 1960s, but a profound shift took place in the early 1970s, especially among
blacks living in more racially segregated areas. In this section, we analyze whether such cultural
divergence also took place on other cultural dimensions, focusing on differences between whites and
all non-whites.



                                                               31
                     Figure 9: Cultural distance by race over time: media consumption
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size each year is 4,150. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction
and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s
race in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess race in the hold-out sample was repeated 25 times, and the share
of guesses reported is the average of these 25 iterations.



    Panel (d) of Figure 1 summarizes our results. With the exception of an outlier data point in 1975,
there is no apparent trend in our ability to predict one’s race based on time use. There is also no
evidence of growing racial cultural divides based on patterns of media consumption. Furthermore,
there is no evidence of any growing racial divides based on social attitudes; if anything, there has
been some weak convergence. The one dimension where we do observe increasing racial differences
is with respect to consumption choices, with much of the increase in the racial gap occurring during
the 1990s.


4.4.1     Media Consumption

Panel (a) of Figure 9 examines racial differences in consumption of the three media subcategories.
While there are no steep trends, the differences in consumption of magazines and movies seem to
have gotten somewhat smaller, while the differences in TV programs have increased.
    Unlike with the prior results (income, education, gender), in the case of race, the combination of
all data on media consumption substantially increases the predictive power of our model compared
to focusing on a subcategory (e.g., magazines).
    Looking at specific media products that are individually most predictive of race (cf: Table


                                                             32
A.8), a few patterns emerge. Thrillers and horror movies appear distinctively more popular among
non-whites than whites; a few movies also emerge that appear a priori targeted at a more black
audience (such as The Preacher’s Wife in 1998 or Big Momma’s House 2 in 2007). In contrast,
dramas appear distinctively more popular among whites. The same three magazines (Ebony, Jet,
Essence) are most indicative of race throughout our sample period. In contrast, the TV shows most
indicative of being white vary quite a lot over time. Some popular sitcoms clearly have differential
appeal across racial lines (e.g., In Living Color in 1992 was more popular among non-whites while
The Big Bang Theory in 2016 was more popular among whites). There is also evidence that whites
and non-whites sort into different sports on TV, with American football being more popular among
whites and basketball more popular among non-whites.


4.4.2    Consumer Behavior

As already indicated, we observe a growing divide between whites and non-whites in terms of
consumption choices. The probability of correctly guessing race from consumer behavior grows
from roughly 80 percent in 1992 to roughly 90 percent in 2016, with much of the increase taking
place during the 1990s and early 2000s. Figure 10 reports on these patterns when we restrict the
consumer data to only products or brands. These time series display the same patterns as the full
consumer behavior data, with increases in the probability of correctly guessing race concentrated
in the first half of the sample period.
    The list of products most indicative of being white (cf: Table A.9) is intriguing. A few common
items in each year (1992, 2004, and 2016) are pets and flashlights, with whites being distinctive
in owning those items.51 Other items on the list may be a reflection of the systematic income
differences between whites and non-whites, such as owning a dishwasher or having a car with cruise
control. It also appears that whites are substantially more invested into kitchen appliances than
non-whites.


4.4.3    Time Use

We do not see a clear trend in racial differences in time use, though the data show a blip in 1975.
We suspect this data point is an accidental outlier, but without a formal take on standard errors
(cf: Section 3.5), we cannot take a firm stance. If we restrict our attention to data since 2003,
  51
     Owning pets might simply reflect living in the suburbs; our data does not allow us to explore this. The MRI
provides information on whether the respondent lives in a large core-based statistical area, but does not indicate
whether the residence in an urban or a suburban area.


                                                       33
                    Figure 10: Cultural distance by race over time: consumer behavior
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size each year is 4,150. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction
and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s
race in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess race in the hold-out sample was repeated 5 times, and the share
of guesses reported is the average of these 5 iterations.



which gives us much larger sample sizes, we see a very stable difference in time use by race over
that decade (cf: Figure A.21).


4.4.4     Social Attitudes

Cultural distance in social attitudes by race shows slight convergence, with the probability of an
accurate guess decreasing from 80 percent to 75 percent over the 40 years of the data. This overall
pattern, however, masks some sharp differences in trends across sub-categories of the GSS.
    As shown in Table 6, whites and non-whites have grown apart on their views on law enforcement.
In 1976, one could correctly predict race based on these views 60 percent of the time but by 2016 that
number was up to 70 percent. On the other hand, whites and non-whites have sharply converged
in their views on life and trust, government spending, and politics and religion. For example, in
1976, one could correctly predict race based on views towards government spending 74 percent of
the time but by 2016 this number was down to 56 percent.




                                                             34
                               Table 6: Culture distance by race over time: GSS
                                                    1976      1996      2016      Coefficient   T-statistic
                              All GSS              80.5%     79.4%     74.8%        -0.14         -2.60
                         Law Enforcement           60.9%     65.4%     70.3%         0.25          5.19
                          Civil Liberties          50.4%     56.6%     55.3%         0.16          2.21
                     Marriage, Sex, Abortion       60.7%     58.1%     58.9%         0.05          0.76
                            Confidence             56.2%     58.5%     53.4%        -0.15         -2.42
                        Politics & Religion        73.0%     69.1%     61.5%        -0.23         -5.41
                      Government Spending          74.3%     71.8%     56.0%        -0.33         -3.94
                           Life & Trust            68.8%     61.7%     52.6%        -0.40         -6.53
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size in each year is 234. Rows 2 to 8 present the results of the ensemble machine-learning
method when performed only on the subset of GSS variables in that row. See Data Appendix for the list of GSS questions
included in each row. See text and Data Appendix for details on sample construction and implementation of the ensemble.
Columns 1 to 3 present the share of correct guesses of respondent’s race in the hold-out sample in 1976, 1996, and 2016. The
procedure to guess race in the hold-out sample was repeated 100 times. The remaining columns present results from a univariate
regression of the share of correct guesses between 1976 and 2016 on a linear year trend, including the estimated coefficient on
year (column 4) and the t-statistic associated with that estimated coefficient.



4.5      Political Ideology

Of all the cultural divides under study in this paper, the divide that separates Democrats from
Republicans, or liberals from conservatives, has received the most prior attention. A large literature
in political science documents the rising polarization of Democrats and Republicans in Congress,
and the discussions of political polarization is undoubtedly on the rise (Gentzkow 2016), but the
literature to date has been far less conclusive on whether Republicans and Democrats in the US
population overall have been growing apart. Most of the academic work has focused on differences in
social attitudes captured in the GSS or the ANES, with some studies concluding that polarization is
on the rise (e.g., Abramowitz and Saunders 2008; Draca and Schwarz 2018) and others rejecting this
conclusion (e.g., Fiorina and Abrams 2008; Glaeser and Ward 2006). Much of the disagreement
between these studies is ultimately driven by differences in how polarization is measured. We
contribute to this literature by examining what our definition of cultural distance implies for changes
in the attitude-differences between liberals and conservatives. Furthermore, we extend the literature
by also analyzing the divide between liberals and conservatives in other aspects of culture, namely
media consumption and consumer behavior. (Political affiliation is not available in our time use
data.)
    In the GSS, respondents are categorized as (a) extremely liberal, (b) liberal, (c) slightly liberal,
(d) moderate, (e) slightly conservative, (f) conservative, or (g) extremely conservative; we define
respondents as liberal if they identify themselves as (a), (b), or (c) and conservative if they identify


                                                               35
themselves as (e), (f), or (g). In the MRI, respondents are categorized as (a) very liberal, (b)
somewhat liberal, (c) middle of the road, (d) somewhat conservative, or (e) very conservative;
we define respondents as liberal if they identify themselves as (a) or (b) and conservative if they
identify themselves as (d) or (e). Given our sample-size-equalization procedure, this yields 4,864
observations per year in the MRI and 566 observations per year in the GSS. We discovered a sharp
change in the MRI data in the number of missing observations on ideology after 2009, so based on
our principle of keeping the quality of the data constant over time, we analyze media consumption
and consumer behavior by ideology only in the 1994-2009 period.
    Panel (e) of Figure 1 summarizes our results. Our ability to predict someone’s political ideology
based on patterns of media consumption or consumer behavior is essentially constant across years.
On the other hand, we document a growing divide between liberals and conservatives based on
their stated social attitudes.


4.5.1    Media Consumption

Figure 11 shows that the stability of the cultural distance between liberals and conservatives based
on the full media bundle broadly extends to the three separate media sub-components, with one
exception. Liberals and conservatives converged in terms of the TV shows they watch during the
1990s; since then, the difference in their TV habits has been mostly stable.
    We also observe that TV shows are not only more predictive of ideology than movies or maga-
zines, they are more predictive than all three subcomponents put together. While this might seem
puzzling at first glance, it simply reflects the fact that our machine learning algorithm is not fully
non-parametric, so inclusion of additional, less predictive variables can decrease predictive power
of the estimated model.52
    Table A.11 in the Online Appendix lists the TV programs, movies, and magazines that are
single-handedly most indicative of political ideology. There is substantial variation over time in
the list of most predictive TV shows. The contrast between the list of top shows in 2001 and 2009
is particularly interesting. The three TV programs most indicative of ideology in 2001 are The
Academy Awards, Will and Grace, and Friends, with liberals disproportionately watching these
shows. In contrast, the three TV programs most indicative of ideology by 2009 are all Fox news
programs: The O’Reilly Factor, Fox and Friends, and Hannity and Colmes, with conservatives dis-
  52
     This is especially the case for random forests. If instead of ensemble (which includes random forest), we predict
ideology using an elastic net or a regression tree, the predictive power is greater when we use all media variables
rather than TV shows alone.


                                                         36
           Figure 11: Cultural distance by political ideology over time: media consumption
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size each year is 4,864. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction
and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s
political ideology in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess political ideology in the hold-out sample was
repeated 25 times, and the share of guesses reported is the average of these 25 iterations.



proportionately watching all three. This contrast provides a good reminder of one key (potentially
undesirable) feature of our measure of cultural distance, which is that the measure does not take
any stance on either which elements of cultural behavior are important nor which elements are close
to one another. One might argue that the distance between liberals and conservative is greater in
2009 than in 2001 in that The O’Reilly Factor or Fox and Friends are more different (the vodka in
our earlier example) from the rest of what TV has to offer (the water) than The Academy Awards
or Friends are (the Sprite). Moreover, even if one does not take a stance on the “distance” between
Friends and other sitcoms, we might worry about differences in where people get their news much
more than about differences in where people get their non-news entertainment.


4.5.2     Consumer Behavior

As indicated in Figure 1, our ability to correctly predict political ideology based on the basket of
goods and brands consumed hovers around the low 70 percent range throughout the sample period.
Figure 12 shows this pattern is similar when we restrict the consumer behavior information to
either products or brands, with the exception of a noticeable increase in ideological distance based
on brands at the end of the 1990s.


                                                              37
            Figure 12: Cultural distance by political ideology over time: consumer behavior
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size each year is 4,864. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction
and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s
political ideology in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess political ideology in the hold-out sample was
repeated 5 times, and the share of guesses reported is the average of these 5 iterations.



    The list of products individually most distinctive of ideology is interesting (cf: Table A.12). In
all years, liberals distinguish themselves from conservatives by drinking alcohol. Conservatives, on
the other hand, are much more likely to engage in fishing.
    Ideology-specific brands are mostly food, primarily with brands indicative of conservatives who
disproportionately buy Jell-O gelatin desserts and eat at Arby’s.53


4.5.3     Social Attitudes

Differences in social attitudes between liberals and conservatives is the dimension of cultural dis-
tance that has received the most prior attention. Based on our measure, we find that liberals and
conservatives are more different today in their social attitudes than they have ever been in the last
40 years. Moreover, this divergence is not a recent phenomenon. Furthermore, Table 7 shows that
liberals and conservatives have diverged in their views on almost every one of the seven thematic
subsets in the GSS.54 In particular, while we detect no time trend in our ability to tell liberals
   53
      In 2009, the most predictive TV show primarily watched by liberals is The Daily Show with Jon Stewart. In
this show, making fun of Arby’s is perhaps the most commonly repeated gag. At the same time, the brand most
predictive of ideology in 2009 was in fact Arby’s.
   54
      Recall, as we mentioned in Footnote 21, that in analyzing ideological differences in social attitudes, we drop
questions about the respondent’s political affiliation and questions about how the respondent voted in a presidential


                                                               38
                       Table 7: Culture distance by political ideology over time: GSS
                                                        1976        1996    2016     Coefficient    T-statistic
                              All GSS                  68.4%     74.5%     81.1%         0.41              6.03
                     Marriage, Sex, Abortion           63.0%     70.5%     77.8%         0.41              5.22
                 Voting Participation & Religion       50.9%     57.7%     61.8%         0.33              5.21
                            Confidence                 58.6%     62.6%     69.5%         0.31              5.65
                      Government Spending              64.2%     62.5%     70.7%         0.23              3.69
                         Law Enforcement               64.1%     62.4%     67.2%         0.19              4.25
                           Life & Trust                52.9%     50.9%     53.6%         0.13              2.13
                          Civil Liberties              60.5%     56.7%     57.2%         0.02              0.17
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size in each year is 566. Rows 2 to 8 present the results of the ensemble machine-learning
method when performed only on the subset of GSS variables in that row. See Data Appendix for the list of GSS questions
included in each row. See text and Data Appendix for details on sample construction and implementation of the ensemble.
Columns 1 to 3 present the share of correct guesses of respondent’s political ideology in the hold-out sample in 1976, 1996, and
2016. The procedure to guess political ideology in the hold-out sample was repeated 100 times. The remaining columns present
results from a univariate regression of the share of correct guesses between 1976 and 2016 on a linear year trend, including the
estimated coefficient on year (column 4) and the t-statistic associated with that estimated coefficient.



and conservatives apart based on views towards civil liberties, we see cultural divergence in the
remaining six dimensions. Divergence has been greatest in views on marriage, sex and abortion;
voting participation and religion; and confidence.


5     Conclusion

We study temporal trends in cultural distances as reflected in media consumption, consumption
choices, time use, and social views between groups in the US defined by income, education, gender,
race, and political ideology. We use a machine learning approach to measure cultural distance,
an approach that is well suited to this particular application given the rich set of features and
traits that define someone’s culture. The main take-away of our analysis is that, except for a
few noteworthy exceptions, cultural distances have remained broadly constant over time. This
take-away runs against the popular narrative of the US becoming an increasingly divided society.
    There are, however, a few important caveats to our main finding. First, our approach does not
take a stance on what features of culture matter for healthy and productive interactions between
groups in society. As we discussed earlier, social frictions may be more affected by whether we
get our news from similar sources than by whether we watch different sitcoms. That said, perhaps
people primarily connect by talking about sitcoms and sports rather than about the news. Nothing

election; accordingly, the questions in the theme “Politics & Religion” are here replaced by a subset on “Voting
participation & Religion”. This theme includes only questions about respondent’s religion, attendance of religious
services, and whether he or she voted in the last two presidential elections.


                                                               39
in our data provides guidance on which aspects of culture are most important for our ability to “get
along.”
   A second limitation of our approach is that it can only analyze cultural distances one dimension
at a time, since no single dataset encompasses data on media diet, consumption behavior, time use,
and social attitudes. It is possible that there have been changes in the correlation between these
components of culture over time and that an analysis that draws on an integrated dataset would
come to different conclusions from ours.
   Finally, our assessment of the extent of cultural divides within the US has been focused on
looking at pre-specified groups (rich vs. poor, more vs. less educated, man vs. woman, white
vs. non-white, liberal vs. conservative). In future work, we plan to explore trends in polarization
across social groups that are defined endogenously, based on their distinct cultural traits.




                                                 40
References

Abramowitz, Alan I. and Kyle L. Saunders. 2008. Is polarization a myth? The Journal of Politics.
      70(2): 542-555.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2007. Measuring trends in leisure: The allocation of time over five
      decades. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 122(3): 969-1006.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2009. A summary of trends in American time allocation: 1965-2005.
      Social Indicators Research. 93(1): 57-64.
Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly. 1999. Public goods and ethnic divisions.
      Quarterly Journal of Economics. 114(4): 1234-84.
Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara. 2000. Participation in heterogeneous communities. Quar-
      terly Journal of Economics. 115(3): 847-904.
Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara. 2005. Ethnic diversity and economic performance. Journal
      of Economic Literature. 43(3): 762-800.
Alesina, Alberto, Guido Tabellini, and Francesco Trebbi. 2017. Is Europe an optimal political
      area? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. Trends in U.S. wage inequality:
      Revising the revisionists. The Review of Economics and Statistics. 90(2): 300-323.
Atkin, David. 2016. The caloric costs of culture: Evidence from Indian migrants. The American
      Economic Review. 106(4): 1144-1181.
Bertrand, Marianne. 2018. Coase Lecture: the glass ceiling. Economica. 85(338): 205-231.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984 [1979]. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. Translated
      by Richard Nice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Box-Steffensmeier, Janet, Suzanna De Boef, and Tse-Min Lin. (2004). The dynamics of the partisan
      gender gap. American Political Science Review. 98(3): 515-528.
Concordance of Activity Codes. American Heritage Time Use Survey Codebook. University of
      Oxford Center for Time Use Research.
Desmet, Klaus, Ignacio Ortuno-Ortin, and Romain Wacziarg. 2017. Culture, ethnicity, and diver-
      sity. The American Economic Review. 107(9): 2479-2513.
Desmet, Klaus and Romain Wacziarg. 2018. The cultural divide. Working paper.
Draca, Mirko and Carlo Schwarz. 2018. How polarized are citizens? Measuring ideology from the
      ground-up. Working paper.



                                                  41
Edlund, Lena and Rohini Pande. 2002. Why have women become left-wing? The political gender
      gap and the decline in marriage. The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 117(3): 917-961.
Fiorina, Morris P. and Samuel J. Abrams. 2008. Political polarization in the American public.
      Annual Review of Political Science. 11: 563-588.
Fortin, Nicole. 2015. Gender role attitudes and women’s labor market participation: Opting-
      out, AIDS, and the persistent appeal of housewifery. Annals of Economics and Statistics.
      117/118: 379-401.
Fryer, Roland G. Jr. and Steven D. Levitt. 2004. The causes and consequences of distinctively
      black names. The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 119(3): 767-805.
Gentzkow, Matthew. 2016. Polarization in 2016. Toulouse Network for Information Technology
      Whitepaper.
Gentzkow et al. 2017. Measuring polarization in high-dimensional data: Method and application
      to Congressional speech. Working paper.
Glaeser, Ewdard L. and Bryce A. Ward. 2006. Myths and realities of American political geography.
      Journal of Economic Perspectives. 20 (2): 119-144.
Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence F. Katz and Ilyana Kuziemko. 2006. The homecoming of American col-
      lege women: The reversal of the college gender gap. The Journal of Economic Perspectives.
      20(4): 133-156.
Jaravel, Xavier. 2017. The unequal gains from product innovations: Evidence from the US retail
      sector. Working paper.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. Changes in relative wages, 1963-1987: Supply
      and demand factors. The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 107(1): 35-78.
Kaufman, Karen. 2002. Culture wars, secular realignment, and the gender gap in party identifica-
      tion. Political Behavior. 24(3): 283-307.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2017. Consumption and income inequality in the U.S.
      since the 1960s. NBER working paper 23655.
Montalvo, José, G. and Marta Reynal-Querol. 2005. Ethnic polarization, potential conflict, and
      Civil Wars. American Economic Review. 95(3): 796-816.
Montgomery, Robert and Charles Stuart. 1999. Sex and fiscal desire. Working paper.
Mossel, Elchanan, Allan Sly, and Omer Tamuz. 2014. Asymptotic learning on Bayesian social
      networks. Probability Theory and Related Fields. 158(1-2): 127-157.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Jann Spiess. 2017. Machine learning: An applied econometric approach.


                                                  42
      Journal of Economic Perspectives. 31(2): 87-106.
Murray, Charles. 2012. Coming Apart: The State of White America, 1960-2010. New York: Crown
      Forum/Random House.
Oliver, Eric, Thomas Wood, and Alexandra Bass. 2016. Liberellas versus Konservatives: Social
      status, ideology, and birth names in the United States. Political Behavior. 38:55–81.
Politis, Dimitris N., Joseph P. Romano and Michael Wolf. 1999. Subsampling. New York: Springer
      series in statistics.
Waldfogel, Joel. 2003. Preference externalities: An empirical study of who benefits whom in
      differentiated product markets. The RAND Journal of Economics. 34(3): 557–568.
Wolfram, Walt, and Erik Thomas. 2002. The Development of African American English. Oxford,
      UK: Blackwell Publishers.
Zimmerman, Seth. 2017. Making the One Percent: The Role of Elite Universities and Elite Peers.
      Working paper.




                                               43
Online Appendix for: Coming apart? Cultural
  distances in the United States over time
          Marianne Bertrand and Emir Kamenica

                       June 2018
A.1      Data Appendix

A.1.1      Sample Construction

General Social Survey

We use the General Social Survey (GSS) to measure cultural distance for social attitudes. We use
18 interspersed years from 1976 to 2016 (1976, 1984, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994, 1996,
1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2012, and 2016). While the GSS is available from 1972 to 2016
(annually from 1972 to 1991, 1993, and bi-annually from 1994 to 2016), we restrict the analysis to
the 18 interspersed years above as the preferred trade-off between maximizing the number of years
(and time coverage) and maximizing the number of common questions asked in each year.
       We use 84 questions from the GSS. We define a variable as a dummy variable for each response
to a question. For example, the question “Are you happy?” has five possible responses: 1) very
happy, 2) pretty happy, 3) not too happy, 4) don’t know, and 5) no answer. We define a variable
“Are you happy - very happy” as a dummy variable that equals 1 for response 1) to the question
and 0 otherwise. We do the same for the other responses. We organize the full list of variables in
seven themes:
       Civil liberties: Allow atheists to teach; allow communists to teach; allow militarists to teach;
allow racists to teach; allow homosexuals to teach; allow atheists’ books in library; allow com-
munists’ books in library; allow militarists’ books in library; allow racists’ books in library; allow
homosexuals’ books in library; allow atheists to speak; allow communists to speak; allow militarists
to speak; allow racists to speak; allow homosexuals to speak.
       Confidence: confidence in military; confidence in business; confidence in organized religion;
confidence in education; confidence in executive branch; confidence in financial institutions; confi-
dence in US Supreme Court; confidence in organized labor; confidence in Congress; confidence in
medicine; confidence in the press; confidence in scientific community; confidence in TV.
       Government spending: foreign aid; military & defense; solving problems of large cities; halting
crime rate; dealing with drug addiction; education; environment; welfare; health care; affirmative
action; space exploration programs; income tax too high/adequate/too low.55
  55
     For the eleven first questions in the government spending module, the GSS has a “split ballot” design since
1984, where one-third of the respondents were asked the original version of the question and another one-third of the
respondents were asked a slightly differently worded version of the question. For these questions, we merge the two
questions and treat them as the same despite the slight change in wording. For example, for government spending
on education, the original question was worded as: “We are faced with many problems in this country, none of which
can be solved easily or inexpensively. I’m going to name some of these problems, and for each one I’d like you to
name some of these problems, and for each one I’d like you to tell me whether you think we’re spending too much


                                                        A-1
     Law enforcement and gun control: courts dealing with criminals; should marijuana be legal;
approve of police striking citizens if: citizen said vulgar things; citizen attacked policemen with
fists; citizen attempted to escape custody; citizen questioned as murder suspect; ever approve of
police striking citizen; favor/oppose death penalty for murder; favor/oppose gun permits; have
gun/pistol/rifle/shotgun at home.
     Life, life outlook, and trust: should aged live with their children; afraid to walk at night
in neighborhood; opinion of how people get ahead; general happiness; condition of health; people
helpful or looking out for selves; any opposite race in neighborhood; if rich, continue or stop working;
can people be trusted.
     Marriage, sex, and abortion: approve of legal abortion if: strong change of serious defect;
woman’s health seriously endangered; married – wants no more children; low income – cannot
afford more children; pregnant as result of rape; not married; divorce laws; happiness of marriage;
homosexual sex relations; feelings about porn laws; premarital sex; extramarital sex; seen X-rated
movie last year.
     Politics and religion: political party affiliation; liberal vs. conservative; voted for D, R, I or
other presidential candidate; voted in the election; how often attend religious services; religion &
denomination; how fundamentalist; belief in life after death.56              57 58 59


     We use all respondents of ages 18 to 64.
     The income variable available in the GSS is family income, and it is reported in income brackets.
The income brackets change across years.60
     To implement the ensemble algorithm, we equalize sample size across years. For each year,


money on it, too little money, or about the right amount. Are we spending too much, too little, or about the right
amount on improving the nation’s education system?” The altered version use the word “education” instead of “the
nation’s education system.”
   56
      When predicting political ideology, we drop three questions: Liberal vs. conservative; Political party affiliation;
Voted for D, R, I or other presidential candidate.
   57
      For the question voted for D, R, I or other presidential candidate, we use the following questions in the GSS:
PRES72, PRES80, PRES84, PRES88, PRES92, PRES96, PRES00, PRES04, PRES08, PRES12. Each of these
questions ask which presidential candidate the respondent voted for in the election in year 19XX or 20XX. These
questions were asked only for the four years after the election. For example, VOTE88 exists in the GSS for years
1989-1992 only.
   58
      For the question voted in the election, we use the following questions in the GSS: VOTE72, VOTE80, VOTE84,
VOTE88, VOTE92, VOTE96, VOTE00, VOTE04, VOTE08, VOTE12. Like the PRESXX questions, each of these
variables ask whether they voted in the election in year 19XX or 20XX, and were asked only for the four years after
the election.
   59
      For the religion and denomination questions, we merged the religion question and the Christian denomination
question such that we have a response for each Christian denomination and for each non-Christian religion.
   60
      There are 12 brackets for the period 1976 to 1976, 16 brackets for the period 1977 to 1981, 17 brackets for the
period 1982 to 1985, 20 brackets for the period 1986 to 1990, 21 brackets for the period 1991 to 1996, 23 brackets for
the period 1998 to 2004, and 25 brackets for the period 2006 to 2016.


                                                          A-2
we choose the sample size for each demographic across years to be equal to the sample size of the
smallest demographic-year bucket. The ensemble algorithm first reads in the entire cleaned dataset
and then selects a random sample that is equal to the sample size listed below. The ensemble
algorithm is iterated over 500 random samples.
        Income: 398 (The income-year with the smallest sample size is top quartile in 1990, which has
a sample size of 199. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 199 x 2 = 398.)
        Education: 652 (The education-year with the smallest sample size is some college or more in
1976, which has a sample size of 326. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 326 x 2 = 652.)
        Gender : 1,000 (The gender-year with the smallest sample size is males in 1990, which has a
sample size of 500. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 500 x 2 = 1,000.)
        Race: 234 (The race-year with the smallest sample size is non-whites in 1976, which has a
sample size of 234. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 117 x 2 = 234.)61                    62


        Political ideology: 566 (The political ideology-year with the smallest sample size is liberals in
2004, which has a sample size of 283. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 283 x 2 = 566.)                         63


        Urbanicity: 236 (The urbanicity-year with the smallest sample size is rural in 1988, which has
a sample size of 118. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 118 x 2 = 236.)64
        Age: 892 (The age-year with the smallest smaple size is 40 years or older in 1990, which has a
sample size of 446. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 446 x 2 = 892.)
        In the GSS, for most questions, the data is missing for approximately one-third of the sam-
ple. This is because the “sociopolitical attitude and behavior questions are administered using a
“split-ballot” design - in which items are assigned to two of three ballots, each of which is answered
by a random two-thirds of most GSS samples” (Smith et al. 2014).65 We impute the missing
data as follows. In each demographic-year, among respondents with non-missing values for each

   61
      In the GSS, we use the question RACE for our race specification. The responses to this question are “white”,
“black”, or “other.” This question is available for all years of the GSS.
   62
      In the GSS, there is a question HISPANIC, which identifies whether or not the respondent is Hispanic and has
values for detailed country of origin in the Hispanic world (for example, Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, etc.). This
variable is available since year 2000. We do not use this variable for our race specification.
   63
      For political ideology, the GSS question that we use is POLVIEW, which has the following responses: extremely
liberal; liberal; slightly liberal; moderate; slightly conservative; conservative; and extremely conservative. We define
political ideology as equal to one if the responses are extremely liberal, liberal, or slightly liberal. We define political
ideology as equal to zero if the responses are slightly conservative, conservative, and extremely conservative. We drop
observations with the response moderate.
   64
      For urbanicity, the GSS question that we use is SRCBELT, which has the following responses: 12 largest SMSA’s;
13-100 SMSA’s; suburb of 12 largest SMSA’s; suburb of 13-100 largest SMSA’s; other urban; and other rural. We
define urbanicity as equal to one for all responses other than “other rural”, zero otherwise.
   65
      Smith, Tom W, Peter Marsden, Michael Hout, and Jibum Kim. 2014. General Social Surveys: Cumulative
Codebook.


                                                           A-3
question, we compute the distribution of answers (for example, 40% answer “Republican,” 30%
answer “Independent,” and 40% answer “Democrat” to the party affiliation question). Then, for
each demographic-year, we use the distribution of answers among respondents with non-missing
values to randomly impute the response for respondents with missing responses in the same pro-
portions.66 After imputing for missing values, we reshaped the data into dummy variables for each
question-response.


American Heritage Time Use Survey (AHTUS)

We use the American Heritage Time Use Survey (AHTUS) to measure cultural distance for time
use. We use all available years: 1965, 1975, 1985, 1993, 1995, 1998 and annually from 2003 to 2012.
For the analysis using income, however, we dropped 1985, 1993, and 1995 because the available
income data were too coarse (only approximate income quartiles are available in those years).
     We equalize the set of activities across years using an activities crosswalk that is based on the
official documentation published by the University of Oxford Center for Time Use Research. After
equalizing the set of activities across years, we use all of the 78 available activities, as well as the
8 aggregates of activities from Aguiar and Hurst (2009).67 We define a variable as minutes spent
on the activity per day. The full list of variables is: general or other personal care; sleep; naps
and rest; wash, dress, personal care; personal medical care; meals at work; other meals and snack;
main paid work (not at home); paid work at home; second job, other paid work; work breaks; other
time at workplace; time looking for work; regular schooling, education; homework; short course or
training; occasional lectures and other education or training; food preparation, cooking; set table,
wash/put away dishes; cleaning; laundry, ironing, clothing repair; home repairs, maintain vehicle;
other domestic work; purchase routine goods; purchase consumer durables; purchase personal ser-
vices; purchase medical services; purchase repair, laundry services’; financial/government services;
purchase other services; general care of older children; medical care of children; play with chil-
dren; supervise/help with homework; read to/with, talk with children; other child care; adult care;
general voluntary acts; political and civic activity; worship and religious acts; general out-of-home
leisure; attend sporting event; go to cinema; theater, concert, opera; museums, exhibitions; café,
bar, restaurant; parties or receptions; sports and exercise; walking; physical activity/sports with
   66
      We note that the above method of imputation uses only the marginal distribution (the distribution of each
variable X by demographic group) and not the joint distribution (the joint distribution of variable X, Y, and Z by
demographic group).
   67
      The 8 aggregates of activities are: market work; home maintenance; obtain goods and services; other home
production; non-market work; child care; leisure; and other.


                                                      A-4
child; hunting, fishing, boating, hiking; gardening; pet care, walk dogs; receive or visit friends;
other in-home social, games; artistic activity; crafts; hobbies; relax, think, do nothing; read books,
periodicals, newspapers; listen to music; listen to radio; watch television, video; writing by hand;
conversation, phone, texting; and use computer.68
        Travel: travel to or from work; travel related to education; travel related to consumption;
travel related to child care; travel related to volunteering and worship; other travel.
        We use full-time employed respondents of ages 18 to 64.
        The income variable available in AHTUS is family income, and it is available in income brackets.
The income brackets change across years.69
        To implement the ensemble algorithm, we equalize sample size across years. For each year,
we choose the sample size for each demographic across years to be equal to the sample size of the
smallest demographic-year bucket. The ensemble algorithm first reads in the entire cleaned dataset
and then selects a random sample that is equal to the sample size listed below. The ensemble
algorithm is iterated over 500 random samples.
        Income: 418 (The income-year with the smallest sample size is top quartile in 1998, which has
a sample size of 209. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 209 x 2 = 418.)
        Education: 524 (The education-year with the smallest sample size is some college or more in
1965, which has a sample size of 262. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 262 x 2 = 524.)
        Gender : 668 (The gender-year with the smallest sample size is females in 1995, which has a
sample size of 334. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 334 x 2 = 668.)
        Race: 298 (The race-year with the smallest sample size is non-whites in 1995, which has a
sample size of 149. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 149 x 2 = 298.)70                   71


        Urbanicity: 756 (The urbanicity-year with the smallest sample size is rural in 1965, which has
a sample size of 378. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 378 x 2 = 756.)
        Age: 1,088 (The age-year with the smallest smaple size is 40 years or older in 1985, which has
a sample size of 544. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 544 x 2 = 1,088.)
   68
       The variable “use computer” first appears in the data in 1985. We assign 0 minutes for “use computer” for all
observations prior to 1985.
    69
       There are 10 brackets for 1965, 18 brackets for 1975, 7 brackets for 1998, and 16 brackets for the period 2003 to
2012.
    70
       In AHTUS, we use the variable ETHNIC2 for our race specification. The values of this variable are “white”,
“black”, “some other race”, “missing or dirty”, or “not applicable.” We drop observations that have the values “missing
or dirty” or “not applicable.” We define the binary race variable as equal to 1 if the value is “white” and 0 if the value
is “black” or “some other race.” This variable is available for all years of AHTUS.
    71
       In AHTUS, there is a variable called HISP which identifies respondent’s Hispanic origin. The variable has values
“Yes” or “No” for respondent’s Hispanic origin. This variable is available since year 1995. We do not use this variable
for our race specification.


                                                          A-5
Mediamark Research and Intelligence Survey of the American Consumer (MRI)

We use the Mediamark Research and Intelligence Survey of the American Consumer (MRI) to
measure cultural distance for media consumption and consumer behavior. We use all the years
that we have access to, which is annually from 1992 to 1999 and annually from 2001 to 2016. The
types of variables that we use are:
       Movies: “Did you watch movie X in the last 6 months?”
       Magazines: “Did you read magazine X in the last 6 months?”72
       TV programs: “Did you watch TV program X in the last 7 days / 30 days / 12 months?”
       Products: “Do you own product X / Did you use product X / Did you buy product X in the
last 30 days / 6 months / 12 months?”         73


       Brands: “Do you own product from brand X / Did you use product from brand X / Did you
buy product from brand X in the last 6 months / 12 months?”
       As each question in the MRI has a yes (1) or no (0) answer, we define a variable as a dummy
variable equal to 1 for a positive response, 0 otherwise.
       MRI includes other variables that we did not use in the analysis. These include: attitudes
(political affiliation, health74 , fashion75 , general76 , attitudes towards advertisements77 , personal
attitudes78 , passionate about topic X79 ), time use (political activity, pets, miles driven on a car,
overnight camping trips, visited theme part X in the last year, been to country X in the last 3
years, been to state X in the last year, hours listened to the radio, hours watched TV, interests,
hours per week spent on doing X, time spent using the internet, hours spent playing videogame
system X/videogame type X, music type X listened to in the last 6 months, hobby X, volunteered
for charitable organization, member of an organization or club, leisure activity X), other consumer
behavior (shopped in store X in the last 6 months), other media consumption (newspapers80 ,visited
social networking site X in the last 30 days, visited website X in the last 30 days).
       The number of variables for each module is 83-97 variables each year for movies, 179 to 242
  72
      We did not use magazines which do not require subscription (such as magazines of airlines and retail stores)
because exposure to these types of magazines may not capture people’s preferences for reading these magazines.
   73
      We use all products except for financial and insurance products. Same for brands.
   74
      An example is “I go to the doctor regularly for check-ups.”
   75
      An example is “Comfort is one of the most important factors when selecting fashion products to purchase.”
   76
      An example is “Buying American products is important to me.”
   77
      An example is “Advertising helps me keep up-to-date about products and services that I need or would like to
have.”
   78
      An example is “Having material possessions is important.”
   79
      Example topics include health care, cooking, and grocery.
   80
      Newspapers are not used because of the small number of newspapers included in the dataset; regional newspapers
are not included in the US-level data that we have access to.


                                                       A-6
variables each year for magazines, 507 to 872 variables each year for TV programs, 1,928 to 3,027
variables each year for products, and 5,367 to 6,610 variables each year for brands. We pool movies,
magazines, and TV programs together as the media module; there are 871 to 1,186 variables each
year for the media module. We also pool products and brands together as the consumer module;
there are 7,130 to 9,385 variables each year for the consumer module.
     Not all variables are available for all years. While products, brands, and TV programs are
available for all years, movies are available for 1998, 1999, and annually from 2001 to 2016. Also,
we only use magazines annually from 1992 to 1999 and annually from 2001 to 2011.81 Hence, for
the media module, we only use the overlapping years for movies, magazines, and TV programs,
which are 1998, 1999, and annually from 2001 to 2011.
     Furthermore, not all demographics are available for all years. While income, gender, and race
are available for all years, education and political ideology are available annually from 1994 to
1999 and annually from 2001 to 2016. While we use all available years for education, for political
ideology we only use data from 1994 to 1999, and from 2001 to 2009. This is because the share
of respondents who do not respond to the political ideology question in the period 2010 to 2013 is
substantially higher than in the period 1994 to 2009, while the share in the period 2014 to 2016 is
substantially lower than in the period 1994 to 2009. This suggests that the quality of the political
ideology question in the period 2010 to 2016 is not the same as in the period 1994 to 2009.
     We sample all respondents from ages 20 to 64 instead of all respondents from ages 18 to 64
because age is only available in five-year age groups (20 to 24,..., 60 to 64).
     The income variable available in MRI is household income, and it is available in income brack-
ets. The income brackets change across years.82
     To implement the ensemble algorithm, we equalize sample size across years. For each year,
we choose the sample size for each demographic across years to be equal to the sample size of the
smallest demographic-year bucket. The ensemble algorithm first reads in the entire cleaned dataset
and then selects a random sample that is equal to the sample size listed below. The ensemble
algorithm is iterated over 25 random samples.
     Income: 6,394 (The income-year with the smallest sample size is top quartile in 1992, which
has a sample size of 3,197. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 3,197 x 2 = 6,394.)
   81
      While magazine data exist in the MRI Media Survey post-2011, the time period was reduced to the last 7 days
for the weekly magazines and the last 14 days for the bi-weekly magazines starting in 2012. This makes the “Did you
read magazine X” variables in 2012-2016 not comparable to those prior to 2012.
   82
      There are 14 brackets for 1992 and 1993, 15 brackets for the period 1994 to 2001, 16 brackets for the period from
2002 to 2008, and 17 brackets for the period 2009 to 2016.


                                                         A-7
     Education: 9,674 (The education-year with the smallest sample size is high school or less in
2015, which has a sample size of 4,837. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 4,837 x 2 = 9,674.)
     Gender : 15,036 (The gender-year with the smallest sample size is females in 1996, which has
a sample size of 7,518. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 7,518 x 2 = 15,036.)
     Race: 4,150 (The race-year with the smallest sample size is non-whites in 1992, which has a
sample size of 2,075. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 2,075 x 2 = 4,150.)83                   84


     Political ideology: 4,864 (The political ideology-year with the smallest sample size is liberals
in 2,432, which has a sample size of 2,432. Hence, the ensemble sample size is 2,432 x 2 = 4,864.)
     Age: 14,602 (The age-year with the smallest smaple size is 40 years or older in 1992, which
has a sample size of 7,301 . Hence, the ensemble sample size is 7,301 x 2 = 14,602.)


A.1.2      Ensemble Algorithm

We use a machine learning approach to determine how predictable group membership is from a set of
variables in a given year. In particular, we use an ensemble method that consists in running multiple
separate algorithms and then averaging the prediction of these algorithms with weights chosen by
cross-validation (Mullainathan and Spiess, 2017). We use three machine learning algorithms: elastic
net regression (tuned by lambda and alpha), regression tree (tuned by the minimal node size of
each tree), and random forest (tuned by the minimal node size of each tree and the proportion of
variables used in each tree). We “ensemble” across algorithms with weights determined by OLS. The
ensemble algorithm yields a prediction (posterior probability) that the respondent is in the given
group (top income quartile, some college or more, etc.) for each respondent. We define “guess” as 1
if the prediction is greater than or equal to 0.5, 0 otherwise. We report the share of correct guesses
in the hold-out sample (30%). The procedure is as follows.

   1. Partition the data into a training sample (70%) and a hold-out sample (30%).

   2. Tuning step (general)

        (a) Divide the training sample randomly into 5 folds.

        (b) For each fold, fit the algorithm for every tuning parameter value on all 4 other folds and
             for predictions on the current fold.
   83
      In MRI, the race variable has the following values for the listed years: 1992-1997 - “White,”“African American,”
or “Other;” 1998-2002 - “White,”“African American,”“Asian,” or “Other;” 2003-2016 - “White,”“African American,”
“American Indian or Alaska Native,”“Asian,” or “Other.”
   84
      In MRI, there is a variable that identifies whether the respondent is of Hispanic origin. This variable is available
since year 2007. We do not use this variable for our race specification.


                                                          A-8
   (c) From 2(b), obtain one prediction per tuning parameter for every observation in the full
       training sample. Now, average the squared-error loss for each tuning parameter value
       over the full training sample.

   (d) Based on loss estimates in 2(c), choose the tuning parameters that minimize the squared-
       error loss.

   (e) Fit the algorithm with the chosen tuning parameter on the full training sample.

    (f) Repeat steps 2(b)-2(e) for each algorithm (elastic net regression, regression tree, random
       forest).

3. Tuning parameters (specific to each algorithm)

   (a) Elastic net regression

         i. In 2(c), elastic net regression is fit for a grid of values of lambda and alpha for the
            following objective function: minβ0 ,β N1 N                        T                     2
                                                        P
                                                           i=1 wi l(yi , β0 + β xi ) + λ[(1 − α)||β||2 +

            α||β||1 ]

            A. Lambda ranges from e−8 to e10 , in increments of 0.5 for the exponent (i.e. -8,
                  -7.5, . . . , 9.5, 10). Lambda controls the penalty on the coefficients. As lambda
                  grows larger, the penalty grows stronger, and coefficients are forced closer to
                  zero.

            B. Alpha grid is 0, 0.5, and 1. α = 1 case is LASSO, α = 0 case is the ridge
                  regression, and α = 0.5 is the intermediate case. Alpha specifies the type of
                  penalty applies to the coefficients. When α = 1 (LASSO), coefficients are penal-
                  ized based on the sum of their absolute values (L1 penalty). When α = 0 (ridge
                  regression), coefficients are penalized based on the sum of their squared values
                  (L2 penalty). When alpha is between 0 and 1, the coefficients are penalized
                  based on both L1 and L2 penalties, and the weights are determined by alpha.

   (b) Regression tree

         i. In 2(c), regression tree is fit for a grid of values of minimum node size (“minbucket”),
            where node size is the number of observations belonging to a terminal node. The
            grid for node size is (1, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 70, 100, 150, 500). The depth of the
            tree is determined by the node size: the smaller the node size, the deeper the tree.

   (c) Random forest

                                               A-9
         i. In 2(c), random forest is fit for a grid of values of 1) minimum node size of each tree
           (“node sizes”) and 2) the proportion of variables used in each tree (“pmtry”). The
           number of trees is set to 100. The grid for node sizes is (5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 400,
           1000) and the grid for pmtrys is (0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4).

4. Ensemble step

   (a) From 2, we have obtained one prediction for each algorithm for every observation in the
       full training sample.

   (b) Fit weights by running a linear regression (OLS) of the outcome on the predicted values
       for each algorithm in the full training sample, and store the resulting linear model.

   (c) To predict in the hold-out sample, fit each algorithm on the full training sample, obtain
       predictions for each algorithm on the hold-out sample, and then ensemble the predictions
       with the linear model obtained in 4(b).

5. Ensemble algorithm implementation

   (a) For each dataset-year, implement the ensemble algorithm where:

         i. LHS = Income / Education / Gender / Race / Political Ideology / Urbanicity / Age
           (dummy variables)

        ii. RHS = Dataset

   (b) Iterate the ensemble algorithm for X number of random subset of the dataset (X=500
       for attitudes and time use, X=25 for media, movies, TV programs, magazines, consumer
       behavior, products, and brands).

   (c) For each iteration, compute the hold-out sample share of correct guesses.

         i. The ensemble algorithm outputs the predictability that a respondent is in the income
           / demographic group for each year.

        ii. We guess whether the respondent is in that income / demographic group if the
           predictability is greater than or equal to / less than 0.5.

       iii. Then, for each respondent, we have the true income / demographic of the respondent
           and our guess using the RHS variables. We compute the hold-out sample share of
           correct guesses.



                                            A-10
            iv. The ensemble algorithm uses 70% of the data to generate a prediction model (train-
                ing sample), and designates the remaining 30% as the hold-out sample. We only use
                the hold-out sample to compute the share of correct guesses.

        (d) For each dataset-year, average the hold-out sample share of correct guesses across the
            iterations.


A.1.3     Bayesian Algorithm

We use a Bayesian approach to determine how predictable group membership is from a single
variable in a given year. We use the results from the Bayesian approach to produce a) the table of
top 10 cultural traits that are most indicative of membership in a demographic group and b) the
heat map of cultural traits that are indicative of membership in a demographic group (for attitudes
only). The procedure is as follows:

  1. Partition the data into a training sample (80%) and a hold-out sample (20%).

  2. In the training sample, calculate the probability of any response (e.g. watched Fox and
     Friends) conditional on the respondents’ membership in a demographic group.

  3. Turning to the hold-out sample, guess whether a respondent is in a demographic group con-
     ditional on his or her response given the conditional probabilities derived in the training
     sample.

  4. Compute the hold-out sample share of correct guesses.

  5. Repeat steps (1) to (4) 100 times for time use and attitudes, and 5 times for media and
     consumer behavior. Obtain the average hold-out sample share of correct guesses across iter-
     ations.

  6. Using the full sample, take the average probability of any response conditional on the re-
     spondents’ membership in a demographic group and store it. (This is needed to record the
     direction of guess.)

The procedure for producing the tables of the top ten cultural traits that are most indicative
of group membership is then as follows. First, we rank each response in decreasing order the
average hold-out sample share of correct guesses obtained by the Bayesian procedure. Second, we
report the average hold-out sample share of correct guesses for the ten responses with the highest

                                               A-11
share of correct guesses. Third, we use the average probability of any response conditional on the
respondents’ group membership to know the direction of the prediction (e.g., watching Fox and
Friends is predictive of being conservative).
    The procedure for producing the heat map of cultural traits that are indicative of group
membership (for attitudes only) is as follows. First, we rank each variable in increasing order of
the average hold-out sample share of correct guesses obtained by the Bayesian procedure for the
first year (1976 for attitudes). Variables are vertically ranked throughout the heat map figure
based on that 1976 order. Second, in each subsequent year, we assign to each variable its rank in
increasing order of the average hold-out sample share of correct guesses for that year. We then
assign color-code to each variable’s relative rank in each year, with the most informative variables
being color-coded dark red and the least informative color-coded dark blue, and lighter shades of
red and blue in between.


A.1.4   Defining income quartile cutoffs by household groups using the Current Pop-
        ulation Survey (CPS)

We use family income for the GSS and AHTUS and household income for the MRI. Note that the
income variables in all three of our main datasets are in income brackets, not continuous dollar
amounts. As the CPS top / bottom income quartile cutoffs by household groups most often occur
within an income bracket, using income brackets does not exactly capture the top / bottom income
quartiles in the CPS. We describe below the method we use to minimize this mismeasurement.
    First, we define household groups as follows. We define the households with one adult and
no children as household group 1, households with two adults and no children as household group
2, households with two adults and children as household group 3, and households with one adult
and children. Households with more than two adults were classified into household group 3; adults
other than the two primary adults are regarded as dependents.
    The procedure for defining the income quartile dummy variable is as follows. For every year-
household group, we obtain from the CPS the top and bottom quartile income cutoffs as well the
full income distribution. For each of the three datasets (GSS, AHTUS, MRI), we then consider
all possible assignments of observations to top and bottom quartiles based on the income brackets
available in that dataset-year. For each possible assignment, we count the number of observations
that actually are in top / bottom quartile according to the CPS but not assigned as such, as well as
the number of observations that actually are not top / bottom quartile according to the CPS but


                                                A-12
assigned as such. We call the sum of these two numbers the number of mis-measured observations.
For each dataset-year-household group, we then generate the top and bottom quartile variables by
choosing the assignment that minimizes the number of mis-measured observations.
    The share of mis-measured observations, when averaged across household groups (with weights
corresponding to the number of observations in each household group), are summarized below.

  1. Top quartile:

      (a) GSS: average - 2.7%, minimum - 1.3%, maximum - 5.1%

      (b) AHTUS: average - 5.0%, minimum - 0.6%, maximum - 8.5%

       (c) MRI: average - 4.0%, minimum - 1.6%, maximum - 6.9%

  2. Bottom quartile

      (a) GSS: average - 1.5%, minimum - 0.7%, maximum - 3.6%

      (b) AHTUS: average - 4.0%, minimum - 2.2%, maximum - 7.3%

       (c) MRI: average - 1.2%, minimum - 0.4%, maximum - 2.1%

While the share of mis-measured observations is less than 5% for most dataset-quartiles, the share is
larger than 5% (and thus not negligible) for: MRI for years 2007-2013 for the top quartile; AHTUS
for years 1965, 1998, and 2006-2012 for the top quartile; and AHTUS for year 1998 for the bottom
quartile. To investigate the effect of mismeasurement on our ability to predict, we regress the
average hold-out sample share of correct guesses on an intercept, average share of mismeasurement
for the top and bottom quartiles, year dummies, and dataset dummies. First, we find that the
coefficient on the average share of mismeasurement is not statistically significant (coefficient =
-0.21, t-statistic = -0.39). Second, we find that the R-squared increases only minimally when we
include the average share of mismeasurement; in fact, the adjusted R-squared decreased. From
these two observations, we conclude that while the level of mismeasurement is not negligible, its
effect on our ability to predict does not appear to be substantive.




                                                A-13
A.2       Main Additional Results

A.2.1       Income


                    Table A.1: Attitudes and norms most indicative of being high-income
                         1976                                                1996                                            2016

 Trusts people                               65.1%   Voted in the election                   64.4%   Voted in the election                  65.2%

 Voted in the election                       65.0%   Trusts people                           62.0%   Approve of police striking citizens    63.4%

 Allow homosexuals’ books in library         64.4%   Allow atheists to teach                 61.1%   Trusts people                          62.2%

 Allow communists to speak                   63.0%   Allow abortion for single women         60.3%   Allow abortion for single women        61.8%

 Spending on space exploration is adequate   62.8%   Allow racists to speak                  60.1%   Not afraid to walk at night            61.5%

 Homosexual sex is not always wrong          62.4%   Federal income tax is too high          59.7%   Voted for Republican pres. candidate   61.2%

 Allow homosexuals to speak                  62.3%   Confident in the scientific community   59.7%   Allow abortion for married women       61.2%

 Voted for Republican pres. candidate        62.2%   Allow abortion for married women        59.5%   Homosexual sex is not wrong at all     60.6%

 Allow communists’ books in library          62.0%   Allow racists’ books in library         59.1%   Allow abortion for low-income women    60.6%

 Allow militarists’ books in library         61.7%   Allow atheists’ books in library        59.0%   Allow militarists’ books in library    59.4%
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size is 398. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most indicative of being
rich in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is rich based on the answer
to the question. For example, in 1976, knowing whether a person trusts people allows us to guess income correctly 65.1% of the
time, whereas knowing whether a person thinks homosexual sex is not always wrong allows us to guess income correctly 62.4%
of the time. An affirmative answer to “Do you trust people?” and a negative answer to “Is homosexual sex always wrong?”
indicate that the person is rich.




                                                                A-14
A.2.2       Education


        Table A.2: TV shows, movies, and magazines most indicative of being more educated
                                                             Panel (a) TV shows

                        1994                                                   2005                                          2016

 Didn’t watch Rescue 911                    56.0%     Watched Super Bowl                        53.9%    Watched Love It Or List It         53.6%

 Didn’t watch Unresolved Mysteries          54.6%     Didn’t watch Cops                         53.8%    Watched Property Brothers          53.2%

 Watched Wimbledon                          54.2%     Watched Academy Awards                    53.1%    Watched House Hunters              53.2%

 Didn’t watch Oprah Winfrey Show            54.1%     Watched NFL Monday Night Football         52.6%    Watched Academy Awards             53.0%

 Watched NCAA Basketball Championship       54.0%     Watched NCAA Men’s Basketball             52.6%    Watched Flip or Flop               52.7%

 Didn’t watch In the Heat of the Night      53.9%     Didn’t watch WWE Smackdown!               52.6%    Didn’t watch Criminal Minds        52.3%

 Didn’t watch Country Music Awards          53.9%     Didn’t watch Noticiero Univision          52.5%    Watched Grammy Awards              52.1%

 Watched Superbowl                          53.8%     Didn’t watch NASCAR Daytona 500           52.5%    Watched NCAA’s Final Four          52.1%

 Didn’t watch America’s Most Wanted         53.6%     Watched The Masters                       52.4%    Watched SNL Specials               52.0%

 Didn’t watch Married with Children         53.3%     Didn’t watch Fear Factor                  52.4%    Watched Wimbledon                  52.0%

                                                                Panel (b) Movies

                      1998                                              2007                                                2016

 Watched Jerry Maguire                   54.6%    Didn’t watch Big Momma’s House 2        52.6%      Watched Gone Girl                      53.6%

 Watched The English Patient             53.3%    Watched Walk The Line                   52.4%      Watched The Hunger Games               53.0%

 Watched First Wive’s Club               52.7%    Watched The Chronicles Of Narnia        52.4%      Watched Interstellar                   52.5%

 Watched Star Trek First Contact         52.1%    Watched Pirates of the Caribbean 2      52.0%      Watched Guardians of the Galaxy        51.8%

 Watched The Empire Stikes Back          52.0%    Watched The Da Vinci Code               51.9%      Watched Into the Woods                 51.7%

 Watched Star Wars - Special Edition     51.9%    Watched The Devil Wears Prada           51.9%      Watched Big Hero 6                     51.6%

 Watched Air Force One                   51.8%    Didn’t watch Saw II                     51.9%      Watched Birdman                        51.6%

 Watched Michael                         51.6%    Didn’t watch Scary Movie 4              51.8%      Watched The Theory of Everything       51.5%

 Watched Ransom                          51.5%    Didn’t watch When a Stranger Calls      51.8%      Didn’t watch Annabelle                 51.4%

 Watched One Fine Day                    51.5%    Didn’t watch Get Rich or Die Tryin’     51.7%      Watched The Hobbit                     51.3%

                                                             Panel (c) Magazines

                             1992                                     2002                                           2011

        Read Newsweek                     60.3%     Read Time                           58.7%     Read Time                         57.8%

        Read Time                         59.1%     Read Newsweek                       58.5%     Read Newsweek                     57.4%

        Read US News & World Report       58.6%     Read People                         56.7%     Read Consumer Reports             57.0%

        Read Consumer Reports             58.0%     Read US News & World Report         55.6%     Read People                       56.2%

        Read National Geographic          57.1%     Read Consumer Reports               55.5%     Read National Geographic          55.5%

        Read Business Week                56.7%     Read National Geographic            55.0%     Read The New Yorker               55.0%

        Read Money                        56.4%     Read Business Week                  54.1%     Read Forbes                       54.8%

        Read The New Yorker               55.6%     Read Fortune                        53.5%     Read Real Simple                  54.8%

        Read Forbes                       55.6%     Read The New Yorker                 53.5%     Read O, The Oprah Magazine        54.8%

        Read Smithsonian                  55.6%     Didn’t read National Enquirer       53.3%     Read Travel & Leisure             54.4%
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size in all panels is 9,674. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most
indicative of being educated in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is
educated based on the answer to the question. For example, in 1992, knowing whether a person watched Wimbledon allows
us to guess education correctly 54.2% of the time, whereas knowing whether a person watched Rescue 911 allows us to guess
education correctly 56.0% of the time. An affirmative answer to “Did you watch Wimbledon?” and a negative answer to “Did
you watch Rescue 911 ?” indicate that the person is educated.




                                                                    A-15
                    Table A.3: Products and brands most indicative of being more educated
                                                               Panel (a) Products

                         1994                                          2005                                        2016

      Own an imported car                 59.6%     Own a PC software                    63.1%   Own a tablet PC                   63.8%

      Traveled in the continental US      59.3%     Own a personal computer              63.0%   Ordered an item by Internet       63.2%

      Own a personal computer             58.9%     Own a PC peripheral device           62.3%   Traveled in the continental US    62.8%

      Own a PC peripheral device          58.5%     Ordered an item by Internet          61.9%   Own a PC software                 62.3%

      Traveled domestically by plane      58.5%     Own a desktop                        61.1%   Own a passport                    62.1%

      Own a PC software                   58.2%     Traveled in the continental US       60.9%   Own a laptop                      61.8%

      Used dishwasher detergent           58.2%     Own a word processing software       60.8%   Own a personal computer           61.4%

      Own a passport                      58.2%     Own a passport                       60.8%   Own a PC peripheral device        61.0%

      Own an answering machine            58.2%     Own a CD-ROM drive                   60.1%   Own a printer                     60.6%

      Drank wine                          57.8%     Own an Inkjet printer                60.0%   Used dishwasher detergent         60.4%

                                                                     Panel (b) Brands

                       1994                                                   2005                                             2016

 Bought Kodak (film)                        55.7%      Own MS Windows XP (OS)                    58.5%     Own an Iphone                       62.4%

 Bought AT&T (calling card)                 55.4%      Own a Dell (personal computer)            56.7%     Own an Ipad                         60.6%

 Used Grey Poupon Dijon (mustard)           55.1%      Used Kikkoman (soy sauce)                 55.4%     Used Verizon Wireless               55.9%

 Used Kikkoman (soy sauce)                  54.9%      Bought at Starbucks (fast food)           55.1%     Used AT&T                           55.4%

 Used Sony (CD player)                      54.1%      Didn’t drink Pepsi (regular cola)         54.4%     Own Amazon Kindle                   55.3%

 Used Sony (TV set)                         53.8%      Used Bertolli (salad/cooking oil)         54.2%     Used Netflix                        55.0%

 Used Philadelphia (cream cheese)           53.7%      Used Kleenex regular (facial tissue)      54.1%     Own HP (printer/fax machine)        54.9%

 Used Fuji (film)                           53.6%      Bought at Olive Garden (family rest.)     54.0%     Bought at Starbucks (fast food)     54.8%

 Used Cascade - Lemon (dish. detergent)     53.5%      Own Sony (CD player)                      53.9%     Bought at Chipotle (fast food)      54.6%

 Used Ben & Jerry’s (ice cream)             53.4%      Used Ziploc (plastic bag)                 53.9%     Didn’t use Country Crock (butter)   54.4%
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size in all panels is 9,674. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most
indicative of being educated in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is
educated based on the answer to the question. For example, in 1994, knowing whether a person owns an imported car allows
us to guess education correctly 59.6% of the time, whereas in 2005, knowing whether a person bought Pepsi regular cola allows
us to guess education correctly 54.4% of the time. An affirmative answer to “Do you own an imported car?” and a negative
answer to “Did you buy Pepsi regular cola?” indicate that the person is educated.




                                                                     A-16
                  Table A.4: Attitudes and norms most indicative of being more educated
                      1976                                            1996                                         2016

 Allow communists to speak            65.1%   Voted in the election                   64.3%   Voted in the election                 62.7%

 Allow atheists to teach              64.6%   Allow communists to speak               62.1%   Trusts people                         61.9%

 Allow militarists to speak           63.8%   Allow militarists to speak              61.8%   Allow communists to speak             60.9%

 Allow communists’ books in library   63.4%   Allow communists’ book in library       61.0%   People are helpful                    60.5%

 Homosexual sex is not always wrong   63.4%   Confident in the scientific community   60.6%   Allow communists to teach             60.2%

 Allow communists to teach            62.6%   Trusts people                           60.2%   Approve of police striking citizens   59.9%

 Allow atheists to speak              62.5%   Allow atheists to teach                 59.6%   Allow communists’ book in library     59.7%

 Allow homosexuals’ book in library   62.5%   Allow communists to teach               59.1%   Allow abortion for single women       59.3%

 Allow militarists’ book in library   62.4%   Allow abortion for single women         59.1%   Homosexual sex is not wrong at all    59.1%

 Allow racists to speak               62.2%   Allow racists to speak                  58.9%   Allow militarists to speak            58.7%
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size is 652. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most indicative of being
educated in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is educated based on the
answer to the question. For example, in 1976, knowing whether a person thinks communists should be allowed to speak allows
us to guess education correctly 65.1% of the time, whereas knowing whether a person thinks homosexual sex is not always
wrong allows us to guess education correctly 63.4% of the time. An affirmative answer to “Should communists be allowed to
speak?” and a negative answer to “Is homosexual sex always wrong?” indicate that the person is educated.




                  Figure A.1: Stability over time of attitudes most indicative of education
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size is 652. Variables are ranked from bottom to top throughout the graph by increasing
order of correctly guessing education in 1976 based on that variable only. Each variable’s relative informativeness in subsequent
years is color-coded, with the most informative variables in each year color-coded dark red and the least informative color-coded
dark blue, and lighter shades of red and blue in between. See Data Appendix for implementation details.




                                                               A-17
A.2.3       Gender


                Table A.5: TV shows, movies, and magazines most indicative of being male
                                                                       Panel (a) TV shows

                            1992                                                      2004                                            2016

 Watched CBS NFL Football Playoffs               62.5%      Watched NFL Regular Season                 61.3%    Watched Super Bowl                        58.2%

 Watched NBC NFL Football Playoffs               62.5%      Watched Super Bowl                         61.3%    Watched NFL Live                          55.7%

 Watched Superbowl                               58.3%      Watched NFL Monday Night Football          60.8%    Watched NCAA Men’s Final Four             55.1%

 Watched Rose Bowl                               57.0%      Watched NFL Regular Season Football        60.3%    Watched Sports Center                     54.8%

 Watched All-Star Basketball Game                55.8%      Watched College Football Regular Season    58.4%    Didn’t watch Love It or List It           54.6%

 Watched NCAA Men’s Championship                 55.7%      Watched Super Bowl Pre-game Show           58.1%    Watched College Football Playoffs         54.6%

 Watched Pro Football Playoffs                   55.6%      Watched College Football                   57.5%    Watched Super Bowl Pre-game Show          54.6%

 Didn’t watch Barbara Walters                    55.1%      Watched Rose Bowl                          57.4%    Didn’t watch House Hunters                54.5%

 Watched World League of American Football       55.0%      Watched Fiesta Bowl                        57.3%    Watched NCAA Men’s Championship           54.2%

 Watched Pro Bowl                                54.7%      Watched Super Bowl Post-game Show          57.3%    Didn’t watch Property Brothers            54.2%

                                                                 Panel (b) Movies

                           1998                                                2007                                      2016

 Didn’t watch First Wives Club               56.0%       Watched King Kong                   52.4%    Watched John Wick                      52.7%

 Didn’t watch The Mirror Has Two Faces       54.0%       Watched Transporter 2               52.3%    Watched Interstellar                   52.6%

 Didn’t watch The Preacher’s Wife            53.7%       Didn’t watch In Her Shoes           52.3%    Watched Fury                           52.2%

 Didn’t watch Dalmatians                     53.6%       Watched Underworld: Evolution       52.1%    Didn’t watch Gone Girl                 51.9%

 Didn’t watch One Fine Day                   53.4%       Watched X-Men: The Last Stand       51.9%    Didn’t watch Annie                     51.9%

 Didn’t watch My Best Friend’s Wedding       53.0%       Watched The Legend of Zero          51.8%    Watched The Hobbit                     51.8%

 Didn’t watch Jerry Maguire                  53.0%       Watched A History of Violence       51.7%    Watched Guardians of the Galaxy        51.8%

 Didn’t watch Fly Away Home                  53.0%       Watched Firewall                    51.7%    Watched The Equalizer                  51.7%

 Didn’t watch The English Patient            52.0%       Watched Mission Impossible 3        51.6%    Didn’t watch Into the Woods            51.7%

 Didn’t watch Michael                        52.0%       Didn’t watch The Family Stone       51.6%    Watched Mad Max                        51.5%

                                                                  Panel (c) Magazines

                        1992                                                2002                                             2011

 Didn’t read Family Circle               67.6%       Didn’t read Woman’s Day                 65.4%    Didn’t read Better Homes & Gardens          65.5%

 Didn’t read Woman’s Day                 67.6%       Didn’t read Better Homes & Gardens      64.6%    Didn’t read Woman’s Day                     64.8%

 Didn’t read Good Housekeeping           66.6%       Didn’t read Good Housekeeping           64.6%    Didn’t read Good Housekeeping               63.8%

 Didn’t read Ladies’ Home Journal        64.6%       Didn’t read Family Circle               64.2%    Didn’t read Family Circle                   62.6%

 Didn’t read Better Homes & Gardens      64.1%       Read Sports Illustrated                 62.3%    Read Sports Illustrated                     62.4%

 Didn’t read McCall’s                    63.1%       Didn’t read Ladies’ Home Journal        61.7%    Didn’t read People                          62.4%

 Read Sports Illustrated                 62.2%       Didn’t read Glamour                     60.7%    Didn’t read O, The Oprah Magazine           62.3%

 Didn’t read Redbook                     61.6%       Didn’t read Martha Stewart Living       60.6%    Didn’t read Glamour                         60.6%

 Didn’t read Glamour                     59.1%       Didn’t read Cosmopolitan                60.3%    Didn’t read Martha Stewart Living           60.1%

 Didn’t read Cosmopolitan                58.7%       Didn’t read People                      59.3%    Didn’t read Ladies’ Home Journal            60.0%
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size in all panels is 15,036. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most
indicative of being male in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is male
based on the answer to the question. For example, in 1992, knowing whether a person watched CBS NFL Football Playoffs
allows us to guess gender correctly 62.5% of the time, whereas knowing whether a person watched Barbara Walters allows us
to guess gender correctly 55.1% of the time. An affirmative answer to “Did you watch CBS NFL Football Playoffs?” and a
negative answer to “Did you watch Barbara Walters?” indicate that the person is male.




                                                                      A-18
                          Table A.6: Products and brands most indicative of being male
                                                                        Panel (a) Products

                         1992                                                 2004                                               2016

 Didn’t use perfume/cologne for women        90.5%    Didn’t use lipstick/lip gloss             88.5%   Didn’t use hair care products for women     88.4%

 Didn’t use lipstick/lip gloss               89.6%    Didn’t use perfume/cologne for women      87.4%   Didn’t use perfume/cologne for women        85.0%

 Didn’t use hair care products for women     87.5%    Didn’t use hair care products for women   87.0%   Didn’t use mascara                          83.4%

 Didn’t use blusher                          86.7%    Didn’t use facial moisturizers            84.6%   Didn’t use lipstick/lip gloss               83.4%

 Used aftershave lotion/cologne for men      84.3%    Didn’t buy women’s clothing               82.6%   Didn’t buy women’s clothing                 83.1%

 Didn’t use mascara                          83.9%    Didn’t use mascara                        82.0%   Didn’t buy women’s lingerie/undergarments   81.8%

 Didn’t buy stockings/pantyhose              82.6%    Didn’t use foundation/make-up             80.3%   Didn’t use foundation/make-up               80.9%

 Didn’t use foundation/make-up               82.4%    Did not use blusher                       78.1%   Didn’t buy eye liner                        79.6%

 Didn’t use face cream/lotion                82.2%    Did not use eye shadow                    77.9%   Didn’t use eye shadow                       77.2%

 Didn’t use eye shadow                       81.5%    Used aftershave lotion/cologne for men    77.2%   Didn’t use nail care products/polish        74.7%

                                                                         Panel (b) Brands

                      1992                                                  2004                                                 2016

 Didn’t buy L’eggs (stockings)            63.3%   Didn’t use Cutex (nail polish remover)        62.6%   Didn’t buy Victoria Secret (lingerie)       60.8%

 Didn’t buy No Nonsense (stocking)        57.3%   Didn’t use Lady BIC (disposable razor)        59.0%   Didn’t use Bath & Body Works (perfume)      59.0%

 Own a Subaru (truck/van/SUV)             56.4%   Didn’t use Bath & Body Works (h/b cream)      58.0%   Didn’t use Cutex (nail polish remover)      58.2%

 Didn’t buy Hanes Silk (stockings)        53.8%   Didn’t use Bath & Body Works (bath add.)      57.1%   Didn’t use Bath & Body Works (h/b cream)    57.4%

 Didn’t use Philadelphia (cr. cheese)     53.0%   Used Philips Norelco (electric shaver)        56.7%   Didn’t use Opi (nail care products)         57.3%

 Didn’t buy Kodak (film)                  53.0%   Didn’t use Tampax (tampon)                    56.5%   Didn’t use Secret invisible (deodorant)     56.9%

 Didn’t use Murphy’s oil soap             52.7%   Didn’t use Skintimate (shave gel)             56.1%   Didn’t buy Hanes (lingerie)                 56.7%

 Didn’t use Playtex (rubber gloves)       52.7%   Didn’t use Maybelline (mascara)               55.9%   Didn’t use Dove solid (deodorant)           56.5%

 Didn’t use Gold Medal (flour)            52.7%   Used Gillette (razor blades)                  55.9%   Didn’t use Victoria Secret (perfume)        56.4%

 Didn’t use Heinz (vinegar)               52.6%   Didn’t use Bath & Body Works (body wash)      55.9%   Used Degree Men solid (deodorant)           56.2%
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size in all panels is 15,036. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most
indicative of being male in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is male
based on the answer to the question. For example, in 1992, knowing whether a person bought aftershave lotion/cologne for men
allows us to guess gender correctly 84.3% of the time, whereas knowing whether a person bought perfume/cologne for women
allows us to guess gender correctly 90.5% of the time. An affirmative answer to “Did you buy aftershave lotion/cologne for
men?” and a negative answer to “Did you buy perfume/cologne for women?” indicate that the person is male.




                                                                    A-19
                          Table A.7: Attitudes and norms most indicative of being male
                      1976                                            1996                                              2016

 Not afraid to walk at night in neigh.   69.3%   Not afraid to walk at night in neigh.   64.9%   Seen x-rated movie in last year            61.8%

 Spending on space expl. is adequate     59.9%   Own gun in home                         60.4%   Not afraid to walk at night in neigh.      60.2%

 Seen x-rated movie in last year         58.3%   Porn should not be illegal to all       59.1%   Porn should not be illegal to all          57.9%

 Favor gun permits                       57.8%   Own a pistol/revolver in home           58.0%   Spending on space expl. is too little      57.8%

 Porn should not be illegal to all       57.7%   Approve of police striking citizen      57.6%   Not confident in banks/fin. institutions   57.0%

 Favor death penalty for murder          57.4%   Own shotgun in home                     57.5%   Trusts people                              57.5%

 Spending on defense is too little       57.4%   Own rifle in home                       57.1%   Approve of police striking citizens        55.8%

 Not moderate (political view)           55.8%   Favor gun permits                       57.1%   Spending on health care is adequate        55.6%

 Not a Democrat                          55.4%   Spending on space expl. is adequate     56.8%   Own pistol/revolver in home                55.4%

 Not allow atheists to teach             55.4%   Seen x-rated movie in last year         56.0%   Favor gun permits                          55.4%
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size is 1,000. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most indicative of being
male in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is male based on the answer
to the question. For example, in 1976, knowing whether a person is afraid to walk at night in the neighborhood allows us to
guess gender correctly 69.3% of the time, whereas knowing whether a person thinks porn should be illegal to all allows us to
guess gender correctly 57.7% of the time. An affirmative answer to “Are you afraid to walk at night in the neighborhood?” and
a negative answer to “Should porn be illegal to all?” indicate that the person is male.




                     Figure A.2: Stability over time of attitudes most indicative of gender
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size is 1,000. Variables are ranked from bottom to top throughout the graph by increasing
order of correctly guessing gender in 1976 based on that variable only. Each variable’s relative informativeness in subsequent
years is color-coded, with the most informative variables in each year color-coded dark red and the least informative color-coded
dark blue, and lighter shades of red and blue in between. See Data Appendix for implementation details.




                                                                   A-20
A.2.4      Race


              Table A.8: TV shows, movies, and magazines most indicative of being white
                                                                         Panel (a) TV shows

                        1992                                                   2004                                               2016

 Didn’t watch Arsenio Hall                  58.5%    Watched Super Bowl                          56.7%     Watched Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer   55.8%

 Didn’t watch In Living Color               57.2%    Didn’t watch The Parkers                    55.7%     Watched Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade   55.6%

 Didn’t watch Cosby Show                    57.1%    Didn’t watch NBA Regular Season Games       55.0%     Watched American Pickers                 55.5%

 Didn’t watch A Different World             56.7%    Didn’t watch Soul Train Music Awards        54.7%     Watched The Big Bang Theory              54.8%

 Watched National Geographic Specials       55.5%    Watched Dick Clark’s New Years Rockin’      54.3%     Watched How the Grinch Stole Christmas   54.6%

 Didn’t watch Motown 30th Anniversary       55.3%    Watched NASCAR Daytona 500                  54.3%     Watched SNL Specials                     54.6%

 Watched Disney Specials                    54.6%    Watched Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade      54.2%     Watched Dick Clark’s New Year Rockin’    54.3%

 Watched Tournament of Roses Parade         54.3%    Didn’t watch Essence Awards                 54.2%     Watched Charlie Brown Specials           54.2%

 Didn’t watch NAACP Image Awards            54.2%    Didn’t watch Girlfriends                    54.1%     Didn’t watch NBA All Star Game           54.2%

 Watched Barbara Walters                    54.0%    Watched NFL Monday Night Football           54.1%     Watched Kentucky Derby                   54.1%

                                                                  Panel (b) Movies

                   1998                                                     2007                                         2016

 Didn’t watch The Preacher’s Wife       55.1%   Watched Walk The Line                          55.6%     Watched Gone Girl               53.3%

 Watched Jerry Maguire                  54.8%   Didn’t watch Big Momma’s House 2               55.5%     Watched The Hunger Games        53.1%

 Watched Michael                        54.7%   Didn’t watch Tyler Perry’s Madea’s Reunion     53.8%     Watched No Good Deed            52.7%

 Watched The English Patient            53.8%   Didn’t watch Saw II                            53.4%     Watched Inside Out              52.2%

 Watched First Wive’s Club              53.6%   Didn’t watch Final Destination 3               53.2%     Watched St. Vincent             52.0%

 Didn’t watch Space Jam                 53.2%   Didn’t watch Transporter 2                     53.1%     Watched Birdman                 52.0%

 Watched That Thing You Do!             52.6%   Didn’t watch Get Rich or Die Tryin’            53.0%     Watched Interstellar            51.9%

 Didn’t watch How to Be a Player        52.5%   Watched Chronicles of Narnia                   52.8%     Didn’t watch The Equalizer      51.9%

 Watched One Fine Day                   52.5%   Didn’t watch Hostel                            52.7%     Watched The Judge               51.7%

 Watched My Fellow Americans            52.5%   Watched Brokeback Mountain                     52.7%     Watched Wild                    51.7%

                                                              Panel (c) Magazines

                        1992                                         2002                                         2011

     Didn’t read Ebony              69.5%       Didn’t read Ebony                     70.7%   Didn’t read Ebony                   64.1%

     Didn’t read Jet                68.4%       Didn’t read Jet                       70.5%   Didn’t read Essence                 61.9%

     Didn’t read Essence            62.8%       Didn’t read Essence                   66.9%   Didn’t read Jet                     61.8%

     Didn’t read Black Enterprise   57.3%       Didn’t read Black Enterprise          61.3%   Didn’t read Black Enterprise        57.8%

     Read Modern Maturity           55.7%       Didn’t read Vibe                      60.3%   Didn’t read TV Guide                55.1%

     Read National Geographic       54.8%       Didn’t read The Source                56.6%   Didn’t read ESPN The Magazine       54.9%

     Read Consumer Reports          54.3%       Didn’t read TV Guide                  54.2%   Didn’t read National Enquirer       54.8%

     Read Reader’s Digest           54.0%       Didn’t read National Enquirer         54.1%   Didn’t read Life & Style Weekly     54.7%

     Didn’t read Star               53.7%       Didn’t read Gentlemen’s Quarterly     53.7%   Didn’t read Seventeen               54.4%

     Read Parade                    53.7%       Read People                           53.7%   Didn’t read Gentlemen’s Quarterly   54.3%
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size in all panels is 4,150. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most
indicative of being white in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is white
based on the answer to the question. For example, in 1992, knowing whether a person watched National Geographic Specials
allows us to guess race correctly 55.5% of the time, whereas knowing whether a person watched Arsenio Hall allows us to guess
race correctly 58.5% of the time. An affirmative answer to “Did you watch National Geographic Specials?” and a negative
answer to “Did you watch Arsenio Hall?” indicate that the person is white.




                                                                      A-21
                            Table A.9: Products and brands most indicative of being white
                                                               Panel (a) Products

                     1992                                           2004                                           2016

 Own a dishwasher                   62.5%   Own cruise control (automobile)            64.5%   Own a pet                             63.4%

 Own a shovel                       62.4%   Own a pet                                  64.4%   Own a flashlight                      63.3%

 Own a smoke/fire detector          62.1%   Own a dishwasher                           63.8%   Own a dishwasher                      62.5%

 Own a pet                          62.0%   Own a coffee maker                         63.7%   Own a sport/recreation equipment      62.4%

 Own a microwave                    61.7%   Own a smoke/fire detector                  63.6%   Own glass ovenware/bakeware           61.9%

 Own a flashlight                   61.5%   Own a flashlight                           63.4%   Own a gas grill                       61.6%

 Used suntan/sunscreen products     61.4%   Own power locks (automobile)               63.3%   Own a smoke/fire detector             61.5%

 Own a hand-held electric mixer     61.3%   Own a hot water heater                     63.2%   Own a hot water heater                61.4%

 Own a coffee maker                 61.2%   Own a hand-held electric mixer             63.0%   Own an air conditioner                61.4%

 Own a hose                         61.2%   Own air bags on driver side (automobile)   62.9%   Own a built-in dishwasher             60.8%

                                                                  Panel (b) Brands

                       1992                                            2004                                            2016

 Used Scotch (transparent tape)         59.8%   Used Scotch (transparent tape)         61.0%   Used Verizon Wireless                         60.2%

 Bought Kodak (film)                    58.7%   Used Cut-rite (waxed paper)            57.7%   Used Thomas’ (English muffin)                 58.6%

 Used Arm & Hammer (baking soda)        56.8%   Own Ford (automobile)                  57.4%   Used Shout (laundry pre-treatment)            56.8%

 Used Philadelphia (cream cheese)       56.5%   Used Shout (laundry pre-treatment)     57.2%   Used Sweet Baby Ray’s (barbecue sauce)        56.5%

 Used Cut-rite (waxed paper)            56.4%   Used Arm & Hammer (baking soda)        56.9%   Used Vlasic (pickles)                         56.4%

 Used Nestle (baking chips)             56.3%   Used Thomas’ (English muffin)          56.8%   Used Arm & Hammer (baking soda)               56.0%

 Used Pam Regular (cooking product)     56.1%   Used Pam Regular (cooking produt)      56.8%   Used Scotch (transparent tape)                55.9%

 Used Murphy’s oil soap (hh. cleaner)   55.9%   Used Bertolli (salad/cooking oil)      56.7%   Used French’s Classic Yellow (mustard)        55.8%

 Used Elmer’s glue                      55.7%   Used Bush’s Best (canned beans)        56.5%   Used Windex (glass/surface cleaner)           55.8%

 Bought Duracell (batteries)            55.6%   Used JIF (peanut butter)               56.4%   Used Stove Top (stuffing mix/product)         55.8%
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size in all panels is 4,150. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most
indicative of being white in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is white
based on the answer to the question. For example, in 1992, knowing whether a person owns a dishwasher allows us to guess
race correctly 62.5% of the time. An affirmative answer to “Do you own a dishwasher?” indicates that the person is white.




                                                                   A-22
                         Table A.10: Attitudes and norms most indicative of being white
                        1976                                           1996                                            2016

 Spending on blacks isn’t too little    75.3%   Spending on blacks isn’t too little      73.0%   Approve of police striking citizens     65.6%

 Not a Baptist                          71.5%   Spending on space expl. is adequate      64.4%   Own gun in home                         62.3%

 Not a fundamentalist                   70.3%   Spending on welfare is too much          64.4%   Favor death penalty for murder          61.0%

 Trusts people                          67.9%   Approve of police striking citizen       64.0%   Own rifle in home                       60.5%

 Voted for Republican pres. candidate   63.9%   Favor death penalty for murder           61.7%   Spending on blacks isn’t too little     60.3%

 People are helpful                     63.9%   Voted for Republican pres. candidate     61.4%   Voted for Republican pres. candidate    60.3%

 Approve of police striking citizens    63.3%   Own gun in home                          60.8%   Homosexual sex isn’t wrong at all       60.1%

 Favor death penalty for murder         61.5%   Divorce laws should not be made easier   60.5%   Own shotgun in home                     60.0%

 Spending on welfare is too much        60.9%   Trusts people                            60.5%   Premarital sex isn’t wrong at all       59.3%

 Spending on space expl. is adequate    60.9%   Not a Democrat                           60.1%   Not confident in the executive branch   58.9%
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size is 234. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most indicative of being
white in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is white based on the answer
to the question. For example, in 1976, knowing whether a person trusts people allows us to guess race correctly 67.9% of the
time, whereas knowing whether a person thinks spending on blacks is too little allows us to guess race correctly 75.3% of the
time. An affirmative answer to “Do you trust people?” and a negative answer to “Is spending on blacks too little?” indicate
that the person is white.




                        Figure A.3: Stability over time of attitudes most indicative of race
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size is 234. Variables are ranked from bottom to top throughout the graph by increasing
order of correctly guessing race in 1976 based on that variable only. Each variable’s relative informativeness in subsequent years
is color-coded, with the most informative variables in each year color-coded dark red and the least informative color-coded dark
blue, and lighter shades of red and blue in between. See Data Appendix for implementation details.




                                                                 A-23
A.2.5      Political Ideology


             Table A.11: TV shows, movies, and magazines most indicative of being liberal
                                                                       Panel (a) TV shows

                        1994                                                   2001                                                    2009

 Watched Academy Awards                      55.4%    Watched Academy Awards                         53.0%    Didn’t watch The O’Reilly Factor        56.0%

 Didn’t watch Bob Hope Specials              55.4%    Watched Will & Grace                           52.9%    Didn’t watch Fox and Friends            55.6%

 Didn’t watch Rush Limbaugh                  55.2%    Watched Friends                                52.9%    Didn’t watch Hannity & Colmes           55.2%

 Didn’t watch Country Music Awards           54.5%    Didn’t watch Country Music Awards              52.8%    Didn’t watch NASCAR Nextel Cup Series   54.4%

 Didn’t watch Bob Hope Chrysler Classic      53.9%    Watched Ally McBeal                            52.8%    Watched The Daily Show                  54.2%

 Watched SNL Anniv. Specials                 53.8%    Didn’t watch Wheel of Fortune                  52.8%    Watched SNL Specials                    54.2%

 Didn’t watch The Second Half                53.8%    Didn’t watch Touched by an Angel               52.7%    Didn’t watch Fox Report                 53.9%

 Watched Phenom                              53.6%    Didn’t watch Tournament of Roses Parade        52.6%    Didn’t watch NASCAR Daytona 500         53.7%

 Didn’t watch Academy of Country Music       53.4%    Didn’t watch US Open                           52.6%    Watched Academy Awards                  53.7%

 Didn’t watch Thanksgiving Day Parade        53.4%    Watched The Simpsons                           52.6%    Didn’t watch Super Bowl                 53.7%

                                                                   Panel (b) Movies

                      1998                                           2004                                                 2009

 Watched Jerry Maguire                    55.3%   Watched Chicago                     54.8%    Watched Juno                                   55.4%

 Watched The People vs. Larry Flynt       53.4%   Watched The Hours                   53.9%    Watched No Country for Old Men                 54.0%

 Watched Ransom                           52.8%   Watched About Schmidt               53.8%    Watched Michael Clayton                        53.2%

 Watched The English Patient              52.4%   Watched 8 Mile                      53.6%    Didn’t watch Nat’l Treasure: Book of Secrets   52.6%

 Watched Michael                          52.3%   Watched Adaptation                  53.6%    Watched Sweeney Todd                           52.4%

 Watched Mars Attacks                     52.2%   Watched Lord of the Rings 2         53.3%    Watched Sex and the City                       52.3%

 Watched Donnie Brasco                    52.0%   Watched Catch Me If You Can         53.1%    Watched American Vincent                       52.1%

 Watched First Wives’ Club                51.9%   Watched The Pianist                 52.9%    Watched The Other Boleyn Girl                  52.1%

 Watched Sleepers                         51.9%   Watched Harry Potter 2              52.8%    Watched Atonement                              52.0%

 Watched The Long Kiss Goodnight          51.7%   Watched Red Dragon                  52.6%    Didn’t watch The Chronicles of Narnia          51.9%

                                                             Panel (c) Magazines

                             1994                                       2001                                       2009

         Read Cosmopolitan                   54.7%    Read Cosmopolitan                54.1%    Read Vanity Fair                 54.9%

         Read Rolling Stone                  53.8%    Read People                      54.0%    Read Rolling Stone               54.6%

         Read Vogue                          53.2%    Read Rolling Stone               53.8%    Read Vogue                       54.0%

         Didn’t read Reader’s Digest         53.2%    Read Entertainment Weekly        53.6%    Read The New Yorker              53.8%

         Read TV Guide                       53.1%    Didn’t read Reader’s Digest      53.5%    Didn’t read Reader’s Digest      53.0%

         Read Newsweek                       53.1%    Read Vogue                       53.2%    Didn’t read Field & Stream       52.9%

         Read The New Yorker                 52.8%    Read The New Yorker              53.0%    Read Time                        52.9%

         Read Vanity Fair                    52.8%    Didn’t read Southern Living      52.9%    Read People                      52.8%

         Read New York Times Magazine        52.8%    Read Newsweek                    52.5%    Read Glamour                     52.7%

         Read Entertainment Weekly           52.8%    Read Vanity Fair                 52.3%    Read O, The Oprah Magazine       52.7%
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size in all panels is 4,864. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most
indicative of being liberal in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is liberal
based on the answer to the question. For example, in 1994, knowing whether a person watched Academy Awards allows us to
guess political ideology correctly 55.4% of the time, whereas knowing whether a person watched Bob Hope Specials allows us
to guess political ideology correctly 55.4% of the time. An affirmative answer to “Did you watch Academy Awards?” and a
negative answer to “Did you watch Bob Hope Specials?” indicate that the person is liberal.




                                                                     A-24
                        Table A.12: Products and brands most indicative of being liberal
                                                                  Panel (a) Products

                             1994                                               2001                                           2009

 Drank any alcoholic beverage                     56.0%   Drank any alcoholic beverage            57.9%    Not own a fishing rod                56.9%

 Drank bottled water/seltzer                      55.5%   Drank imported beer                     57.7%    Not own fishing lures/hooks          56.8%

 Drank beer                                       55.5%   Drank any distilled liquor              57.1%    Not own a fishing reel               56.7%

 Not own a lawn mower                             55.5%   Drank any beer                          57.0%    Own any vehicle                      56.5%

 Not own a portable circular saw                  55.3%   Drank any mixed drinks                  55.5%    Didn’t use frozen bread/dough        56.3%

 Bought pre-recorded audio records/tapes/discs    55.2%   Didn’t buy religious books (ex-Bible)   55.4%    Drank any alcoholic beverage         56.2%

 Drank wine                                       55.2%   Bought toiletries at a drug store       55.4%    Bought a novel                       56.2%

 Used tampons                                     55.0%   Not own a fishing rod                   55.4%    Didn’t use ranch salad dressing      56.2%

 Didn’t use gelatin/gelatin desserts              54.9%   Not own a fishing reel                  55.4%    Didn’t use disposable plates         56.0%

 Not own a separate freezer                       54.8%   Drank wine                              55.2%    Not own other fishing equipments     55.8%

                                                                   Panel (b) Brands

                       1994                                              2001                                                2009

 Didn’t use Jell-o regular                54.7%   Drank Poland Springs (bottled water)        54.2%   Didn’t buy at Arby’s (fast food)          55.6%

 Didn’t use Minute original (rice)        54.1%   Used Celestial Seasonings (tea)             53.7%   Didn’t use JIF (peanut butter)            54.4%

 Didn’t use Kellogg’s rice krispies       54.0%   Drank Corona Extra (beer)                   53.5%   Didn’t buy at Applebee’s (family rest.)   54.4%

 Didn’t use Crisco regular (shortening)   53.7%   Did not buy at Arby’s (fast food)           53.5%   Not own a Chevrolet (automobile)          54.2%

 Didn’t use Heinz (vinegar)               53.5%   Not own a Chevrolet (automobile)            53.4%   Didn’t use Tyson (chicken/turkey)         54.2%

 Didn’t buy Kodak (film)                  53.5%   Did not buy at Burger King (fast food)      53.3%   Didn’t buy at Sonic (fast food)           54.1%

 Didn’t use Cut-rite (waxed paper)        53.4%   Used Ben & Jerry’s (ice cream)              53.3%   Didn’t buy Wrangler (men’s clothing)      54.0%

 Didn’t use Raid (outdoor insecticide)    53.4%   Drank Sam Adams (beer)                      53.2%   Didn’t use Little Debbie (snack cake)     54.0%

 Didn’t use Calumet (baking soda)         53.3%   Didn’t use Betty Crocker (dry cake mix)     53.2%   Didn’t buy Dockers (men’s clothing)       54.0%

 Didn’t use Morton (salt)                 53.3%   Didn’t use Cracker Barrel (family rest.)    53.2%   Didn’t use Cool Whip (whip. topping)      54.0%
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size in all panels is 4,864. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most
indicative of being liberal in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is liberal
based on the answer to the question. For example, in 1994, knowing whether a person bought any alcoholic beverage allows
us to guess political ideology correctly 56.0% of the time, whereas knowing whether a person owns a lawn mower allows us to
guess political ideology correctly 55.5% of the time. An affirmative answer to “Did you buy any alcoholic beverage?” and a
negative answer to “Do you own a lawn mower?” indicate that the person is liberal.




                                                                  A-25
                        Table A.13: Attitudes and norms most indicative of being liberal
                        1976                                               1996                                                2016

 Marijuana should be made legal             66.6%   Homosexual sex is not always wrong          66.1%   Allow abortion for single women             71.8%

 Extramarital sex isn’t always wrong        63.3%   Premarital sex isn’t wrong at all           64.7%   Allow abortion for low income women         71.2%

 Porn shouldn’t be illegal to all           62.2%   Allow abortion for low income women         63.5%   Homosexual sex isn’t wrong at all           69.7%

 Homosexual sex isn’t always wrong          62.1%   Allow abortion for single women             62.7%   Allow abortion for married women            68.8%

 Allow atheists to teach                    62.1%   Allow abortion for married women            62.0%   Spending on defense is too much             66.1%

 Allow communists to teach                  62.0%   Spending on welfare is adequate             61.5%   Allow abortion for rape victims             65.0%

 Oppose death penalty for murder            62.0%   Spending on defense is too much             61.3%   Spending on the environment is too little   64.7%

 Spending on blacks is too little           61.7%   Spending on the environment is too little   61.1%   Premarital sex isn’t wrong at all           64.2%

 Divorce laws shouldn’t be more difficult   61.7%   Spending on health care is too little       60.2%   Spending on blacks is too little            64.0%

 Allow militarists to speak                 61.7%   Spending on blacks is too little            60.2%   Confident in the executive branch           63.4%
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size is 566. Reported in each column are the 10 cultural traits most indicative of being
liberal in that year. The numbers indicate the likelihood of guessing correctly whether an individual is liberal based on the
answer to the question. For example, in 1976, knowing whether a person thinks marijuana should be made legal allows us
to guess political ideology correctly 66.6% of the time, whereas knowing whether a person thinks porn should be illegal to all
allows us to guess political ideology correctly 62.2% of the time. An affirmative answer to “Should marijuana be made legal?”
and a negative answer to “Should porn be illegal to all?” indicate that the person is liberal.




             Figure A.4: Stability over time of attitudes most indicative of political ideology
Note: Data source is the GSS. Sample size is 566. Variables are ranked from bottom to top throughout the graph by increasing
order of correctly guessing political ideology in 1976 based on that variable only. Each variable’s relative informativeness in
subsequent years is color-coded, with the most informative variables in each year color-coded dark red and the least informative
color-coded dark blue, and lighter shades of red and blue in between. See Data Appendix for implementation details.




                                                                  A-26
A.3      Robustness




                                   Figure A.5: Cultural distance by urbanicity
Note: Data sources are the GSS and the AHTUS. Sample sizes each year are 756 for time use and 236 for attitudes. See text and
data appendix for details on sample construction and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the
figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s urbanicity in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess urbanicity
in the hold-out sample was repeated 500 times, and the share of guesses reported is the average of these 500 iterations.




                                                             A-27
                                        Figure A.6: Cultural distance by age
Note: Data sources are the GSS, the AHTUS, and the MRI. Sample sizes each year are 14,602 for media and consumption,
1,088 for time use, and 892 for attitudes. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction and implementation
of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s age in the hold-out
sample each year. The procedure to guess age in the hold-out sample was repeated 5 times for consumption, 25 times for media,
and 500 times for time use and attitudes, and the share of guesses reported is the average of these iterations.




                         Figure A.7: Cultural distance over time: Euclidean distance
Note: Figure reports normalized Euclidean distances between groups in each year based on media diet, consumer behavior,
time use, or social attitudes.




                                                             A-28
               Figure A.8: Cultural distance by education over time: consumer behavior
Note: Data sources are the MRI and Nielsen. Sample sizes each year are 1,628 for MRI and 2,164 for Nielsen. See text and
data appendix for details on sample construction and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the
figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s education in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess education
in the hold-out sample was repeated 5 times, and the share of guesses reported is the average of these iterations.




                 Figure A.9: Cultural distance by gender over time: consumer behavior
Note: Data sources are the MRI and Nielsen. Sample sizes each year are 2,242 for MRI and 4,566 for Nielsen. See text and
data appendix for details on sample construction and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the
figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s gender in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess gender in the
hold-out sample was repeated 5 times, and the share of guesses reported is the average of these iterations.



                                                            A-29
                  Figure A.10: Cultural distance by race over time: consumer behavior
Note: Data sources are the MRI and Nielsen. Sample sizes each year are 594 for MRI and 2,450 for Nielsen. See text and data
appendix for details on sample construction and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure
is share of correct guesses of respondent’s race in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess race in the hold-out
sample was repeated 5 times, and the share of guesses reported is the average of these iterations.




              Figure A.11: Compositional changes in income, education, gender, and race
Note: Income defined by top vs. bottom quartile of household income by type.



                                                            A-30
                        Figure A.12: Cultural distance by income controlling for age
Note: Data sources are the GSS, the AHTUS, and the MRI. Sample sizes each year are 6,026 for media and consumption,
590 for time use, and 372 for attitudes. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction and implementation of
machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s income in the hold-out
sample each year. The procedure to guess income in the hold-out sample was repeated 5 times for consumption, 25 times for
media, and 500 times for time use and attitudes, and the share of guesses reported is the average of these iterations.




                                                            A-31
          Figure A.13: Cultural distance in both media consumption and consumer behavior
Note: Data source is the MRI. Sample size each year is 6,394. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction
and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s
income in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess income in the hold-out sample was repeated 25 times, and
the share of guesses reported is the average of these 25 iterations.




                                                              A-32
                Figure A.14: Cultural distance by income, controlling for household size
Note: Data sources are the GSS, the AHTUS, and the MRI. Sample sizes each year are 4,952 for media and consumption,
312 for time use, and 274 for attitudes. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction and implementation of
machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s income in the hold-out
sample each year. The procedure to guess income in the hold-out sample was repeated 5 times for consumption, 25 times for
media, and 500 times for time use and attitudes, and the share of guesses reported is the average of these iterations.




                                                            A-33
                                      Figure A.15: Alternative income groups
Note: Figure shows the likelihood, in each year, of correctly guessing an individual’s group membership based on his/her media
diet, consumer behavior, time use, or social attitudes. Panel (a) is equivalent to panel (a) in 1. Panel (b) measures the cultural
distance between the top half and the bottom half of the income distribution. Panel (c) measures the distance between top
quartile and the rest (second, third, and fourth quartiles), and panel (d) measures the distance between the bottom quartile and
the rest (first, second, and third quartiles). See text and data appendix for details on sample construction and implementation
of machine-learning ensemble method.




                              Figure A.16: Number of TV shows in the MRI data
Note: Data source is MRI. The increase in 2009 reflects addition of cable shows.




                                                             A-34
      Figure A.17: Average no. of movies and TV shows watched by income in the MRI data
Note: Data source is MRI. The increase in 2009 reflects addition of cable shows.




                 Figure A.18: Cultural distance by income in time use for the full sample
Note: Data source is the AHTUS. Sample size each year is 706. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction
and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s
income in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess income in the hold-out sample was repeated 500 times, and
the share of guesses reported is the average of these 500 iterations.




                                                              A-35
     Figure A.19: Distribution of time spent on leisure by education level, 1975 vs. 2003-2012
Note: Data source is the AHTUS.




                Figure A.20: Gender differences over time in allocation of non-work time
Note: Data source is the AHTUS. Sample size each year is 812. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction
and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s
gender in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess gender in the hold-out sample was repeated 500 times, and
the share of guesses reported is the average of these 500 iterations.




                                                              A-36
              Figure A.21: Cultural distance by race in time use for the 2003-2012 sample
Note: Data source is the AHTUS. Sample size each year is 2,052. See text and data appendix for details on sample construction
and implementation of machine-learning ensemble method. Presented in the figure is share of correct guesses of respondent’s
race in the hold-out sample each year. The procedure to guess race in the hold-out sample was repeated 500 times, and the
share of guesses reported is the average of these 500 iterations.




                                                              A-37
