NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRUST IN LENDING
Richard T. Thakor
Robert C. Merton
Working Paper 24778
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24778

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018

We thank Barney Hartman-Glaser (discussant) and participants at the 2018 Financial
Intermediation Research Society Conference, 2018 North American Summer Meeting of the
Econometric Society, and Minnesota Junior Finance Conference for helpful comments. We also
thank Xuelin Li for research assistance. We alone are responsible for remaining errors, if any.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24778.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Richard T. Thakor and Robert C. Merton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trust in Lending
Richard T. Thakor and Robert C. Merton
NBER Working Paper No. 24778
June 2018
JEL No. E44,E51,E52,G21,G23,G28,H12,H81
ABSTRACT
We develop a theory of trust in lending, distinguishing between trust and reputation, and use it to
analyze the competitive interactions between banks and non-bank lenders (fintech firms). Trust
enables lenders to have assured access to financing, whereas a loss of investor trust makes this
access conditional on market conditions and lender reputation. Banks endogenously have stronger
incentives to maintain trust. When borrower defaults erode trust in lenders, banks are able to
survive the erosion of trust when fintech lenders do not. Trust is also asymmetric in nature—it is
more difficult to gain it than to lose it.

Richard T. Thakor
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South, 3-255
Minneapolis, MN 5545
rthakor@umn.edu
Robert C. Merton
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-634
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
rmerton@mit.edu

1

Introduction

This paper examines the role of trust in affecting the cost of lending and credit market
competition between banks and non-banks. Trust in financial products and institutions is
often essential for financial markets to function efficiently. Since the very origins of banking,
trust has played a foundational role in banks, with “my word is my bond” defining the very
essence of banks with regard to their safekeeping and depository functions. This notion of
trust in financial institutions also has deep implications for the credit that lenders provide,
since intermediaries use the funds they raise from depositors and investors to make loans.
For example, if a bank uses the money it raises via deposits to knowingly make a bad loan,
then it endangers the trust that depositors place in the bank and hence future funding. In
line with this, the concept of trust has emerged in policy discussions regarding the potential
impact of non-intermediated credit on banks and the credit market, with particular focus on
financial technology (fintech) lenders such as peer-to-peer (P2P) lending platforms (see He
et al. (2017)). Even with fintech lending, practitioners and market participants understand
the role of trust in enabling fintech firms to compete with banks.1
Trust in lending is therefore central to financial intermediation—it affects the ability of
banks and other intermediaries to sustain their funding models. But analyzing trust can also
generate a perspective on the future evolution of the credit market in the face of the growth
of non-intermediated credit such as P2P and other fintech lending. Ever since the 2007-2009
financial crisis, P2P lending platforms and other types of lending by fintech companies have
been growing at a rapid clip.2 Although still small compared to bank lending, this lending
has come at a time when bank lending capacity seems to not be growing (see Fenwick,
McCahery, and Vermeulen (2017) and Demyanyk, Loutskina, and Kolliner (2017)). This
1
For example, Rhydian Lewis, co-founder and chief executive of RateSetter, says “Banks can currently
access money more cheaply than marketplace lenders and, in order to be truly competitive, this gap must
reduce. The route to this for lending platforms is to build trust and acceptance, which comes with a strong
track record” (see Green (2016)).
2
While it initially started as non-intermediated platform-assisted credit transactions between peers, the
investors in these platforms are now mainly institutional investors; during the first quarter of 2016, only 15%
of Lending Club’s loans came from individuals investing on their own (see Salisbury (2016)).

2

has been observed not only in the U.S. but also in Europe, causing many to debate whether
fintech companies will eventually replace banks in performing lending and other functions
(e.g. Sorkin (2016)). While we have not yet observed any major crises or scandals in fintech
lending, there are many ways in which they can create suspicion of being untrustworthy.3
Our analysis suggests that the growth of fintech firms may be halted if there is an event that
erodes trust; this would cause funding to dry up and their borrowers to return to banks. We
therefore posit that understanding the role of trust in lending is central to understanding
the future evolution of the credit market, especially in terms of the relative provision of
intermediated and non-intermediated credit.
These developments raise a number of important questions: What is the effect of trust
on the access to and cost of financing for lenders? How is trust related to and different from
lender reputation? What incentives do lenders have to maintain trust and what can erode
it? How do these incentives differ across banks and fintech lenders?
We develop a theoretical model in order to address these questions. As a starting point,
we note that from a functional perspective (e.g. Merton (1990, 1993, 1995) and Merton
and Bodie (1995, 2005)), the lending functions of banks and fintech firms are similar—both
provide debt financing to clients. However, these lenders have different institutional features.
We therefore take an institutional perspective in order to examine the differences between
banks and fintech firms in terms of their ability to endogenously sustain trust.
In taking this institutional perspective, we focus on one key difference between banks and
fintech lenders, which is that banks raise significant financing through deposits (and thus are
leveraged lenders), whereas fintech lenders like P2P platforms are all-equity financed (see
Philippon (2015, 2016)).4 We draw upon the earlier work of Merton (1993, 1995, 1997) and
3

For example, Lending Club sold a major portfolio of $22 million to a large investor and subsequently
discovered the loans were neither what Lending Club had advertised nor what the investors had asked for.
Lending Club bought back the loans and launched an investigation that led to the firing of three senior
executives. See Wallace (2016).
4
Not all fintech lenders are all-equity financed, but the key is they are non-banks with no access to
deposits. Thus, the crucial distinction between banks and fintech that our analysis relies on is that banks
have access to lower-cost funding via deposits, but fintech lenders lack this access.

3

Merton and Thakor (forthcoming) in which the bank’s depositors are viewed as customers
who are provided valuable liquidity services and are insulated from the bank’s credit risk
through a combination of deposit insurance and the bank’s actions, whereas fintech lenders
have no such “customer relationship” with their financiers. This gives banks a potential
funding cost advantage over fintech lenders as well as an endogenous economic motivation to
act in a more trustworthy manner in investing their funds. While in practice there are other
differences too, such as fintech lenders having a technological and regulatory cost advantage
over banks, these differences do not appear in our main analysis.5 Thus, in our base model,
one could broadly interpret a fintech firm as any non-depository lender. However, we discuss
the implications of additional features unique to fintech within the context of our model. For
example, our analysis implies that if banks face higher regulatory costs than fintech lenders
and these costs are higher for riskier borrowers, the market will segment with fintech lenders
taking away the riskiest borrowers.6 A technological cost advantage for fintech firms allows
them to further peel away borrowers from banks.
In order to model trust, we follow Fehr (2009), who argues that a behavioral definition
of trust is the most appropriate and that the development or erosion of trust is often more
than just inferring a priori unknown types from observations.7 Indeed, trust often has a 0-1
property—you either trust someone or you do not.8 Unlike Fehr (2009), however, we model
trust using Ortoleva’s (2012) model of (partly) non-Bayesian belief revision in which agents
5

For example, as Morrison and White (2005) point out, regulatory screening of banks improves the
quality of banks given operating licenses. In our context, this implies that bank lending may be more
prudent on average than that of less-regulated non-banks. We show that this can arise endogenously even
absent regulatory intervention. Moreover, in our analysis, all of the bank’s non-equity funding comes from
insured deposits. If regulatory screening of banks had an influence at the margin on bank asset quality, even
uninsured deposit funding would be cheaper for banks than for non-banks.
6
See Jagtiani and Lemieux (2017), Demyanyk, Loutskina, and Kolliner (2017), and de Roure, Pelizzon,
and Thakor (2017) for evidence.
7
Fehr (2009, p. 238) notes: “An individual...trusts if she voluntarily places resources at the disposal of
another party (the trustee) without any legal commitment from the latter. In addition, the act of trust is
associated with an expectation that the act will pay off in terms of the investor’s goals. In particular, if the
trustee is trustworthy the investor is better off than if trust were not placed, whereas if the trustee is not
trustworthy the investor is worse off than if trust were not placed.”
8
Fehr (2009) notes that this can be modeled via betrayal aversion, and points out “...people are more
willing to take risk when facing a given probability of bad luck than to trust when facing an identical
probability of being cheated.”

4

face uncertainty both about the correct model of the world (“is the lender trustworthy or
self-interested?”) as well as about the lender’s “type” within a given model (if self-interested,
is the lender still worth financing?). Within-model uncertainty is a reputational effect and is
captured by the usual prior beliefs, whereas uncertainty about the true model is captured by
a prior over priors. This then leads to a belief revision process that is Bayesian in some states
and non-Bayesian in others, providing an ideal framework for analyzing lender reputation
and trust simultaneously. In this framework, a lender is trusted if agents adopt a model of the
world that the lender will never make a bad loan; this leads to an analysis in which market
conditions and lender performance do not affect the lender’s cost of funding.9 But in the
face of sufficiently strong ex post evidence that this model is incorrect, trust is lost (via nonBayesian belief updating)—lenders are viewed as self-interested, and market conditions and
lender performance (reputation) influence the cost and availability of financing to lenders,
with post-model-shift beliefs revised in a Bayesian manner.10
We motivate our modeling of trust by noting a remarkable feature of the 2007-2009 crisis,
namely the alacrity with which the effect of stress was manifested. Gorton and Metrick (2012)
document that the average haircut on bilateral repo transactions (excluding U.S. Treasuries)
rose from zero in early 2007 to almost 50% at the peak of the crisis in late 2008, with several
classes of assets having 100% haircuts, i.e., they were excluded entirely from being used as
collateral. Similarly, Iyer, Lopez, Peydro, and Schoar (2013) documented an unexpected
and sudden freeze of the European interbank market in August 2007. These are examples
9
In fact, the trust perspective also helps to shed light on a puzzling stylized fact. During the 2007-2009
crisis, although haircuts on bilateral repos rose sharply, haircuts on tri-party repos remained roughly constant
(see Copeland, Martin, and Walker (2011), and Sanches (2014)). One possible reason for this is that there
are two banks—Bank of New York Mellon and JP Morgan—that act as third-party agents for U.S. tri-party
repo transactions, and these institutions maintained the trust of investors during the crisis. Since tri-party
agents are involved in collateral selection, payment and settlement as well as essentially financing collateral
sellers (borrowers) for most of the day during intraday unwinding and resetting of contracts, investor trust
in these tri-party agents is important. Such agents are absent in bilateral repos.
10
Our modeling of within-model uncertainty is somewhat similar to Hartman-Glaser (2017), where there is
asymmetric information about issuer preferences for honestly revealing quality. In that model, asset retention
by an issuer selling the asset acts as a signal of asset quality, and reputation induces pooling, in contrast to
the static case in which the equilibrium is separating. In our model, there is no securization or loan retention
decision, and uncertainty about the true model plays a central role.

5

of discontinuities in pricing that suggest non-Bayesian belief revision by agents about the
economic environment—agents believing in a particular model of the economic environment
and then, faced with unexpected news, switching to a different model. We believe that
such behavior is plausibly understood in a trust framework—economic agents trust that the
financial products and institutions they are dealing with have certain attributes, but then
that trust is lost when unexpectedly bad news arrives that is incompatible with the initial
trust. This can induce a sharp and discontinuous change in prices and trading volume.
This modeling of trust is intended to capture three features. One is that trust reduces
an investor’s perception of the riskiness of a given investment (as in Gennaioli, Shleifer,
and Vishny (2015)), making the pricing of credit seem disassociated from the risk in the
environment. Thus, during periods in which lenders are trusted, risk will—from an ex
post perspective—appear to be underestimated. For example, Coval, Jurek, and Stafford
(2009) document that investors underestimated the probability of mortgage defaults in pricing mortgage-backed securities.11 Second, trust may be lost with a minor perturbation of
observed outcomes, but when it is lost it can precipitate a crisis that involves a drying up
of funding to lenders, consistent wtih sharp discontinuities in prices and trading. Third,
a crisis generated by the loss of trust will have the feature that the risks being penalized
during the crises were not even contemplated by investors when there was trust.12 Lack
of contemplation of positive probability events followed by episodes of funding drying up
entirely for some institutions when a crisis occurs are not phenomena that can be explained
using reputational/career concerns models with Bayesian updating.13 The use of model un11

A reason for trust being placed in these types of lenders and financial technologies in the first place is
likely due to a combination of the technologies being opaque and yet working well to begin with. Indeed, if
such technologies were transparent, then there may be no need for trust for them to be adopted. We provide
a discussion of this point later in the paper.
12
In the context of the 2007-2009 crisis, evidence presented by Foote, Gerardi, and Willen (2012) indicates
that investors did not even contemplate the magnitude of the home price declines that actually occurred.
13
Discontinuities may also arise in moral-hazard-based reputation models with known types in which the
threat of future punishment deters bad behavior and generates trigger strategy equilibria. For example,
Winton and Yerramilli (2015) create a model of loan securitization by a bank, in which the moral hazard
is that the bank may not monitor the borrower. Reputation acts as a sanctioning mechanism that operates
purely through the threat of future punishment imposed on the bank for poor loan performance. In equilibrium, both the punishment threat and loan retention by the bank combine to provide monitoring incentives.

6

certainty in Ortoleva’s (2012) non-Bayesian framework allows us to capture all these three
features of trust, but in a way that differs from previous approaches.
Our theory produces the following main results. First, when lenders are trusted, they can
raise financing at the lowest possible cost regardless of their prior loan default experience and
market conditions, so default risk will appear to be underestimated and hence mis-priced.
Second, the lender’s ability to maintain the trust of its financiers depends on its post-trust
default experience and market conditions—trust can be eroded when lenders experience
(significant) defaults during an economic boom. We show that when trust is lost, banks may
survive the loss of trust and hence continue to operate in circumstances in which fintech
lenders are forced to shut down. That is, while trust is important for all lenders, it is
essential for fintech lenders to operate. Third, banks have stronger endogenous incentives to
maintain trust, so a potential advantage of banks is that they are trusted lenders. Finally,
investor trust has an “asymmetry” property—it is easier to lose it than to gain it. Beyond
our model, we also discuss how trust may interact with the informational environment, and
in what circumstances additional transparency may substitute for trust.
The intuition for the results is as follows. When lenders are trusted, they are able to
obtain the cheapest possible funding. But because banks finance with deposits and provide
depositors liquidity services, they share in the associated liquidity benefits and are able to
raise financing at a lower cost than fintech lenders, all else being equal. The associated
higher profitability is available only when the bank remains solvent, which provides the
bank a stronger incentive than the fintech lender to make good loans that have a higher
solvency probability. When loans repay, trust is maintained and funding costs remain the
same since trusted lenders are believed to unconditionally make only good loans. However,
There are some key differences between these models and ours. One is that our model features both private
information and moral hazard and the key to both reputation and trust is the intertemporal learning that
occurs about the lender’s type, with price adjustments predicated on this learning. Thus, we only admit
subgame perfect strategies, thereby precluding trigger-strategy punishments that provide ex ante incentives
but may not be subgame perfect. Second, we focus on providing a way to distinguish between credit market
reputation and trust in a private-information setting (with unknown types) with the feature that in equilibrium, trust insulates lenders against performance-based risk pricing adjustments, whereas reputation does
not.

7

if loans default, then investors may question their assumed model of the world that lenders
are trustworthy. Trust may still be maintained if default occurs in a “bad” macro state in
which such default is relatively likely, but trust will be lost if default occurs in a relatively
“good” macro state in which it was unlikely to occur with a trusted lender. A loss of trust
means that investors’ initially-adopted model is discarded, and investors will now believe
that lenders are self-interested. This non-Bayesian model switching causes a discontinuous
increase in the funding costs of lenders, with funding possibly drying up for fintech lenders.
The reason is that if all lenders are self-interested (and hence not to be trusted), banks will
have stronger reputational incentives to make good loans. Recognizing this, investors may be
willing to finance self-interested banks, but not self-interested fintech lenders, giving banks
a greater ability to survive a loss of trust.14
In a nutshell, our basic idea is that trust insulates lenders from the adverse reputational
consequences of loan defaults, and the degree of insulation depends on market conditions.
Whether they are trusted or must rely on reputation, the depository (customer) relationships
banks have are a source of rents—unavailable to fintech lenders—that influence banks to
make good loans in some states even when they are self-interested. This is what enables
banks to survive when trust is lost, a circumstance in which fintech lenders shut down.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature.
Section 3 develops the model. Section 4 provides an analysis of the first best. Section 5
analyzes the second best. Section 6 discusses extensions and additional implications of the
analysis. In this section, we discuss the implications of introducing costs of bank regulation
and of operating fintech lending platforms, transparency versus opaqueness for lenders, and
the viability of financial innovations. Section 7 concludes. All proofs are included in the
Appendix.
14

Our analysis does not consider the contagion effects of a loss of trust, a feature that may amplify the
effects we model. For example, in a reputation model, Morrison and White (2013) model the regulator’s
reputation and show that this can give rise to contagion effects, whereby the failure of one bank may indicate
regulatory incompetence and induce investors to withdraw funding from other banks.

8

2

Related Literature

Our paper is also related to work on the role of trust in financial markets. Guiso, Sapienza,
and Zingales (2008) develop a model in which the individual’s trust that he will not be
cheated determines whether he will participate in the stock market. Less trusting individuals
are less likely to buy stock, and buy less when they do participate. Their calibration of the
model indicates that mistrust is sufficiently severe to explain limited participation in the
U.S. and differences across countries. Sapienza and Zingales (2011) review this literature.
Our work is complementary in the sense that whether institutional lenders have the trust
of investors affects whether investors are willing to fund these lenders.15 However, there
are numerous differences, the key one being our focus on the role of trust in determining
the cost and availability of financing to institutional lenders and the resulting nature of
the competitive interaction between banks and fintech lenders. Other differences are our
modeling of the way trust can be lost and the asymmetric nature of trust.
Another paper in which trust plays a role is Gennaioli, Shelifer, and Vishny (2015a). In
that model, trust in investment advisors helps to reduce the risk that risk-averse investors
perceive in investing in assets recommended by the advisor. Net of advisors’ fees, investors
do worse than the market, but they still prefer to pay fees. When investors have biased
expectations and chase hot stocks, even trusted advisors pander to their clients’ beliefs
rather than correcting them. This is quite a different notion of trust from what we model,
in at least three respects. First, in our model, all agents are risk neutral, so trust plays no
role in reducing risk-aversion-related anxiety. Second, a lender that is truly a trusted lender
never violates the trust; it is only self-interested lenders mistaken as trusted lenders that
violate trust at times. And finally, our focus is on a very different set of issues, including
incentives to maintain trust that differ across lenders and the asymmetric nature of trust in
15

Recently, Gurun, Stoffman, and Yonker (forthcoming) show how communities exposed to the Madoff
Ponzi scheme withdrew assets from investment advisers and increased deposits at banks, and provide evidence
that services which built up more trust experienced fewer withdrawals. Although their focus is money
management, this is broadly consistent with the mechanism in our model that banks are trusted and that
there will be flight towards more trusted entities following a loss of trust.

9

the sense that it is easier to lose than to gain it.
Our theory is complementary to the “neglected risks” argument in Gennaioli, Shleifer,
and Vishny (GSV, 2012, 2015b), who develop models of financial crises in which investors
overweight “representative events” (based on the Kahneman and Tversky (1972) idea of
“representativeness”), thereby underestimating security risk during good times. While their
theory is about the security-related beliefs of investors, our theory is about lender-specific
beliefs of investors. This leads to numerous differences. First, in the GSV models, when
the neglected risks of a security are eventually recognized, all firms holding that security
experience a negative shock. By contrast, in our model the loss of trust is a lender-specific
phenomenon, so only the lenders suffering from a loss of trust are adversely affected. Second, in the GSV models, belief revisions are always non-Bayesian, whereas in our model
belief revision coincides with Bayes rule in “normal” times (i.e. when there is uncertainty
resolution within the initially-adopted model) and departs from it only for “unexpected” or
zero-probability events (uncertainty resolution that rejects the initially-adopted model).16
Third, the GSV models predict that a crisis will be preceded by a sufficiently long string of
bad news, whereas in our model a crisis can occur suddenly in an economic boom, with high
defaults experienced by lenders.17 Finally, the prediction of our model about the asymmetry
of lender trust is unique.
Our paper is part of a growing literature on the role of non-depository lenders vis a
vis banks and how this is affecting the credit market. This literature is at present mainly
empirical or descriptive. See, for example, Buchak et. al. (2017), Fenwick et. al. (2017),
Greenwood and Scharfstein (2013), Phillipon (2016), and Zetzsche et. al. (2017). To the best
of our knowledge, ours is the first paper to theoretically model trust-based intermediation
and use it to characterize the impact of fintech firms on the credit market.
16

The evidence provided by Weinstein (2011) is consistent with this kind of belief revision.
In their model, investors use extrapolative expectations, so they initially under-react to bad news, but
then over-react to it when there is a sufficiently long sequence of such news.
17

10

3

The Model

There are two time periods. The first period begins at t = 0 and ends at t = 1, while
the second period begins at t = 1 and ends at t = 2. All agents are risk neutral, and the
one-period riskless rate is r > 0. Since the riskless asset is accessible to all agents, the
reservation rate of return on providing financing is r for lenders as well as the financiers
of lenders. That is, a lender can always obtain an expected return of r by investing in
the market. The economy has individual agents who can be borrowers or savers (or both),
banks that intermediate between borrowers and savers by raising money from depositors and
shareholders at t = 0 and funding loans with that money, and (non-bank) fintech lending
platforms that provide non-intermediated financing (e.g. P2P lending). While lenders (banks
and fintech platforms) exist for both periods, each borrower, depositor, and shareholder
lives for one period. Thus, there are first-period borrowers and financiers and second-period
borrowers and financiers. This means all claims are settled at the end of each period and
the only “long-lived” entity is the lender. This allows us to focus on the role of reputation
and trust without complications from multiperiod debt contracting issues.

3.1

Agents

Borrowers: At the start of each period, there are agents who have projects, with each
project requiring L at the start of the period and paying off at the end of the period. The
agents with projects are penniless and need loans to finance these projects—so we call them
borrowers. Each borrower has a good (socially efficient) project that pays off x ∈ R+ with
probability q ∈ (0, 1) at the end of the period and 0 with probability 1 − q. The good project
is therefore assumed to have a payoff of

qx > L[1 + r]

A loan to a borrower with such a project is referred to as a “G loan”.
11

(1)

The Loan Contract: Each first-period borrower takes a loan of L at t = 0 and promises
to repay the lender some amount R at t = 1; this amount can be repaid only if the borrower’s
project pays off x. Thus, q can also be viewed as a measure of the borrower’s default risk,
with higher q implying lower default risk. Similarly, each second-period borrower takes a
loan of L and promises to repay some R at t = 2.

Depositors: These are agents who have liquidity at the start of each period that they
can either deposit in a bank or invest in a riskless security that delivers a return of r. If
an amount D is deposited in the bank at t = 0, it produces liquidity, safekeeping, and
transaction services worth ϕ(D) > 0 ∀D > 0 at t = 1 if the bank is solvent and fully repays
depositors, ϕ̂(D) > 0 ∀D > 0 at t = 1 if the bank fails and depositors are paid off by
the insurer, and zero at t = 1 if the bank fails and the depositors receive nothing.18 Here,
ϕ(D) > ϕ̂(D) ∀D > 0, ϕ0 ≥ ϕ̂0 > r, and ϕ(0) = ϕ̂(0) = 0. The same assumptions apply to
second-period deposits that arrive at t = 1 and are paid off at t = 2. We take the available
supply of deposits as exogenously fixed at D < L.
Depositors play two roles here—they provide financing and they consume services provided by the bank. As in Merton and Thakor (forthcoming), we refer to them as “customers”
of the bank. This is in contrast to shareholders who are pure financiers of the bank. This is a
feature that distinguishes banks from non-bank lenders—banks receive substantial financing
from customers.

Banks: There are regulated entities that operate in a competitive credit market, designing
loan contracts that maximize the expected utilities of borrowers subject to the participation
constraints of depositors and investors. We assume that each bank is operated by a (penni18

Donaldson, Piacentino, and Thakor (forthcoming) provide a foundational theory of banking in which
banks exist to provide safekeeping depository services in an economy with no pledgeability of output. The
notion that the value of depository services is lower when the bank fails and depositors are paid off than
when the bank is solvent is meant to capture the idea that when a bank fails and the deposit insurer has
to step in, there is some disruption in the services that depositors receive, some of it possibly arising from
weaker incentives that a bank on the verge of insolvency will have in providing services to its customers (see
Merton and Thakor (forthcoming)).

12

less) insider who seeks to maximize his own expected utility. Each bank raises D ∈ (0, L)
in deposits at the start of each period and the rest of the needed funding from shareholders
who require an expected return of r on the funds they provide. Shareholders who provide
funding at t = 0 are paid off fully at t = 1, conditional on the bank being solvent, at which
time funds are raised from a new group of shareholders. Deposits are completely insured
to guarantee depositors’ payoff in the event of bank insolvency.19 If the bank is insolvent,
the claims of the bank’s shareholders are worthless, and after the depositors are paid of by
the deposit insurer, equity financing for the second period is raised from a new group of
shareholders.20 Without loss of generality, we set the deposit insurance premium at zero.21
Note that banks are raising all of their funding at t = 0 from only two sources—deposits
and equity. This is without loss of generality since our model distinguishes between deposits
and funds provided by investors, but there is no difference between the expected returns
that need to be provided to shareholders and subordinated debtholders, so the mix of equity
and “sub” debt in the bank’s capital structure is irrelevant. Financing to each bank is in
perfectly elastic supply, and the return to each group of financiers satisfies the participation
constraints of that group, i.e., gives that group an expected return of at least r.22

Fintech Lenders: There is no intermediation with this form of lending and hence no depository services provided to customers. All financing is raised from investors (shareholders)
and loaned to borrowers. That is, as in Philippon (2016), while banks are “levered lenders”,
fintech lenders such as P2P platforms are “all-equity” lenders. Each fintech platform is also
operated to maximize the expected utility of the insider owner.
19

This is for simplicity; our results are unchanged if we assume partial deposit insurance.
That is, the previous shareholders of the failed bank no longer have any claim on the bank’s cash flows.
21
This is consistent with the institutional reality for U.S. banks over long periods of time. Moreover, as
long as the premium is risk-insensitive, it reduces to a constant and does not affect the analysis.
22
We will show later that the participation constraint of shareholders will hold tightly in equilibrium,
whereas depositors’ participation constraint will be slack.
20

13

3.2

Agent Types, Models of the World, and Uncertainties

Models of the World: There are two models of the world that financiers (investors and
depositors) can have: (1) lenders are trustworthy (Model I), and (2) lenders are self-interested
(Model II). In Model I, the lender chooses to always make the G loan. The lender’s type
in Model I is referred to as τ0 . In Model II, the lender maximizes a type-dependent utlility
function that could lead the bank to make a different loan.
There are three possible lender types in Model II: τ1 , τ2 , and τ3 . All three types of lenders
can invest in an inefficient loan (“PB” loan) in each period that generates a private benefit, β̃,
in any period in which it is chosen.23 The choice of loan is unobservable. For type τ1 , in any




period β̃1 ∈ {βl1 , βh1 }, with 0 < βl1 < βh1 , with Pr β̃1 = β1l = ν, and Pr β̃1 = βh1 = 1 − ν.


For type τ2 , in any period β̃2 ∈ {βl2 , βh2 }, with βl1 < βl2 < βh1 < βh2 , Pr β̃2 = βl2 = ν, and


Pr β̃2 = βh2 = 1 − ν. In addition to generating these private benefits, the inefficient loan
of types τ1 and τ2 pays off a pledgeable amount x with probability p < q and zero with
probability 1 − p, with
px + βh < L[1 + r].

(2)

This means that the PB loan of type-τ2 is more attractive than that of type-τ1 when both have
low private benefits and also when both have high private benefits. For type τ3 , β̃3 = B > βh2
in any period. The PB loan for type-τ3 lender has a pledgeable payoff of zero almost surely.
We assume that B is so large that the type τ3 lender will always make the type-τ3 PB loan.24
Beliefs and Preferences: Conditional on the “correct” model of the world being Model
II, the common prior belief of financiers and borrowers at t = 0 is that Pr (τ1 ) = γ1 ∈ (0, 1)
23

There are many ways to interpret β̃. One is that it is a private cost of monitoring the good loan that
is avoided with the PB loan which pays the lender less because it is not monitored. The other is that it is
literally a rent that accrues to the lender because the loan is made to a friend or relative of the manager of
the lender.
24
The reason for having type-τ3 in the model despite this is that in some of the equilibria we characterize,
both types τ1 and τ2 choose the same strategies in the first period. This pooling means that the first-period
outcome would not affect agents’ perceptions of the lender’s type in terms of distinguishing between τ1 and
τ2 . Having τ3 means that both τ1 and τ2 have a reputational incentive for avoiding default to separate from
τ3 .

14

and Pr (τ2 ) = 1 − γ2 and Pr (τ3 ) = 1 − γ1 − γ2 . In Model II, the lender has the following
utility function in each period:



utij = αj 1 − sti zijt + [1 − αj ] β̃j

(3)

where the superscript t designates the time period, the subscript j designates the lender’s
“type” in Model II—where j ∈ {1, 2, 3} with j = 1 designating τ1 , j = 2 designating τ2 , and
j = 3 designating τ3 —and i ∈ {b, f } designates “bank” or fintech platform. In addition, zijt
is the payoff to the shareholders of the lender, sti is the share of that payoff that the insider
i must sell to raise the equity needed in period t, and α ∈ (0, 1) is a weighting factor.
The common prior belief of borrowers and financiers at t = 0 is that the probability
is ζ 0 ∈ (0, 1) that the true model of the world is Model I and 1 − ζ 0 that it is Model II.
Whatever model of the world is adopted by borrowers and financiers (“agents” henceforth
when referred to collectively as a group), it applies to banks as well as fintech platforms.
This “model uncertainty” plays a key role in the analysis.
t
∈ {G, P B} be the choice
Lender Maximization Programs and Information: Let lij

of loan in period t by type j ∈ {τ1 , τ2 , τ3 } of lender i ∈ {b, f } in Model II. Then in the second
period:
2
lij
∈ arg max u2ij

(4)

1
lij
∈ arg max Uij0

(5)



2
Uij0 = u1ij + E u2ij lij

(6)

{G,P B}

and in the first period:
{G,P B}

where

is the expected utility of the bank decisionmaker over two periods, and it takes as a given
2
the subgame perfect choice lij
in the second period. The maximizations above are subject

15

to the participation constraints of the financiers of the lenders and borrowers.
We assume that while each lender can observe the borrowers’ type, the lender’s financiers
cannot tell whether the lender made a G or a PB loan.

Macro Uncertainty: The model also has a macro uncertainty whose realization is observed at the end of each period. The uncertainty represents the state of the overall economy,
namely a systematic risk, and we delineate it as a random variable m̃ with probability density function η. Let supp η = [m, m]. The realization of m̃ is publicly observed and has
a multiplicative effect on the success probability of any investment by the lender. That is,
there exists a function:
C : [m, m] × (0, 1) → (0, 1)

(7)

such that for a given q ∈ (0, 1) and a realized m ∈ [m, m], the repayment probability of the
good loan becomes C(m, q) ∈ (0, 1), with ∂C/∂m > 0, C (m, q) < q, C (m, q) > q. This
means the better the macro state, the higher the success probability of the good project and
hence the repayment probability of the good loan. Similarly, for the PB loan of the type τ1
lender in Model II,
C : [m, m] × (0, 1) → (0, 1)

(8)

and again for any p ∈ (0, q), we have ∂C/∂m > 0.
Let
Z

m

q≡

C(m, q)η dm

(9)

C(m, p)η dm

(10)

m

Z

m

p≡
m

Both (1) and (2) are assumed to hold with q and p replacing q and p, respectively.

The Use of Model Uncertainty in the Equilibrium Concept: Introducing model
uncertainty and using the equilibrium concept developed by Ortoleva (2012) allows us to
model the possible loss of trust in lenders as a discontinuous shift in beliefs about their
16

type or motives, as we explained in the Introduction. This sort of shift better captures
loss of trust than would a smooth Bayesian revision of beliefs about types that is more
the reputational effects frequently encountered in career-concerns models.25 Within-model
uncertainty captures the normal Bayesian revision of beliefs about types that occurs once
agents have (re)selected their model of the world based on their posterior beliefs about the
lender’s type. Since banks and fintech lenders are observationally distinct, revision of beliefs
occurs for each as a distinct entity.

3.3

Competitive Structure of the Credit Market

Borrowers search for lenders. We assume that a borrower can find only one lender with
probability 1 − θ, and can find two or more lenders with probability θ ∈ (0, 1). When the
borrower can find two or more lenders, these lenders engage in Bertrand competition and the
pricing of the loan is competitive, in that the lender’s participation constraint holds tightly.
When the borrower can find only one lender, the pricing is monopolistic, so the repayment
obligation on the loan is set at the maximum pledgeable cash flow on the borrower’s project,
x. We can thus view θ as a measure of how competitive the credit market is, with higher
values of θ representing greater credit market competitiveness.26 As mentioned previously,
lenders are able to raise financing at competitive terms.
Bank Regulator: There is a regulator who provides complete deposit insurance.27 Although we take this as given, we also provide a microfoundation for it. In reality, insured
banks are subject to a host of regulations that entail compliance costs. We ignore these for
now but discuss their implications in a later section. Because fintech platforms do not have
access to deposits, they are not subject to regulation.
25

For example, Holmstrom and Ricart i Costa (1986).
This specification is a way to provide for an ex ante sharing of the project surplus between the bank and
the borrower. An alternative specification would be a Nash bargaining game.
27
The justification for this specification is that depositor insurance is provided to enhance social welfare
by insulating the bank’s depository customers from the bank’s credit risk (see Merton and Thakor (forthcoming)).
26

17

Zero Lower Bound: We assume that all interest rates in the economy have a zero lower
bound.28

3.4

Summary of Timing and Actions

There are two time periods, period 1 and period 2, and three dates: t = 0, t = 1, and
t = 2. At the start of each period, there are banks and fintech lending platforms that can
potentially make loans to borrowers. The banks finance themselves in each period with a
mix of deposits and equity. The deposits are completely insured, where D is the amount of
deposits raised and insured. The fintech platform finances itself entirely with equity raised
from investors.
Economic agents can put their beliefs on two possible economic models of the world:
that lenders are all trustworthy and will make good loans (Model I), or that lenders are selfinterested and will take into account their private benefits in choosing what loan to make
(Model II). The beliefs of agents are common knowledge at t = 0. These beliefs determine
the costs of financing for lenders and hence the repayment obligations for borrowers in the
first period.
At t = 0, each borrower searches for a lender, and with probability θ it finds two or more
lenders who are willing to lend, whereas with probability 1 − θ only one lender is found.
The borrower cares only about the price of credit, not whether the lender is a bank or a
fintech platform. Also at t = 0, banks raise whatever financing they need from deposits and
equity to make the first-period loan and satisfy regulatory capital requirements, and fintech
platforms raise their necessary financing from investors. Then each lender privately observes
its realized β̃ and chooses between the good loan and the PB loan, being aware that its
financiers cannot tell whether it is a good loan or a PB loan.29
At t = 1, the macro state m̃ is realized and it determines the success probability of
28

This assumption helps to simplify the algebra, but is not crucial to the analysis. Essentially, it leads to
depositors receiving a zero interest rate on deposits in equilibrium.
29
If the bank wishes to make a PB loan, it does not approach a good borrower, so that borrower has no
ability to learn the bank’s “type”.

18

the loan made by the bank at t = 0. The borrower repays or defaults on its loan and the
lender settles the claims of its financiers, with the deposit insurer stepping in for the bank
if the borrower defaults. Borrowers and financiers revise their beliefs about the true model
of the world, and then arrive at their posterior beliefs about the lender’s type within the
model of the world chosen for the second period. Trust in lenders is either maintained or
lost. This then determines each lender’s cost of financing in the second period, and hence
the price at which the second-period loan can be offered. It is possible that the first-period
outcome is such that financiers are unwilling to provide second-period financing. That is,
the first-period outcome may lead to a loss of trust that shuts out the lender in the second
period. If lending occurs, then all second-period claims are settled at t = 2. See Figure 1
which summarizes the sequence of events.
Note that all lenders start out with the same prior beliefs about whether they are trustworthy or self-interested, and the same prior beliefs over types conditional on being selfinterested. Hence, if Model I prevails, then all lenders are trusted at t = 0, and if Model II
prevails, then al l lenders are considered self-interested at t = 0. However, at t = 1, whether
an initially-trusted lender continues to be trusted depends on the information set at t = 1,
so some lenders may be trusted at t = 1 and others may not be.

4

Preliminary Analysis

In this section we present some premliminary analysis. We start by describing the first best,
then present results regarding the deposit interest rate and the extent of risk exposure for
depositors. We then characterize the fintech platform’s and the bank’s loan obligations in
the first-best case. This is followed by a discussion of the equilibrium.

19

t=0
I Borrowers and financiers
share common prior beliefs
about the true model of the
world (i.e. the probability
that lenders are
trustworthy) and the
lender’s type within each
model.
I These beliefs determine
the prices at which banks
and fintech lenders raise
financing.
I Each lender observes its
realized private benefit
from the PB loan and
decides whether to make
that loan or the good loan.

Figure 1: Time Line
t=1
I The macro uncertainty
m̃ is realized and it affects
first-period success
probabilities.
I Borrowers pay off or
default on first-period
loans. Lenders settle claims
with financiers. If the
lender collects a profit, it is
paid off to shareholders as
a dividend. In the case of
banks that fail, the deposit
insurer covers part of the
claim.
I Economic agents revise
their beliefs about the true
model of the world, and
their beliefs about lender
types within the model.
Lenders may lose trust.
I Second period begins
with new borrowers and
new depositors.
Shareholders may or may
not choose to provide more
financing.

20

t=2
I Second-period claims are
settled after second-period
m̃ is realized and loans are
repaid or default.

4.1

First Best

This is the case in which the borrower’s project choice and the bank’s loan choice are both
observable. The first-best outcome can be trivially shown to be the bank making the good
loan, and the borrower investing in the good project. Note that the first-best outcome for
a single period is the same as the single-period outcome with trustworthy lenders. Next we
have a useful result.
Lemma 1: The deposit interest rate is zero if we assume that depositors’ financial claims
are completely insulated from the bank’s credit risk, i.e., deposits are riskfree.
The idea that depositors do not wish to be exposed to the bank’s credit risk builds on
the insights of Merton (1989, 1993, 1995, 1997), and most recently, Merton and Thakor
(forthcoming). In the next result, we will establish that this is indeed the efficient outcome
in our setting here.
The reason why the deposit interest rate is zero is that depositors receive bank services
that are valued more highly, conditional on bank solvency, than the riskless rate r. Absent
the zero lower bound on interest rates, depositors would even accept a negative interest rate.
Thus, with a zero interest rate, the depositors receive an expected total return (including
services) that exceeds their reservation expected return of zero (i.e. their participation
constraint is slack).
Lemma 2: The social welfare benefit of the regulator providing complete deposit insurance
relative to providing no insurance is

[1 − q] [ϕ̂(D) − D] > 0.

(11)

The intuition is that the value of depository services to the depositors when they are
fully paid off in the state in which the bank fails is ϕ̂(D), and this exceeds the net cost
21

of the provision of this insurance, rD. This makes it socially efficient for complete deposit
insurance to be provided.
Next we turn to the borrower’s first-best repayment obligations.
Lemma 3: The borrower’s (first-best) repayment obligation when faced with only one lender
is:
R1F B = x

(12)

and when faced with two or more lenders, it is:
R2F B = {L[1 + r]} {q}−1 .

(13)

The repayment obligation offered is independent of whether the lender is a bank or a fintech
lender.
This result follows from the fact that the lender fully extracts all project surplus when
it is a monopolist, but offers a price to the borrower at which the loan yields an expected
return of r to the lender when there are two or more competing lenders. The reason why no
lender prices the loan lower is that r is each lender’s reservation expected return on lending,
since this is the return that can be obtained by investing in the riskless asset.

4.2

Second Best: Equilibrium Concept

We now define the equilibrium we will use to characterize the strategies of banks and fintech
platforms in the second best. One of our main goals is to examine the role that financier
trust plays in influencing lender behavior. Many seem to believe that the usurping of bank
market share by fintech platforms is only the tip of the iceberg and that eventually banks will
lose at least most of their transaction lending to their fintech rivals. Our point is that trust
will be an important mediating variable in this dynamic and that banks have a potential
advantage as “trusted lenders”.
22

As we discussed in the Introduction, trust is typically all-or-nothing—one either trusts
an agent, or does not. So if we begin with a situation in which a lender is trusted and
then we observe an outcome that seems patently incompatible with that trust, then we are
essentially observing a zero-probability event, and Bayes rule for belief revision cannot be
used.
To model such behavior and its implications for the strategies of lenders, we rely on
Ortoleva’s (2012) Hypothesis Testing Representation (henceforth HTR) to characterize belief
revision. We embed this model in the definition of our equilibrium, which follows a discussion
of how beliefs are formed and revised.

Discussion of Equilibrium Belief Formation: At t = 0, all financiers and borrowers
(“agents” henceforth) have common prior beliefs that if Model I is the true model of the
world, then all lenders are trustworthy, and if Model II is the true model of the world, then
there is a probability γ1 ∈ (0, 1) that the lender is of type τ1 , a probability γ2 that the lender
is of type τ2 , and a probability 1 − γ1 − γ2 that the lender is type τ3 . All financiers also
have a prior over priors and believe that ζ 0 ∈ (0, 1) is the probability that Model I is the
correct model and 1 − ζ 0 is the probability that Model II is the correct model. In the first
step, at t = 0 the agents choose the model to which the prior over priors assigns the highest
likelihood, i.e., they adopt Model I for their beliefs if ζ 0 ≥ 0.5 and Model II if ζ 0 < 0.5.
They also choose the threshold probability ε ∈ (0, 1) for a future revision of their prior over
priors. Given these beliefs, agents determine the price at which financing will be provided
to lenders so as to yield each group of financiers an expected return of at least r, with the
expectation taken over the beliefs adopted in Step 1.
At t = 1, the macro state realization is observed and also whether the borrower has repaid
or defaulted on the first-period loan. Based on this information, in Step 2 agents test their
priors to determine if the correct model of the world was used in Step 1. If the probability
that the agents’ prior assigned to the observed repayment/default outcome at t = 1 is above

23

the threshold ε, then the prior belief chosen in Step 1 is not rejected, and beliefs are now
updated using Bayes rule, thereby determining the second-period financing costs for lenders
and the terms at which the lenders will make second-period loans to borrowers.
If, however, the probability that the agents’ prior assigned to the new information observed at t = 1 is below the threshold ε, then the prior is rejected and agents go back to their
prior over priors ζ 0 , update it using Bayes’ rule using the information at t = 1, and then in
Step 3 chooses the prior to which the updated prior over priors assigns the highest likelihood.
With these new beliefs, financiers determine the cost at which lenders can raise financing,
and lenders determine the terms at which they will lend to second-period borrowers. A
visualization of this process is provided in Figure 2.
This means that if the prior “chosen” at t = 0 is rejected by the data, agents reconsider
the prior to use by choosing the new maximum likelihood prior, which is extracted by
examining the prior over priors after its updating using Bayes’ rule. The idea is that ε is
some arbitrarily small positive number, and we will assume throughout that this is the case.
As Ortoleva (2012) points out, when ε = 0, belief revision is exactly in accordance with
Bayes’ rule.30
Note that in our setting, a model is itself a prior belief over the lender’s type, and ζ is
the prior over these prior beliefs. Using Ortoleva’s (2012) notation, we therefore define π as
the prior belief, which in our model is a vector of two probability distributions over lender
types, π = {πT , πN }, where

πT = hPr (τ0 ) = 1, Pr (τ1 ) = 0, Pr (τ2 ) = 0, Pr (τ3 ) = 0i ,

(14)

πN = hPr (τ0 ) = 0, Pr (τ1 ) = γ1 ∈ (0, 1), Pr (τ2 ) = γ2 ∈ (0, 1), Pr (τ3 ) = 1 − γ1 − γ2 ∈ (0, 1)i ,
(15)
where τ0 denotes that the lender is trustworthy, τi denotes that the lender is self-interested
and of type τi , with i ∈ {1, 2, 3}. Then the prior over priors says that ζ 0 is the prior belief
30

See Ortoleva (2012) for an analysis of the uniqueness properties of this representation.

24

Figure 2: Hypothesis Testing Representation

STEP 2

STEP 1






All agents
(financiers) start
with prior over
priors about the right
model of the world
The model assigned
the highest
likelihood by the
prior over priors is
adopted as the
model of the world
A threshold
probability ε > 0 is
assigned for
hypothesis testing




Outcomes observed
Agents test their initial hypothesis that their chosen
model was correct

Based on initial model, did observed outcome have
probability of occurrence > ε?

No

Yes

Do not reject initial
model and revise beliefs
using Bayes’ Rule

Reject initial prior and
go back and revise prior
over priors using Bayes
Rule and observed
outcome at t = 1

STEP 3


25

Choose the model to which the updated prior over
priors assigns the highest likelihood

that the correct prior is πT and 1 − ζ 0 is the prior belief that the correct prior is πN .
Before we define the equilibrium formally, some additional notiation is useful. We will
use the time superscript on the prior to designate the date at which the prior is chosen,
i.e., π 0 is the prior chosen at t = 0 and π 1 the prior chosen at t = 1. We will use the
same date nomenclature in assigning superscripts to all the other variables. Let ω be the
observed outcome at t = 1, where ω is the realization of a pair of random variables: ω =
{borrower defaults or repays, m}. Let Ω be the set of ω’s for all lenders.

Definition of Competitive Equilibrium: A competitive equilibrium consists of a vector
of beliefs, prices, and strategies at t = 0 and a vector of beliefs, prices, and strategies at
t = 1 that can be described as follows:
(i)

At t = 0, the equilibrium consists of hε, π 0 , R10 , R20 , φ0i (τj )i where it is common
knowledge that ε is the threshold probability chosen by agents, π 0 ∈ {πT , πN } is
the prior belief chosen by agents over lenders’ types, R10 and R20 are the repayment
obligations of the borrower when faced with a single lender and when faced with
two or more lenders, respectively, φ0i (τj ) is the strategy of a lender i ∈ {b, f } of
type τj , j ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}, where the lender’s strategy is a choice of loan from {G,
PB}, conditional on making a loan, as well as the decision of whether to make
a loan. Here π 0 is chosen by agents using the HTR; and φ0i is chosen by each
lender to maximize its expected utility over two periods, given π 0 and π 1 (ω) in
each future ω ∈ Ω.31

(ii)

At t = 1, each ω ∈ Ω, the equilibrium consists of hπ 1 (ω), R11 , R21 , φ1i (τj )i, where
π 1 (ω) ∈ {πT , πN }is the updated prior belief over lenders’ types chosen by agents
at t = 1 based on the HTR; R11 and R21 are the repayment obligations of the
borrower in the second period when finding only one lender and when it finds two
or more lenders, respectively; and φ1i (τj ) is the strategy of a lender in the second

31

Agents here are all financiers of lenders and those who borrow from the lenders.

26

period, defined in a manner similar to φ0i (τj ). Note that φ1i (τj ) also includes not
extending a loan because the lender may be unable to raise financing at t = 1. All
strategies are subgame perfect in the sense that: the lender’s choice of loan solves
(4) and the loan prices is determined as in Lemma 3, subject to the participation
constraints of lenders’ second-period financiers, taking π 1 (ω) as given.
Our focus in the analysis will be on a situation in which agents use the HTR and at t = 0
choose the prior that lenders are trustworthy.32 We will then examine the behavior of banks
and fintech platforms in the first period when they are trusted. This allows us to characterize
conditions under which trust can be lost in the second period, which then leads to an analysis
of how the potential to lose trust in the future influences lender behavior at t = 0.

5

Analysis of the Second-Best Equilibrium with Trust

5.1

Evolution of Beliefs and Trust

In this section, we solve for the equilibrium. We establish four general results about trust,
how it can be lost, and how banks have an advantage over fintech platforms because of their
traditional role as trusted lenders. Our first result has to do with how a lender chooses
its second-period strategy, conditional on the strategy it chose in the first period and the
first-period outcome.
In preparation for this result, we need to introduce some notation. Recall that ζ 1 is the
prior over priors at t = 1 and π 1 (ω) is the prior belief chosen by agents at t = 1 using the
32

In a sense, we can think of this as corresponding to the current credit market situation in which lenders
are trusted by financiers to make good loans.

27

HTR. Thus, using the notation from (14) and (15):33

π 1 (ω) =





πT





if agents believe lender is trusted

πN = hµiω (1), µiω (2), 1 − µiω (1) − µiω (2)i if agents believe at t = 1







that lender is self interested

(16)

µiω (j) ≡ Pr(lender i is type τj | π 2 = πN , ω, j = 1, 2)

(17)

where

where i ∈ {b, f }, and recall that ω ∈ Ω is the composite state that includes the realized m̃
and whether the first-period borrower repaid the loan or defaulted. To simply notation, let
µiω (3) = 1 − µiω (1) − µiω (2).
We now introduce some additional notation that is useful in the subsequent analysis. Let
λi (with i ∈ {b, f }) be the net payoff to the lender’s shareholders when the G loan repays,
and define an indicator function indicating that Model I is chosen:

t
I{π
=
T}




1 if π t (ω) = πT , t ∈ {0, 1}

(18)



0 otherwise
and an indicator function related to the choice of the G loan:

Iit (j) =




1 if the strategy φti (τj ) chooses the G loan

(19)



0 otherwise
Note that

33

λb = θR2F B + [1 − θ]x − D

(20)

λf = θR2F B + [1 − θ]x

(21)

Specifically, πi = hPri (τ0 ) , Pri (τ1 ) , Pri (τ2 )i ∀ i ∈ {1, 2}.

28

where R2F B is available in (13). Both the bank and the fintech lender need to raise equity
financing to fund the loan. Let sti (ω), i ∈ {b, f }, be the share of ownership that a type-i
lender must sell in order to raise the financing needed at t ∈ {0, 1} when the state ω is
observed (this observation is only relevant for t = 1). We now have the following result:
Lemma 4: R1t ≡ R1 ≡ R1F B = x ∀ t ∈ {0, 1} and R2t ≡ R2 = R2F B = {L[1 + r]} {q}−1 ∀
t ∈ {0, 1}. Moreover, for any set of beliefs about the lender’s type, in each period we have:
[L − D][1 + r]
iP
h
i
stb (ω) = h
3
t
t
b (j)I t (j) λ
+
1
−
I
qI{π
qµ
b
ω
b
j=1
{πT }
T}
stf (ω) = h

t
qI{π
T}

h

+ 1−

L[1 + r]
iP

t
I{π
T}

3
j=1

i

qµfω (j)Ift (j)

(22)

(23)
λf

where µiω (j) is defined in (17).
This lemma says that the borrower’s repayment obligation depends only on whether
there is just one lender or there are two or more lenders. This is because that is the only
factor that affects loan pricing. Investors’ beliefs about the bank’s type affect the cost and
availability of funds as well as the lender’s participation constraint, but not loan pricing.
That is, investors’ beliefs influence the shares of ownership that lenders must sell to raise
financing for the loan.
Theorem 1: Suppose that lenders start out at t = 0 with agents choosing
ζ 0 ∈ 0.5, [1 − µm C (m, q)] [2 − µC (m, q) − C (m, q)]−1



(24)

where
µm ≡

2
X
j=1

[1 − C (m, q)] γj
P
[1 − C (m, q)] 2j=1 γj + 1 − γ1 − γ2

(25)

Then lenders will be viewed as trustworthy at t = 0 under the HTR. Whether they lose this
trust at t = 1 is sensitive to the realization of m̃ and whether the lender experiences default.
29

Trust will not be lost if the borrower repays the lender at t = 1, but it may be lost if the
lender experiences default, depending on m̃. If

1 − C (m, q) < ε < 1 − C (m, q)

(26)

then ∃ m∗ ∈ (m, m) such that a lender that experiences borrower default at t = 1 will lose
trust in the second period if m > m∗ and not lose trust if m ≤ m∗ .
This result shows that lenders that fail at the end of the first period are more likely to lose
trust if the failure occurs when the macroeconomic state is better.34 The intuition is that
even a good loan is more likely to default in a recession than in a boom, so the hypothesis
testing under the HTR at t = 1 will reject the initial prior over priors that led agents to
view the lender as trustworthy in the first period when the bank fails in a boom, but may
not do so in a recession. We next have a corollary of this theorem.
Corollary 1: Suppose ζ 0 is as in (24)–(26) holds. Then, conditional upon experiencing
borrower default at t = 1: (i) in states m > m∗ , all lenders experiencing default lose trust;
and (ii) in states m ≤ m∗ , no lender experiencing default loses trust.
The intuition is that if agents believe that lenders are trustworthy in the first period,
then they are believed to have made G loans in the first period. The probability of failure
with the G loan is the same for every lender. Hence, the HTR either rejects the initial prior
over priors for all lenders experiencing default or for none. Note that since the G loans
have outcomes that are not perfectly correlated, at t = 1 there are lenders who experienced
default and lenders that did not. Hence, at t = 1, it is possible to have some lenders who
are trusted and some who are not. Henceforth, we will assume that (24) and (26) hold.
Theorem 2: Conditional on being funded, for any set of beliefs of investors about the bank’s
type, the following are true:
34

Note that (26) is not a very restrictive condition. It simply states that [C (m, q) , C (m, q)] is a sufficiently
large subset of [0,1].

30

(i) A bank and a fintech lender have the same incentive to choose loan G if both are type
τ0 (Model I); and
(ii) A bank always has a stronger incentive to make (higher profitability from making)
the G loan than does a fintech lender, conditional on both being type τi , i ∈ {1, 2} (in Model
II), and have the same incentive if both are type τ3 .
This result says that, when it comes to choosing between a G loan and a PB loan, a
self-interested bank always has a stronger incentive than a self-interested fintech lender to
make the G loan, as long as it is type τ1 or τ2 . If they are type τ3 , then they clearly have
the same incentive to choose the PB loan.
This result arises from the access that banks have to insured deposits and the valuable
services they provide to depository customers. The surplus generated by these services gives
banks a powerful incentive to make the efficient (G) loan. This result will play a central role
in the subsequent analysis.

5.2

Lender Strategies

We now turn to the strategies of lenders starting with the second period. Before this analysis,
we state some restrictions on the parameter values; the formal expressions related to these
restrictions are placed in the Appendix.
Restriction 1: The bank’s incremental expected utility from investing in the G loan relative
to the PB loan at the first-best financing cost is between the high private benefits of the PB
loans of the type-τ1 and type-τ2 banks. In addition, the high private benefit of the type-τ2
bank is not excessively high.
This is essentially a restriction on the private benefits of the PB loan for the type-τ1 and
type-τ2 banks. Having type-τ1 lenders have lower private benefits is one of the key features
distinguishing the type-τ1 lenders from type-τ2 lenders. Moreover, if the private benefit of
the PB loan for the type-τ2 is too high, this type would be indistinguishable from the type-τ3
31

lender.
Restriction 2: The fintech lender’s incremental expected utility from investing in the G loan
relative to the PB loan at the first-best financing cost is high in value relative to the low
private benefit of the PB loan for the type-τ1 lender, and low in value relative to the low
private benefit of the type-τ2 lender. Moreover, the high private benefit of the type-τ1 lender
is not too high, but the high private benefit of the type-τ2 lender is high relative to the
fintech lender’s utility.
This is a restriction on the private benefits of the PB loan for the type-τ1 and type-τ2
fintech lenders, similar to Restriction 1 for banks. From Theorem 2, we know that a bank
has a stronger incentive to make a G loan than a fintech lender does, which is reflected in
Restrictions 1 and 2.
Restriction 3: The bank’s incremental expected utility from investing in the G loan relative
to the PB loan at the second-best (no trust) financing cost is high relative to the high private
benefit of the PB loan for the type-τ1 bank.
This is a restriction on the high private benefit of the type-τ1 bank relative to the bank’s
incremental expected utility from investing in the G loan at a financing cost higher than the
second-best. If such a restriction were not in place, no bank (or any other type of lender)
would be able to operate when there is no trust.
Restriction 4: Investors’ prior belief that the lender is type-τ1 and the success probability of
the G loan are intermediate in value.
The reason for this condition is as follows. Lenders lose trust at the beginning of the
second period (assuming they had it in the first period) only if they experience defaults on
first-period loans. This restriction ensures that, conditional on losing trust, the posterior
probability that the lender is type-τ1 is neither too high nor too low. We wish to focus on
separating equilibria in which second-period lending strategies differ based on lender type
and loss of trust is consequential in terms of an increase in funding costs and possibly lack
32

of access to second-period funding. Since the type-τ1 lender makes prudent loans in more
states of the world than the other types, if the posterior probability of type τ1 is too high,
the loss of trust will have little impact on access to financing and its cost. If the posterior
probability of type τ1 is too low, all lenders will get shut out of the market in the second
period. Restriction 4 helps us to focus on the (subgame perfect) Nash equilibria of interest.
Lemma 5: Suppose agents adopt Model I and lenders are trusted in the second period (at
t = 1). Then the optimal second-period strategies of lenders in equilibrium are as follows:
Bank/Fintech

Lender’s Type

Lending Strategy

τ0

G with probability 1

τ1

G ∀ β ∈ {βl1 , βh1 }

τ2

G for β = βl2 and PB for β = βh2

τ3

PB with probability 1

τ0

G with probability 1

τ1

G for β = βl1 and PB for β = βh1

τ2 and τ3

PB with probability 1

Bank:

Fintech Lender:

The intuition for this lemma comes from Theorem 2. When lenders are trusted, they can
raise funding at the lowest cost possible because investors believe that the G loan will be
made with probability 1. In other words, each lender has the highest expected second-period
surplus from making the G loan under these circumstances. Nonetheless, given Theorem 2,
we also know that a type τi (i ∈ {1, 2}) bank always finds it more profitable to make the G
loan than a type τi fintech lender does. Thus, the set of states in which a type τi (i ∈ {1, 2})
bank makes the G loan is no smaller than the set of states in which a type τi fintech lender
makes the G loan, and for some sets of parameter values, the set of states in which the bank
makes the G loan is strictly larger.
The next result deals with what happens in the second period if there is no trust:

33

Lemma 6: Suppose agents adopt Model II and lenders are not trusted in the second period
(at t = 1). Then the optimal stategies of lenders in the second period are as follows:
Bank/Fintech

Lender’s Type

Types of Loan Made

τ0

G with probability 1

τ1

G for β = βl1 and PB for β = βh1

τ2 and τ3

PB with probability 1

τ0

G with probability 1

All τi , i ∈ {1, 2, 3}

PB with probability 1

Bank:

Fintech Lender:
Consequently, conditional upon loss of trust, banks will be able to raise second-period financing. But fintech lenders that have lost trust will be unable to raise second-period financing.
This lemma has two striking implications. The first is that banks may be able to weather
a loss of trust, but fintech lenders cannot. The second is that reputation becomes important
when trust is lost. In a sense, trust insulates lenders against the adverse reputational consequences of bad outcomes. But once that shield is lost, the lender needs a sufficiently strong
reputation to survive.
Comparing Lemmas 5 and 6, we see that agents’ beliefs about whether lenders are trustworthy or self-interested affect the equilibrium strategies of lenders. The reason is that these
beliefs then impact the attractiveness of the G loan relative to the PB loan. When lenders
are not trusted, their financing costs are higher than when they are trusted. This means
that the PB loan is preferred by lenders in more states of the world when lenders are trusted
than when they are not. Thus, lenders make the G loan in fewer states when there is no
trust than when there is trust.

5.3

First-period Strategies and Overall Equilibrium

We can now characterize the overall equilibrium, including first-period strategies.
Theorem 3: Suppose agents adopt Model I and lenders are trusted in the first period (at
34

t = 0). Then there exists m high enough such that lenders choose the following strategies in
the first period:
Bank/Fintech

Bank:

Lender’s Type

Lending Strategy

τ0

G with probability 1

τ1 and τ2

G with probability 1

τ3

PB with probability 1

τ0

G with probability 1

τ1

G with probability 1

τ2

G for β = βl2 , PB for β = βh2

τ3

PB with probability 1

Fintech Lender:

If a lender makes a loan at t = 0 that repays at t = 1, trust is maintained in the second
period. Similarly, if m ≤ m∗ (Theorem 1) and a loan made at t = 0 defaults at t = 1, trust
in the lender is maintained in the second period. In this case, the lender’s second-period
strategies are as described in Lemma 5. If a lender makes a loan at t = 0 that defaults at
t = 1 and m > m∗ , trust is lost in the second period. In this case, the lender’s second-period
strategies are as described in Lemma 6.
This theorem reveals an intuitive result, which is that a self-interested lender makes the
G loan in more states of the world in the first period when it is trusted than in the second
period when it is trusted. The reason, of course, is that maintaining trust through its firstperiod lending strategy has value in terms of reducing the cost of second-period financing;
this added value is absent in the second period because it is the last period. That is, investor
trust has a stronger incentive effect on the lender when there are more periods to go.
Next we turn to the nature of the equilibrium when there is no trust in the first period.
Theorem 4: Suppose agents adopt Model II at t = 0 and lenders are not trusted. Also
assume that it is impossible to become trusted at t = 1 if the lender started out not being
trusted at t = 0. Then for m high enough, in equilibrium banks are able to raise financing
35

at t = 0 and they have the following equilibrium strategies in the first period:
Bank Type

Lending Strategy

τ0

G with probability 1

τ1

G ∀ β ∈ {βl1 , βh1 }

τ2

G for β = βl2 , PB for β = βh2

τ3

PB with probability 1

No fintech lender is able to raise financing at t = 0.
This theorem asserts that trust is important for all lenders, but it is essential for fintech
lenders to operate. This result is an extension of Lemma 6, but it goes further—a fintech
lender will not even be able to begin to operate at t = 0 if there is no trust. The intuition is
as follows. We know from Lemma 6 that if a fintech lender is not believed to be trustworthy
at t = 1 by investors, then investors will not be willing to finance it. Given the assumption
that a lender who is not trusted at t = 0 will not be able to gain trust at t = 1, the fintech
lender knows at t = 0 that it will be out of the market in the second period regardless of
the first-period outcome. Hence, its lending strategy at t = 0 is a single-period strategy,
identical to its second-period strategy. Since it is unable to raise financing with this strategy
in the second period, it is also unable to raise financing in the first period.
In Theorem 4, it was assumed that if lenders start out not having the trust of investors,
then it is impossible for them to win that trust in the second period. In our next result, we
validate this assumption.
Theorem 5: Consider parameter values such that in equilibrium, lenders start out being
trusted at t = 0 and lose trust at t = 1. Then, for the same parameter values, lenders can
never regain trust at t = 1 if they start out being considered self-interested at t = 0.
This result shows that trust can be asymmetric—it is easier to lose trust that exists than
to gain trust when it does not exist in the first place. The intuition is as follows. Suppose
lenders do not have trust at t = 0, and the equilibrium at t = 0 is one in which the type-τ1
36

lenders make good loans for all realizations of its private benefit from the PB loan. Then
if the lender experiences loan repayment at t = 0, it may merely “confirm” that the lender
is a type-τ1 lender, especially if the prior probability attached to the lender being type-τ1
was high, i.e., if it had a strong reputation ex ante. And of course this reputation must be
high enough or else the lender would not have been able to raise financing at t = 0. In other
words, the HTR will not reject the initial model II based on the repayment outcome. Thus,
a lender with a strong reputation but no trust is unable to become trusted by experiencing
good outcomes. However, if it starts out with trust and experiences borrower default, the
HTR may reject the initial Model I and trust will be lost.

6

Model Extensions and Discussion

In this section, we explore extensions of the model which introduce additional differences
between banks and fintech firms. We also provide a discussion of additional applications of
the model, and suggestions for future work.

6.1

Regulatory and Technological Costs

In our main model, the key difference between banks and fintech lenders is that banks are able
to obtain funding via deposits, while fintech lenders are all-equity financed. We showed that
this gives banks a funding-cost advantage, as well as endogenous incentives to maintain trust.
In practice, fintech firms also have other potential cost advantages which may partially offset
this advantage of banks. One such advantage is lower regulatory costs—banks are regulated
entities, whereas fintech lenders such as P2P platforms are not.35 Another cost advantage
may come from more effective utilization of information technology, that may allow fintech
35
While there are some regulations that affect these platforms, they are far less than what banks face. Each
U.S. state has different rules for the regulation of P2P borrowers and investors. Residents of all states except
Iowa, Maine, and North Dakota can apply for P2P loans, whereas investors in 30 states can invest in Prosper
loans and investors in 26 states can invest in Lending Club. Other than being “accredited investors” ($1
million or more in new worth), there are no specific regulations on these investors. See Knowledge@Wharton,
January 8, 2014.

37

lenders to have a borrower screening advantage over banks (see Buchak, Matvos, Piskorski,
and Seru (2017) for evidence).36
If a fintech lender has a cost of operating its lending platform that is lower than the
regulatory and operating costs that banks face, there will be no effect on loan interest rates
offered to borrowers as long as lenders can still lend profitably. However, the difference
between the profit margins of banks and fintech lenders will decline. This means that there
will be a relative decline in the role of banks as “trusted lenders”. Thus, high regulatory
costs can reduce a key competitive advantage of banks. Moreover, regulatory costs for banks
are typically higher for riskier loans. This means that these are the loans for which the
relative advantage of banks over fintech lenders will decline the most when regulatory costs
are introduced. The implication is that it is the riskiest loans that fintech lender are most
likely to lure away from banks—for these loans, banks are not able to offer competitive terms
compared to fintech lenders.37

6.2

Trust, Transparency, and Opacity

In our analysis, the key informational assumption is that the lender’s asset choice is unobservable to its investors and the regulator. In reality, lenders face reporting requirements as
well as regulatory monitoring that can reduce opaqueness and shed light on the lender’s asset
choice. Moreover, lenders themselves can choose to voluntarily become more transparent by
choosing to disclose more information. How does transparency interact with trust?
The answer depends on the nature of the loans the lender is making. If investors can, at
36

As Buchak et al. (2016) point out, one of the factors that has facilitated the growth of fintech is
information technology, including techniques to analyze big data. Such automated credit analysis does not
rely on the generation and interpretation of soft information that has been a competitive advantage for many
(especially small) banks. In fact, Buchak et al. (2016) point out that fintech platforms appear to be more
proficient than banks in analyzing big data relating to borrower default risk. It should be noted that while
banks have been making an effort to adopt the same technology as fintech firms, fintech firms still in general
have an technology advantage.
37
There is one caveat to this. If the higher regulatory costs that banks face are due to more stringent
regulatory monitoring, then holding everything all else constant, there would be less moral hazard in lending
with banks than with fintech lenders. This can offset the adverse impact of regulatory costs on banks’
incentives to be trustworthy.

38

relatively low cost, understand the quality of the lender’s loans (and other assets, if any) with
sufficient information disclosure, then the lender can reassure investors that it is investing in a
good loan simply by disclosing enough information. In this case, transparency can substitute
for trust. Thus, in cases in which specialized expertise is not needed to understand disclosed
information about a lender’s activities, transparency and trust are substitutes.
However, an implicit assumption in our analysis is that the loans made by banks and
fintech platforms are inherently opaque in the sense that risk-shifting is difficult (or prohibitively costly) to detect even with a great deal of information disclosure. A substantial
amount of expertise/judgment may be needed to process and interpret the information, and
even then it may be quite costly. In such cases, transparency does not substitute for trust.
In other words, when assets are innately opaque and it takes both expertise and significant
costs to process any information disclosed about the assets—the setting in this paper—a
lender cannot overcome lack of trust simply by being more transparent.
Our analysis of lender trust thus provides a different perspective on bank opaqueness from
that in earlier research. Bhattacharya and Chiesa (1995) propose that banks choose to be
opaque because they seek to protect the confidentiality of their borrowers’ information. Dang,
Gorton, Holmstrom, and Ordonez (2017) argue that banks are opaque because disclosing
information would expose initial uninsured depositors to unwanted (price) risk. Our point
is different. Trusted banks can “afford” to be opaque, and if there is any cost associated
with transparency—even if very small—trusted banks will strictly prefer to be opaque. In
contrast, lenders lacking trust may choose transparency.
To sum up, when disclosed information can be processed by investors at a low cost,
the value of trust is relatively low because trust and informational transparency are partial
substitutes. In this case, the market segments into trusted lenders who are opaque and other
lenders who are transparent. But when information is very costly to process, all lenders
remain opaque and the value of trust is high, with the trusted lenders having a significant
funding cost advantage over others.

39

This market segmentation potentially applies to other segments of financial services, like
money management. The trusted money managers can follow opaque, high-expertise active
managerment strategies, whereas those lacking such trust can follow transparent, passive
management strategies. When the trusted managers lose trust, that segment of the market
will flee to the passive managers. An example of this is the post-crisis “flight” from active
money managers to indexed ETFs and mutual funds.38

6.3

Application to Financial Innovation

Our analysis of trust also provides a perspective on the future evolution of fintech innovations such as “robo advisors” and cryptocurrency like bitcoin. Many of these technologies
are quite opaque to investors, especially households. Thus, accoding to our analysis, their
acceptance by consumers and their long-run viability depend on the extent to which these
technologies are trusted. In this case, trust pertrains not so much to risk-shifting behavior by
the platform operator, but to the security of the technology. Events such as hackers stealing
large amounts of cryptocurrency erode trust. A strong implication of our analyssis is that
trust is a 0-1 phenomenon, so if investors lose trust in these innovations, there will not be a
gradual Bayesian belief revision. Rather, there will be a massive flight away from these new
technologies. In other words, as long as investors trust these technologies, periodic episodes
of breaches and failures will have no apparent effect on the popularity of fintech. But if trust
is lost, there will be a sharp drop-off in the acceptance of these technologies.

7

Conclusion

This paper has developed a theory of trust in lending. Trust enables lenders to have access
to financing at rates that are insulated from the adverse reputational consquences of prior
38
As an illustration, Vanguard took in about $280 billion in net new money in 2016, greatly surpassing
other types of funds, while actively managed funds have experienced consistently large net outflows since
2007. See the Investment Company Institute 2017 Factbook: http://www.icifactbook.org/ch2/17 fb ch2.

40

loan defaults as well as market conditions. However, trust can be broken. It is most likely to
be eroded when the lender experiences relatively high borrower defaults during an economic
boom. Trust is asymmetric—it is easier to lose it than to gain it. The importance of trust
varies across banks and fintech lenders. While banks may be able to operate without trust,
investor trust is essential for fintech lenders to be able to operate.
From a functional perspective, banks and fintech platforms perform similar lending functions. Our analysis of trust and a characterization of the difference between banks and fintech
lenders relies on an essential institutional difference between these lenders—banks have access to insured deposits and they provide valuable depository services to their customers,
whereas fintech platforms are entirely investor-financed. This distinction makes banks innactely more trustworthy than fintech platforms, and provides them with a competitive
advantage over non-depository lenders on the trust dimension.

41

References
[1] Buchak, Greg, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru. FinTech, regulatory
arbitrage, and the rise of shadow banks. No. w23288. National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2017.
[2] Copeland, Adam, Antoine Martin, and Michael Walker. ”Repo Runs: Evidence from
the Tri-Party Repo Market.” The Journal of Finance 69, no. 6 (2014): 2343-2380.
[3] Coval, Joshua, Jakub Jurek, and Erik Stafford. ”The economics of structured finance.”
The Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, no. 1 (2009): 3-25.
[4] de Roure, Calebe, Loriana Pelizzon, and Anjan Thakor, “P2P Lenders versus Banks:
Cream Skimming or Bottom Fishing?” Working paper, Goethe University, December,
2017.
[5] Demyanyk, Yuliya S., Elena Loutskina, and Daniel Kolliner. ”The Taste of Peer-to-Peer
Loans.” (2017).
[6] Donaldson, Jason Roderick, Giorgia Piacentino, and Anjan V. Thakor. ”Warehouse
banking.” Forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.
[7] Fehr, Ernst. ”On the economics and biology of trust.” Journal of the european economic
association 7, no. 2-3 (2009): 235-266.
[8] Fenwick, Mark, Joseph A. McCahery, and Erik PM Vermeulen. ”Fintech and the Financing of Entrepreneurs: From Crowdfunding to Marketplace Lending.” (2017).
[9] Foote, Christopher L., Kristopher S. Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen. Why did so many
people make so many ex post bad decisions? The causes of the foreclosure crisis. No.
w18082. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2012.
[10] Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. ”Neglected risks, financial innovation, and financial fragility.” Journal of Financial Economics 104, no. 3 (2012):
452-468.
[11] Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. ”Money doctors.” The Journal
of Finance 70, no. 1 (2015): 91-114.
[12] Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. ”Neglected risks: The psychology
of financial crises.” The American Economic Review 105, no. 5 (2015): 310-314.
[13] Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick. “Securitized banking and the run on repo.” Journal
of Financial Economics 104, no. 3 (2012): 425-451.
[14] Green, Harriet, “Here’s Why Banks Have—and Can Keep—the Upper Hand Over P2P
Lenders”, City A.M. Newsletters, Thursday, May 26, 2016.
42

[15] Greenwood, Robin, and David Scharfstein. ”The growth of finance.” The Journal of
Economic Perspectives 27, no. 2 (2013): 3-28.
[16] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. ”Trusting the stock market.” The
Journal of Finance 63, no. 6 (2008): 2557-2600.
[17] Gurun, Umit G., Noah Stoffman, and Scott E. Yonker. ”Trust busting: The effect of
fraud on investor behavior.” forthcoming, The Review of Financial Studies.
[18] Hartman-Glaser, Barney. ”Reputation and signaling in asset sales.” Journal of Financial
Economics 125, no. 2 (2017): 245-265.
[19] He, Dong, Ross Leckow, Vikram Haksar, Tommaso Mancini-Griffoli, Nigel Jenkinson,
Mikari Kashima, Tanai Khiaonarong, Celine Rochon, and Hervé Tourpe. ”Fintech and
Financial Services: Initial Considerations.” IMF Staff Discussion Note: Fintech and
Financial Services: Initial Considerations 17, no. 05 (2017).
[20] Holmstrom, Bengt, and Joan Ricart I. Costa. ”Managerial incentives and capital management.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 101, no. 4 (1986): 835-860.
[21] Iyer, Rajkamal, José-Luis Peydró, Samuel da-Rocha-Lopes, and Antoinette Schoar. ”Interbank liquidity crunch and the firm credit crunch: Evidence from the 2007–2009 crisis.” The Review of Financial Studies 27, no. 1 (2013): 347-372.
[22] Jagtiani, Julapa, and Catharine Lemieux. ”Fintech Lending: Financial Inclusion, Risk
Pricing, and Alternative Information.” (2017).
[23] Merton, Robert C. ”An analytic derivation of the cost of deposit insurance and loan
guarantees an application of modern option pricing theory.” Journal of Banking &
Finance 1, no. 1 (1977): 3-11.
[24] Merton, Robert C. ”On the Cost of Deposit Insurance When There Are Surveillance
Costs.” The Journal of Business 51, no. 3 (1978): 439-452.
[25] Merton, Robert C. ”The financial system and economic performance.” In International
Competitiveness in Financial Services, pp. 5-42. Springer Netherlands, 1990.
[26] Merton, Robert C., “Operation and Regulation in Financial Intermediation: A Functional Perspective”, in Operation and Regulation of Financial Markets, ed. Peter Englund, (The Economic Council, Stockholm, 1993), 17-67.
[27] Merton, Robert C. ”A Functional Perspective of Financial Intermediation.” Financial
Management 24, no. 2 (1995): 23-41.
[28] Merton, Robert C. ”A Model of Contract Guarantees for Credit-Sensitive, Opaque
Financial Intermediaries.” European Finance Review 1, no. 1 (1997): 1-13.
[29] Merton, Robert C., and Zvi Bodie. ”A Conceptual Framework for Analyzing the Financial Environment.” Chap. 1 in The Global Financial System: A Functional Perspective,
by D. B. Crane et. al., 3–31. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1995.
43

[30] Merton, Robert C., and Zvi Bodie. ”Design of Financial Systems: Towards a Syntheses
of Function and Structure.” Journal of Investment Management 3, no. 1 (2005): 6.
[31] Merton, Robert C., and Richard T. Thakor. “Customers and investors: a framework for
understanding the evolution of financial institutions.” Forthcoming, Journal of Financial Intermediation.
[32] Morrison, Alan D., and Lucy White. ”Crises and capital requirements in banking.”
American Economic Review 95, no. 5 (2005): 1548-1572.
[33] Morrison, Alan D., and Lucy White. ”Reputational contagion and optimal regulatory
forbearance.” Journal of Financial Economics 110, no. 3 (2013): 642-658.
[34] Ortoleva, Pietro. ”Modeling the change of paradigm: Non-Bayesian reactions to unexpected news.” The American Economic Review 102, no. 6 (2012): 2410-2436.
[35] Philippon, Thomas. ”Has the US finance industry become less efficient? On the theory
and measurement of financial intermediation.” The American Economic Review 105,
no. 4 (2015): 1408-1438.
[36] Philippon, Thomas. The fintech opportunity. No. w22476. National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2016.
[37] Salisbury, Ian, “Lending Club’s CEO has Left and its Stock has Plunged. Should Lenders
Bail Out?”, Money, June 13, 2016.
[38] Sanches, Daniel. ”Shadow Banking and the Crisis of 2007-08.” Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia Business Review Q2 (2014): 7-14.
[39] Sapienza, Paola, and Luigi Zingales, “Trust and Finance”. NBER Reporter 2011, no. 2:
Research Summary, 2011.
[40] Sorkin, Andrew R. “Fintech Firms Are Taking On the Big Banks, but Can They Win?”
The New York Times, April 6, 2016.
[41] Wallace, Tim. “Lending Club’s Woes Raise Questions for Britain’s Peer-to-Peer
Lenders”, The Telegraph, May 11, 2016.
[42] Weinstein, Jonathan. ”Provisional Probabilities and Paradigm Shifts.” Unpublished
working paper, 2011.
[43] Winton, Andrew, and Vijay Yerramilli. ”Lender moral hazard and reputation in
originate-to-distribute markets.” (2015).
[44] Zetzsche, Dirk A., Ross P. Buckley, Douglas W. Arner, and Janos Nathan Barberis.
”From Fintech to Techfin the Regulatory Challenges of Data-Driven Finance.” (2017).

44

Appendix
A. Parametric Restrictions
We present below the formal restrictions on the parameters of the model. We first need some
notation as a prelude to the restrictions. Let the lowest possible shares of ownership the bank and
the fintech lender must sell to raise the necessary external financing be (respectively):

s∗b =

s∗f =

[L − D][1 + r]
qλb

L[1 + r]
qλf

(bank)

(fintech lender)

(A.1)

(A.2)

and define the incremental expected utilities from investing in the G loan relative to the PB loan
at the first-best financing costs as:

u∗b = α [q − p] λb [1 − s∗b ]

(bank)

(A.3)



u∗f = α [q − p] λf 1 − s∗f

(bank)

(A.4)

Also define the incremental expected utility of bank insiders from investing in the G loan at
the second-best financing cost as:
h
i
ub = α [q − p] λb 1 − s∗b [νγ1 ]−1

(A.5)

and let the bank’s adjusted expected utility differential be defined as:

D ≡ u∗b − ub

(A.6)

We can now state our restrictions on the parameters:
Restriction 1:
[1 − α]βh1 < u∗b < [1 − α]βh2 < u∗b + D

45

(A.7)

Restriction 2:

[1 − α]βl1 < u∗f < [1 − α]βl2 < [1 − α]βl1 < 2u∗f < [1 − α]βh2

(A.8)

ub > [1 − α]βh1

(A.9)

γ1 and C(m, q) are intermediate in value ∀ m

(A.10)

Restriction 3:

Restriction 4:

B. Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1:

Since ϕ̂0 > r, it follows that
Z

D

Z

0

ϕ̂ (y) dy >
0

D

r dy

(A.11)

0

which means that ϕ̂(D) > rD. The depositors’ participation constraint (with riskless deposits) is:

D [1 + rD ] + q ϕ(D) + [1 − q] ϕ̂(D) ≥ D[1 + r]

(A.12)

Since the zero-lower-bound assumption implies that rD ≥ 0, if (A.12) holds for rD = 0, then the
competitive equilibrium solution must be rD = 0 because maximizing the lender’s utility implies
minimizing the left-hand side of (A.12) while satisfying (A.12). At rD = 0, (A.12) becomes:

q ϕ(D) + [1 − q] ϕ̂(D) ≥ rD

(A.13)

Now, q ϕ(D) + [1 − q] ϕ̂(D) > ϕ̂(D) > rD by (A.11). Thus, (A.13) holds with rD = 0. 

Proof of Lemma 2: If deposits are riskless, the value of the bank’s depository services to its
customers is
q ϕ(D) + [1 − q] ϕ̂(D)

46

(A.14)

where we recognize that when the borrower defaults and deposit insurance kicks in, depositors value
the bank’s services only at ϕ̂(D) even though their financial claim is fully covered. If the bank is
unable to fully pay off depositors when the borrower defaults, the value of the bank’s depository
services to its customers is:
q ϕ(D)

(A.15)

Thus, the welfare gain due to making deposits riskless is:

[1 − q] ϕ̂(D)

(A.16)

Now by providing deposit insurance, relative to not providing it, the deposit insurer increases
the expected payoff to depositors by

[1 − q] [ϕ̂(D) + D]

(A.17)

The expected cost of providing deposit insurance is

[1 − q] D[1 + r]

(A.18)

Thus, the net welfare benefit of complete deposit insurance provision is the difference between
(A.17) and (A.18):
4 ≡ [1 − q] [ϕ̂(D) − rD]

(A.19)

From the proof of Lemma 1, we know that ϕ̂(D) > rD, which means

4>0

(A.20)

This completes the proof. 

Proof of Lemma 3:

When there is only one lender, it can act as a monopolist with respect to

the borrower, so the repayment obligation is set at the maximum pledgeable cash flow, x. When
there are two or more lenders, the repayment obligation must be set to yield the lender an expected

47

return of r on the loan, which is the minimum return the lender will accept, given its ability to
invest its funds at r. Thus, R2F B solves:
qR2F B = L[1 + r]

(A.21)

which yields (13). 
Proof of Lemma 4: The result that R1t ≡ R1 = R1F B = x ∀ t ∈ {0, 1} and R2t ≡ R2 = R2F B =
{L[1 + r]} {q}−1 ∀ t ∈ {0, 1} follows from the fact that the lender’s loan pricing depends only on
whether lenders are competing and the lender’s participation constraint (minimum return of r) and
not on the beliefs of investors about the lender’s type.
Now stb (ω) will be determined to satisfy the outside shareholders’ participation constraint, which
holds tightly in equilibrium:


3


h
iX
t
t
b
t
(j)
+
1
−
I
qµ
(j)I
λ
stb (ω) qI{π
ω
b
{πT }
T}
 b

j=1

= [L − D][1 + r]

(A.22)

where the bank’s strategy is restricted to lending (since financing is needed only if the bank decides
to make a loan). Solving (A.22) yields (22). Similarly, for the fintech lender, stf (ω) solves:


3


h
iX
t
t
t
f
t
sf (ω) qI{πT } + 1 − I{πT }
qµω (j)If (j) λf


j=1

= L[1 + r]

(A.23)

Solving (A.23) yields (23). 
Proof of Theorem 1: By the HTR, since ζ 0 > 0.5, the agents’ prior over priors will select
π 0 = πT and lenders will be viewed as trustworthy in the first period. Since 1 − C (m, q) < ε,
it follows that if the lender experiences default and m̃ = m, then by the HTR agents will reject
their initial prior πT and go back to their prior over priors to update using Bayes’ rule. They will

48

compute the posterior belief

ζ1 =

[1 − C (m, q)] ζ 0
[1 − C (m, q)] ζ 0 + qF (m) [1 − ζ 0 ]

(A.24)

where qF (m) is the expected failure probability in macro state m if the lender is self-interested,
given the optimal strategies untrustworthy lenders would have chosen in the first period (with the
expectation taken over lender types in Model II) when faced with agents believing them to be
trustworthy.
Note that ζ 1 is decreasing in qF (m). The higher the probability that a type-τj (j ∈ {1, 2})
lender makes the G loan in the first period, the lower is qF (m) and hence the higher is ζ 1 . The
maximum probability that a type-τj lender will make the G loan is 1. Thus, if we can establish
that ζ 1 < 0.5 with this conjectured first-period strategy chosen by type τj , then ζ 1 < 0.5 with any
first-period strategy chosen by the type-τj lender.
Now if the type-τj makes the G loan with probability 1 in the first period ∀ j ∈ {1, 2}, then

qF (m) = 1 − C (m, q)

2
X

µm (j)

(A.25)

j=1

where µm (j) is defined in (25), with the superscript i dropped, ω = m, and recognizing that the
posterior is after observing default at t = 1, it can be written as:

µm (j) =

[1 − C (m, q)] γj
P
[1 − C (m, q)] 2j=1 γj + 1 − γ1 − γ2

(A.26)

with j ∈ {1, 2}. Substituting this in (A.25), the condition for ζ 1 < 0.5 becomes:
[1 − C (m, q)] ζ 0
< 0.5
[1 − C (m, q)] ζ 0 + [1 − µm (j)C (m, q)] [1 − ζ 0 ]

(A.27)

where
µm ≡

2
X
j=1

49

µm (j)

(A.28)

Simplifying this yields
ζ0 <

1 − C (m, q) µm
2 − C (m, q) [1 + µm ]

(A.29)

Note that since µm < 1, the quantity on the right-hand side of (A.29) is bigger than 0.5. Thus, the
interval defined in (24) has positive Lebesgue measure.
So we have proven that at m̃ = m, if the lender experiences borrower default, by HTR the prior
over priors will reject the intially chosen Model I as the correct belief and the revised prior over
priors at t = 1 will choose Model II as the correct prior for the second period. This holds for any
first-period strategy chosen by the lender. By continuity, ∃ m∗ in the neighborhood of m for which
this will be true as well. Further, given ε < 1 − C (m, q) in (26), it also follows that the initial prior
is not rejected if m̃ = m. Thus, m∗ ∈ (m, m).
It is straightforward that the initial prior will not be rejected for any m̃ if the lender experiences
success (borrower-repayment) at t = 1. 

Proof of Corollary 1:

At t = 0, agents believe that all lenders are trustworthy. Thus, all

make G loans and the probability of failure for every lender is 1 − C (m, q) in every m ∈ [m, m]. By
Theorem 1, if m > m∗ , then the HTR will reject the initial hypothesis that the lender is trustworthy
if default is experienced, and if m ≤ m∗ , the HTR will not reject the initial hypothesis. Moreover,
since every trustworthy lender had the same strategy in the first period, ζ 1 (see (A.24)) is also the
same for every lender. The result now follows from Theorem 1. 

Proof of Theorem 2:

Part (i) of the theorem is clear, given that the type-τ0 lenders always

choose G. To prove part (ii), note that the expected utility of the insider of a type-τi (i ∈ {1, 2})
bank from making the G loan is


α 1 − stb λb q

(A.30)

where ω, the argument of stb , is suppressed. The expected utility from a PB loan is


α 1 − stb λb p + [1 − α]βji

50

(A.31)

where j ∈ {l, h} and i ∈ {1, 2}. Thus, the incentive compatibility (IC) constraint for the bank to
prefer the G loan to the PB loan is:



αλb 1 − stb [q − p] > [1 − α]βji

(A.32)

The analogous IC constraint for the fintech lender is:



αλf 1 − stf [q − p] > [1 − α]βji

(A.33)

Thus, to show that the bank has a stronger incentive to make the G loan than a comparable
fintech lender, we need to show that:





1 − stb [q − p] λb > 1 − stf [q − p] λf

(A.34)

For this comparison, we need to have the same posterior belief about the lender’s type for both the
bank and the fintech lender. That is, let
3
h
iX
t
t
ξ ≡ qI{π
+
1
−
I
qµbω (j)Ibt (j)
{πT }
T}
j=1

h

t
t
= qI{π
+ 1 − I{π
T}
T}

3
iX

qµfω (j)Ibt (j)

(A.35)

j=1

Then using (22) and (23) we can write:

stb =

L[1 + r] − D[1 + r]
λb ξ

(A.36)

L[1 + r]
λf ξ

(A.37)

λb = λf − D

(A.38)

stf =
with (using (20) and (21)):

51

(A.35) thus requires showing that:





1 − stb λb > 1 − stf λf

(A.39)

Substituting in (A.39) from (A.36) and (A.37):
{ξλf − L[1 + r]}
{ξλb − L[1 + r] + D[1 + r]}
λb >
λf
λb ξ
λf ξ

(A.40)

ξλb − L[1 + r] + D[1 + r] > ξλf − L[1 + r]

(A.41)

or, re-writing this:

And substituting in (A.41) from (A.38) we have:

ξ [λf − D] + D[1 + r] > ξλf

(A.42)

D{1 + r − ξ} > 0

(A.43)

which requires:

which is true since ξ is a probability. 

Proof of Lemma 5:

Given Theorem 2, we know that, conditional on identical investor beliefs

about their types, banks have stronger incentives to make G loans than fintech lenders. Here lenders
are trusted in the second period, so ξ = q for both banks and fintech lenders. The strategies of the
type-τ0 bank and fintech lender stated in the lemma are clear. The same is true for the type-τ3
bank and fintech lender.
For the type-τ1 bank the IC constraint associated with the conjectured strategy is (using (A.33)):



αλb 1 − stb [q − p] > [1 − α]βh1

(A.44)



αλb 1 − stb [q − p] > [1 − α]βl2

(A.45)

whereas for the type-τ2 we need:

52

and


αλb 1 − stb [q − p] < [1 − α]βh2

(A.46)

Since βl2 < βh1 < βh2 , and (A.7) holds, it is possible for (A.44), (A.45), and (A.46) hold simultaneously.
In the case of the fintech lender, for the conjectured strategies to hold, we need:



αλf 1 − stf [q − p] > [1 − α]βl1

(A.47)



αλf 1 − stf [q − p] < [1 − α]βh1

(A.48)



αλf 1 − stf [q − p] < [1 − α]βl2

(A.49)

and

Given (A.8), we know that (A.47), (A.48), and (A.49) hold at the same time. Thus, the optimal
second-period strategies of lenders are as described in the lemma. 

Proof of Lemma 6: Consider banks first. We will show that the strategies characterized in
the lemma constitute a (subgame perfect) Nash equilibrium. Without trust, given the conjectured
strategies of banks stated in the lemma, investors set:

ξ = µbω (1)νq

(A.50)

Note that types τ0 and τ3 will obviously follow the lending strategies stipulated in the lemma, so
we can focus on types τ1 and τ2 . For the type-τ1 bank to find this lending strategy optimal, the IC
constraints below must be satisfied:



αλb 1 − s1b [q − p] > [1 − α]βl1

(A.51)



αλb 1 − s1b [q − p] < [1 − α]βh1

(A.52)

53

where λb is given by (20) and
s1b =

L[1 + r] − D[1 + r]
λb {µbω (1)νq}

(A.53)

For the type-τ2 bank, the analogous IC constraint is:



αλb 1 − s1b [q − p] ≤ [1 − α]βl2

(A.54)

Since βl1 < βl2 and βl1 < βh1 , note that if (A.54) holds, so will (A.52). Given the parametric
restrictions in Appendix A, (A.51), (A.52), and (A.54) hold simultaneously. Hence, the bank’s
strategies and investors’ beliefs constitute a Nash equilibrium.
Now consider the fintech lender’s strategy. Suppose counterfactually that investors believe that
a fintech lender of type τi (i ∈ {1, 2}) will follow the same lending strategy as a bank of that type.
We know by Theorem 2 that a fintech lender has a weaker incentive to make a G loan than a bank
of the same type, given the same investor beliefs, so the fintech lender can never be believed to
invest in G with a higher probability than a bank (for the same ω realization). Then the relevant
IC constraint for the fintech lender correpsonding to the strategy stipulated in the lemma is:



αλf 1 − s1f [q − p] ≤ [1 − α]βl1

(A.55)

where λf is given by (21) and
s1f =

L[1 + r]
λf {µbω (1)νq}

(A.56)

if we assume (counterfactually) that investors have the same beliefs about the fintech lender’s types
and strategies as they do about the bank.
Now solve for the value of µbω (1), call it µ̂bω (1), such that (A.55) holds as an equality. If we
choose µbω (1) = µ̂bω (1) − ε, where ε > 0 is arbitrarily small, then (A.55) will hold and (A.51) will
hold since λb > λf . Next, find the value of µbω (1), call it µ
ebω (1), such that (A.54) holds as an

equality. Choose µbω (1) = min µ̂bω (1), µ
ebω (1) − ε. Then (A.54) will hold, and (A.51) and (A.55)
will continue to hold.
Thus, investors will believe that a type τi (i ∈ {1, 2, 3} fintech lender will not invest in loan G
with a positive probability. Given the absence of trust, the fintech lender will therefore be unable

54

to raise financing. Finally, note that since (A.51) holds, s1b < 1, which means µbω (1) cannot be too
small, i.e., it takes an intermediate value. Restriction 4 ensures that µbω (1) is intermediate in value.

We will focus on the strategies of types τ1 , τ2 , and τ3 . Let u2ij be the

Proof of Theorem 3:

second-period utility of lender i ∈ {b, f } of type j ∈ {1, 2, 3} (where 1 represents τ1 , 2 represents τ2 ,
and 3 represents τ3 ), when the lender is trusted in the second period and û2ij be the corresponding
utility when the lender is not trusted. The theorem assumes the condition that all lenders are
trusted in the first period. We will now validate that the strategies stipulated in the theorem
represent a Nash equilibrium, given investors’ beliefs.
Consider banks first. Since type-τ1 banks have a stronger incentive than type-τ2 banks to make
G loans, and since a bank has a stronger incentive than a fintech lender to make a G loan, to
validate the strategies of the banks of types τ1 and τ2 , and the fintech lender of type τ1 , it suffices
to check that the following IC constraints are satisfied. The first is that the type-τ2 bank prefers
G to P B ∀ β:
(
(
Z


0
α 1 − sb qλb + q + [1 − q]

m∗

)
η dm u2b2 + [1 − q]

m

≥α

(


(

1 − s0b pλb +

m∗

Z

)
η dm u2b2 + [1 − p]

p + [1 − p]
m

m

Z

m∗

)

η dm û2b2

)

m
η dm û2b2 + [1 − α]βh2

Z

(A.57)

m∗

The second is that the type-τ1 fintech lender prefers G to PB ∀ β:

α

(


(

1 − s0f qλf +

Z

m∗

)
η dm u2f 1 + [1 − q]

q + [1 − q]

Z

m∗

m

(
(
Z


0
≥ α 1 − sf pλf + p + [1 − p]

m∗

)
η dm u2f 1 + [1 − p]

m

m

)

η dm û2f 1

)

m
2
η dm ûf 1 + [1 − α]βh1 (A.58)

Z

m∗

The third is that the type-τ2 fintech lender prefers G to PB for β = βl2 :

α

(


(

1 − s0f qλf +

Z

m∗

q + [1 − q]

)
η dm u2f 2 + [1 − q]

m

(
(
Z


0
≥ α 1 − sf pλf + p + [1 − p]

m∗

)
η dm u2f 2 + [1 − p]

m

55

Z

Z

m

m∗

)

η dm û2f 2

)

m
η dm û2f 2 + [1 − α]βl2 (A.59)

m∗

And the fourth is that the type-τ2 fintech lender prefers PB to G for β = βh2 :

α

(


(

1 − s0f qλf +

Z

)

m∗

η dm u2f 2 + [1 − q]

q + [1 − q]
m

(
(
Z


0
< α 1 − sf pλf + p + [1 − p]

)

m∗

η dm u2f 2 + [1 − p]

m

Z

Z

m

m∗

)

η dm û2f 2

)

m
η dm û2f 2 + [1 − α]βh2 (A.60)

m∗

The relevant second-period utilities with and without trust were derived in the proofs of the
previous results. From those proofs, we know that

u2ij > û2ij

(A.61)

u2bj > u2f j

(A.62)

û2bj > û2f j

(A.63)

Noting that α [q − p] u2b2 = u∗b , α [q − p] u2f = u∗f for i ∈ {1, 2}, and α [q − p] û2b2 = ub , and that a
fintech lender lacking trust is locked out of the market in the second period, we can write (A.57),
(A.58), and (A.60) respectively as:
"
u∗b

Z

#

m∗

+ 1−

u∗b

η dm

Z
+

m∗

m

"
u∗f + 1 −

m∗

Z

m


η dm ub ≥ [1 − α] βh2

(A.64)

#
η dm u∗f ≥ [1 − α] βh1

(A.65)

m

"
u∗f + 1 −

Z

m∗

#
η dm u∗f ≥ [1 − α] βl2

(A.66)

m

"
u∗f + 1 −

Z

m∗

#
η dm u∗f < [1 − α] βh2

(A.67)

m

Now, in the limit as m∗ → m, we see that (A.7) guarantees that (A.64) holds and (A.8)
guarantees that (A.65), (A.66), and (A.67) hold. By continuity, therefore, these inequalities will
hold for m∗ > m, given a small enough measure of [m, m∗ ], i.e., for m high enough. The rest of the
theorem follows from the previous proofs. 

56

Proof of Theorem 4: Consider first the strategies of banks, Given the arguments in the proof
of Theorem 3, we need to show that it is possible for (A.57) to hold and for the following IC
constraints to hold (where the beliefs of investors at t = 0 are consistent with the conjectured
equilibrium strategies of banks) and we utilize the assumption that if a lender does not have trust
at t = 0, it can never gain it at t = 1). The first is that the type-τ1 bank prefers the G loan ∀ β:

α




1 − ŝ0b qλb + û2b1 ≥ α 1 − ŝ0b pλb + û2b1 + [1 − α]βh1



(A.68)

The second is that the type-τ2 bank prefers the G loan for β = βl :

α




1 − ŝ0b qλb + û2b2 ≥ α 1 − ŝ0b pλb + û2b2 + [1 − α]βl2



(A.69)

The third is that the type-τ2 bank prefers the PB loan for β = βh :

α




1 − ŝ0b qλb + û2b2 < α 1 − ŝ0b pλb + û2b2 + [1 − α]βh2

(A.70)

[L − D][1 + r]
q [γ1 + νγ2 ] λb

(A.71)



In the above,
ŝ0b =

Now, following steps similar to those in the proof of the previous theorem, we can write (A.68)(A.70) as:


α 1 − ŝ0b [q − p] λb ≥ [1 − α]βh1

(A.72)



α 1 − ŝ0b [q − p] λb ≥ [1 − α]βl2

(A.73)



α 1 − ŝ0b [q − p] λb < [1 − α]βh2

(A.74)

ŝ0b < s∗b [νγ1 ]−1

(A.75)



α 1 − ŝ0b [q − p] λb > ub > [1 − α] βh1

(A.76)

Now note that

which means that

57

where (A.76) follows from (A.5). Given this, (A.72) holds. Moreover, (A.73) also holds since
βl2 < βh1 . Finally, since


α 1 − ŝ0b [q − p] λb < u∗b

(A.77)

and u∗b < [1 − α]βh2 by (A.7), we see that (A.77) guarantees that (A.75) holds. Thus, the strategies
in the theorem constitute a Nash equilibrium.
For the fintech lenders, given that it is impossible to gain trust in the second period once it
is absent in the first period and the result in lemma 6 that absent trust, a fintech lender is shut
out of the market in the second period, the first-period problem is the same as the second-period
problem without trust. But we know from Lemma 6 that in this case, no financing is available to
the lender. 

Proof of Theorem 5:

Assume (26) holds. Then we have already established in Corollary 1 that

a lender who starts out being trusted can lose trust if default is experienced at t = 1 at m > m∗ .
So what we need to prove is that, for the same set of parameter values, a lender who starts out
not being trusted can never gain trust in the future.
So suppose agents start out at t = 0 with Model II. The only way for lenders to gain trust
at t = 1 is if they experience first-period loan repayment. Suppose this happens when m = m,
so the repayment probability of the G loan is C (m, q). Clearly, if trust cannot be regained with
loan repayment when m = m, it cannot be regained with m > m. The HTR will reject the
initially-adopted Model II if
[γ1 + νγ2 ] C (m, q) > ε

(A.78)

where it is recognized that with Model II only the type-τ1 lenders and type-τ2 lenders with β̃2 = β2l
choose loan G, so γ1 + νγ2 is the probability measure of lenders choosing loan G (Theorem 4).
Since ε is arbitrarily small, (A.78) holds. Thus, trust will never be gained at t = 1. 

58

