NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SHOCKS MATTER:
IMPROVING OUR ESTIMATES OF EXCHANGE RATE PASS-THROUGH
Kristin Forbes
Ida Hjortsoe
Tsvetelina Nenova
Working Paper 24773
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24773

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018

Thanks to Gianluca Benigno, Giancarlo Corsetti, Gita Gopinath, Pierre Olivier Gourinchas,
Gabor Pinter, Frank Smets, Kostas Theodoridis, and participants at the MMF Conference at
Cardiff University, at the EACBN event at the Bank of England, at the University of Kent, at the
HKUST-Keio-HKMA Conference on Exchange Rates and Macroeconomics, at the 2016
Economic Growth and Policy Conference at Durham University, at the Exchange Rate PassThrough workshop at the Central Bank of Chile, and the NBER Summer Institute for helpful
comments and suggestions. The views in this paper do not represent the official views of the
Bank of England or its Monetary Policy Committee. Any errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Kristin Forbes, Ida Hjortsoe, and Tsvetelina Nenova. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Shocks Matter: Improving Our Estimates of Exchange Rate Pass-Through
Kristin Forbes, Ida Hjortsoe, and Tsvetelina Nenova
NBER Working Paper No. 24773
June 2018
JEL No. E31,E41,E52,F3
ABSTRACT
A major challenge for monetary policy is predicting how exchange rate movements will impact
inflation. We propose a new focus: directly incorporating the underlying shocks that cause
exchange rate fluctuations when evaluating how these fluctuations “pass through” to import and
consumer prices. A standard open-economy model shows that the relationship between exchange
rates and prices depends on the shocks which cause the exchange rate to move. We build on this
to develop a structural Vector Autoregression (SVAR) framework for a small open economy and
apply it to the UK. We show that prices respond differently to exchange rate movements based on
what caused the movements. For example, exchange rate pass-through is low in response to
domestic demand shocks and relatively high in response to domestic monetary policy shocks.
This framework can improve our ability to estimate how pass-through can change over short
periods of time. For example, it can explain why sterling’s post-crisis depreciation caused a
sharper increase in prices than expected, while the effect of sterling’s 2013-15 appreciation was
more muted. We also apply this framework to forecast the extent of pass-through from sterling’s
sharp depreciation corresponding to the UK’s vote to leave the European Union.
Kristin Forbes
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-416
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu

Tsvetelina Nenova
London Business School
London, UK
Tsvetelina.nenova@gmail.com

Ida Hjortsoe
Bank of England
London, UK
ida.hjortsoe@bankofengland.co.uk

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24773

I.

Introduction
Exchange rates fluctuate over time, sometimes sharply. These fluctuations can have sizable

effects on output and prices. Understanding the extent to which exchange rate fluctuations affect
prices (i.e. the degree of exchange rate pass-through) is crucial to evaluate the impact of these
fluctuations on the economy and set monetary policy appropriately. An extensive literature has
improved our understanding of the link between exchange rates and prices. This includes earlier
theoretical work (such as Krugman, 1987 and Dornbusch, 1987), a series of cross-country empirical
studies (such as Campa and Goldberg, 2005 and 2010), and recent work using detailed goods-level
pricing data (well summarized in Burstein and Gopinath, 2014). Despite the substantial advances in
this literature and general understanding that exchange rate pass-through is state dependent, some
key insights have not been incorporated into empirical macroeconomic models,4 and a “rule of
thumb” based on long-term historic relationships is often used to estimate how a given exchange rate
movement will affect prices (see Forbes, 2015b, Fischer, 2015, and Savoie-Chabot and Khan, 2015).
This paper takes the economic theory seriously and develops a framework that can bridge this gap.
We explicitly incorporate the factors behind exchange rate movements when estimating their effects
and show how these factors determine pass-through with an application to the UK—a country that
has experienced sharp changes in pass-through over the past two decades. The results suggest that
explicitly incorporating the shocks behind an exchange rate movement can improve our understanding
of, and ability to predict, how exchange rate movements affect prices.
This paper begins by highlighting key results from a general open-economy framework which
provides intuition on how exchange rates and prices are jointly determined. Firms’ decisions to adjust
their prices in response to exchange rate movements depend on why the exchange rate has moved
and how corresponding conditions in the economy have changed. For example, if a given exchange
rate appreciation was driven by a positive shock to domestic demand, a foreign exporting or domestic
importing firm would be more likely to increase its mark-ups (and correspondingly less inclined to
reduce its prices). This is due to the simultaneous increase in demand for the firm’s output and
reduced competition from domestic firms, as input costs increase and demand strengthens in the
economy. In contrast, if the same exchange rate appreciation was driven by tighter monetary policy
and a corresponding reduction in expected demand, the firm would be more likely to decrease its
mark-ups and prices. The combination of these results suggests that pass-through is likely to be lower
4

Several papers have pointed out what factors may affect the degree of exchange rate pass-through over time, including
Gopinath et al. (2010), Amiti et al. (2016), Berger and Vavra (2013) and Devereux et al. (2015). Some of these attempt to
control for these variables in their regressions, but none have explicitly modelled the factors we focus on in their empirical
framework as done in this paper. The noteworthy exception is Shambaugh (2008), which is closely related to this paper, and
discussed in more detail in Section II.

1

after a domestic demand shock than after a domestic monetary policy shock (for a given exchange
rate movement). We also discuss how domestic supply and “risk” shocks, as well as persistent and
temporary global shocks, affect the degree of pass-through. Each of these shocks can cause an
exchange rate to move and simultaneously affect expected demand, input costs, mark-ups and the
broader economic environment—therefore making the degree of pass-through from the exchange
rate movement shock-dependent.
Next, we use the insights from this theoretical framework to develop an SVAR model in which
we can estimate these relationships for the UK. The framework allows us to identify separate shocks
to UK demand, UK supply, and UK monetary policy, as well as any exogenous exchange rate shocks
and persistent and temporary global shocks. The SVAR model is identified using a series of short-run,
long-run, and sign restrictions based on economic theory. We then evaluate the impact of exchange
rate fluctuations caused by these different shocks. We follow the existing literature and focus on passthrough to import prices, but also report results about exchange rate pass-through to other variables,
including final consumer prices.
Our empirical results confirm that standard measures of exchange rate pass-through (namely
the correlation between changes in the exchange rate and changes in import prices or consumer
prices) vary substantially depending on the source of the shock behind the exchange rate fluctuation.
For example, domestic demand shocks that cause an appreciation (depreciation) tend to cause a
smaller decrease (increase) in import prices than other shocks causing comparable currency
movements. The boost to demand supports both domestic prices and import prices, so that the drag
on inflation from cheaper imports is contained and firms have more ability to increase margins. As a
result, there is substantially less pass-through to import prices from exchange rate movements
primarily driven by demand shocks than other types of shocks. The estimates of shock dependent
degrees of pass-through are consistent with the theoretical predictions and can be explained by the
different general equilibrium effects causing firms to respond differently depending on the shocks
causing the exchange rate fluctuation.
The results also show that this framework explicitly considering the shocks behind exchange
rate fluctuations can help explain why the degree of exchange rate pass-through has varied
significantly in the UK. For example, pass-through to both UK import and consumer prices was
substantially greater than expected in the period after sterling’s depreciation during the global
financial crisis. This can be explained by the different distribution of shocks behind this depreciation
(relative to the historic average). Negative global shocks and domestic supply shocks (which
correspond to greater pass-through) were more important drivers of the 2007-2009 depreciation,
2

while negative domestic demand shocks (which correspond to less pass-through) had a relatively
smaller weight. Our model implies that this different composition of shocks caused pass-through to
import prices to increase by almost one-third, and to consumer prices to roughly double, after the
2007-2009 crisis relative to pass-through after sterling’s last sharp movement in 1996-97. The
estimates also show how the distribution of shocks driving sterling changed again during sterling’s
appreciation from 2013-2015, and why this corresponded to substantially lower pass-through. The
final section of the paper uses this framework to construct out-of-sample forecasts for how sterling’s
sharp depreciation around the June 2016 “Brexit” vote to leave the European Union would affect
import prices and inflation, based on data available at that time. The distribution of shocks for this
period suggested that pass-through would be substantially lower than after sterling’s last sharp
depreciation in 2007-09, and close to that after sterling’s 2013-2015 appreciation. The most recent UK
price data supports this forecast.
The findings of this paper have important implications for monetary policy. They suggest that
policymakers should not assume exchange rate movements are primarily driven by exogenous risk
shocks (a common modelling assumption) or use fixed “rules-of-thumb” to predict how an exchange
rate movement will affect prices. Instead, they should explicitly account for the fact that pass-through
is state dependent by modelling the shocks driving the exchange rate movement when estimating the
effects on prices. Although this insight is not new (for example, see the discussions in Klein, 1990 and
Shambaugh, 2008), it has not been widely incorporated or operationalized.5 This paper, however,
provides a straightforward methodology for bringing the insights from the theoretical literature to the
data in a usable empirical framework. The proposed framework could improve policy makers’ ability to
forecast how exchange rate movements will affect prices in the face of different types of shocks, and
thereby their ability to forecast inflation and set monetary policy appropriately.
The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section II briefly summarizes the literature on
exchange rate pass-through and places our approach within that literature. Section III sets out the
theoretical foundations for the link between exchange rates and prices and why this relationship
changes based on the underlying shocks. Section IV discusses our empirical methodology for
estimating shock-dependent pass-through, including the identification strategy, data, and estimation
technique. Section V discusses the central results on how different shocks correspond to different
degrees of pass-through to import prices and applies the framework to better understand observed
changes in pass-through in the UK. Section VI then shows that this approach yields similar insights on

5

For example, see Smets and Wouters (2002) for a discussion of how pass-through has routinely been modelled
in DSGE frameworks used in policy institutions.

3

exchange rate pass-through to consumer prices. Section VII discusses a series of extensions and
robustness checks, including out-of-sample forecasts for pass-through using this framework after the
“Brexit” vote for the UK to leave the European Union. Section VIII concludes.
II.

Previous literature on exchange rate pass-through
A large literature has contributed to our understanding of pass-through using a range of

different approaches. Early work, including Krugman (1987), Dornbusch (1987), and Klein (1990),
showed that pass-through was incomplete due to imperfect competition and pricing-to-market. In the
past decade, the literature has used extensive micro data on firm pricing decisions to highlight factors
such as the role of the currency of pricing (Gopinath et al., 2010, Gopinath, 2015, and Devereux et al.,
2015), whether transactions take place within or between firms (Neiman, 2010), the frequency of
price adjustment (Gopinath and Itskhoki, 2010), the role of local costs and mark-up adjustments
(Nakamura and Zerom, 2010), the dispersion of price changes (Berger and Vavra, 2013) and the extent
of competition in final product markets (Amiti et al., 2016).
The standard approach for estimating exchange rate pass-through at the macroeconomic level
has been to regress changes in some measure of domestic prices on past and present changes in the
exchange rate and additional control variables. For example, in their Handbook article providing an
overview of this literature, Burstein and Gopinath (2014) estimate distributed lag regressions for a
number of countries using:
𝚫𝒑𝒏,𝒕 = 𝜶𝒏 + ∑𝑻𝒌=𝟎 𝜷𝒏,𝒌 𝚫𝒆𝒏,𝒕−𝒌 + 𝜸𝒏 𝑿𝒏,𝒕 + 𝜺𝒏,𝒕 ,

(1)

where Δ𝑝𝑛,𝑡 represents the quarterly log difference in the import price index or the consumer price
index in country n at time t, expressed in country n's currency; Δ𝑒𝑛,𝑡−𝑘 represents the log change in the
trade-weighted nominal exchange rate in country n at time t – k; 𝑋𝑛,𝑡 includes trade-weighted foreign
export prices to control for changes in the trade-weighted cost of production in countries exporting to
country n during the current and previous eight quarters. Long-run exchange rate pass-through is
calculated as the sum of the estimated coefficients on the exchange rate changes for all periods
included in the regression (i.e., for all 𝛽𝑛,𝑘 ). Although most papers in this literature acknowledge that
the exchange rate and prices are both endogenous variables and will be jointly determined by other
shocks, this is usually not a focus of the analysis.
This basic framework for estimating average pass-through at the macroeconomic level is
widely used not only in the academic literature, but also in policy institutions and by other
professional forecasters. The resulting estimates are often treated as general “rules of thumb” for how

4

an exchange rate movement would be expected to affect import prices and future inflation. For
example, in the UK, the Bank of England (BoE) has estimated that on average the pass-through from
exchange rate movements to UK import prices (the sum of the 𝛽𝑛,𝑘 in equation (1)) is about 60%, and
to consumer prices is about 20%.6 In other words, a 10% appreciation would be expected to reduce
import prices by 6% and consumer prices by about 2% in the long run. Similarly, Fischer (2015)
indicates that in the US, a 10% appreciation is predicted to reduce non-oil import prices by about 3%
and core PCE prices by 0.5%. Estimates for Canada are larger, with the same 10% appreciation
predicted to decrease consumer prices by 6% (Savoie-Chabot and Khan, 2015).
The challenge is that these estimates of pass-through can change meaningfully over time. In
the past, much of the focus on why pass-through could change over time focused on slow-moving
structural factors , such as changes in the composition of imports, the monetary policy framework, or
the role of China (e.g., Campa and Goldberg, 2005, Marazzi et al., 2005, Gagnon and Ihrig, 2004, and
Gust et al., 2010 and Taylor, 2000). More recently, however, there is accumulating evidence that passthrough can change significantly over short periods of time—and more quickly than can be explained
by slow-moving structural changes (e.g., Fleer et al. (2015) for Switzerland, Hara, et al. (2015) for
Japan, Forbes (2015b) for the UK and Forbes et al. (2017) for a sample of small open economies). This
is not surprising given the extensive theoretical and empirical literature showing how firms adjust their
prices and mark-ups differently after different shocks, based on factors such as: how these shocks
affect their current and future marginal costs, potential competitors’ prices, and demand conditions
(e.g., Bils, 1987, Rotemberg and Woodford, 1999, Gilchrist and Zakrajsek, 2015, Corsetti et al., 2009,
and Goldberg and Hellerstein, 2013).
The standard framework for estimating pass-through in equation (1), however, does not
explicitly incorporate these many ways in which exchange rate movements are endogenously
determined with prices. Empirical papers in this literature have attempted to address this by including
variables in X to try to capture these omitted variables that affect mark-ups, such as controls for
production costs, domestic demand (with proxies such as GDP), domestic competitive pressures (with
proxies such as domestic producer prices) or changes in monetary policy.7 These additional control
variables will capture some of the changes in the economic environment that jointly affect exchange
rates and prices, but since many of the omitted variables are difficult to measure, they will be unlikely
to fully account for the underlying macroeconomic shocks.

6

Calculated as this 60% multiplied by the 30% share of imported inputs in the consumer price index See Forbes (2015a,
2015b) and the Bank of England Inflation Report, November 2015.
7 For example, Burstein and Gopinath (2014), Campa and Goldberg (2005) and Ihrig et al. (2006). Ito and Sato (2008) show
the importance of simultaneously controlling for monetary policy changes when estimating pass-through.

5

Therefore, this paper develops an alternate approach to control for the widespread — and
largely unmeasurable — factors that could influence pass-through: explicitly model and incorporate
the shocks underlying exchange rate movements. This should help control for the multifaceted
channels by which the initial shock affects a firm’s desired margins and domestic costs. A limited
number of papers have mentioned this strategy of controlling for the underlying source of the shock
behind an exchange rate movement when measuring pass-through. Klein (1990) is the first paper we
have found that makes this point, but does not operationalize it in the estimation. Corsetti et al.
(2008) and Kirby and Meaning (2014) show that estimates of exchange rate pass-through are shockdependent using a limited number of shocks.8 An and Wang (2012) and Stulz (2007) focus on
identifying exogenous exchange rate movements within a VAR framework—but do not use their
frameworks to estimate shock-dependent pass-through.
The analysis that is closest to our approach, and makes the most progress in incorporating the
factors behind an exchange rate movement when estimating pass-through, is Shambaugh (2008). It
uses a simple and intuitive set of equations based on PPP and the quantity theory of money to show
why different sources of an exchange rate movement can have different effects on prices. Then it
estimates a VAR with five shocks (supply, relative demand, nominal, foreign price, and import price
shocks) that affect the exchange rate and generate different degrees of pass-through. The shocks are
identified using long run restrictions only (as proposed by Blanchard and Quah, 1989). In our view, this
analysis did not receive the attention it deserved, and its insights were not incorporated in subsequent
research and estimation of pass-through.
Our approach builds on this work in several ways, attempting to better link it to the current
theoretical literature and make it more applicable for forecasting. First, our analysis is based on a
different set of shocks that are more closely linked to the theoretical literature on pass-through and
more straightforward to interpret for empirical analysis (such as monetary policy shocks, exogenous
risk shocks, and differentiating “foreign” shocks into those which are temporary and permanent).9
Second, our approach uses recent advances in SVAR methodology to better identify this richer set of
shocks behind exchange rate fluctuations. We combine long run restrictions with short run zero and
sign restrictions to extract shocks with a clearer interpretation. This also allows us to better mitigate
well-documented concerns with weak identification in SVAR models with long-run restrictions.10
Finally, our analysis considers the effects of these shocks on a broader set of variables—including on

8

Corsetti et al. (2008) show that pass-through changes based on whether the shocks are real or nominal. Kirby and Meaning
(2014) discuss how different shocks affect pass-through for the UK using the NIESR’s global structural model.
9
We also do not include import prices as one of our shocks, as done in Shambaugh (2008).
10
See Pagan and Robertson (1998), Faust and Leeper (1997), Christiano et al. (2007).

6

interest rates and foreign export prices. These changes make our model closer to the theoretical and
micro-empirical literature on pass-through, as well as making it more straightforward to forecast the
degree of pass-through after an exchange rate movement.
III.

Exchange rate pass-through in a standard open-economy framework
To provide intuition on why pass-through may not be full (i.e., 100%) and may depend on the

shocks corresponding to the exchange rate movement, this section discusses the factors that
determine the degree of pass-through. We focus on understanding how pass-through depends on the
underlying shocks, and although pass-through could also vary with the degree of price stickiness or the
currency of invoicing, we do not consider how variations in these affect pass-through here as these
factors are likely to be less important in explaining variations within the UK over the period we
consider. A more detailed discussion, including a model developed using a specific variant of this
general framework, is available in the Online Appendix to this paper.
Within any open-economy framework, the import price level in period t (𝑃𝐹,𝑡 ) is a function of:
the exchange rate (𝑠𝑡 ); marginal costs faced by foreign exporters (𝑚𝑐𝑡∗ ); and the mark-up over
marginal costs (𝑚𝑘𝑢𝑝𝑡∗). Any change in the import price level can then be decomposed into changes
in: the nominal exchange rate, marginal costs, and the average mark-up over marginal costs:
̂∗
̂∗
𝑃̂
𝐹,𝑡 = 𝑠̂𝑡 + 𝑚𝑘𝑢𝑝𝑡 + 𝑚𝑐𝑡 ,

(2)

where hatted variables denote deviations from steady state. Equation (2) clarifies that the correlation
between the nominal exchange rate and the import price depends on the extent to which foreign
exporters’ mark-ups and marginal costs change when the exchange rate moves. If these do not comove with the exchange rate, then the import price level fully adjusts to any change in the exchange
rate and pass-through is full.
Most shocks that move the exchange rate also cause foreign exporters’ mark-ups to change,
however, as exporting firms set their prices in a forward-looking manner to reflect their expected
marginal costs, expected demand conditions and expected competitive pressures.11 More specifically,
if a shock is expected to change these marginal costs, demand conditions and competitive pressures,
exporters might choose to reflect this in their prices and adjust their mark-ups. Because these
determinants of exporters’ pricing decisions will be affected differently by different shocks, the extent
to which exchange rate changes are reflected into prices will depend on the shock. Other factors—

11

Competitive pressures play a role when strategic complementarities are present. See Gopinath (2015) for an extensive
discussion of models of strategic complementarities which imply variation in desired mark-ups.

7

such as the monetary policy response and the persistence of the exchange rate movement—can also
be important.
For example, consider the case where a small open economy (such as the UK) experiences a
domestic shock, e.g. to demand, supply or to monetary policy. Foreign exporters’ marginal costs are
not affected by this shock (given the assumption of a small open economy). Foreign exporters’ markup, however, may be sensitive to the change in the exchange rate. In particular, foreign exporters who
invoice in the domestic currency and face price rigidities will not be able to adjust their prices and will
not pass-through the exchange rate movement. Instead, their mark-up will adjust in response to the
exchange rate. At the same time, foreign exporters who get the opportunity to adjust their price may
adjust mark-ups in response to simultaneous changes in demand conditions and competitors’ prices—
changes which could also be caused by the driver of the exchange rate movement.
More specifically, if the exchange rate appreciated due to a positive domestic demand shock,
foreign exporters would face stronger demand from the domestic market, as well as increasing
domestic prices and wages. In that environment, foreign exporters may find it optimal to respond to
the appreciation by only marginally reducing their prices in the domestic market (or not reducing them
at all), implying a low degree of exchange rate pass-through. In contrast, if the exchange rate
appreciated due to tighter domestic monetary policy, demand conditions in the domestic economy
would be less favourable and any price and wage increases would be more muted. As a result, foreign
firms would reduce their prices by more, thereby passing through more of the exchange rate
appreciation into lower prices for their goods in domestic currency. In a third scenario, if the exchange
rate appreciated due to a domestic supply shock, the effect of demand conditions and competitive
pressures on pass-through is less straightforward, as the effects on different variables affecting firm
pricing decisions work in opposite directions. The positive supply shock would generate stronger
domestic demand for foreign exporters (to the extent that the income effect dominates the
substitution effect12), which would normally support less price reductions, but at the same time, the
positive supply shock could reduce domestic price and wage pressures, supporting price reductions. In
this case, the interplay between the two effects will determine the extent of pass-through.
Next, consider scenarios where the shock moving the exchange rate was global instead of
domestic. The marginal costs of foreign exporters will now be affected. The extent to which they
adjust their mark-up, or pass through the entire change in exchange rates and marginal costs to prices,
will depend on the same factors discussed above: how the shock is expected to affect future demand

12

For a detailed analysis of these effects in the face of supply shocks, see Corsetti et al. (2010).

8

conditions, competitive pressure, and marginal costs. Global shocks which are assessed to be
transitory would be expected to have less impact on these variables in the future, and therefore firms
would adjust prices by less and generate a lower degree of pass-through than global shocks which are
believed to be more permanent.
To summarize, theory suggests a number of ways in which exchange rate-pass through is
shock dependent. Are the predictions of these models—such as less pass-through when exchange rate
movements are caused by a domestic demand shocks than those caused by monetary policy shocks—
supported in the empirical evidence? And if pass-through does change based on the corresponding
shocks—are any such changes in pass-through economically meaningful?
IV.

Empirical methodology
1.

Identification strategy

Our empirical framework for studying pass-through allows us to estimate how different shocks
incorporated in many theoretical models impact the exchange rate, import prices and consumer
prices. Specifically, we consider the impact of six shocks: domestic supply, domestic demand, domestic
monetary policy, exogenous exchange rate, persistent global and transitory global shocks. This is a
wider variety of shocks than previously considered in related literature and should encompass all
shocks that could be important determinants of exchange rate movements.13 For example, a
persistent change in oil prices would be captured as a persistent global shock, an increase in domestic
productivity would be captured as a domestic supply shock, and a sudden increase in domestic risk
aversion would be captured as an exogenous exchange rate shock. To the extent that these shocks
drive fluctuations in the exchange rate, they may also determine the characteristics of pass-through.
One challenge in this type of analysis—which applies to models of changes in monetary policy
as well as exchange rates—is to use economic theory to identify the shocks of interest with
appropriate restrictions on variables’ impulse responses. The identification strategies used in the
previous work estimating exchange rate pass-through conditional on underlying shocks have a number
of limitations and can only identify a restricted set of shocks. More specifically, Shambaugh (2008)
uses long-run restrictions to identify separately domestic supply, relative demand, nominal shocks and
foreign price shocks. The interpretation of the latter three types of shocks, however, is not
straightforward, does not easily translate into standard macroeconomic models and the identification
strategy does not allow for disentangling shocks originating in different regions. Farrant and Peersman

13

Our methodology allows us to identify unanticipated shocks, and we do not identify shocks such as news shocks to
productivity.

9

(2006) instead use short-run sign restrictions to identify relative supply, relative demand and relative
nominal shocks. Because their sign restrictions apply to relative output, relative prices and the real
exchange rate, they are only able to investigate the impact of shocks on the real exchange rate and on
relative prices. Therefore, it is not possible to examine pass-through from the nominal exchange rate
to import prices or to consumer prices within their model, but only the correlation between the real
exchange rate and relative prices. Moreover, as in Shambaugh (2008), the identification scheme is
quite general, and does not allow for disentangling shocks with different origins.
To overcome these challenges in identifying separately the different types of shocks and then
be able to analyse exchange rate pass-through to domestic prices, we use a combination of zero shortand long-run restrictions, as well as sign restrictions. These restrictions are summarized in Table 1 and
consistent with standard open economy models (such as the one described in more detail in the
Online Appendix for this paper). These restrictions for our example of the UK are based on three sets
of assumptions.
Table 1: Identification restrictions

UK GDP
UK CPI
UK interest rate
UK nominal ERI
UK import prices
World (ex-UK)
export prices
UK GDP
UK CPI
UK interest rate
UK nominal ERI
UK import prices
World (ex-UK)
export prices

UK
supply
shock

UK
demand
shock

+
-

+
+
+
+

0

0
0

0

0

UK
Exogenous Persistent Transitory
monetary
exchange
global
global
policy
rate shock
shock
shock
shock
Short-run restrictions
_
_
+
-/0
+
+
0

0

Long-run restrictions
0
0

0

+
0

0

Note: A ‘+’ (‘-’) sign indicates that the impulse response of the variable in question is restricted to be positive (negative) in the quarter the
shock considered hits and in the following quarter. A ‘0’ indicates that the response of the variable in question is restricted to be zero (either
on impact or in the long run).

First, we assume that only domestic supply shocks and the persistent global shock affect the
growth rate or level of output in the long run. This is consistent with the idea that only changes in
technology can affect the productive capacity of an economy in the long run, and that prices will
10

adjust to ensure that markets clear. This identification restriction is based on work by Blanchard and
Quah (1989) and Gali (1999),14 and is widely used in the SVAR literature, including by Shambaugh
(2008) and Erceg et al. (2005). Persistent global shocks can incorporate global technology shocks, as
well as oil/commodity price shocks or any other shocks with a persistent effect on UK output.
Second, we assume that domestic shocks do not affect world (ex-UK) export prices, either on
impact or in the long run. This restriction is necessary to identify domestic shocks and should hold for
small open economies such as the UK (albeit not for larger economies such as the US). This
assumption that small open economies cannot affect the rest of the world is commonly made in the
literature, e.g. Liu et al. (2011) and Carrière-Swallow and Céspedes (2013). Instead, only global shocks
(either persistent or transitory) may have an impact on world export prices, whether they also affect
the UK directly or simply spill over to the UK. It is important to note that we do not separate relative
shocks from global shocks. In addition, the global transitory shock is identified flexibly enough that it
can incorporate a range of shocks, such as those caused by policy abroad (e.g., foreign monetary
policy), an increase in global risk aversion or temporary mark-up shocks. Therefore, we do not impose
any restrictions on how the exchange rate responds to these shocks.
Third, we impose several short-run sign restrictions on domestic shocks which are motivated
by open-economy DSGE models such as the one discussed in the Online Appendix.15 These sign
restrictions have been widely used in the literature and shown to be consistent with theoretical
models, for example in Fry and Pagan (2011). More specifically, we restrict supply shocks to be
associated with a negative correlation between GDP and CPI in the first 2 periods. This is consistent
with previous literature, such as Canova and de Nicolo (2003), who also point out that this
combination of restrictions is shared by a large class of models with different micro-foundations. 16
We restrict positive demand shocks to be associated with a positive correlation between GDP and CPI,
a counter-cyclical monetary policy response, and an exchange rate appreciation, as in Ellis et al.
(2014). Monetary policy shocks are identified such that a lower interest rate is associated with a rise in
GDP and the CPI and a depreciation of the nominal exchange rate. Hjortsoe, Weale and Wieladek
(2016) show that these sign restrictions are consistent with a standard small open-economy model for
a wide range of different parameterisations. They are also consistent with sign restrictions imposed in

14

Gali (1999) discusses the conditions under which this restriction holds, as well as its consistency with a large class of RBC
and New-Keynesian models. Our identification scheme allows demand shocks with a long-term impact (e.g., related to
secular stagnation) to be classified as a persistent global shock as long as they are not only domestic in nature.
15
The impulse responses from the theoretical framework discussed in Section III and derived from full model in the
corresponding online Appendix support these key assumptions in our identification scheme.
16 Note that by imposing sign restrictions on the domestic supply shock, we ensure that we do not pick up shocks which lead
to highly persistent changes in output but are not technology-related. This avoids one of the critiques often mentioned with
regards to the long-run restriction methodology, see Erceg et al. (2005).

11

the previous SVAR literature, such as Mountford (2005). Next, we assume that an exogenous exchange
rate appreciation implies a fall in the CPI and no increase in the interest rate (with no assumption
about whether the interest rate is unchanged or lowered). This is consistent with An and Wang (2012),
but less restrictive in that we do not restrict the response of import prices.
Finally, our identification scheme does not impose any sign restrictions on the global shocks
and only differentiates between the two based on the persistence of their impact on UK GDP. We also
do not put any restrictions on how domestic import prices—a key variable for pass-through—respond
to any of the shocks. This combination of sign restrictions—together with the zero restrictions
described previously — constitutes the minimum number of economically sensible restrictions that
allow us to identify the shocks of interest separately.17
2.

Data

We estimate the SVAR model described above using quarterly data for the UK and the rest of
the world over the period from 1993q118 through 2015q1 on the following six variables: UK real GDP
growth, UK CPI inflation, the UK shadow Bank Rate (Shadow BR), changes in the Sterling exchange rate
index (ERI), UK import price inflation19, and changes in foreign export prices. More specifically, we use
a version of the headline UK Consumer Price Index, excluding the contribution from VAT changes in
the aftermath of the 2007/8 crisis. Shadow BR measures UK monetary policy as the UK policy rate
(Bank Rate) until 2009 and then adjusts for the asset purchases/quantitative easing (QE) undertaken
by the Bank of England (BoE) Monetary Policy Committee after that.20 This avoids estimation
difficulties stemming from the constant policy rate at the effective zero lower bound. We use the
nominal sterling effective exchange rate index produced by the BoE, which weighs each bilateral
sterling exchange rate by the respective country’s relative importance in UK trade21. Finally, the series
for foreign export prices is constructed by averaging the export price indices of all UK trade partners in
foreign currency using the sterling ERI weights. All variables except the interest rate are transformed
into quarterly log differences. We use the de-trended level of the interest rate to account for the
downward trend observed in that series over the period considered.22
The SVAR model is estimated with two lags of the endogenous variables using Bayesian
methods with Minnesota-style priors. The standard errors, percentiles and confidence intervals
17

Section VII discusses a range of robustness checks of the estimation methodology and finds little impact on the key results.
The first and second quarter of 1993 are only used as explanatory variables in the estimation.
19 We use the import price deflator for total imports, including all goods and services.
20 This series is constructed by comparing the estimated effects of QE to the economic multipliers assigned to conventional
changes in Bank Rate. For further detail on the economic impact of UK asset purchases, see Joyce et al. (2011).
21 For further detail see http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/Pages/iadb/notesiadb/effective_exc.aspx
22 Standard unit root tests suggested that the interest rate level is nonstationary but the de-trended level is stationary.
18

12

reported in this paper are based on a Gibbs sampling procedure, from which we save and use the final
1,000 repetitions. The sign restrictions shown in Table 3 are imposed for two periods
(contemporaneously and in the quarter thereafter) for each shock. These are combined with short-run
and long-run zero restrictions using the algorithm suggested by Rubio-Ramirez et al. (2010) and
extended by Binning (2013) for under-identified models.23
V.

Exchange rate pass-through to UK import prices
1.

Shock-based metrics of exchange rate pass-through

Applying this identification strategy to the UK data allows us to estimate a series of impulse
responses to the six shocks in our model. The resulting impulse responses are shown in Appendix B,
Figures B.1 through B.6, and are consistent with economic theory (as discussed in the Online
Appendix). We will not discuss each set in detail, and instead concentrate on what the results imply for
exchange rate pass-through associated with each shock. The most straightforward way to capture this
is through the corresponding ratios of the impulse responses of prices relative to the exchange rate.
This section focuses on exchange rate pass-through to import prices, which has been the primary
focus in the literature and is easier to measure, and Section VI extends the analysis to the passthrough to consumer prices.
Before discussing the key results on how exchange rate pass-through varies based on the
source of the underlying shock, it is useful to begin by examining if the estimated exchange rate
responses agree with economic theory and our model. To simplify the comparison, we calibrate each
shock so that it initially causes a cumulative 1% appreciation of sterling within four quarters of the
initial shock. The resulting exchange-rate paths for each respective shock (which will be used as the
denominators in calculating the implied profiles of pass-through to domestic prices) are shown in the
graphs in Appendix B. First, a positive domestic supply shock causes the exchange rate to appreciate in
the median case, albeit with wide confidence bands (Figure B.1).24 Second, a positive domestic
demand shock leads to a sterling appreciation (consistent with the sign restrictions imposed on the
first two quarters and with the prediction from the DSGE model outlined in the Online Appendix) and
is more tightly estimated (Figure B.2). It is worth noting that, also in line with the theoretical model,
this appreciation is associated with a less than one-for-one fall in import prices and a rise in consumer
prices. Third, a shock from tighter monetary policy or an increase in the exchange rate due to
23

For further details of the estimation procedure see Appendix A.
The exchange rate response to a productivity shock has been shown to vary both in theoretical and empirical studies.
Empirically, Shambaugh (2008) also finds a statistically insignificant real exchange rate appreciation in response to a positive
supply shock. Theoretically, the result is consistent with a very low trade elasticity or high trade elasticity combined with very
persistent shocks (Corsetti et al., 2008).
24

13

exogenous factors both cause an appreciation – consistent with our identifying restrictions for the
short-term responses (Figures B.3 and B.4, respectively).
Finally, the two global shocks generate exchange rate appreciations in the median case and
both have very wide confidence bands (Figures B.5 and B.6). The persistent global shock could be
interpreted as a positive global productivity shock or a long-term fall in oil or other commodity prices.
The transitory global shock could be interpreted generally as a transitory shock that has a negative
effect on global prices, such as a negative demand shock, monetary policy shock or temporary markup shock. The wide confidence bands may reflect the diverse sources and lack of strict identifying
criteria for these global shocks. It is worth highlighting that for both global shocks, UK import prices
appear to move substantially more than after the domestic shocks and more than directly warranted
by just the exchange rate appreciation. This is consistent with the global shocks having effects not only
on the exchange rate, but also on foreign export prices. As a result, the corresponding changes in
import prices reflect both the direct effects of these global shocks on foreign export prices and their
pass-through to import prices, as well as the pass-through effects from the exchange rate as occurs
with the domestic shocks.
2.

Exchange rate pass-through after different shocks

What do these results imply for exchange rate pass-through? Can these different shocks
driving exchange rate fluctuations, and their corresponding effects on the six variables in our SVAR
model, explain why pass-through to import prices can vary at different points in time? In order to
answer these questions and more easily compare the pass-through implied by the different shocks in
our framework, we focus on the ratios of the impulse responses of import prices to those of the
exchange rate. We calculate these ratios for each of the 1,000 sets of impulse responses we have
saved. Figure 1 graphs the median of these ratios, as well as the pass-through profile implied by the
more standard reduced-form regressions estimated from equation (1) in Section II (as a black dashed
line). We differentiate between the effects of the four domestic and two global shocks (Figures 1.a and
1.b, respectively) in order to highlight that the import price movements corresponding to global
shocks also incorporate the direct effect of the global shocks on foreign export prices—as well as any
exchange rate effects as occurs with the domestic shocks. The numerical estimates and different
percentiles of the ratios at selected horizons are also reported in Appendix B, Table B.1.

14

Figure 1.a: Pass-through to import prices for

Figure 1.b: Pass-through to import prices for

domestic shocks

global shocks

Note: Pass-through is defined as the median ratio of cumulative impulse responses of import prices relative to the exchange rate.

These results clearly indicate that different shocks causing a 1% appreciation after 1 year have
different effects on import prices. Of the domestic shocks, the domestic demand shock has the lowest
degree of pass-through—with less than 40% of the exchange rate appreciation being passed through
to import prices after 5 quarters. This weaker effect is intuitive; importers facing an appreciation
linked to stronger domestic demand would have less incentive to reduce prices. The increase in
domestic prices (corresponding to stronger demand) gives them some leeway to increase margins
without losing market share, a result consistent with the discussion in Section III. At the other
extreme, monetary policy shocks lead to the highest observed degree of pass-through. The magnitude
of pass-through is large—with import prices falling by almost 70% of the appreciation in two quarters
(and by 85% by quarter six). The theoretical framework suggests this may reflect the impact of the
tighter monetary policy exerting some additional downward pressure on import prices by supressing
domestic demand. Pass-through for the other domestic shocks is in between—at 67% for the domestic
supply shock and 50% for the exchange rate shock after 5 quarters. It is worth noting that the
reduced-form estimate of exchange rate pass-through to import prices shown in the dashed black line
(i.e., the “rule-of-thumb”) appears close to an average of the responses for the four domestic shocks.
But using this constant estimate and ignoring the source of the shock underlying the exchange rate
move could lead to large errors; the shocks from the SVAR suggest substantially more variation in the

15

degree of exchange rate pass-through by shock than would be implied by just adding two standard
errors on each side of the reduced-form estimate. 25
Finally, the two global shocks correspond to the sharpest falls in import prices—by magnitudes
even greater than the appreciation in the exchange rate. As discussed above, this is not surprising as
they incorporate the simultaneous large falls in foreign export prices from the underlying foreign
shocks, as well as the direct exchange rate effects on import prices.
To summarise, the impulse responses from our SVAR support the theoretical predictions that
a given appreciation or depreciation could have very different effects on import prices depending on
what caused the initial currency movement. The estimates also suggest that the magnitude of these
differences can be economically meaningful. This could explain why estimates of pass-through can
change over time—even within a country—and why it is so hard to predict the effect of an exchange
rate movement on inflation in real time, without fully understanding the reason behind the
movement.
3.

Applying the framework to evaluate pass-through in the UK

To assess the importance of shock-contingent exchange rate pass-through, this section
investigates whether our framework can help understand the link between movements in sterling and
UK import prices. It focuses on the period since the UK left the European Exchange Rate Mechanism
(ERM), under which the value of sterling was pegged. (In the sensitivity analysis, we examine a longer
period.) We analyse what types of shocks have driven UK exchange rate fluctuations and import prices
over this period by examining the forecast error variance decompositions and historical shock
decompositions from the SVAR. Then we evaluate if the shock decomposition of exchange rate
movements can explain changes in the observed rates of pass-through over time.
To begin, Table 2 shows the variance decomposition of the six variables that are the focus of
our model above for the UK (GDP, CPI, Shadow Bank Rate, Exchange Rate Index, Import Prices, and
Foreign Export Prices). It reports the proportion of the variance for each of these variables explained
by shocks to UK supply, UK demand, UK monetary policy, the exchange rate and the two global shocks.
In order to better understand how this model helps explain changes in pass-through over time, it is
useful to focus on the estimates explaining variations in the exchange rate, which are highlighted in
25

Given the wide confidence bands around the impulse responses in Appendix B, Figures B.1 through B.6, there is significant
uncertainty around these exchange rate pass-through estimates. However, the ranking of the shocks according to the
associated exchange rate pass-through described in this section is more stable. For example, in over two-thirds of the models
from which the median exchange rate pass-through profiles in Figure 1 are constructed, the domestic demand shock leads to
lower exchange rate pass-through than either the monetary policy shock or the exogenous exchange rate shock, consistent
with the theoretical predictions in Section III.

16

the middle of the table. These results suggest that demand shocks have accounted for around a
quarter of unanticipated nominal exchange rate movements (or more precisely for 28% at the onequarter horizon and 23% over the long run) over the period from 1993q1 to 2015q1. The exogenous
exchange rate and monetary policy shocks are also each important—with each explaining around 20%
of the variance after one quarter and 15% to 19% in the long run. The other three shocks play less of a
role in the short term (with each accounting for about 10% of the variance after one quarter). There is,
however, an increased role for both persistent and transitory global shocks over the longer term
(accounting for 17% and 15% of the exchange rate variation, respectively, at five years).
Table 2: Forecast error variance decomposition
Variable

Proportion of variance explained by shocks to:
Horizon
(quarters)
1
20

Supply

Demand

Monetary
policy

Exchange
rate

Persistent
global shocks

0.50
0.47

0.08
0.05

0.04
0.03

0.06
0.04

0.14
0.28

Transitory
global
shocks
0.17
0.13

CPI

1
20

0.14
0.15

0.15
0.12

0.17
0.16

0.07
0.07

0.33
0.36

0.13
0.15

Shadow BR

1
20

0.22
0.21

0.10
0.09

0.07
0.08

0.12
0.05

0.25
0.29

0.25
0.28

Exchange rate

1
20

0.09
0.11

0.28
0.23

0.18
0.15

0.22
0.19

0.12
0.17

0.11
0.15

Import prices

1
20

0.08
0.08

0.11
0.10

0.22
0.19

0.12
0.12

0.23
0.26

0.24
0.26

Foreign export
prices

1
20

0.00
0.01

0.00
0.01

0.00
0.01

0.00
0.00

0.48
0.46

0.52
0.51

GDP

Note: The forecast error variance decomposition is the average of the 1,000 variance decompositions obtained from the saved iterations of
the estimation algorithm. See Appendix A for further detail on the estimation methodology.

This decomposition clearly indicates that structural shocks other than exogenous exchange
rate shocks account for the majority of the variation in the exchange rate—for over ¾ of the variation
over any time period to be precise. Therefore, treating all exchange rate fluctuations as exogenous
exchange rate shocks (as is common in the macro literature discussed in Section II) might not
adequately capture the underlying dynamics, especially if the mix of shocks driving the exchange rate
varies over time.
Next, to better understand if the relative importance of these different shocks does vary over
time in a meaningful way, we plot the corresponding historical decomposition of year-on-year
exchange rate changes in Figure 2. A quick glance at the figure suggests that there are significant

17

differences in the sources of exchange rate movements at different points in time. For example, the
large depreciation during the 2007-2009 crisis was associated with larger global shocks (in red and
purple) and domestic supply shocks (in green) than occurred in most other periods. Both of these
types of shocks — and especially the global shocks — generate relatively higher exchange rate passthrough to import prices. In contrast, the sharp appreciation of sterling around 1996-7 was driven
more by domestic demand shocks (in dark blue) and exchange rate shocks (in yellow) — which exhibit
substantially lower pass-through. Providing yet another contrast, the appreciation from 2013-2015 is
associated with a relatively greater role of global shocks (both persistent and transitory). These are
correlated with large movements in import prices, but make it necessary to differentiate the direct
impact on foreign export prices from global shocks separately from the effects of the exchange rate.
Figure 2: Historical decomposition of year-on-year changes in nominal sterling ERI

Note: The figure depicts the contribution of each of the six shocks to y/y changes in the ERI, in percent. These historical decompositions of
the variables in the SVAR are the averages of the 1,000 historical decompositions obtained from the saved iterations of the estimation
algorithm. See Appendix A for further detail on the estimation methodology.

To clarify the distinctions between these periods more formally, Table 3 decomposes the
movements in sterling into the corresponding average contributions from the six shocks during three
recent episodes when sterling has experienced its most extreme movements. In addition, the last
column reports the corresponding shock decomposition of the sterling forecast error variance for the
full estimation sample. A comparison between the different episodes highlights the importance of
demand and exchange-rate shocks in driving the 1996-7 episode—not only relative to the historical
average, but also relative to the 2007-9 depreciation. In contrast, global shocks play a substantially
greater role in driving the 2007-9 episode, when compared to the historical averages and the earlier
episode. Shocks to domestic supply are also very important in driving the 2007-9 episode, more than
double the historical average and more than other periods of sharp exchange rate movements.
18

Turning to the most recent sterling appreciation, global shocks are identified as the two most
important factors – even more than during the 2007-9 depreciation. The most important point from
this analysis is that the contribution from different shocks varies across these episodes of sharp
exchange rate movements, indicating that the resulting exchange rate pass-through might also differ
across episodes.
To better understand what these shock decompositions imply for changes in pass-through
over time, we can use our model estimates of the pass-through ratios shown in Figures 1.a and 1.b.
This exercise gives us an estimate of the unadjusted (but shock-contingent) exchange rate passthrough, which does not control for movements in any other variables during each episode. More
specifically, although our framework will control for the effects of each of our shocks on each of the
variables in the SVAR, it is not able to control for other events causing simultaneous movements in
commodity prices and foreign export prices more broadly. This can be a particularly important issue
when there are changes in global prices (such as when oil prices fell sharply in 2013-2014 when Saudi
Arabia changed its policy on oil production and the US shale industry experienced rapid changes).
Reduced-form regressions estimating pass-through (such as discussed in Section II) usually address this
by controlling for these changes in foreign export prices (whatever their causes), in order to attempt
to isolate the effects of exchange rate movements on import prices.
To relate our results to the standard approach we also report “adjusted pass-through”
coefficients at the bottom of Table 3. These coefficients are meant to illustrate that movements in
foreign export prices can affect the “unadjusted” pass-through to import prices, based on
assumptions. More specifically, and in order to capture the imprecision around these additional
assumptions, we use a range and assume that 50% to 100% of changes in foreign export prices are
passed-through to UK import prices.26
Focusing on the adjusted pass-through estimates at the bottom of Table 3, the shock
decomposition from the 1996-7 episode suggests that a 10% exchange rate appreciation would have
caused import prices to fall by around 7%. In contrast, using the decomposition from the 2007-9
episode, the same 10% exchange rate movement would cause import prices to adjust by 9%. In other
words, using the pass-through coefficients from the 1996-7 episode as a rule of thumb would have
underestimated the impact of the 2007-9 depreciation on the level of UK import prices by almost 30%.

26

This range corresponds to approximately two standard errors below and above the long-run impact of foreign export prices
on UK import prices, estimated using the reduced form regressions described in Section II, and should therefore capture any
likely outcomes.

19

Table 3: Shock decomposition of sterling exchange rate changes(a) and implied pass-through
coefficients for import prices after large exchange rate movements
Shocks
Supply
Demand
Monetary policy
Exchange rate
Persistent global shock
Transitory global shock
Unadjusted pass-through to import
prices (not controlling for foreign
export prices)
Adjusted pass-through to import
prices(c)

1996-7
appreciation
10%
33%
19%
24%
6%
8%

2007-9
depreciation
21%
20%
11%
13%
18%
17%

2013-2015q1
appreciation
14%
22%
17%
0%
25%
23%

Full sample
FEVD(b)
10%
25%
17%
21%
14%
13%

-0.67

-0.86

-0.99

-0.79

-0.69 to -0.71

-0.89 to -0.92

-0.40 to -0.69

Note: Estimated using SVAR model described in Section IV. Implied-pass-through is for 8 quarters after the shock.
(a) We look at the average 4-quarter change during each episode and the respective average contribution from each shock. This
avoids issues arising when offsetting shock contributions lead to an overall change in the exchange rate close to zero in any
given period.
(b) Average contribution of each shock to the forecast error variance decomposition (FEVD) of the exchange rate over the first
eight quarters of the forecast horizon.
(c) The “adjusted pass-through” measure assumes 50% to 100% pass-through from world export prices. The calculations are
based on the actual peak-to-trough or trough-to-peak changes in the sterling ERI and corresponding changes in world export
prices (including oil) during each episode.

The estimates from the most recent appreciation episode starting in 2013 show another sharp
shift in the extent of pass-through. The shock decomposition to the right of Table 3 suggests that a
10% exchange rate appreciation would have caused import prices to fall by 4% - 7%. These estimates
are less precise due to the large movements in commodity prices that occurred during this period and
the corresponding uncertainty about how much of the changes in sterling import prices reflected
movements in commodity prices or effects of sterling’s appreciation. Even using this broad range of
estimates, however, pass-through has fallen substantively compared to that following the 2007-9
depreciation. Using the pass-through coefficients from the 2007-9 episode to predict the impact of the
2013-15 appreciation on import prices would have substantially overestimated the reduction in import
price inflation.
As a check on these results, Appendix Figure B.7 shows the same decomposition for import
price inflation. It highlights that after sterling’s depreciation in 2007-9, import price inflation was
boosted by global shocks (in red and purple) and domestic supply shocks (in green)—both of which
played a large role on an absolute basis and relative to previous historical episodes. After the 2013-15
appreciation, both global shocks played a key role in the decline in import prices (even explaining all of

20

the decline in some quarters). These estimates agree with the above estimates for pass-through to
import prices.
This series of results highlights the importance of regularly adjusting estimates of pass-through
over time to incorporate the nature of the underlying shocks. After the 2007-9 depreciation, the
surprisingly high levels of pass-through caused institutions such as the BoE to adjust their estimates of
pass-through upward as a new “rule of thumb”. This upward adjustment was justified by the increased
pass-through observed at the time. The results in this section, however, suggest that using this higher
estimate after the 2013-15 appreciation would lead to inaccurate estimates of the extent of passthrough, due to the different shocks driving these two large exchange rate movements. More
specifically, this “rule-of-thumb” would have generated forecasts predicting a greater drag on import
price inflation than was likely to occur in the aftermath of the recent sterling appreciation.27 Similarly,
lower pass-through from the 2013-15 appreciation might also not be an accurate indicator of the
extent of any pass-through that will occur subsequently—such as after the “Brexit” vote for the UK to
leave the European Union. Instead, it is critically important to evaluate the nature of the shocks driving
the currency movements when predicting how they will affect inflation.
VI.

Exchange rate pass-through to consumer prices
Even more important for monetary policy is the pass-through to consumer prices (or

corresponding variable for any inflation target). This section shows that exchange rate pass-through to
consumer prices is also shock-contingent, that the rankings of the effects of different types of shocks is
similar to that for pass-through to import prices, and that in some cases the differences resulting from
different shocks are even starker.
To begin, Figure 3 plots the same measures of exchange rate pass-through as shown in Figure
1 for import prices, but this time for consumer prices. As before, we compare these to the reducedform estimates obtained in Section II. Different percentiles of the ratios of consumer price to exchange
rate impulse responses at selected horizons are also reported in Appendix B, Table B.2. Before
discussing these results, however, it is useful to compare them to the results for pass-through to
import prices and the standard findings in the literature. A quick comparison between the estimates
for the first-stage of pass-through (Appendix Table B.1, Figures 1.a and 1.b) and those for overall passthrough to consumer prices (Appendix Table B.2, Figures 3.a and 3.b) indicates that pass-through is
significantly lower to final consumer prices than to import prices. This is a well-documented finding in

27

The Bank of England recently adjusted its assumptions about the extent of exchange rate pass-through to import prices
from about 90% (as observed after sterling’s depreciation in 2007-9) to a base case of 60%. For further detail, see the box
“The effect of imported price pressures on UK consumer prices” in the BoE Inflation Report, November 2015.

21

the literature (see Gopinath, 2015). These tables and figures also support evidence that pass-through
to import prices is quicker than to final consumer prices. Figures 3.a and 3.b suggest that a given
movement in the exchange rate has its full impact on consumer prices around six to eight quarters
after the initial shock (compared to around four quarters for import prices).
Figure 3.a: Pass-through to consumer prices for

Figure 3.b: Pass-through to consumer prices for

domestic shocks

global shocks

Next, the profiles for overall exchange rate pass-through in Figure 3 reveal that appreciations
driven by five of the six shocks (all except domestic demand) generate the traditional result of lower
consumer prices, with consumer prices falling by about 20% of the initial exchange rate appreciation
after 8 quarters. The exogenous exchange rate shock has a somewhat lower estimated pass-through,
and the monetary policy shock has the greatest pass-through. In contrast to the drag on domestic
prices from five of the six shocks, an appreciation corresponding to a domestic demand shock
generates an increase in consumer prices—resulting in a positive pass-through ‘coefficient’. This is
consistent with the theoretical results discussed in the Online Appendix, as well as the results for passthrough to import prices shown in the previous section. Not only do appreciations corresponding to
positive demand shocks lead to less drag on import prices, but the support to the economy from the
positive demand shock drives up prices overall—more than counteracting the drag from import prices.
In other words, appreciations resulting primarily from positive domestic demand shocks would be
expected to exhibit much less pass-through, and possibly no decline in overall inflation. This is a sharp
distinction relative to the effects of appreciations driven by other types of shocks.

22

As shown in the previous section, the different composition of shocks behind the recent large
moves in the sterling exchange rate generated differing degrees of pass-through to import prices.28
We can apply the same calculations as before to consumer prices and weigh the exchange rate passthrough profiles shown in Figure 3 by the exchange rate decompositions in Table 3 to get an
“unadjusted” exchange rate pass-through coefficient for each episode. The resulting multipliers are
reported in the first row of Table 4. To adjust these for the simultaneous changes in foreign export
prices, we use the impact of foreign prices on UK import prices calculated in Table 5 and scale it by the
import intensity of the UK CPI basket of around 30%.29
The resulting “adjusted” pass-through coefficients lead to very similar conclusions as the
equivalent measure for import price pass-through. The mix of shocks associated with sterling’s
depreciation in 2007-9 led to pass-through to consumer prices twice as high as that observed
following the preceding appreciation. Using that higher pass-through estimate to quantify the effects
of the 2013-15 appreciation on consumer prices, however, would have substantially overestimated
the effects of the exchange rate move; consumer prices would have been predicted to fall by 1.7-1.8%
after a 10% appreciation using the 2007-08 shock decomposition, rather than by between 0.1 and 1%
using the actual 2013-15 shock decomposition. In other words, the impact on inflation would have
been more than double what occurred.
Table 4: Implied pass-through coefficients for consumer prices after large exchange rate movements

Unadjusted pass-through to consumer
prices (not controlling for foreign
export prices)
Adjusted pass-through to consumer
prices(b)

1996-7
appreciation
-0.08

2007-9
depreciation
-0.16

2013-2015q1
appreciation
-0.18

-0.09 to -0.09

-0.17 to -0.18

-0.01 to -0.10

Full sample
FEVD(a)
-0.13

Note: Estimated using SVAR model described in Section III. Implied-pass-through is for 8 quarters after the shock.
(a) Average contribution of each shock to the forecast error variance decomposition (FEVD) of the exchange rate over the first
eight quarters of the forecast horizon.
(b) The “adjusted pass-through” measure assumes 50% to 100% pass-through from world export prices to import prices and
a 30% CPI import intensity. The calculations are based on the actual peak-to-trough or trough-to-peak changes in the sterling
ERI and corresponding changes in world export prices (including oil) during each episode.

28

The decomposition of the shocks driving changes in UK consumer price inflation yields estimates very similar to the
decomposition of UK import prices. See Forbes et al. (2015) for the corresponding graphs.
29 This 30% imported share of the CPI is calculated by the UK’s Office of National Statistics and should include both imported
goods as well as the share of imported content in non-traded goods (to the best that it can be calculated). Clearly, the passthrough from foreign prices in foreign currency can also change over time, but using constant import-intensity estimates and
assuming 100% pass-through from import prices to consumer prices is a common assumption (see Gopinath, 2015). An
alternative is to directly use the coefficients from the reduced-form regression of CPI inflation on the exchange rate and
foreign export prices, as estimated in Section II. That approach gives the same ranking of exchange rate pass-through
coefficients associated with the three episodes as the two-stage approach.

23

VII.

Extensions, Robustness, and Out-of-Sample Predictions for the “Brexit” Vote
In order to test if the results reported above are robust to various specifications, this section

begins by summarizing a series of extensions and sensitivity tests: for different types of exchange rate
movements and regimes, and then for modifications to the baseline specification and estimation
framework. The section ends by applying the framework using estimates from before the UK vote to
leave the European Union (in June 2015) to calculate out-of-sample forecasts of pass-through resulting
from sterling’s sharp depreciation after the “Brexit” vote. It then compares these estimates to the
most recent data on UK import prices and inflation.
1.

Extensions: Asymmetries, nonlinearities and regime changes

There is some empirical and theoretical evidence that firms could respond differently to larger
exchange rate movements than smaller ones, to appreciations than to depreciations, and based on the
monetary and exchange rate regime.30 For example, if there are “menu costs” or wages are
downwardly rigid, companies may be more reluctant to adjust prices in response to small changes in
the exchange rate or after appreciations, implying less pass-through in these circumstances. The
model used to estimate pass-through in this paper is linear and symmetric, however, so it is difficult to
explicitly test for all of these effects. It is possible, however, to focus on specific episodes with
different types of exchange rate movements or regimes to see if the nature of the shocks tends to
differ—and which could in turn drive different degrees of pass-through. For example, if domestic
demand shocks have historically played a greater role in driving appreciations than depreciations,
when combined with the evidence in Figures 1 and 3 that demand shocks correspond to lower passthrough, then appreciations might be expected to correspond to periods of lower pass-through.
To test for these types of effects, we perform two sets of analyses. First, we divide the sample
into periods of “large” exchange rate moves, defined as periods when the exchange rate moves by at
least 3% relative to a year earlier. Periods of small exchange rate moves are the rest of the sample. We
also divide the sample into periods during which the exchange rate appreciated by at least 3% on an
annual basis, and those when the exchange rate depreciated by at least 3%. Then we examine
whether certain shocks tend to be associated more with a particular type of exchange rate movement,
and whether that implies a different degree of pass-through. The results are described in detail in
Forbes et al. (2015). The shocks driving large (relative to small) exchange rate movements, and
appreciations (relative to depreciations) are broadly similar. The minor differences that exist are

30

Berger and Vavra (2013) find no evidence of asymmetries in the extent of pass-through in the US, while Rincón-Castro and
Ridríguez-Nino (2016) and Caselli and Roitman (2016) find evidence of asymmetries in pass-through in emerging markets.
Lewis (2016) finds a higher degree of pass-through to UK import prices for large exchange rate moves than for small ones.

24

intuitive (such as the exogenous exchange rate shock explaining a slightly larger share of small
fluctuations in sterling compared to large ones), but given the limited observations, it is impossible to
draw any firm conclusions from these small differences.
Next, in order to test for different relationships under different monetary and exchange rate
regimes, we extend our analysis to start in 1980 (instead of from 1993 as in our central analysis). This
extended period incorporates a range of monetary and exchange rate regimes: UK monetary policy
targeted various monetary aggregates between 1976 and 1987 and switched to exchange rate
targeting between 1987 and 1992, with sterling entering the European Exchange Rate Mechanism
(ERM) from 1989 to 1992. The resulting estimates of pass-through in this extended period are
described in detail in Forbes et al. (2015). They indicate substantial changes in the distribution of
shocks driving exchange rate movements, as well as the extent of pass-through corresponding to
these shocks, under these different regimes. For example, monetary policy shocks explain a larger
proportion of the exchange rate variance in the longer period, while global shocks explain much less—
a result consistent with the fact that the UK economy has become more open and therefore more
sensitive to global shocks since the early 1980s. These substantial changes in the parameter estimates
under different monetary and exchange rate regimes support the decision to start the baseline
analysis in this paper in 1993—after sterling had left the ERM, began to float, and the UK adopted an
inflation target—the same framework that largely remains in place today.31
2.

Robustness tests

In addition to the extensions reported above, we have also estimated a number of different
variants of our model to test if the main results are sensitive to: the 2008 crisis, different measures for
prices, different measures for interest rates, changes to the model lag order, and different sign
restrictions.
First, we examine if there was a structural change in our sample associated with the global
financial crisis and sharp recession between 2007 and 2009.32 We begin by estimating the model over
the baseline 1993-2015q1 period with a dummy for the period from 2007. Our key results are
reported in column 2 of Table 5 and are little changed from the baseline analysis (in column 1). Then,

31

We also tested if our findings were robust to starting the sample in 1998 (rather than 1993), which was when the Bank of
England became independent. The resulting variance decompositions and implied pass-through ratios are reported in Forbes
et al. (2015) and the key results are quite close to those using 1993 as the start date. The most noteworthy change is that the
average implied pass-through for the period starting in 1998 is higher than that that starting in 1993, largely reflecting the
greater role of persistent global shocks (that correspond to higher pass-through) in the more recent period. Other key results
discussed throughout this paper are unchanged.
32
We do not have enough data after the crisis to split our baseline estimation sample into two different periods: pre- and
post-crisis.

25

in order to test for any structural change after 2007, we re-estimate our model with data from 1993
until the end of 2007. We use this to test whether the mean out-of-sample forecasts for the following
20 quarters either individually or jointly violate the model’s assumptions of independent, normallydistributed shocks with a zero mean and constant variance.33 The results suggest no evidence of a
structural change in the data or estimated relationships during and after the financial crisis.
Table 5: Robustness tests: Forecast error variance decompositions of the exchange rate and implied
pass-through for different price and interest rate measures
SVAR estimated with:

Supply
Demand
Monetary policy
Exchange rate
Persistent global shock
Transitory global shock
Implied ERPT to:
Import prices
Consumer prices

Baseline: CPI,
BoE shadow
rate
(1)
10%
25%
17%
21%
14%
13%

Postcrisis
dummy
(2)
10%
21%
15%
25%
17%
12%

PPI
(3)
8%
23%
19%
23%
15%
12%

-0.79
-0.13

-0.85
-0.11

-0.79
-0.25

Core
CPI
(4)
11%
22%
15%
22%
18%
12%

1-year
forward gilt
yield
(5)
10%
25%
24%
21%
12%
9%

Wu-Xia
shadow
rate
(6)
10%
25%
23%
21%
11%
9%

-0.86
-0.03

-0.66
-0.10

-0.76
-0.11

Note: Estimated using SVAR model described in Section III. Implied-pass-through is for 8 quarters after the shock.

Second, we examine the impact of using the PPI and core CPI (instead of CPI) to measure
domestic prices. Column 3 of Table 5 shows that using producer rather than consumer prices leads to
very similar conclusions in terms of the effects of the five different shocks and the overall passthrough to import prices. The one notable difference is the higher implied exchange rate pass-through
to producer prices than consumer prices (despite nearly identical pass-through to import prices for
both, as would be expected). This higher pass-through to the PPI basket is not surprising, however, as
this basket is largely comprised of manufactured goods, which are more likely to be traded and
sensitive to exchange rate movements. In contrast, the CPI basket holds a large share of consumer
services, which are less likely to be traded and tend to be less sensitive to the exchange rate. Column 4
shows the corresponding estimates for core CPI (excluding energy, food and non-alcoholic beverages,
also adjusted for VAT changes). Once again the results are similar to the baseline, except the degree of
pass-through to final prices—which is now substantially lower than found for the CPI. This is because

33

We implement the tests for structural change based on one and on several forecast periods described in Lutkepohl (2005),
Chapter 4, pp. 184-188.

26

the core-CPI excludes some highly import-intensive goods (such as oil and food) which exhibit a very
high degree of pass through.
Third, we test for any impact of using different measures for UK domestic interest rates than the
shadow Bank Rate calculated by the Bank of England. We use two alternatives: the one-year
instantaneous forward UK government bond yield34 and the UK shadow rate calculated by Wu and Xia
(2016) from financial instruments. The main results are reported in columns 5 and 6 of Table 5, with
minimal changes. A higher proportion of the variance is attributed to the monetary policy shock, and a
slightly higher proportion attributed to the two global shocks. The monetary policy shocks estimated
with the one-year yield and the Wu-Xia shadow rate have lower pass-through than in our baseline,
however, possibly due to being noisier monetary policy indicators compared to the BoE shadow rate in
the baseline specification.35
As a fourth set of robustness tests, we examine any impact of changes to the lag order and timing
of the sign restrictions and report results in Table 6. We begin by changing the lag structure by
estimating the model using one, three and four lags of the endogenous variables (instead of two lags
as in our baseline results). There are no notable differences in these results (shown in columns 2-4 of
Table 6) compared to our baseline results (replicated in column 1). We also test whether our results
are sensitive to imposing the sign restrictions for a shorter period of one quarter, and a longer period
of four quarters. The results are shown in columns 5 and 6 and are also similar to the baseline.
For a final set of robustness tests, we assess the sensitivity of our results to the sign restrictions
imposed on the CPI – a key price index for an assessment of pass-through. Column 2 of Table 7 shows
the exchange rate forecast error variance decomposition and implied pass-through to import and
consumer prices from dropping all sign restrictions on consumer prices. In our identification scheme,
this implies relying solely on our long-run zero restrictions to distinguish between UK supply shocks
and other domestic shocks. Columns 3-5 add an additional UK price variable to the SVAR from column
2– the GDP deflator, core CPI (excluding energy and food) or PPI, respectively – and impose on these
additional price variables the sign restrictions that we impose on CPI in our baseline model, while
leaving the CPI itself unrestricted. Our results remain robust to each of these model variants.

34

Using interest rates of longer maturity was not appropriate in our set-up as these are often driven by term premia and the
long-term bond term premia have been found to co-move considerably across countries, presumably reflecting international
shifts in risk sentiment. Such a measure would not be consistent with our identification of a UK-specific monetary policy
shock which does not affect foreign prices.
35 These financial market proxies of the shadow policy rate probably capture factors other than just monetary policy
surprises. One-year interest rates might, for example, also reflect changes in term premia and not just expected policy rates –
albeit to a lesser degree than longer-term policy rates.

27

Table 6: Robustness tests: Forecast error variance decompositions of the exchange rate and implied
pass-through for different lag order and sign restriction periods
SVAR estimated with:

Supply
Demand
Monetary policy
Exchange rate
Persistent global shock
Transitory global shock
Implied ERPT to:
Import prices
Consumer prices

Baseline: 2 lags,
2-period sign
restrictions
(1)
10%
25%
17%
21%
14%
13%

1 lag
(2)
10%
24%
16%
29%
11%
10%

3 lags
(3)
11%
26%
18%
21%
12%
11%

-0.79
-0.13

-0.77
-0.11

-0.80
-0.12

4 lags
(4)
13%
27%
18%
20%
12%
11%

Sign
restrictions
for 1 period
(5)
11%
21%
14%
25%
17%
12%

Sign
restriction
for 4 periods
(6)
13%
30%
12%
20%
16%
10%

-0.77
-0.12

-0.86
-0.14

-0.75
-0.09

Note: Estimated using SVAR model described in Section III. Implied-pass-through is for 8 quarters after the shock.

Table 7: Robustness tests: Forecast error variance decompositions of the exchange rate and implied
pass-through for different sign restriction on CPI

Supply
Demand
Monetary policy
Exchange rate
Persistent global shock
Transitory global shock
Implied ERPT to:
Import prices
Consumer prices

Baseline:
with sign
restrictions
on CPI
(1)
10%
25%
17%
21%
14%
13%

No sign
restrictions
on CPI
(2)
11%
21%
22%
21%
15%
10%

-0.79
-0.13

-0.76
-0.12

SVAR estimated with:
No sign
No sign
restrictions on restrictions on
CPI, restrict
CPI, restrict
GDP defl.
core CPI
(3)
(4)
12%
13%
19%
28%
14%
14%
19%
17%
21%
14%
14%
12%
-0.79
-0.12

No sign
restrictions on
CPI, restrict
PPI
(5)
11%
23%
18%
20%
16%
13%

-0.74
-0.08

-0.77
-0.12

Note: Estimated using SVAR model described in Section III. Implied-pass-through is for 8 quarters after the shock.

3.

Out-of-Sample Forecasts: Pass-through after the “Brexit” vote

While the framework developed in this paper appears to be robust to various extensions, variable
definitions, and estimation strategies, can it be used in real-time to better forecast the extent of passthrough from a given exchange rate movement? To demonstrate how the methodology can be used
28

for out-of-sample forecasts, this section uses the framework developed above to forecast passthrough following sterling’s sharp depreciation in 2016, around the time of the United Kingdom
referendum on membership of the European Union (which took place on 23 June 2016). We show
real-time model forecasts using data available at two dates: immediately after the referendum (midway through sterling’s subsequent depreciation) and about 4 months later (after the Bank of England
had announced a substantial easing in monetary policy and sterling was more stable). At the end of
the section, we compare the real-time model predictions from these two dates with the subsequent
change in import prices.
The UK referendum on EU membership—what we will refer to as the “Brexit” vote for
simplicity—was a key factor contributing to the sharp depreciation of sterling over 2016. Two weeks
after the UK referendum, sterling had fallen by almost 13% (compared to the last quarter of 2015). To
assess how the methodology developed in this paper could predict the pass-through from this
depreciation in real time, we begin by updating the estimates reported above with data available on 6
July 2016, two weeks after the “Brexit” vote. We use market data available at the close of business, as
well as the real-time Bank of England forecasts for Q2 and Q3 that existed at that time.36 We also
assume that the sterling exchange rate index would not move further in Q3 (consistent with a random
walk forecast).
The resulting shock-dependent pass-through estimates of this model updated in July are very
similar to those depicted in Figures 1.a-b and 3.a-b, and the forecast error variance decomposition
over the entire period is almost identical to that for the baseline estimates shown in Table 3 (which
end in 2015Q1). Figure 4 shows the resulting historical shock decomposition of sterling’s movements,
extending that from Figure 2 with the six additional quarters of data. The figure shows that the model
attributes basically all of sterling’s depreciation during the first three quarters of 2016 to domestic
shocks. More specifically, 46% of sterling’s depreciation is attributed to domestic demand shocks, 36%
to exchange rate shocks, and 14% to domestic supply shocks—all well above the corresponding
averages for the full sample. Albeit not surprising given the domestic nature of the ”Brexit” vote, this is
in sharp contrast to other periods when sterling moved sharply and global shocks usually played a
meaningful role. The model also suggests that monetary policy shocks only played a minor role at this
stage (and less than the average over the full sample period), which is also not surprising as the Bank
of England had not yet changed its monetary policy stance.

36

These forecasts are confidential but were close to those published in the August 2016 Inflation Report.

29

Figure 4: Historical decomposition of year-on-year changes in sterling ERI – July 2016 update
Global transitory

Global permanent

Exchange rate

Monetary policy

Demand

Supply

Base level and trend

Sterling ERI

% chg. on a year earlier
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Note: The figure depicts the contribution of each of the six shocks to y/y changes in the ERI, in percent. These historical decompositions of
the variables in the SVAR are the averages of the 1,000 historical decompositions obtained from the saved iterations of the estimation
algorithm. See Appendix A for further detail on the estimation methodology.

This different composition of shocks causing sterling’s sharp depreciation around the time of
the “Brexit” vote could also cause the resulting pass-through to prices to differ from historical
averages, as well as other episodes when sterling depreciated sharply. To asses this, Table 8 reports
the weight of the five different shocks corresponding to sterling’s movements for the full sample
period, from 2007-2009 (sterling’s previous sharp depreciation), and immediately after the “Brexit”
vote (July 2016)—based on the model’s estimates as of July 2016. This confirms that global shocks
were a less important driver of sterling’s 2016 depreciation, and domestic demand shocks more
important, relative to the 2007-2009 depreciation (as well as compared to the sample average). Since
pass-through after domestic demand shocks tends to be lower than that after global shocks, this
suggests that pass-through would be lower after the 2016 depreciation than that after the 2007-2009
depreciation. Substituting the estimated pass-through from each type of shocks confirms this
assessment. As shown at the bottom of Table 8, the July 2016 estimates predicts that sterling’s
“Brexit” depreciation would have a relatively low degree of pass-through to import prices of 40% after
4 quarters (and around 45% in the long run). This is about half of the model’s prediction of more than
90% pass-through in the long run after the financial crisis, and around 80% for the full sample.

30

Table 8. Comparison of shock decompositions and estimated pass-through of exchange rate changes
Shocks
Supply
Demand
Monetary policy
Exchange rate
Persistent global shock
Transitory global shock
Unadjusted pass-through to import
prices after 4 quarters (not controlling
for foreign export prices)

Full sample
FEVD(a)
10%
25%
16%
20%
15%
14%
-0.75

2007-9
depreciation
21%
20%
12%
5%
22%
19%
-0.87

2016q1-q3 –
July update
14%
46%
13%
36%
-2%
-7%
-0.40

2016q1-q4 –
Nov update
15%
31%
23%
34%
1%
-4%
-0.52

Note: Estimated using SVAR model described in Section IV. Implied-pass-through is for 8 quarters after the shock. See notes to
Table 4 for more details.
(a) Average contribution of each shock to the forecast error variance decomposition (FEVD) of the exchange rate over the first
eight quarters of the forecast horizon.

Next, to assess the performance of these forecasts, Figure 5a graphs several key statistics. The
small shapes on the right of the graph show the predicted level of import prices in 2017Q2 based on
July 2016 data, using the shock decomposition from Table 8 for the “Brexit” depreciation (the purple
triangle), the 2007-9 depreciation (the orange circle) and the historic average decompositions (the
green diamond). Using the shocks behind the “Brexit” depreciation, import prices are forecast to rise
by only 7% (from 2015q4)—substantially less than they would have been forecast to rise if the shocks
behind the 2007-9 depreciation or historic averages were used to forecast pass-through. The solid
blue line at the top of the graph shows the evolution of sterling at this time, and the dashed black line
shows the evolution of import prices. A quick glance at the graph might suggest that the July 2016
model forecasts were not very accurate; import prices subsequently rose by more than predicted—
and pass-through appears to be closer to that predicted by historic shock decompositions than the
more domestic-based shocks estimated to drive the “Brexit” depreciation.
This initial assessment, however, misses two important developments. First, sterling did not
remain at its July 2016 level (shown by the wide, vertical purple line). Instead, sterling subsequently
depreciated by about 5% (before later appreciating). Second, the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy
Committee introduced a larger-than-expected stimulus package in August – generating a “monetary
policy shock” (and likely contributing to sterling’s further depreciation after our July 2016 update).
Both of these developments would impact the predicted path of import prices. The further
depreciation would provide an additional boost to import prices even if there was no change in the
composition of shocks behind the exchange rate movement, and the degree of pass-through would
likely increase due to the greater role of monetary policy shocks (which generate higher pass-through).

31

Figure 5. Sterling and import prices around the EU referendum
a. July 2016 update

b. November 2016 update

In order to incorporate these two developments, we update the model using data available on
November 2, 2016. This incorporates market pricing at that time (including the additional
depreciation), the monetary policy actions, and updated GDP forecasts.37 The subsequent shock
decomposition is shown in the column on the right of Table 8, with the estimated role of monetary
policy shocks almost doubling, while that of domestic demand shocks falls (and the role of other
shocks is roughly unchanged). Given that monetary policy shocks generate greater pass-through than
domestic demand shocks, this would be expected to increase the expected degree of pass-through—
as confirmed in the estimates at the bottom of the table.
Next, Figure 5b updates Figure 5a, incorporating the accumulated sterling depreciation as of 2
November 2016 (with the date shown in the thick red vertical line), plus the different estimates of
pass-through from the different shocks decompositions (from Table 8). This includes updates of the
previous decompositions, plus a new forecast using the November 2016 decompositions and shown in
a red square. The updated model now predicts that pass-through would be about 52%, so that import
prices will increase by 11.5% by the end of 2017q3 (after four quarters). This is greater than predicted
in July 2016, but substantially less than the 19% increase in import prices predicted using the shock
decompositions from the 2007-2009 depreciation (in the orange circle), or the 17% predicted based on

37

These forecasts were produced by the Bank of England for the November Inflation Report.

32

historic averages (in the green diamond). In fact, the dashed black line, which shows the subsequent
path of import prices, shows that import prices as of 2017Q3 were exactly in line with the forecast
made in November 2016.
This out-of-sample forecast exercise shows the potential benefits of adjusting pass-through
estimates in real time, rather than relying on specific episodes (such as the previous exchange rate
change) or historic averages.
VIII.

Conclusions
Many countries have experienced sharp currency movements over the past few years. These

movements have highlighted the importance of better understanding how exchange rate fluctuations
pass-through into import prices and overall price levels. Although the academic literature has made
noteworthy strides in improving our understanding of pass-through across countries and industries, it
has had less success estimating why currency movements can have such different effects over short
periods of time within a given country. This limited understanding is particularly challenging for central
banks, which must forecast how currency fluctuations will affect inflation in the future in order to set
monetary policy appropriately.
This paper has proposed an approach that should improve our ability to evaluate these effects
of exchange rate fluctuations on prices—especially over time within a country. It suggests that we
should not take an exchange rate movement as exogenous—a concern acknowledged in some papers,
but generally not addressed sufficiently within a clear framework. Instead, we should explicitly model
and understand what drives the exchange rate movement and incorporate other changes in the
economic environment. Different types of shocks causing an appreciation (or depreciation) could have
different effects on the economy and broader set of prices and economic variables that determine
firm behaviour—even if the shocks generate an equivalent currency movement. We show that
different types of exchange-rate shocks can affect prices in different ways in terms of both magnitude,
duration, and even sign. We also discuss and model the intuition behind these different effects,
drawing on how the economy and firms respond to exchange rate fluctuations resulting from changes
in domestic demand, domestic supply, monetary policy, an exogenous exchange rate shock, or global
variables.
Although this approach can improve our understanding of how exchange rate movements
affect inflation—and especially help explain how that relationship can change so quickly over time in a
country such as the UK—it is not meant to be exhaustive and does not capture all the complexities of
how exchange rate movements affect inflation. For example, there are many structural differences
33

across countries that are important in explaining different effects of exchange rate fluctuations, such
as the currency composition of invoicing, the share of debt in foreign currency, the dispersion of price
changes, and the monetary policy framework.38 The fact that the exchange rate can move in different
directions with respect to different currencies might also play a role.39 Currency appreciations may
have different effects than depreciations, and the effects of currency movements may be non-linear.
The framework in this paper is not meant or able to capture all of these complexities—but still adds an
important new dimension to the standard approach for analysing exchange rate pass-through.
The results indicate that explicitly modelling pass-through as shock-dependent can improve
our understanding on several dimensions. It can help explain why pass-through can change over time.
It can help explain episodes when currency movements had surprisingly large or small effects on
import prices and inflation. For example, it shows how the different nature of the shocks causing
sterling’s depreciation during the 2007-8 crisis generated substantially higher inflation than would
have been expected based on previous estimates of pass-through, and why pass-through from
sterling’s 2013-15 appreciation and post-Brexit vote depreciation has been more muted. New work
has recently extended this framework to estimate shock-dependent pass-through to four countries in
the euro area (Comunale and Kunovac, 2017)40, and to a large set of small open emerging markets and
advanced economies (Forbes, Hjortsoe and Nenova, 2017). Utilizing this shock-dependent framework
to estimate pass-through should improve our ability to predict the impact of currency movements
and, as a result, hopefully improve the ability of central banks to set monetary policy appropriately in
the future in countries around the world.

38

See Gopinath (2015) for the role of currency invoicing and Stulz (2007) for the role of monetary policy expectations. Also
see Berger and Vavra (2013) and Fleer et al. (2015), which show that sectors with high price-change dispersion tend to have
larger pass-through than sectors with low price dispersion.
39 See Casas et al. (2017) for evidence on the special role of US dollar bilateral exchange rates.
40
See Coeuré (2017) for an example of how this shock-based approach to estimating pass-through is affecting the monetary
policy debate.

34

Appendix A: Bayesian estimation of SVAR model
This appendix outlines the key steps in the Bayesian procedure used to estimate the SVAR
model described in Section IV.
We start with the reduced-form Vector Autoregression (VAR) model in matrix form below:
𝑌 = 𝑋 ∗ 𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑎 + 𝜀,
where 𝑌 is a matrix of the endogenous variables with n rows (equivalent to the number of quarters in
the estimation sample) and k columns (equivalent to the number of endogenous variables in the
model). 𝑋 is a matrix containing all explanatory variables (exogenous as well as endogenous), which
also has n rows and p*k+1 columns, implying that each equation in the VAR has p lags of each
endogenous variables and a constant term on the right hand side.41 𝜀 is a matrix of reduced-form VAR
residuals of size n-by-k. We define Σ = 𝜀′𝜀 as the residual covariance matrix. The six reduced-form
shocks in 𝜀 are correlated, so we need to extract a set of structural uncorrelated shocks from them by
imposing sign and zero restrictions on the residual covariance matrix Σ as well as the resulting impulse
responses – we will call the new matrix of structural shocks u.
We use a Bayesian simulation method known as Gibbs sampling to approximate the
distributions of estimated parameters in our model. This algorithm uses a user-specified prior for the
first and second moments of the VAR coefficients (beta) and the residual covariance matrix (Σ) and
draws different values of these parameters from the associated conditional or posterior distributions.
Specifically, we apply a widely-used Minnesota-style prior, which is based on the assumption that the
endogenous variables in the VAR model follow an AR(1) process (Litterman, 1986). However, we relax
the strict Minnesota prior’s assumption that the VAR residual covariance matrix is diagonal42 by
incorporating the prior specification into our Gibbs sampling algorithm and using random draws of the
covariance matrix. We proceed in the following three steps:43
i.

We specify our prior for the coefficient matrix beta by setting all coefficients’ prior means
apart from the ones on each variable’s own first lag to zero. The first autoregressive
coefficient for each endogenous variable is set to 1 in our baseline specification but using
0.5 or 0.9 produced very similar results. We then specify a diagonal matrix that defines the
variance of our prior about the coefficient matrix (see Lutkepohl (2005) pp. 225-8). We opt

41

We chose to use two lags of endogenous variables in our baseline model in line with the lag length favoured by the Akaike
information criterion. However, as the Schwarz criterion preferred one lag, we re-estimated the model with one lag as well as
three and four lags and found these changes did not affect the results significantly.
42 This assumption is problematic in the type of structural analysis undertaken here (Kadiyala and Karlsson, 1997).
43 For a more thorough explanation of the simulation technique refer to Canova (2007) pp. 361-367.

35

for a relatively loose prior on the VAR coefficients.44 Then, we draw a new coefficient
matrix from the corresponding Normal posterior distribution.
ii.

We draw a residual covariance matrix estimate from the Inverse Wishart distribution,
using a k-by-k identity matrix as the scale matrix in only the first iteration and the previous
draw in the following iterations.

iii.

We obtain an orthogonal decomposition of the resulting covariance matrix that satisfies
the sign and zero restrictions and produces uncorrelated structural shocks by applying the
algorithm suggested by Rubio-Ramirez et al. (2010) and extended by Binning (2013) for
under-identified models.
We repeat this algorithm 11,000 times but discard the initial 10,000 and only save the final

1,000 draws. Rather than using a median of these 1,000 models or applying the median target method
suggested by Fry and Pagan (2011) to conduct further analysis presented in the main text (such as
forecast error variance decompositions and historical decompositions), we save the respective result
from each iteration and show averages of these. For example, we save 1,000 different forecast error
variance decompositions and show the average of the contribution of each shock to each variable’s
variance in Table 2. This provides more robust results than using one single model.

44

We set the hyperparameter determining the tightness of our prior about coefficients on exogenous variables to 10,000
(implying an uninformed prior); the one defining our uncertainty about the prior on own lags to 0.2; the hyperparameter on
priors regarding the coefficients on other variables to 0.5 (implying that coefficients on lags of other variables are clustered
more tightly around their prior value, which is 0); the priors are tighter for the second lags of all variables.

36

Appendix B: Impulse responses and additional output from SVAR
Figure B.1: Impulse responses to a UK supply shock

Note: These graphs report the median impulse responses (in solid lines) along with confidence bands at the 68% threshold (dashed lines) and
90% threshold (dotted lines) for all six variables to the respective shock. The responses for all variables except the interest rate – which is
already expressed in de-trended levels – are accumulated, so that the figure shows the impact on the level of each variable over time. In
addition, all responses are rescaled so that each shock causes the sterling exchange rate to appreciate by 1% within the first year in the
median case.

Figure B.2: Impulse responses to a UK demand shock

Note: See note to Figure B.1.

37

Figure B.3: Impulse responses to a UK monetary policy shock

Note: See note to Figure B.1.

Figure B.4: Impulse responses to a UK exchange rate shock

Note: See note to Figure B.1.

38

Figure B.5: Impulse responses to a persistent global shock

Note: See note to Figure B.1.

Figure B.6: Impulse responses to a transitory global shock

Note: See note to Figure B.1.

39

Table B.1: Pass-through to import prices by shock (ratio of import prices response to exchange rate
response)

Period Percentile
1
50
16
84

Supply
-0.4
-1.2
0.3

Monetary Exchange
Demand
policy
rate
-0.2
-0.6
-0.4
-0.5
-1.4
-0.7
0.5
0.3
0.2

Persistent Transitory
global
global
shock
shock
0.1
0.0
-2.1
-2.6
1.8
2.1

5

50
16
84

-0.7
-1.3
0.0

-0.3
-0.7
1.0

-0.9
-1.6
0.1

-0.5
-0.7
-0.1

-1.2
-2.8
0.3

-1.5
-3.2
0.7

20

50
16
84

-0.6
-1.7
0.4

-0.4
-1.3
1.0

-1.0
-2.3
0.4

-0.5
-0.7
-0.1

-1.1
-2.8
0.4

-1.4
-2.3
-0.6

Table B.2: Pass-through to consumer prices by shock (ratio of consumer prices response to exchange
rate response)

Period Percentile
1
50
16
84

Supply
0.0
-0.4
0.4

Monetary Exchange
Demand
policy
rate
0.1
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
-0.7
-0.2
0.2
0.0
0.0

Persistent Transitory
global
global
shock
shock
0.1
0.0
-0.4
-0.3
0.6
0.4

5

50
16
84

-0.2
-0.7
0.3

0.2
0.0
0.6

-0.3
-0.9
-0.1

-0.1
-0.2
0.0

-0.3
-1.1
0.5

-0.2
-0.7
0.2

20

50
16
84

0.0
-0.9
0.7

0.2
-0.2
0.9

-0.2
-1.1
0.7

-0.1
-0.3
0.0

-0.2
-1.2
0.8

-0.2
-0.5
0.2

40

Figure B.7: Historical decomposition of year-on-year changes in UK import prices

Note: See note to Figure 2.

41

References
Amiti, Mary, Itskhoki, Oleg and Konings, Josef (2016). “International Shocks and Domestic Prices: How
Large Are Strategic Complementarities?,” NBER Working Paper, No. 22119, March.
An, Lian and Wang, Jiang (2012). “Exchange Rate Pass-through: Evidence Based on Vector
Autoregression with Sign Restrictions”, Open Economies Review, 23(2), 359-380.
Berger, David and Vavra, Joseph (2013). “Volatility and Pass-through”, NBER Working Paper, No.
19651, May.
Bils, Mark (1987). “The Cyclical Behavior of Marginal Cost and Price”, American Economic Review,
77(5), 838–55.
Binning, Andrew (2013). ”Underidentified SVAR models: A framework for combining short and longrun restrictions with sign-restrictions”, Norges Bank Monetary Policy Working Paper, No. 14.
Blanchard, Olivier and Quah, Danny (1989). “The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and Supply
Disturbances”, The American Economic Review, Vol. 79, No. 4, 655-673.
Burstein, Ariel, and Gopinath, Gita (2014). “International Prices and Exchange Rates”, in Handbook of
International Economics, 4th Ed., 4:391-451.
Burstein, Ariel and Jaimovich, Nir (2012). “Understanding movements in aggregate and product-level
real exchange rates”, UCLA Working Paper.
Campa, José and Goldberg, Linda (2005). “Exchange rate pass-through into import prices”, The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 87(4), 679–690.
Campa, José and Goldberg, Linda (2010). The sensitivity of the CPI to exchange rates: Distribution
margins, imported inputs, and trade exposure. Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(2):392-407.
Canova, Fabio (2007). “Methods for Applied Macroeconomic Research”, Princeton University Press,
ISBN: 9781400841028, pp. 361-367.
Canova, Fabio and de Nicolo, Gianni (2003). "On the sources of business cycles in the G-7", Journal of
International Economics, vol. 59(1), 77-100.
Carrière-Swallow, Yan and Céspedes, Luis Felipe (2013). "The impact of uncertainty shocks in emerging
economies", Journal of International Economics, vol. 90(2), 316-325.
Casas, Camila, Diez, Federico, Gopinath, Gita and Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier (2017). "Dominant
Currency Paradigm: A New Model for Small Open Economies", IMF Working Papers 17/264,
International Monetary Fund.
Caselli, Francesca and Roitman, Agustin (2016), “Non-Linear Exchange Rate Pass-Through in Emerging
Markets”, IMF Working Paper, No. 16/1.
Christiano, Lawrence, Eichenbaum, Martin and Vigfusson, Robert (2007). "Assessing Structural VARs",
NBER Chapters, in: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, Volume 21, pages 1-106, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc.
42

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Dedola, Luca and Leduc, Sylvain (2009). "Optimal Monetary Policy and the Sources
of Local-Currency Price Stability", in International Dimension of Monetary Policy edited by Jordi Gali
and Mark Gertler, Chicago University Press, 2009, 319-367.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Dedola, Luca and Leduc, Sylvain (2008). "High Exchange-Rate Volatility and Low
Pass-Through", Journal of Monetary Economics, 55 (6), 1113-1128.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Dedola, Luca and Leduc, Sylvain (2010), “Optimal Monetary Policy in Open
Economies” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3B, pp. 861-933.
Corsetti, Giancarlo and Pesenti, Paolo (2004). “Endogenous Pass-Through and Optimal Monetary
Policy: a Model of Self-validating Exchange Rate Regimes”, CEPR Working Paper, No. 8737
Coeuré, Benoit (2017). “The transmission of the ECB’s monetary policy in standard and non-standard
times”, Speech given in Frankfurt am Main on 11 September 2017.
Comunale, Mariarosaria and Kunovac, Davor (2017). “Exchange Rate Pass-Through in the Euro Area”,
ECB Working Paper, No. 2003 / January.
Devereux, Michael, Tomlin, Ben and Dong, Wei (2015). “Exchange Rate Pass-Through, Currency of
Invoicing and Market Share”, NBER Working Paper, No. 21413, July.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, (1987). “Exchange rates and prices”, American Economic Review, 77, 93-106.
Ellis, Colin, Mumtaz, Haroon and Zabczyk, Pawel (2014). “What Lies Beneath? A Time-Varying Favar
Model for the UK Transmission Mechanism”, The Economic Journal, 124 (May), 668–699.
Erceg, Christopher, Gust, Christopher and Guerrieri, Luca (2005). “Can long-run restrictions identify
technology shocks?”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 3(6), 1237–1278.
Farrant, Katie and Peersman, Gert (2006). “Is the Exchange Rate a Shock Absorber or a
Source of Shocks? New Empirical Evidence”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 38, No. 4
Faust, Jon, and Leeper, Eric (1997). “When Do Long-Run Identifying Restrictions Give Reliable
Results?”, Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, vol. 15(3), pp. 345–353.
Fischer, Stanley (2015). “The Transmission of Exchange Rate Changes to Output and Inflation”, Speech
given at the Federal Reserve Board on November 12, 2015,
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/fischer20151112a.htm.
Fleer, Rita, Rudolf, Barbara and Zurlinden, Mathias (2015). “Price change dispersion and time-varying
pass-through into consumer prices”, mimeo.
Forbes, Kristin (2015a). “Risks around the Forecast”, Speech given in London on January 22, 2015.
Forbes, Kristin (2015b). “Much ado about something important: How do exchange rate movements
affect inflation”, Speech given at the Money, Macro and Finance Research Group Annual Conference
in Cardiff on September 11, 2015.

43

Forbes, Kristin, Hjortsoe, Ida and Nenova, Tsvetelina (2017). “Shocks versus Structure: Explaining
Differences in Exchange Rate Pass-Through across Countries and Time”, Bank of England External MPC
Unit Discussion Paper, No. 50.
Forbes, Kristin, Hjortsoe, Ida and Nenova, Tsvetelina (2015). “The Shocks Matter: Improving our
Estimates of Exchange Rate Pass-Through”, Bank of England External MPC Unit Discussion Paper, No.
43.
Fry, Renée, and Pagan, Adrian (2011). "Sign Restrictions in Structural Vector Autoregressions: A Critical
Review", Journal of Economic Literature, 49(4), 938-60.
Gagnon, Joseph and Ihrig, Jane (2004). “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Pass-Through”,
International Journal of Finance & Economics, Vol. 9, Issue 4, 315–338.
Gali, Jordi (1999). “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks Explain
Aggregate Fluctuations?”, The American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No.1.
Gilchrist, Simon and Zakrajsek, Egon (2015). “Customer Markets and Financial Frictions: Implications
for Inflation Dynamics”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole.
Goldberg, Pinelopi and Hellerstein, Rebecca (2013). “A Structural Approach to Identifying the Sources
of Local Currency Price Stability”, Review of Economic Studies, Oxford University Press, vol. 80(1), pp.
175-210.
Gopinath, Gita (2015). “The International Price System”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic
Symposium, Jackson Hole.
Gopinath, Gita and Itskhoki, Oleg (2010). “Frequency of Price Adjustment and Pass-Through”, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125 (2): 675-727.
Gopinath, Gita, Itskhoki, Oleg and Rigobon, Roberto (2010). “Currency Choice and Exchange Rate PassThrough,” American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 100(1), pp. 304-36, March.
Gust, Christopher, Leduc, Sylvain and Vigfusson, Robert (2010). "Trade integration, competition, and
the decline in exchange-rate pass-through", Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 57(3), 309-324.
Hara, Naoko, Hiraki, Kazuhiro and Ichise, Yoshitaka (2015). “Changing Exchange Rate Pass-Through in
Japan: Does It Indicate Changing Pricing Behavior?”, Bank of Japan Working Paper Series, No. 15-E-4,
June.
Hjortsoe, Ida, Weale, Martin and Wieladek, Tomasz (2016). “Monetary Policy and the Current Account:
Theory and Evidence”, Bank of England External MPC Unit Discussion Paper, No. 45.
Ihrig, Jane, Marazzi, Mario and Rothenberg, Alexander D. (2006). "Exchange-rate pass-through in the
G-7 countries," International Finance Discussion Papers 851, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System (U.S.)
Ito, Takatoshi and Kiyotaka Sato (2008), “Exchange Rate Changes and Inflation in Post-Crisis Asian
Economies: VAR Analysis of the Exchange Rate Pass-Through,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 40 (7), 1407-1438.
44

Joyce, Michael, Tong, Matthew and Woods, Robert (2011). “The United Kingdom's quantitative easing
policy: design, operation and impact”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Q3, 200-212.
Kirby, Simon and Meaning, Jack (2014). “Exchange rate pass-through: a view from a global structural
model”, National Institute Economic Review, No. 230, November.
Klein, Michael (1990). “Macroeconomic Effects of Exchange Rate Pass-Through”, Journal of
International Money and Finance, vol. 9 (4), 376-387.
Krugman, Paul (1987). “Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes”, in Real-Financial
Linkages among Open Economies, edited by Sven W. Arndt and J. David Richardson. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Lewis, John (2016). “What can Big Data tell us about the pass-through of big exchange rate changes?”
Bank of England Staff Working Paper, No. 579.
Litterman, Robert (1986). "Forecasting with Bayesian Vector Autoregressions-Five Years of
Experience," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, American Statistical Association, vol. 4(1), pp.
25-38, January.
Liu, Mumtaz and Theophilopoulou (2011). “International transmission of shocks: a time-varying factoraugmented VAR approach to the open economy”, Bank of England Working Paper, No. 425.
Lutkepohl, Helmut (2005). “New Introduction to Multiple Time Series Analysis”, Springer.
Marazzi, Mario, Sheets, Nathan, Vigfusson, Robert J., Faust, Jon, Gagnon, Joseph , Marquez, Jaime,
Martin, Robert F., Reeve, Trevor and Rogers, John (2005). "Exchange rate pass-through to U.S. import
prices: some new evidence", International Finance Discussion Papers, 833, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System (U.S.).
Mountford, Andrew (2005). "Leaning into the Wind: A Structural VAR Investigation of UK Monetary
Policy", Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, Department of Economics, University of Oxford,
vol. 67(5), 597-621.
Nakamura, Emi and Zerom, Dawit (2010). “Accounting for Incomplete Pass-Through”, Review of
Economic Studies, 77(3), 1192-1230.
Neiman, B. (2010). “Stickiness, synchronization, and pass-through in intrafirm trade prices”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 57(3):295-308.
Pagan, A. R. and Robertson, J. C. (1998). "Structural Models of the Liquidity Effect", The Review of
Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 80(2), pp. 202-217.
Rincón-Castro, Hernán and Rodríguez-Niño, Norberto (2016). “Nonlinear Pass-Through of Exchange
Rate Shocks on Inflation: A Bayesian Smooth Transition VAR Approach”, Borradores de Economia,
Banco de la Republica de Colombia.
Rotemberg, Julio, and Woodford, Michael (1999). “The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and Costs”, In
Handbook of Macroeconomics. , ed. John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, 1051–135.

45

Rubio-Ramirez, Juan, Waggoner, Daniel and Zha, Tao (2010). “Structural Vector Autoregressions:
Theory of Identification and Algorithms for Inference”, The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 77, No. 2,
665-696.
Savoie-Chabot, Laurence and Mikael Khan (2015). “Exchange Rate Pass-Through to Consumer Prices:
Theory and Recent Evidence.” Bank of Canada Discussion Paper 2015-9.
Shambaugh, Jay (2008). “A new look at pass-through”, Journal of International Money and Finance,
No. 27, 560-591.
Smets, Frank and Wouters, Raf (2002). “Openness, imperfect exchange rate pass-through and
monetary policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49(5), 947-981.
Stulz, Jonas (2007). “Exchange rate pass-through in Switzerland: Evidence from vector
autoregressions”, Swiss National Bank Economic Studies, No. 4.
Taylor, John (2000). “Low inflation, pass-through and the pricing power of firms”, European Economic
Review 44(7): 1389-1408.
Wu, Jing Cynthia and Xia, Fan Dora (2016). "Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy
at the Zero Lower Bound", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Blackwell Publishing, vol. 48(2-3), pp.
253-291, March.

46

