                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                         INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS:
           FINANCING GROWTH WITH CRYPTOCURRENCY TOKEN SALES

                                        Sabrina T. Howell
                                         Marina Niessner
                                         David Yermack

                                       Working Paper 24774
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24774

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 2018, Revised September 2019


For helpful comments, we are grateful to Yakov Amihud, Bruno Biais, Will Cong, Darrell Duffie,
Alex Edmans, Wei Jiang, Bryan Kelly, Mervyn King, William Mann, and seminar participants at
the Association of Financial Economists annual meeting, Claremont McKenna College, Crypto
Conference Berlin, OECD Paris Workshop on Digital Financial Assets, Munich Crowdfunding
Symposium, the University of Adelaide, CAFRAL–Reserve Bank of India, University of Central
Florida, University of Chicago, Concordia University, Deakin University, Dublin City University,
Erasmus University Corporate Governance Conference, King’s College London, La Trobe
University, Maastricht University, University of Manchester, McGill University, Melbourne
University, Michigan State University, Monash University, University of New South Wales, the
University of North Carolina Future of FinTech Conference, Oxford University, St. John’s
University FinTech Conference, Stanford Financing and Innovation Summit, Swedish House of
Finance, SUNY-Albany Symposium on Blockchain and FinTech, UCLA Blockchain and Law
Workshop, the USC Conference on Emerging Technologies in Financial Economics and
Accounting, and the University of Western Australia. We thank Protocol Labs and particularly
Evan Miyazono and Juan Benet for providing data. Sabrina Howell thanks the Kauffman
Foundation for financial support. We are also grateful to all of our research assistants, especially
Jae Hyung (Fred) Kim. Part of this paper was written while David Yermack was a visiting
professor at Erasmus University Rotterdam. AQR Capital Management is a global investment
management firm, which may or may not apply similar investment techniques or methods of
analysis as described herein. The views expressed here are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of AQR or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Sabrina T. Howell, Marina Niessner, and David Yermack. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Initial Coin Offerings: Financing Growth with Cryptocurrency Token Sales
Sabrina T. Howell, Marina Niessner, and David Yermack
NBER Working Paper No. 24774
June 2018, Revised September 2019
JEL No. G24,G32,K22,L26

                                          ABSTRACT

Initial coin offerings (ICOs) have emerged as a new mechanism for entrepreneurial finance, with
parallels to initial public offerings, venture capital, and pre-sale crowdfunding. In a sample of
more than 1,500 ICOs that collectively raise $12.9 billion, we examine which issuer and ICO
characteristics predict successful real outcomes (increasing issuer employment and avoiding
enterprise failure). Success is associated with disclosure, credible commitment to the project, and
quality signals. An instrumental variables analysis finds that ICO token exchange listing causes
higher future employment, indicating that access to token liquidity has important real
consequences for the enterprise.

Sabrina T. Howell                                David Yermack
NYU Stern School of Business                     Stern School of Business
KMC 9-93                                         New York University
44 West 4th Street                               44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012                               New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                         and NBER
showell@stern.nyu.edu                            dyermack@stern.nyu.edu

Marina Niessner
AQR Capital Management
Greenwich Plaza
Greenwich, CT 06830
marina.niessner@aqr.com
1         Introduction
Initial coin oﬀerings (ICOs) are a new method of raising capital for early stage ventures, an
alternative to more traditional sources of start-up funding such as venture capital (VC) and
angel finance. In an ICO, a blockchain-based issuer sells cryptographically secured digital
assets, usually called tokens. The ICO market grew explosively in 2017 and early 2018;
according to one estimate, between January 2016 and August 2019 ICOs raised over $31
billion, and at least 20 individual ICOs to date have taken in more than $100 million.1 At
the same time, the market has become notorious for scams, jokes, and frauds. Its growth and
novel characteristics have attracted interest from entrepreneurs, investors, and regulators.
This paper asks which venture and ICO process characteristics predict operating success
for ICO issuers, focusing on whether the market exhibits dynamics consistent with existing
theoretical literature about entrepreneurial finance and, more recently, about ICOs.
        When well designed, ICOs can provide more security, liquidity and transparency than
conventional financing instruments. These features potentially mitigate costs of asymmetric
information and agency problems that have long deterred arms-length retail investment in
early stage private ventures (Hall and Lerner 2010). These frictions have made fundraising
diﬃcult for those entrepreneurs who are located outside VC hubs or lack elite professional
networks (Chen et al. 2010). While these frictions may represent unavoidable risks of start-
up ventures, they might also arise due to ineﬃcient aspects of market design or overly
burdensome regulation, problems that many ICOs have openly tried to address.
        We define three types of digital assets. The first is a general-purpose medium of exchange
and store of value cryptocurrency, such as Bitcoin; these are often termed coins. The second
is a security token, which represents a conventional security that is recorded and exchanged
on a blockchain to reduce transaction costs and create a record of ownership; the underlying
assets may range from commodities to currencies to real estate or even corporate equity.
The third is a utility token, which gives its holder consumptive rights to access a product
or service.2 Utility tokens comprise the largest and most well-regarded ICOs and are the
    1
    See https://www.coinschedule.com/stats.
    2
    These are our definitions, not an industry standard, and we do not view the categories as mutually
exclusive. For example, Ether (the token of the Ethereum blockchain) is a utility token, but its widespread
circulation has led it to become also a store of value. An emerging class of so-called stablecoins, such as


                                                    1
primary focus of our paper, although our data include numerous tokens in all categories.
Utility token ICOs somewhat resemble crowdfunding pre-sales of products on platforms such
as Kickstarter. Perhaps a closer analogy is selling tradable ownership rights to stadium seats
before a sports or entertainment venue is built, a practice that goes back to the 19th century.3
While utility tokens can be simple “corporate coupons” that give the holder the right to an
issuer’s product or service, the most well-known ICOs employ them as the means of payment
in a new marketplace. In this case, we can extend the analogy to suppose that the unbuilt
stadium’s games were to be played (or at least watched) by people in the grandstands.
    Why should a platform have its own token instead of accepting payment using
conventional fiat currency? This foundational question casts a long shadow over current
political debates about how to regulate token markets, and it plays a central role in
motivating the models in most of the ICO theory papers that we cite below.                              ICO
proponents argue that blockchains with native tokens permit disintermediation of Internet
marketplaces with centralized control such as Amazon or Facebook. In these firms with
traditional equity-debt capital structures, the managers’ control over the platform enables
them to extract a large share of its economic surplus on behalf of the equity holders, who
are often also the managers. These platforms’ centralized control and opacity also raise
concerns over their use of transacting party data, a privilege that has become controversial
and triggered high-profile political hearings and legislative reforms.4
    In the blockchain utility token model, platform management is decentralized, and value
Tether, arguably belong to both the first and second categories. Other papers have developed taxonomies
of ICOs that can be elaborate. See, for example, Zetzsche et al. (2017) and Lo and Medda (2019).
    3
      The practice of raising capital from prospective customers by selling ownership rights for future
seats in an unbuilt arena dates back at least to Royal Albert Hall in London in the 1860s (we
thank Bruce Grundy for this reference). Others trace the practice to the time of the Reformation
or even earlier, when European church construction began to be financed by the advance sales
of pews that were owned in perpetuity by their sponsors and could be re-sold for profit.                   See
http://anglicanhistory.org/misc/freechurch/fowler_pews1844.html. For utility tokens to have value, the
issuer must commit to a cap on the total supply, and this is easily done in a sports arena or church where
adding new seats is physically diﬃcult. Smart contracts can impose these limits for ICO tokens.
    4
      The 2018 enactment of the European General Data Protection Regulation reform in the European Union
and days of U.S. Congressional hearings in 2019 have been among the most prominent manifestations of the
political backlash against large, centrally controlled Internet platforms. Among other issues, these platforms
have been accused of earning large profits by enabling invasions of privacy and on-line bullying, suppressing
consumer retail competition, permitting the dissemination of supremacist “hate speech,” and facilitating
the manipulation of democratic elections via precisely targeted “fake news” disinformation promulgated by
unmonitored rogue platform users.



                                                      2
accrues to the token holders, who may include the platform developers but are mostly its
customers, workers and other contributors. The token’s value is often expected to increase
with the value of the decentralized network. This correspondence enables three features,
though not every ICO makes use of all three. First, the token can reward the network creators
without giving them operational control after the network has launched. Second, token
buyers who may be prospective customers can fund the platform’s development, speculating
on the future value of the service it will provide. Third, like concert tickets, food stamps,
or stock certificates, the token’s value arises by providing access to a future good or service,
creating customer commitment.
   We study a sample of 1,520 geographically dispersed ICOs, for which we gather data on
a wide range of characteristics, such as whether the token has utility value, previous VC
financing, and founder professional backgrounds. The amount raised in the ICO is public
information for 580 ICOs, which collectively raise the equivalent of $12.9 billion. We analyze
ICO process characteristics for a subsample of 451 successful oﬀerings that subsequently trade
on secondary market exchanges for at least 90 days. Our descriptive statistics document
design tradeoﬀs faced by ICO issuers, who must balance objectives not unlike those for
initial public oﬀerings (IPOs) of equity securities: target proceeds, fraction of total token
supply sold, pricing mechanism, distribution method, lock-ups and set-asides, token rights,
and choice of secondary market exchange. Our detailed benchmarks of data in these areas,
nearly all hand-collected from original sources, represent one contribution of our study.
   We study the operational progress of ICO issuers by tracking the failure rate of the
companies in our sample through November 2018 and, for those firms still operating at
that time, by analyzing their employment as reported by individuals on LinkedIn in both
November 2018 and July 2019. As most of the ICO issuers in our sample raised funds in
2017 or early 2018, an issuer’s headcount through mid-2019 provides an important indicator
of progress toward commercializing its product or service.
   A significant predictor of survival and employment is whether a token has apparent utility
value, which is relevant to current policy debates over whether ICO tokens are investment
securities in disguise, or whether they represent an innovation that enables a new venture to
raise funds in a way that promotes future product adoption and loyalty, while also oﬀering


                                               3
liquidity. Additional factors associated with ICO success reflect longstanding theories in
corporate finance about the importance of reducing information asymmetry and the use
of bonding and certification strategies to reduce agency costs. We find that ICO issuers
have lower failure rates and/or higher future employment when the issuer makes voluntary
disclosures via a white paper, when the white paper provides a budget for the use of ICO
proceeds, when the issuer’s executive team has a lockup (vesting) period for sale of its ICO
tokens, when some tokens are reserved in an incentive pool, when the issuer has successfully
raised VC funding in the past, and when the CEO or founder has professional experience as
an entrepreneur or in computer science.
      In related analysis we study which tokens become listed on an exchange, which represents
an important step toward wider circulation that would facilitate an issuer’s progress toward
operational goals. We conduct two exercises. First, we examine factors that predict listing.
These largely parallel those that predict survival and employment. Second, noting that
listing is itself an interesting characteristic, with a strong connection to token liquidity, we
instrument for listing to assess its eﬀect on employment.5 Specifically, we use price changes
in the Ethereum Classic (ETC) token around the time of an ICO, focusing on periods
when Bitcoin prices are high (see Section 4.1.2 for details). The IV estimate indicates that
successful token listing increases the issuer’s future employment substantially.
      Further analysis shows that many aspects of ICO design choices and social media
promotion have significant associations with measures of ICO issuers’ operating success.
For example, success is associated with token sales that use dynamic pricing mechanisms,
that promote transparency and crowdsource development by publicly posting source code
on Github, and that have large Telegram user groups. We categorize the issuers into 12
sectors and find that success along both real and financial dimensions is associated with
business models related to advertising and rewards, tokenizing real assets (e.g., putting real
estate or art on a blockchain), and new blockchain protocols (creating a new blockchain
rather than attaching the token to the Ethereum or another existing blockchain). These
results shed light on where the market has perceived opportunities for value creation.
      One reason that ICOs have proliferated so quickly is that in their most basic form they
  5
      We could not identify suitable instruments for the other issuer and ICO process characteristics.


                                                       4
impose almost no costs on the issuer. This contrasts with IPOs, where explicit underwriting
and legal costs comprise a significant fraction of the funds raised (Ellis et al. 2000). IPOs
also have less quantifiable costs, importantly the cost of disclosure, the ongoing regulatory
burden, and the possibility that a high stock price will attract product market competition
(Maksimovic and Pichler 2001). In our discussion and analysis below, we draw parallels and
highlight diﬀerences between ICOs and three forms of more conventional finance: equity
crowdfunding, venture capital, and IPOs. The literature in financial economics about these
instruments illuminates mechanisms that may be important for ICOs. These comparisons
highlight connections between our paper and the broader entrepreneurial finance literature,
especially work on new vehicles for financing and alternative contracting structures including
Kaplan et al. (2009), Hochberg (2011), Mollick (2014), and Bernstein et al. (2017).
       This paper also contributes to a nascent literature describing the economics of digital
assets. The subset of this literature focused on ICOs now includes more than 100 working
papers. We relate our findings to recent ICO theory papers, including Li and Mann (2018),
Sockin and Xiong (2018), and Cong et al. (2018). For example, the importance of utility
value to success and the prevalence of token pre-sales are consistent with the ways that ICOs
resolve cross-side and same-side coordination failures in Li and Mann (2018).6
       Our detailed investigation of token issuers’ real outcomes complements a number of other
recent empirical studies. Deng et al. (2018) study the post-ICO Github-based technological
development of token issuers, making it the only paper to date besides ours that examines
tangible operational outcomes for ICO issuers. Additional related work investigates ICO
financial market success measured as an indicator for obtaining an exchange listing for the
token. These papers include Amsden and Schweizer (2018), De Jong et al. (2018), Lyandres
et al. (2018), and Boreiko and Vidusso (2018). Other papers study topics that resemble
the empirical literature on IPOs, focusing on variables such as token underpricing, investor
returns, the amount raised in the ICO, and post-oﬀering liquidity, topics that we do not
consider in our study.7 Some papers, including Boreiko and Risteski (2019) and Fahlenbrach
   6
     Additional recent theory contributions include papers by Bakos and Halaburda (2019), Gan et al. (2019),
and Kassibrakis and Malamud (2019). Blémus and Guegan (2019) study the implications of tokens for
corporate governance.
   7
     On token underpricing, see: Benedetti and Kostovetsky (2018), Chanson et al. (2018), Dittmar and Wu
(2018), Drobetz et al. (2018), Felix (2018), Stastny (2018), Chen (2019), and Momtaz (2019). On investor


                                                     5
and Frattaroli (2019), use the transparency of blockchain addresses to study the behavior of
individual ICO investors. Li and Mann (2019) and Ofir and Sadeh (2019) provide literature
reviews of this fast-growing subject area.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the
ICO market, including regulation, theoretical work, and a detailed description of our hand-
collected data. Section 3 discusses the motivations for entrepreneurs to issue ICOs instead
of relying on more traditional sources of capital. Section 4 contains our analysis of token
success. Section 5 concludes the paper. An Appendix presents a case study of one of the
more successful ICOs to date, Filecoin, whose sponsor provided us with confidential data
about its token sale for use in this study.



2     The ICO market
ICOs are a phenomenon of the worldwide networks of open blockchains and distributed
ledgers that began with the 2009 launch of Bitcoin and now include thousands of digital
assets.8    These novel databases provide decentralized record-keeping that cannot be
retroactively edited and use cryptographic functions that link records, enable rapid
verification of data, and prevent hacking. Early blockchains such as Bitcoin and Litecoin
were designed as simple payment systems, and they also provide an archival function
because text can be appended to ordinary transactions. The advent of more sophisticated
blockchains such as Ethereum and EOS has enabled a much wider range of applications,
including insurance contracts, voting schemes, and contingent investment products. ICOs
are a fundraising mechanism in which a new token is sold to investors and prospective
returns, see Benedetti and Kostovetsky (2018), Chanson et al. (2018), Dittmar and Wu (2018), Drobetz et al.
(2018), Hu et al. (2018), Lu (2018), Momtaz (2018a), Stastny (2018), Yuryev (2018), and Stanley (2019).
On the amount raised, including failure to meet a set target, see Adhami et al. (2018), An et al. (2018), Ante
et al. (2018), Blaseg (2018), Burns and Moro (2018), Davydiuk et al. (2018), Feng et al. (2018), Fenu et al.
(2018), Fisch (2018), Lee et al. (2018), Momtaz (2018b), Momtaz (2018c), Rhue (2018b), Albrecht et al.
(2019), Ante and Fiedler (2019), Cai and Gomaa (2019), Cerchiello et al. (2019), Chen (2019), Johnson and
Yi (2019), Masiak et al. (2019), Philippi et al. (2019), and Wu et al. (2019). On liquidity see Bourveau
et al. (2018), Lyandres et al. (2018), and Fisch and Momtaz (2019). On trading volume see Florysiak and
Schandlbauer (2018). Fisch et al. (2019) use survey data to study the motivations of ICO investors. Li and
Yi (2019) study the factor structure of tokens’ post-ICO expected returns.
   8
     See Flood and Robb (2017) for an account of the historical antecedents that led to the launch of
cryptographic tokens by Nakamoto and others.


                                                      6
users. Most tokens sold in ICOs are smart contracts within the Ethereum blockchain,
though some are the units of account in new blockchain protocols.
       In order to explore what predicts ICO success – the primary aim of this paper – it
is important to first understand the features of this new market. This section begins by
discussing the legal status of ICO tokens. The subsequent sections describe the data that
we use in this paper and explain the economic content and institutional practice behind the
variables we collect.


2.1       Legal status of ICO tokens

Because of their novel design, cryptographic assets have given rise to a large number of legal
uncertainties in the U.S. and elsewhere. Regulatory questions begin with basic problems such
as how to account for cryptographic assets as part of a company audit. For ICO tokens,
another important and still unresolved issue is whether the sale of tokens in an ICO creates
income tax liability for the promoter and potential capital gains liability for investors. Some
tokens may have the legal status of commodities, which would implicate a federal regulatory
regime, and some token issuers may be construed as money transmitters, a status which
in the U.S. requires cumbersome state-by-state registration and broad know-your-customer
compliance obligations.9
       The most important legal question surrounding ICO tokens is whether they have the
status of securities, which would trigger various compliance requirements that could create
cost, risk, and delay for issuers. In the U.S., the four-part Howey test, which originated in
a 1946 Supreme Court case, governs whether an investment scheme qualifies as a security.10
   9
      See a memo published by a leading law firm at https://www.clearygottlieb.com/-/media/files/alert-
memos-2018/us-regulators-continue-scrutiny-of-virtual-currencies-and-icos.pdf, which details how token
issuers could variously be covered by the U.S. securities, commodities, and/or money transmission laws,
which may have overlapping eﬀects and are not mutually exclusive.
   10
      SEC v. W.J. Howey Co., 328 U.S. 293 (1946). Rohr and Wright (2017) provide a detailed analysis of
the relevant statutes and caselaw and their potential applications to blockchain-based tokens. More broadly,
a significant body of legal scholarship has begun to emerge around these issues, including many papers that
make proposals for optimal regulation of ICOs. See Baker (2017), Enyi and Le (2017), Preston (2017),
Robinson (2017), Brummer et al. (2018), Burilov (2018), Chiu (2018), Chiu and Greene (2018), Dambre
(2018), Dell’Erba (2018), Gurrea-Martínez and Remolina (2018), Holoweiko (2018), Sherman (2018), Zhang
et al. (2018), Annunziata (2019), Andrés et al. (2019), Essaghoolian (2019), Hughes and Wang (2019), Lausen
(2019), Mendelson (2019), Rodrigues (2019), Smith (2019), Travis (2019), Verstein (2019), and Waxenbaum
(2019).


                                                     7
How U.S. courts interpret the 73-year-old Howey precedent in the context of modern
technology will have worldwide implications, because U.S. securities laws are often followed
at least informally by many other countries.11 Two parts of the Howey test seem to be
satisfied by most token sales: whether an investment of money is made by the ICO
purchaser, and whether the ICO investment is part of a common enterprise among
numerous purchasers. Uncertainties arise from the other two branches of the test: whether
the success of the enterprise depends on the eﬀorts of a third-party promoter, and whether
a purchaser has an expectation of a financial return, such as capital gains. Virtually all
tokens are issued by promoters, but after launch many tokens are governed not by a
management team but instead by a computer algorithm on a decentralized public network.
This was recognized by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission’s (SEC)’s Director of
the Division of Corporate Finance in a June 2018 address, in which he opined that the
Ether token on the Ethereum blockchain, viewed as one of the first-ever ICOs, no longer
met the criteria to qualify as a security due to its lack of centralized control.12 If a token
buyer intends to use a token as a customer, he may not be motivated by an expectation of
financial profit. However, many ICOs have no apparent utility purpose (47 percent of our
sample), and non-utility tokens are almost certainly securities under Howey.
       The commission has brought a handful of high-profile enforcement actions against select
token issuers, such as the Airfox and Paragon settlements announced in November 2018,
and these cases have tended to have extreme fact patterns that leave little ambiguity about
whether the underlying tokens qualified as securities (Rhue 2018a). Further test cases of
these principles seem inevitable in the near future, given the intensity of the SEC’s scrutiny
of ICOs. SEC Chairman Walter J. Clayton took an extreme position in a February 2018 U.S.
Senate hearing, stating that “I believe every ICO I’ve seen is a security,” but the decision for
any individual ICO ultimately belongs to the federal courts and not to the SEC. Congress also
has the opportunity to supersede Howey and clarify the future regulation of ICOs through
  11
     Regulation of ICOs internationally is studied by Barsan (2017), Kaal and Dell’Erba (2017), Shroﬀ and
Venkataraman (2017), Blemus (2017), Collomb et al. (2018), Gürcan (2018), Gutfleisch (2018), Hacker and
Thomale (2018), Kaal (2018), Klöhn et al. (2018), Koeppl and Kronick (2018), Pilkington (2018), Bellavitis
et al. (2019), Burilov (2019), Caponera et al. (2019), Chohan (2019), Flood and McCullagh (2019), Frick
(2019), Maas (2019). Maume (2019), McCullagh and Flood, and Vandezande (2019).
  12
     See https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/speech-hinman-061418.



                                                    8
legislation.
       Some issuers have responded to the threat of U.S. securities regulations by selling rights to
tokens as explicit securities to accredited investors under established registration exemptions,
which requires extensive know-your-customer due diligence. Since late 2017, some ICOs have
taken place under the Simple Agreement for Future Tokens (SAFT) framework, which was
introduced by Cooley (a law firm) and Protocol Labs, the company responsible for Filecoin
(see Appendix). SAFT issuers enter into an investment contract for the future delivery of
tokens – essentially a forward contract – once a platform is developed and becomes functional.
The tokens delivered in the future are meant to be products that are subject not to securities
laws, but instead to the ordinary consumer protection and tax laws of the U.S. and various
states. Whether federal agencies and courts will adopt the regulatory stances anticipated by
the SAFT framework is a question for the future.
       Seeking to bring regulatory clarity to the U.S. ICO market, the SEC created a Strategic
Hub for Innovation in Financial Technology in October 2018 to “serve as a resource for public
engagement on the SEC’s FinTech-related issues,” and in April 2019 that group published
a memorandum that enumerated criteria for “whether oﬀers and sales of a digital asset are
securities transactions” under Howey.13 On the same day, the group issued a No-Action letter
opining that the tokens of one issuer, Turn-Key Jet, were not subject to the securities laws. A
milestone occurred in August 2019 when INX Limited filed for an IPO (rather than an ICO)
of its utility tokens via the SEC’s usual securities registration process, making it potentially
the first fully registered token sale in the U.S. capital markets. These developments appear
to be part of a gradual trend toward regulatory compliance by the larger and more reputable
token issuers, matched partly by a willingness of the U.S. regulator to limit its reach into
the ICO market by acknowledging that not every token qualifies as an investment security.
       Other countries have adopted a wide variety of regulatory stances toward ICOs. These
range from blanket prohibitions (China, South Korea) to relatively accommodating safe
harbors (Singapore, Switzerland). Whether a country can enforce its tax and securities laws
against an ICO issuer is not always obvious, because public blockchains, including Ethereum,
operate everywhere and are not anchored physically in any particular jurisdiction. An issuer
  13
       See https://www.sec.gov/corpfin/framework-investment-contract-analysis-digital-assets.


                                                      9
that markets tokens to U.S. investors has U.S. compliance obligations even if the issuer
is located abroad, leading some issuers to declare their ICOs oﬀ-limits to U.S. residents
(this is the case for 19 percent of our sample). However, bringing a foreign issuer into a
U.S. court might be impossible. Also, the pseudo-anonymous nature of public blockchain
addresses makes excluding U.S. buyers diﬃcult. The geographic distribution of ICOs appears
to reflect emerging international regulatory competition between countries seeking to attract
a portion of the fast-growing market (see Figure 1). For example, 81 ICOs in our sample
have their primary location in Singapore.


2.2     Market overview

We create a large, unique dataset of ICOs and their characteristics. Data are hand collected
from issuer websites and white papers, as well as news articles, ICO aggregator and tracker
websites, LinkedIn, Github, Twitter, and Telegram.14 We use our data in Section 4 below
to investigate of ICO success factors. As shown in Table 1, Panel 1, we begin with a
sample of all 1,520 unique ICOs listed on the TokenData website as of April 2018. At the
start of our data collection in the summer of 2017, TokenData was recognized as the most
prominent and respected website among several that tracked the growing roster of ICOs.15
We merge the ICOs from TokenData with daily trading data from CoinMarketCap, which
is the most comprehensive and credible source of trading data for digital assets, with indices
featured in the data feeds provided by NASDAQ, Bloomberg Terminal, Thomson Reuters,
and others. CoinMarketCap aggregates daily data from those public exchanges that charge
trading fees. Exchanges without fees permit issuers or other stakeholders to generate false
volume, where a trader (or its bots) trades back and forth with itself. Two examples illustrate
CoinMarketCap’s coverage, as of August 2019. Price and volume data for the token Blocktix,
  14
    The data were collected by a team of more than a dozen research assistants and spot-checked.
  15
    Some ICO listing websites have biased samples because they charge payments for including the tokens in
their rosters. Deng et al. (2018) (footnote 7) discuss the benefits and limitations of many ICO aggregators.
They note that TokenData is one of three websites “that have the most comprehensive coverage and provide
the most thorough list of deal characteristics” and that TokenData covers the largest number of ICOs.
Amsden and Schweizer (2018) (footnote 32) make a similar observation about the comprehensiveness of
TokenData’s coverage. In a recent analysis of ICO white papers, The Wall Street Journal used TokenData
as one of its three sources of a sample of 3,291 documents. See https://www.wsj.com/graphics/whitepapers/.
One of the other sites used by The Journal, ICOBench, had only just launched and had limited coverage at
the time of our data collection.


                                                    10
which has a $0.28 million market cap, comes from a single exchange, HitBTC. Data for EOS,
one of the top five tokens with a market cap of $3.4 billion, comes from 117 exchanges.
       Table 1, Panel 1 shows that of the 1,520 ICOs, 1,266 were completed.16 Figure 2 shows
the number of ICOs and the U.S. dollar value equivalent of amount raised by quarter. It
indicates that our sample ends before the overall market bubble concluded in the first half
of 2018. We observe the amount raised for 580 ICOs and convert it when necessary to U.S.
dollars (Table 1, Panel 2). This variable has a mean of $22 million, a median of $7.4 million,
and a maximum value of $4.2 billion for the EOS token sale (the next highest is Tezos, at
$230 million). We do not use amount raised as a success metric, because raising more money
than needed for development has potential downsides, such as unwanted publicity and the
agency problems that arise when the founders have a large cash cushion. These issues are
recognized in the VC literature (Gompers 1995).
       Roughly half of the completed ICOs ultimately became listed on an exchange as of
November 2018, the point at which we tabulate the data for Table 1. Some crypto exchanges
are centralized, such as Poloniex and Binance, and others are decentralized (peer-to-peer),
such as ShapeShift and EtherDelta. They vary in approaches to approving tokens for listing.
For example, Circle, which runs the Poloniex exchange, considers dozens of factors including:
“Does the project encourage rational participation by investors?” and “Is the team transparent
with company developments, operations, and hiring?” 17 In 2017 it was reported that many
exchanges charged listing fees ranging as high as $1 to $3 million.18 By comparison, listing
a registered equity security on a traditional exchange such as NASDAQ costs $125,000 to
$300,000. Some exchanges charge token-specific listing fees depending on factors such as
expected daily volume.
       Since we aim to establish predictors of success in the ICO market, we tabulate information
about the operational progress of each token’s parent organization. The first real outcome
success measure is employment, defined as individuals who identify as employees of the issuer
  16
     Completed means that the ICO was not canceled and that the tokens were actually sold (or given away
in the case of airdrops). TokenData categorizes all ICOs as completed, active, or failed. We use their failure
indicator and spot check for accuracy.
  17
     See https://www.circle.com/marketing/pdfs/en/circle-asset-framework.pdf.
  18
     See    https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-04-03/crypto-exchanges-charge-millions-to-list-
tokens-autonomous-says.



                                                     11
on LinkedIn. We collected employment data at two points in time, November 2018 and July
2019. Table 1, Panel 2 shows that at the first measurement date the mean of this variable is
12.6, and the median is 3. Eight months later at the second measurement date, these values
increase to 14.3 and 4, respectively. The growth rate of employment (in log form) has a
mean of 0.9 percent and a median of 0 percent between these two dates. Second, we use an
indicator for whether the ICO issuer has failed by November 2018, which is the case for 30
percent of the sample.19
       Panel 3 of Table 1 indicates that nine percent of ICO issuers have previously received VC
equity financing. Anticipating that portfolio companies may raise additional funding through
ICOs, some VCs now include rights to future tokens as a standard term sheet clause.20 As
the relationship between the VC and ICO markets matures, they function as complements in
some circumstances and substitutes in others. Instances where issuers previously raise equity
VC or include VCs as token buyers include Kik, Blockstack, and Filecoin. In contrast, the
founder of Pillar explicitly described its ICO as a substitute for VC.21


2.3       Prevalence of utility tokens

Utility tokens confer consumptive rights, unlike equity. Using issuer white papers and other
public information, we assess whether each token’s issuer intended the token to have utility
value. Table 1, Panel 3 indicates that 53 percent of ICOs in our sample sell tokens with
intended utility value. Utility tokens typically do not carry rights to the future cash flows
of the issuer or platform, except to the degree the token’s value is intrinsically tied to the
network’s value. There are exceptions; for example, ICONOMI tokens come with the rights
to a portion of fees paid to the network. The most common right for utility token holders is
the right to use the token to access services. For example, the Basic Attention Token (BAT),
  19
     We classify an ICO as failed if the issuer does not have an active website, the token is not listed on
CoinMarketCap, and Internet searches yield no other indication that it still exists (if it ever did).
  20
     Based on author conversation with a Union Square Ventures founding general partner, and
https://www.coindesk.com/ico-investors-seek-veto-power-future-token-sales. The National Venture Capital
Association has added a protective provision to its model term sheet that gives investors a veto over token,
cryptocurrency and blockchain related oﬀerings. See https://nvca.org/pressreleases/nvca-unveils-updated-
model-legal-documents.
  21
     Digital identity company Pillar’s founder unsuccessfully sought VC before raising $25 million in an ICO.
See http://www.wired.co.uk/article/what-is-initial-coin-oﬀering-ico-token-sale.



                                                     12
which was sold in an ICO that raised $35 million in 24 seconds, will be the only means for
users, advertisers and publishers, to transact for attention on the Brave Internet browser.
   Token holders sometimes have platform governance rights, like equity shareholders. At
one extreme, token holders set the overall business strategy. An example is TheDAO (a
“decentralized autonomous organization”), which became famous for incurring an attack
that precipitated a hard fork of the Ethereum blockchain in 2016. More commonly, token
holders have limited governance roles, such as adjudicating disputes. Token holders may also
have the right to play a role in creating and securing blocks through a proof-of-stake system
where, as with company stock, voting power is determined by token holdings. The smart
contracts that create ICO tokens can include state-contingent privileges similar to those in
VC contracts, which typically give an entrepreneur more control in good states of the future,
and the investor more control in bad states.


2.4      Pre-sales

Our data show that for 43 percent of ICOs, the issuer segments the market by conducting
a pre-sale before the public ICO. This resembles how IPO issuers have often sold private
equity to VCs and other stakeholders prior to going public. ICO pre-sales serve multiple
functions. One is to fund the costs of promoting the ICO itself. A second is to certify the
issuer, particularly if well-known experts or institutions participate. A third is to determine
demand and the appropriate price, which is analogous to the book-building part of the IPO
process (Sherman and Titman 2002, Derrien and Womack 2003).
   Pre-sale buyers usually receive discounts.       These are akin to the lower prices that
conventional early stage equity investors receive in exchange for taking on more risk,
providing value-added services, and signaling quality to the market (Hellmann and Puri
2002).    Li and Mann (2018) rationalize the pre-sale as one mechanism to resolve the
coordination failure that emerges in the case of what they call a “same-side network eﬀect
during the ICO.” This is a traditional network eﬀect, in that the value of being a user
depends on there being a suﬃcient number of other users on the platform. Pre-selling
discounted tokens can help the issuer approach the needed critical mass of participants.



                                               13
2.5    White papers and other bonding devices

The failure rates of ICOs have attracted scrutiny from regulators, and a number of empirical
studies document evidence of fraud (Hamrick et al. 2018, Li et al. 2018, Liebau and Schueﬀel
2019, Cohney et al. 2018). Even if an ICO occurs without market manipulation such as
“pump and dump” schemes, no legal safeguards prevent the issuer from absconding with the
proceeds, nor is there accountability via audits or oversight through corporate governance of
promoters’ use of proceeds. More generally, ICO token buyers do not have legally enforceable
residual claims due to absence of regulation.
   We therefore expect that certification, disclosure, and bonding mechanisms are important
for ICO success. Variables relevant to these mechanisms are listed in Table 1, Panel 3.
Eighty-six percent of issuers publish a white paper, a voluntary disclosure document similar
in spirit to an IPO prospectus. However, in the absence of regulation their contents vary
dramatically. Most describe how the token will be used, including its benefits to holders
and how its blockchain architecture will operate. Beyond the white paper, issuers typically
conduct public relations campaigns to promote tokens.
   Table 1, Panel 3 shows that 43 percent of issuers set tokens aside to incentivize platform
development through a foundation, bounty, or endowment. There is a vesting schedule for
tokens assigned to insiders in 22 percent of ICOs, and a budget for use of the proceeds
in 42 percent. Vesting periods for founders help align developer incentives with those of
token buyers. Brav and Gompers (2003) find that this commitment device to alleviate
moral hazard problems is the best explanation for the 180-day lockups of insider shares that
exist in the IPO market. A few ICO issuers, including Golem, have tied token lock-ups
to specific development milestones. Other lock-ups are hard-coded set-asides to incentivize
future network contributors. For example, Bancor set funds aside for a market maker that
is charged with maintaining price stability, and from which funds cannot be removed for a
pre-specified period.




                                                14
2.6       Founder backgrounds

ICO issuers are sometimes firms and sometimes simply a group of developers. We are able to
identify a lead individual in the form of a founder or CEO for 1,017 of the ICOs, summarized
in Table 1, Panel 4. Of these, 96 percent of founders are male, a distribution that is even more
skewed than the share of VC-backed entrepreneurs who are male, which Gompers and Wang
(2017) find to be about 90 percent post-2010. LinkedIn information about previous jobs
is available for 964 ICOs. Among these, 28 percent of founders/CEOs have backgrounds
in the crypto community, which includes having worked at a blockchain-based company.
Thirty-three percent have backgrounds in financial services, and 48 percent in computer
science. If the founder/CEO claims on LinkedIn to have previously founded a company, we
assign him an entrepreneurship background, which applies to 57 percent of the sample (these
classifications are not mutually exclusive).


2.7       Location

We identify the issuer’s headquarters oﬃce location for 1,296 tokens, and the map in Figure 1
illustrates that issuers are located or partially located in 60 countries. The top five countries
are identified individually; the U.S. and Russia lead, with 214 and 105 ICOs, respectively.
The dollar amounts raised by country roughly correlate with the number of ICOs. The U.S.
leads, with Switzerland, Singapore, Russia, China, and Israel following (in order).
      ICOs may facilitate entrepreneurial finance in countries with less mature regulatory
systems such as Russia and China.               ICOs often employ self-enforcing, state-contingent
contracts that enable arms-length investors to have some degree of trust without relying on
enforcement by weak government institutions.22 Lerner and Schoar (2005) examine private
equity contracts across countries and find that in low-enforcement countries with socialist
backgrounds or civil law traditions, it is most common for private equity investors to
purchase majority equity ownership. The cost of this may inhibit optimal development of
vibrant entrepreneurial ecosystems in these markets.
      Location also raises the issue of jurisdiction for legal purposes. An ICO issuer that
 22
      For a skeptical alternative view, see the analysis in Venegas (2017) and Cohney et al. (2018).



                                                      15
successfully removes its tokens from the jurisdiction of the securities laws may create income
tax or value-added tax liability. To reduce potential income tax liability, some token issuers
have routed their ICOs through non-profit foundations, while others have located in tax
havens such as the Cayman Islands or Zug, Switzerland, which has come to be known as the
Crypto Valley. However, Huang et al. (2018) find that tax considerations are less important
than lenient securities regulation in attracting ICOs to individual countries.


2.8       Github and social media characteristics

Publishing source code provides a powerful form of transparency, which also leverages the
wisdom of the crowd to identify bugs and improve quality. Github is the dominant web-
based repository hosting service for computer code. We collect Github data as of July 2019.
There is a main repository containing the token contract for 812 ICOs, or 53 percent of the
sample of 1,520. As shown in Table 1, Panel 5, the average main Github repository has
more than 2,100 commits (revisions), 11 branches (pointers to specific versions), 80 releases
(oﬃcial new versions of the software), and 44 contributors (people who are not organization
members but contribute to the project). We use the number of months from the last commit
as a proxy for ongoing engagement with the software; a higher number of months implies
less user engagement.23
      Token issuers use social media to communicate with stakeholders primarily on two
platforms, Telegram and Twitter. Telegram is a cloud-based messaging application with a
focus on security and speed. Accounts are tied only to phone numbers. Telegram’s own
source code is publicly available and, to some degree, open-source. As a result of this and
perceived independence from large companies and governments, it has become a preferred
platform for the crypto community.              Eighty-three percent of the ICOs in our detailed
sample have a Telegram group, and among this subset, the average group has more than
5,000 members. Ninety-seven percent of the detailed sample has an oﬃcial Twitter account,
which has on average 22,200 followers. Data on social media are as of November 2018.
 23
      Specifically, this is the number of months between July 10, 2019 and the last commit prior to that date.




                                                      16
2.9    ICO processes

When launching an ICO, the issuer typically makes tradeoﬀs among a set of economic
variables with parallels to IPO decision points: target proceeds, fraction of total token
supply sold, pricing mechanism, and distribution method, among others. To study the ICO
process in depth, we hand-collect data on the 451 exchange-listed tokens that had traded
on an exchange for at least 90 days as of April 2018. The summary statistics for these
variables about ICO processes appear in Table 2.             They represent an important
contribution of our study.
   In most ICOs, a prospective buyer sends payment to the blockchain address of the issuer.
Payment usually occurs in cryptocurrency, most commonly Ether since the majority of ICOs
occur on the Ethereum blockchain. Table 2 shows that 66 percent of ICOs in our data accept
Ether. Orders are filled through automated, pre-established smart contracts. These dictate,
for example, how to ration tokens when the oﬀer is over-subscribed. The issuer has no control
over the ICO process once the smart contract launches. As oﬀers are accepted, the contract
sends tokens to the blockchain addresses of successful buyers, while refunds are conveyed to
addresses of unsuccessful buyers.
   Data in Table 2 indicate that the Ethereum blockchain dominates the token market, with
73 percent of tokens using the ERC20 smart contract template. ERC20 refers to an oﬀ-the-
shelf Ethereum protocol that standardizes issuance, distribution, and control functionality of
tokens. Knowing that a token is ERC20 compliant provides information about its reliability
and interoperability with other systems. ERC20 tokens can be specialized to a platform’s
needs. For example, the issuer may want to bar some class of agents from spending its token.
   The Waves blockchain is a distant second, hosting five percent of the ICOs in our sample.
Fifty-one percent of ICOs disclose a fundraising goal. We are able to ascertain whether this
goal is achieved for 419 token oﬀerings, and of these, 52 percent meet their goal. Fourteen
percent of ICOs give tokens away for free, a strategy for building interest known as an
airdrop.
   More than three quarters of ICOs place a cap on the number of tokens sold (the
number sold is akin to the public float in an IPO). Some capped sales have been grossly



                                             17
oversubscribed, creating an incentive to buy just as the sale starts, which can lead to
blockchain congestion and high transaction fees. In an uncapped ICO, buyers do not know
what share of total supply a token represents. Fourteen percent of issuers have the right to
issue more tokens after the ICO, expanding the total supply (this parallels IPOs, where
issuers can conduct seasoned equity oﬀerings). On average 53 percent of total token supply
is sold in an ICO, including both capped and uncapped deals. ICOs sometimes occur
essentially instantaneously, while at the other extreme some have lasted for multiple years.
The average duration is 40 days.
    Most ICOs in our data sell tokens on a fixed price and first-come, first-served basis.
Thirty-three percent of ICOs use dynamic pricing, where the price changes during the ICO
in a pre-determined way. Nine percent have a price that is sensitive to demand (i.e., changes
during the ICO in a way that reflects demand), and five percent use an auction mechanism.
For example, Gnosis and Viva used auctions in which the number of tokens sold was unknown
and depended on the lowest successful bid. The infrequency of auction mechanisms may seem
puzzling to economists, as auctions are an eﬃcient way to allocate a scarce resource. Auctions
are also rare among IPOs (Kutsuna and Smith 2003). Their paucity among ICOs suggests
that rather than regulatory institutions, other features of the complex IPO process or even
inertia may explain their rarity. This appears to be a fruitful avenue for future research.24


2.10      ICO industry sectors

We assign each issuer to one of 12 industry sectors, shown in the left Column of Table 3.25
The largest category is Non-Crypto Marketplaces and Services, with 18 percent of issuers.
One example in this category is Paragon, which raised $70 million to build “a community
dedicated to the worldwide legalization and systematization of cannabis” and later became a
high-profile target of SEC enforcement in November 2018. The second largest sector is Asset
Management / Other Crypto Financial Services, with 15 percent of issuers. One example
  24
     To the extent that breathless coverage and pricing mechanisms that benefit early
buyers create a “fear of missing out” and attract investors who lack knowledge about
the intricacies of blockchain technology, there is abundant opportunity for scams.                      See
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2017/05/cryptocurrency-ponzi-schemes/528624/.
  25
     We developed sector categories via detailed analysis of a subset of 60 ICOs, and researcher assistants
then applied these categories to the whole sample.


                                                    18
in this category is Bloom, a platform for identity attestation, risk assessment and credit
scoring that raised $41 million. An interesting category is Smart Contract Creation, with
five percent of issuers. An example of a smart contract ICO is Agrella, which raised $29
million and plans to enable users to create and manage legal agreements that automate
obligation fulfillment (e.g. payment).
    To explore what types of ventures use ICOs instead of traditional financing, we collect
data from the CB Insights database on startups using blockchain technology that receive
seed or VC investment. We are able to assign most of the VC-backed startups into one of
the 12 ICO sectors, and data reflecting these assignments appear on the right side of Table 3.
Two sectors are much better represented among VC-backed blockchain startups than among
ICO issuers: Payments and Wallets, and Enterprise, Health and Identity. This may reflect
VC-backed blockchain startup being more oriented towards centralized, business-oriented,
or easily monetized blockchain business models than ICO issuers.
    To pursue the possibility that they are more business-oriented, we categorize the
VC-backed blockchain startups as either having a business-to-business model or a
business-to-consumer model. We find that 43 percent have a business-to-business model,
while essentially all ICO issuers in our sample target atomized consumers and are usually
building two-sided marketplaces (see the theory in Garratt and van Oordt 2019). These
diﬀerences     indicate   selection   by   start-ups   into   diﬀerent   types   of   financing.
Enterprise-focused blockchain startups such as Digital Asset Holdings are more likely to
fund themselves with VC, while decentralized, consumer-focused platforms are more likely
to issue tokens, as they may not be well suited to conventional equity and debt
instruments.



3    Advantages of ICOs
As a new financing instrument, what do ICOs oﬀer that other entrepreneurial finance
methods do not? That is, why would a venture use an ICO rather than a traditional
instrument? This section discusses six advantages of ICOs: (i) financing the development
of decentralized networks; (ii) securing commitment from future customers and gauging


                                               19
their demand; (iii) establishing immutable, non-negotiable governance terms; (iv) providing
rapid liquidity; (v) hastening network eﬀects; and (vi) reducing transaction costs.
Explaining these advantages provides context for what “success” means, the question that
we consider empirically in Section 4 below.


3.1    Financing development of decentralized networks

Instead of value accruing to network sponsors or intermediaries, as is the case with equity-
funded startups such as Facebook and Google, it is possible for a blockchain network’s
value to accrue to its token holders, who are diﬀuse future contributors and users of the
blockchain. Popper (2016) points out that this can remunerate creators of content for open
source applications, which have traditionally relied on volunteer work (e.g. Wikipedia and
Unix). That is, an ICO compensates initial developers without giving them more control
of the network than any other token holders (Canidio 2018). After the network launches, a
native token can also incentivize platform helpers, such as validators.
   A utility token faces a tension between two adverse outcomes. On one hand, the ability
of an ICO to jump-start network eﬀects may be undermined if token holders perceive more
value from holding rather than using the tokens. On the other hand, if a utility token’s value
does not increase with the network’s value, there is no reason to hold it at all, and extremely
high velocity will put downward price pressure on the token. While the technology is still
evolving, one approach to resolving this tension is a token whose value is tied to work that
maintains the network. To illustrate, consider Augur, a decentralized prediction market that
has been functional since 2016. Betting and payouts are conducted using Ether. Augur’s
token, REP, is used to identify the true outcome for any market in a decentralized manner.
Suppose a market exists to guess whether the Patriots will win the 2020 Super Bowl. After
the game ends, Augur’s oracle process will come to consensus about whether the Patriots
won. Anyone can stake REP to report on the outcome. The reporter receives her REP
back, plus a portion of the reporting fee if her report is the same as the majority. The
fee is a function of how much has been staked and is also set such that the overall market
capitalization of REP is at least five times the value of open interest in markets. If her
report deviates from the crowd’s, she loses her tokens, which elicits honest reporting. With

                                              20
higher demand, more revenue accrues to reporters, who then are willing to stake more for
the right to report. A significant fraction of tokens is locked up at any given time through
these stakes, preventing excess velocity.
       It is possible for a token to both be used to compensate “work” for the network while also
being used by customers. An example is the Filecoin network, described in the Appendix.
There, customers are not expected to hold tokens for long. Instead, the service providers hold
tokens and are therefore more likely to participate in platform governance. This is similar
to producer-owned cooperatives, such as the farmer-owned agricultural co-ops discussed in
Hansmann (1996). The result is that, in theory, the value of the token will scale neither too
quickly nor too slowly with the network’s value.


3.2       Securing commitment from future customers

A second advantage of ICOs is that they permit a venture to raise financing from future
users, similar to the pre-sale of goods via crowdfunding. This contrasts with conventional
equity, where investors have claims on future cash flows and are generally distinct from
intended customers. Raising capital from customers could potentially redistribute network
growth gains from financial intermediaries such as VCs to developers and consumers. It
also helps to promote the brand among consumers and provide the issuer with an early
signal about demand (Demers and Lewellen 2003, Catalini and Gans 2018). Some have
therefore heralded ICOs as a means to “democratize” access to investment opportunities in
new ventures.26 However, conventional institutional investors such as hedge funds and VCs
have purchased significant shares of tokens, especially in the most sought-after ICOs, raising
concerns that utility tokens are held mostly by speculators rather than future customers.
       In Li and Mann (2018)’s model, users purchase tokens to make a credible commitment
to use the platform. It is precisely because the token is worthless outside of the platform
that its purchase oﬀers a credible commitment to spend the token later on the platform.
Their theory also suggests the presence of speculators does not detract from the ability of
  26
    For example, Sam Altman, the president of Y Combinator, a well-regarded startup accelerator in Silicon
Valley, said in 2017 that “We are interested in how companies like Y Combinator can use the blockchain to
democratize access to investing.” See https://www.coindesk.com/y-combinator-sam-altman-icos-bubble/.



                                                   21
utility tokens to resolve coordination problems; speculators would only purchase tokens if
they believed that the tokens would ultimately be held and spent by platform users. An
alternative theoretical justification for speculation appears in Cong et al. (2018). They argue
that an important aspect of ICOs is expected price appreciation, which helps to accelerate
adoption and network eﬀects by making token ownership attractive to potential early users.


3.3    Establishing immutable governance terms

A third advantage of ICOs arises from the credible commitments that an issuer makes to
token scarcity and governance through the immutable token creation contract. Once the
token contract and platform are launched, the platform can exist independently of the issuer.
Catalini and Gans (2018) consider utility tokens that will serve as the medium of exchange
on a platform and have no governance or future cash flow rights. However, their model raises
several concerns about ICOs as a fundraising mechanism. Similar to the theory in Canidio
(2018), they argue that the ability to issue tokens in the future (i.e., earn seigniorage revenue)
creates commitment problems.


3.4    Providing rapid liquidity

ICOs provide start-up investors with early liquidity, because the tokens are easily
transferable. Liquidity increases dramatically if the token is listed on a cryptocurrency
exchange, where it is tradable for other cryptocurrencies or for fiat currency. The liquidity
feature of tokens diﬀers sharply from the preferred equity used in VC or the pre-sale
contracts used in crowdfunding. Instead, this benefit is a key parallel between IPOs and
ICOs (Zingales 1995). Liquidity is not guaranteed, however; as shown in our data, 47
percent of the ICO tokens had not become exchange-traded by November 2018, and even
for those tokens that become listed, liquidity may prove low or non-existent.


3.5    Hastening network eﬀects

Tokens hasten network eﬀects, because token holders are motivated to help the platform
succeed either by using tokens directly or contributing (e.g. finding bugs or adding features).

                                               22
This advantage highlights the dynamic aspect of token value, emphasized in the model in
Cong et al. (2018), where expected token price appreciation leads more users to join the
platform. Bakos and Halaburda (2018) model the sale of platform-specific utility tokens in an
ICO as useful if pre-selling tokens can help solve a coordination problem among prospective
users – i.e., to jump-start one-sided network eﬀects. The incentive to pre-join in order to
benefit from token appreciation is an important diﬀerentiating feature of ICO models relative
to conventional network eﬀects.
   Establishing network eﬀects quickly is particularly important in this setting, because
decentralized applications are often easily imitated. Of course, token holders may hoard their
tokens if they expect their value to appreciate. Platforms therefore often have mechanisms
for issuing tokens in the future or releasing existing supply from a reserve inventory.


3.6      Reducing transaction and regulatory costs

A final benefit of using a token on the platform instead of fiat currency is lower transaction
costs, especially when agents exist in multiple countries.      Other conventional currency
services, such as the need for a common unit of account or the desire of the issuer to collect
seigniorage, could be accomplished without a native token. Indeed, low transaction costs
alone do not motivate a native token, as the platform could alternatively use Bitcoin or
Ether.
   Relatedly, thus far a benefit of conducting an ICO is that the transaction and
regulatory costs have been essentially zero, in striking contrast with IPOs, which impose
large underwriting and legal costs. Disclosure has also been entirely voluntary, in contrast
to the large amount of disclosure required for listed, public companies.        However, the
increasing regulatory scrutiny of the sector appears to have made the low regulatory
burden a fleeting phenomenon, and ICO issuers now frequently use token sale strategies
that explicitly acknowledge the instrument is sold as a security and aim to comply with
existing securities laws (see Section 2.1).




                                              23
4       Analysis of ICO success factors
We study the factors associated with ICO success using variants of Equation 1:


           Successi,t = ↵ +   0
                                  Xi + BT CP ricet + ⌧t + Sectori + Countryi + "i,t         (1)


We regress success measures on a vector of characteristics Xi , which are generally not time-
varying. All except the Github and social media variables are observed before the ICO
or any exchange listing. We include the price of Bitcoin and fixed eﬀects for the calendar
quarter that the ICO started (⌧t ), both of which help to control for market sentiment (in
some specifications we use fixed eﬀects tied to other time intervals). Finally, our main models
also include indicator variables for industry sectors and for the top nine countries by number
of ICOs, as well as an indicator for being dispersed across at least five countries. For some
ICOs we are unable to identify a country or sector, so models with these fixed eﬀects have
slightly smaller samples. Standard errors for the regression estimates are clustered by the
quarter in which each token begins trading.


4.1     ICO characteristics and issuer real outcomes

We begin our analysis of ICO success factors by studying how the future employment at
token issuers, the failure rates of these issuers, and their success in obtaining token exchange
listings are associated with important characteristics of the parent organizations and their
top managers.


4.1.1    Issuer and founder/CEO characteristics

Our analysis of future employment at token issuers appears in Table 4, in which the
dependent variable is projected on proxies for issuer quality, transparency, and credibility.
Most of the token sales in our sample were concluded in the spring of 2018 or earlier, and
we obtain future employment data from LinkedIn at two subsequent points: November
2018 and July 2019. The dependent variable in the first three columns of Table 4 equals the
log of 1 plus employment at each issuer as of July 2019. In Column 4, the earlier November


                                                24
2018 measure is used instead. The last two columns use the growth rate of employment at
each issuer between these two dates. In most of our regression models we include fixed
eﬀects for calendar quarters in which each ICO starts, to control for time-series shocks that
aﬀect ICOs. Standard errors are clustered by calendar quarters as well. In a few models,
such as Column 2 of this table, we substitute weekly fixed eﬀects and weekly clustering in
place of quarterly, to show that the main results are not driven by time variation within a
specific quarter, and we add fixed eﬀects for countries and industry sectors in Columns 3
and 6. As shown by the patterns of estimates in Table 4 and in other tables, varying the
inclusion of these fixed eﬀects has little meaningful eﬀect on the other estimates.
       The first row of Table 4 shows a positive and significant association between token utility
value and future employment. For example, the coeﬃcient of 0.308 in Column 1 implies that
utility tokens are associated with a 36 percent increase in employees by July 2019 relative
to other types of tokens (mainly security tokens),27 while the coeﬃcient of 0.184 in Column
4 implies that employment is 20 percent higher by November 2018. The growth rate of
employment between these two dates is also higher for utility token issuers. These results
are consistent with theory. First, Li and Mann (2018) argue that ICOs can create economic
value if the issuers sell utility tokens that promote network eﬀects on a new platform. Second,
Cong et al. (2018) focus on how network eﬀects interact with token price dynamics. They
argue that tokens can help accelerate network adoption when the value of the network
increases in its number of users. While they do not explicitly discuss utility tokens, the
dependence of token value on the size of the user base suggests that the token is used as
a medium of exchange or to purchase a product/service. Third, Lee and Parlour (2018)’s
model, in which an ICO is essentially a means of crowdfunding, requires the token to have
utility value. The positive correlation between utility value and real outcomes is relevant
to the regulatory debate about ICOs (see Section 2.1), as some observers argue that utility
tokens should not be regulated as securities.
       Voluntary disclosure is also associated with future employment, although the positive
coeﬃcient estimates for the relevant variables are not always statistically significant.
  27
    When the dependent variable is logged, and coeﬃcients are greater than 0.1, the correct percent
interpretation is 100 ⇤ (e 1).



                                                 25
Publishing a white paper and a budget for use of proceeds predicts higher future
employment as of November 2018, and including a budget for the use of ICO proceeds in
the white paper is associated with higher employment by July 2019. The importance of
these disclosures that are not required by law speaks to the longstanding academic debate
about the eﬀectiveness of voluntary vs.       mandatory disclosure.     For public securities
oﬀerings in the U.S., disclosure has been required since the 1933 and 1934 securities acts,
but critics view these rules as costly and inflexible (e.g. Easterbrook and Fischel 1984). If
disclosure were voluntary, according to this critique, companies would still choose to release
information to the market, but each issuer would tailor its releases to its own needs and
circumstances, potentially increasing the volume and variety of information reaching
investors. The diverse and extremely frequent white paper disclosures by the ICO issuers in
our sample seem to reflect this type of outcome. Our results suggest that ICO issuers are
mindful of the importance of transparency, consistent with literature on IPOs showing that
attempts to reduce information asymmetry or agency costs make fundraising more
successful (Healy and Palepu 2001, Loughran and Ritter 2002).
   We find strong evidence that bonding to reduce agency costs is relevant to future
employment. Indicators for setting aside an incentive pool of tokens and using insider
vesting schedules always have the expected signs and are significant in models for the levels
of future employment. Relatedly, prior VC investment in the issuer is among the strongest
and most significant predictors of future employment and its growth rate. These estimates
parallel papers in the IPO literature that have found a positive relation between VC
backing and post-IPO success, such as Baker and Gompers (2003) and Hochberg (2011).
Catalini and Gans (2018) note that a challenge for the ICO model is that the issuer may
raise insuﬃcient capital to cover its costs of development. They suggest this latent funding
need helps explain why ICO issuers sometimes raise VC before the ICO. Our finding that
previous VC consistently predicts higher employee headcount supports their hypothesis,
though of course it is also consistent with a variety of other mechanisms, including simply
being a proxy for quality.
   Finally, the background of the issuer’s founder/CEO also has significant associations with
future employment. While founders’ backgrounds in finance and computer science appear


                                             26
to be important, the strongest result is that entrepreneurial experience is associated with
49 percent more employees (Table 4, Column 2). Evidence in other studies shows that the
quality of a startup’s founding team is the most important factor in attracting early stage
angel and VC investment capital (Gompers et al. 2016, Bernstein et al. 2017, Howell 2019),
and our results show that founder quality aﬀects ICO capital raising as well.
   Table 5 shows regression estimates in which the indicator for token failure (as of November
2018) is projected on the same proxies for issuer quality, transparency, and credibility as used
in Table 4. All columns report linear probability estimates except Column 2, which uses a
logit model and drops fixed eﬀect groups without successes, so its sample size is somewhat
smaller. Column 3 includes sector fixed eﬀects. Columns 1-3 use quarterly fixed eﬀects,
while Column 4 uses weekly fixed eﬀects.
   Estimates in Table 5 indicate that utility token issuers are significantly less likely to
experience failure than issuers of other types of tokens, a strong result across all four models.
Other estimates in Table 5 for the determinants of Failure are similar to those in Table 4 for
the future employment, suggesting a heavy emphasis on bonding and transparency. Failure
is less likely when issuers publish a white paper, disclose a budget for the use of proceeds,
provide an incentive pool of tokens for employees, and establish vesting schedules for top
managers’ token holdings. Issuers whose top managers have computer science backgrounds
experience significantly less failure. Prior VC equity reduces the probability of failure on the
order of 5 to 10 percent, depending upon the model (the estimate is not identified in the logit
model). While statistically significant, these estimates for the VC variable have much less
economic significance than those in Table 4’s models of future employment and employment
growth. The asymmetry between the importance of VC equity for success (employment,
Table 4) and failure (Table 5) is consistent with VCs investing in a highly skewed portfolio,
in which there are (hopefully) a few home runs, and many failures (Ewens et al. 2018).


4.1.2   Exchange listing and future employment

Regression estimates in Tables 4 and 5 illuminate relationships between ICO issuer
characteristics and the real outcomes of employment and failure.           A further outcome,
whether the token becomes listed on a cryptocurrency exchange, has particular importance

                                               27
for investors because of its strong connection to token liquidity, a primary benefit of ICOs
relative to conventional instruments in entrepreneurial finance. Beyond its significance for
investors, listing may help ICO issuers achieve real outcomes, a conjecture we explore in
this section. In a two-stage regression model, we instrument for listing and demonstrate
that listing causally aﬀects the token issuer’s future employment.                       (We found no
instruments for the other issuer and ICO process characteristics.)
       Because only a subset of relatively more successful ICOs achieve exchange listings, we
first attempt to identify which variables are associated with selection into listing. Table 6
presents a regression analysis using models very similar to those in Tables 4 and 5, in which
we study future employment and operational failure. In general, results in Table 6 are fairly
similar to Tables 4 and 5; explanatory variables such as the use of an incentive pool, insider
vesting, VC backing and computer science founder experience have statistically significant
associations with successful exchange listing. Interestingly, founder financial experience also
exhibits a positive and significant association with listing, which is a more financial outcome,
while it has no robust relation with future employment or operational failure.28
       Next, we estimate a two-stage least squares model, with estimates shown in Table 7.
The instrumental variable for token listing is price changes in the Ethereum Classic (ETC)
token around the time of an ICO. As noted above, the large majority of ICOs occur on the
Ethereum blockchain and accept Ether (ETH) as payment. One barrier to being listed on
an exchange is the high fee that exchanges charge for the opportunity. These have been
reported to range from $1 million to $3 million, and they appear to correlate with market
sentiment. Since issuer wealth is tightly tied to ETH, high ETH prices may predict the
ability or willingness to pay to list on an exchange.
       We do not use price changes of ETH itself as an instrument for changes in issuer wealth,
because ETH raises a concern about the exclusion restriction, which would require that ETH
price movements cannot independently aﬀect employment. To understand this, suppose that
ETH price changes are comprised of two types of variation. The first type (call this “Type
1”) is driven by overall ICO activity. ICO activity likely aﬀects ETH prices, because most
  28
      In related work, Amsden and Schweizer (2018), De Jong et al. (2018), Boreiko and Vidusso (2018) and
Deng et al. (2018) study listing predictors and also find that disclosure and VC backing are associated with
listing.


                                                    28
ICO tokens are smart contracts hosted on Ethereum, requiring small ETH expenditures for
each of their transactions (as explained above in Section 2.9). If a lot of sucessful ICOs are
being lested on the ETH blockchain, it would lead to increase in ETH prices in the short run,
and higher future employment at those firms in the future. This would violate the exclusion
restriction. The second type of variation (call this “Type 2”) reflects broader Ethereum value
and cryptocurrency market conditions beyond the ICO market. We seek an instrument that
is correlated with Type 2 but not with Type 1 variation.
    Price changes in Ethereum Classic (ETC) appear to provide a suitable instrument for
changes in issuer wealth. ETC was created in 2016 as a controversial hard fork from ETH. It
is strongly correlated with Type 2 variation because ETC and ETH have a common design
and shared heritage, but we believe ETC is uncorrelated with Part 1 variation because ICO
token contracts do not occur on the ETC blockchain, and ETC is rarely if ever used as
a means of payment in token sales. As Type 2 variation over a longer term likely aﬀects
employment, we consider price movements of ETC over a short window (20 days), making
it unlikely that the price changes aﬀect employment measured at least one year later.29 In
sum, ETC price changes likely satisfy the IV requirements of the relevance condition and the
exclusion restriction, because they are uncorrelated with Type 1 but correlated with Type 2
variation.
    Our IV estimation makes use of a market mechanism in which exchange listing fees for
ICOs are costly. Conversely, when listing fees are low, it should matter less how much money
founders raise in their ICOs. Exchange fees tend to be higher when overall cryptocurrency
market sentiment is frothier, which can be proxied with the price of Bitcoin (BTC). Some
exchanges post listing fees in BTC, creating a direct connection, but even when the fees
are posted in fiat, they tend to increase when sentiment is high. We therefore divide the
   29
      We measure the change in ETC prices as the 90th percentile of ETC prices between 23 and 43 days
after the start of an ICO, relative to the average ETC price 30 days before the start of the ICO. In this case,
23- and 43-day cutoﬀs are the 25th and 50th percentiles for how long it takes for tokens in our dataset to
list on an exchange. The results are not very sensitive to selecting other thresholds. The analysis includes
1,404 ICOs for which we can calculate the ETC price change. This is smaller than the 1,520 in the overall
sample because there are 50 tokens issued before ETC was available and 65 without a start date. Of the
1,404, 570 eventually became listed on an exchange, and 834 did not. For the post-ICO price, we use the
90th percentile to capture the spikes in prices. Again, our results are similar if we use the 75th or the 95th
percentiles, for example.




                                                      29
sample into three time periods: No Bubble, Shoulders of Bubble, and Bubble. No Bubble
is defined as days in which BTC prices are below $6,000, which is is almost all days before
10/29/2017 and after 11/13/2018 (while the price has since recovered, it did so after the
end of our data). Shoulders Bubble is defined as days in which BTC prices are between
$6,000 and $11,000, which is is almost all days between 10/29/2017 and 11/29/2017, as well
as between 1/30/2018 and 11/13/2018. Bubble is defined as days in which BTC prices are
above $11,000, which is almost all days between 11/30/2017 and 1/29/2018. Our research
indicates that exchange fees are higher during the Bubble period.
   Table 7 shows two-stage least squares estimates for a model in which future
employment (specifically, the log of one plus future employment) measured in July 2019 is
the dependent variable, and token listing is the independent variable of interest. Columns
1-3 show estimates for the No Bubble period, Columns 4-6 for the Shoulders of Bubble
period, and Columns 7-9 for the Bubble period. In each case, the first column shows the
naive OLS relationship between listing and employment. The second and third columns
contain the first and second stages of the IV estimation, respectively. We do not include
other controls in the regression because all of the variables we observe about issuers are
choices, such as where to locate or whether to raise VC. As these are endogenously
determined, including them in the IV analysis as controls could lead to a “bad control”
problem (Angrist and Pischke 2014) which we wish to avoid.
   Estimates in Table 7 indicate that when listing fees are high during the Bubble period,
ICO listing exhibits a strongly positive association with future employment. In the No
Bubble period, the second stage estimate of the eﬀect of listing on future employment is
statistically insignificant (Column 3). The first stage is economically small. In the Shoulders
of Bubble period, the second stage estimate is larger, at 0.97, and is statistically significant
(Column 6). Finally, in the Bubble period, the significant second stage coeﬃcient of 1.72
indicates that listing causes a more than 500 percent increase in the number of employees
(Column 9). The first stage estimate is large and robust in the Shoulders and Bubble periods,
with Cragg-Donald F-statistics of 58 and 18, respectively, which satisfy the rule of thumb of
10 for weak instruments.
   We conduct a placebo test to validate our use of ETC price changes around the ICO


                                              30
date as the instrumental variable (results are not reported to save space). In this test we
re-estimate the IV regressions using ETC price changes two months before the ICO start.
This earlier price change should not aﬀect the amount of money the founders obtain from
the ICO proceeds. Consistent with this intuition, we find marginally significant first stages,
with very low F-statistics, and completely insignificant second stages in this placebo test.
   In Table 7 the OLS estimates (Columns 1, 4, and 7) increase across the three time periods
and are strong and significant throughout, indicating the importance of an IV approach in
this context. The estimated IV eﬀect is larger than the OLS eﬀect in the Bubble period,
indicating that the subset of listings sensitive to the ETC price lead to higher employment
than the average ETC price increase captured by the OLS regression. This could reflect
endogeneity that biases the OLS result downward. Alternatively, the local average treatment
eﬀect for compliers with the instrument may be larger than the population average treatment
eﬀect. As Jiang (2015) explains, this can lead to a larger IV eﬀect even if the exclusion
restriction is satisfied. In our context, it seems possible that some issuers are very strong
or very weak and will have good or bad outcomes regardless of whether their token lists
or not. The IV captures the marginal issuers, whose listing status is sensitive to the ETC
price-change instrument. Their future success depends more on the liquidity enabled by
exchange listing.
   In sum, this section shows that when a token sold in an ICO succeeds in becoming listed on
a cryptocurrency exchange, the liquidity and reputation benefits of listing causally increase
issuer employment Therefore, ICO capital raising and listing help to issuers to achieve real
economic progress in the crypto sector.


4.2    Operating sectors

The remaining analyses examine the relationship between additional issuer or ICO
characteristics and real outcomes.         While the independent variables considered
subsequently do not have the same obvious connections with entrepreneurial finance theory
as those in Tables 4-6, they help to illuminate the ICO market and constitute an important
contribution of this study.
   We begin by addressing ICO business models, or “sectors.” The left three columns of

                                             31
Table 8 present regression estimates of associations between our real ICO outcomes and the
indicator variables for the 12 sectors introduced in Table 3 above.       Based upon these
estimates, three of the less popular sectors stand out as the ones most significantly
associated with successful ICOs: the advertising and loyalty rewards tokens, tokens issued
by organizations developing new blockchain protocols, and tokens connected to smart
contract creation platforms. We also find that tokenizing real assets has a strong positive
relationship with employment, and a negative relationship with failure. This likely is linked
to the increasing apparent viability of what is often called the “security token” business
model (Kharif 2019).Further estimates in the left half of Table 8 indicate that tokens issued
by asset management firms as well as those associated with enterprise blockchains,
healthcare, and identity management have stronger associations with future employment
growth.
   The predictive power of new blockchain protocols support the model in Chod and
Lyandres (2018), which focuses on the tradeoﬀ between diversification and monitoring from
the perspective of a potential investor.    The authors compare the ICO model to the
conventional VC model; while VC investors are poorly diversified, they can monitor the
venture closely and thus reduce underinvestment induced by agency conflicts (since the
entrepreneur chooses the investment level after raising money). Their model predicts that
an ICO will dominate VC when the issuer’s payoﬀs are highly right-skewed. We do not
have a direct measure of issuer uncertainty, but it seems likely that issuers building new
blockchain protocols (rather than issuing an ERC20 token that is part of the Ethereum
blockchain) have more right-skewed payoﬀs.
   This is because new blockchain protocols usually intend to be the infrastructure for
diverse applications. They may be riskier investments than tokens tied to a narrow product
or service, but their potential for value creation seems much larger, because they can become
the infrastructure for potentially widespread and diverse applications. Whereas value has
not accrued to the infrastructure layer of the Internet, the tie between the token and the
network in a blockchain ensures that the two have correlated value, at least in theory. The
potential of a new blockchain is like the value that Facebook created as the underlying
network, relative to the value of applications such as games that developers have built for


                                             32
use on Facebook. Consistent with the hypothesis that new blockchain protocols are likely
to be better suited to ICOs than to VC, Table 3 shows that they comprise six percent of
ICOs compared to two percent of VC-backed blockchain startups, a diﬀerence that is highly
significant.


4.3       ICO design choices

We study the importance of ICO design features in the right three columns of Table 8.
We use only the dependent variable for future employment, as we obtain no significant
results for associations of ICO design features with employment growth or ICO failure. Our
independent variables are from the subsample of 451 tokens that trade for at least 90 days, as
of April, 2018, after achieving an exchange listing. Due to the costs and time required for data
collection, most of these variables have not appeared in other ICO empirical papers except for
the pre-sale indicator, which is used as a control variable by many authors. Column 4 shows
estimates for a model with quarterly and country fixed eﬀects. In Columns 5 and 6 we use
the amount raised in the token sale as a control variable, and this model has a smaller sample
size since this variable is not available for all observations. Among all ICO characteristics,
amount raised is the strongest positive predictor of employment, and negative predictor of
failure. Indeed, none of the ICO characteristics predict failure significantly besides amount
raised.
   One of the most consistent and also unsurprising results in the analysis of ICO design
features is that those ICOs which accept ETH tokens as payment – about two-thirds of the
sample – are associated with higher future employment. The large majority of this subgroup
would use the ERC20 token template, a design choice that many potential investors are
likely to find reassuring due to its wide adoption in the marketplace. ICOs with dynamic
pricing, in which the sale price escalates during the transaction, also are associated with
higher future employment at the issuer. Somewhat surprisingly, tokens that attempt to bar
U.S. investors seem to be more successful as well. For other ICO design characteristics, the
full range of which appear in Table 2, we do not obtain significant estimates, and we exclude
these variables from the model in order to keep it reasonably parsimonious.



                                              33
4.4    Github and social media

In Table 9 we analyze the importance of Github and social media as factors in ICO success.
Publishing code on Github has strong associations with future employment, employment
growth, and avoidance of failure. For example, posting code on Github is associated with a
100 percent employment increase, and a decrease in the probability of failure by 12 percentage
points. We find little evidence in support of the importance of Twitter, although the number
of Twitter followers of the issuer is positively associated with its future employment. Having
a Telegram group is positively associated with employment..
   We gather detailed data about Github for the subsample of 780 tokens for which the
ICO’s source code is posted on Github. As shown in Columns 4 and 8, many of the Github
variables exhibit significant associations with future employment and with failure avoidance
in this subsample, in the directions that we would expect. For instance, future employment is
higher when there are more Github repositories and commits, and when less time has elapsed
since the last commit, or code revision. A longer time since the last revision indicates that
the code is not being actively worked on, and this may signal that the issuer is abandoning
or not prioritizing the project. We obtain symmetric estimates with opposite signs when
failure is the dependent variable, but not all of these results are statistically significant.


4.5    Issuer countries

In Table 10 we study whether an ICO issuer’s real outcomes are more closely associated
with some host countries than others. For each ICO, we read white papers and other
publicity material to identify up to four countries in which the issuer maintains an oﬃce or
the management team resides. The table uses indicator variables for the top nine countries,
as well as an indicator for dispersed ICOs whose issuers are domiciled in more than four
countries.   All regressions include quarterly fixed eﬀects and clustered standard errors.
Columns 2 and 5 also include fixed eﬀects for industry sectors, and columns 3 and 6
include the full range of issuer and manager control variables used earlier in Tables 4, 5, 6
(estimates for those variables are not reported to save space).
   The table contains a striking pattern of estimates, with Switzerland-based issuers having


                                               34
the strongest and most robust relationship with success. Switzerland is home to the so-called
“crypto valley” and is known for lenient regulation of ICOs. The indicator for Singapore,
which has a reputation as the most welcoming ICO nation-state in the Eastern hemisphere,
behaves similarly, although the estimates are smaller. ICOs based in Canada, Hong Kong,
and to an extent Russia and the U.S. are also more likely to achieve significant operational
outcomes in the desired direction. We make no claims about causation, and it is entirely
possible that higher quality ICO issuers gravitate toward those countries with reputations
for thoughtful regulation and well-developed investor markets. However, the data clearly
show that like most investment markets, outcomes from the sales and trading of ICOs are
closely associated with geography, and the location of an ICO provides a transparent signal
about the issuer’s prospects for success.
    A final note about all of the regression results in this paper is that the main findings
are robust to inclusion of alternative independent variables. For example, we continue to
find very strong positive eﬀects of being in Switzerland, of VC investment, and of having
an incentive pool on employment when all the covariates at our disposal are included (i.e.
ICO characteristics, Github measures, the covariates in Tables 4-6). While omitted variable
biases can never be completely eliminated in our empirical approach, robustness of certain
findings to comprehensively including known variables is quite striking given the relatively
small sample and represents an important initial step for research on digital assets.



5     Conclusion
This paper studies the market for ICOs, which grew rapidly from mid-2017 through mid-
2018 and emerged as a vibrant alternative channel for start-up financing. We study a sample
of more than 1,500 ICOs that collectively raise the equivalent of $12.9 billion. Our dataset,
which includes hand collected data about ICO design features and oﬀering mechanisms,
provides new insights into how the market operates and the design tradeoﬀs faced by ICO
issuers.
    We examine ICO success in two dimensions of operational progress, as measured by future
employment (and its growth rate) as well as an indicator for failure of the venture. Tokens


                                             35
designed with a utility feature enabling the access of future products and services appear
to be the most successful in helping the issuer avoid failure and achieve higher levels of
future employment. Other variables that predict future ICO operational success are related
to voluntary disclosure, bonding, certification, promotion through social media platforms,
and code development on Github. Finally, an instrumental variables analysis shows that
successful ICO listing helps cause higher levels of future employment.
   Our paper contributes to a rapidly growing literature about ICOs. While some ICO
success factors reflect classical corporate finance predictions about the importance of reducing
information asymmetry and engaging in bonding, others tend to support new theoretical
models that illuminate ICOs’ unique potential to promote customer adoption and loyalty
while raising capital from a new class of investors.




                                              36
References
Adhami, S., Giudici, G., and Martinazzi, S. (2018). Why do businesses go crypto? An empirical analysis of
  Initial Coin Oﬀerings.

Albrecht, S., Lutz, B., and Neumann, D. (2019). How Sentiment Impacts the Success of Blockchain Startups-
  An Analysis of Social Media Data and Initial Coin Oﬀerings. In HICSS, pages 1–10.

Amsden, R. and Schweizer, D. (2018). Are blockchain crowdsales the new ’Gold Rush’ ? Success determinants
  of initial coin oﬀerings.

An, J., Duan, T., Hou, W., and Xu, X. (2018). Initial Coin Oﬀerings and Entrepreneurial Finance The Role
  of Founder Characteristics. Journal of Alternative Investments, Forthcoming.

Andrés, P. d., Arroyo, D., Correia, R., and Rezola, A. (2019). Regulatory and Market Challenges of Initial
  Coin Oﬀerings. European Corporate Governance Institute-Law Working Paper, (461).

Angrist, J. D. and Pischke, J.-S. (2014). Mastering’metrics: The path from cause to eﬀect. Princeton
  University Press.

Annunziata, F. (2019). Speak, If You Can: What Are You? An Alternative Approach to the Qualification
  of Tokens and Initial Coin Oﬀerings. An Alternative Approach to the Qualification of Tokens and Initial
  Coin Oﬀerings (February 11, 2019).

Ante, L. and Fiedler, I. (2019). Cheap Signals in Security Token Oﬀerings (STOs).

Ante, L., Sandner, P., and Fiedler, I. (2018). Blockchain-Based ICOs: Pure Hype or the Dawn of a New Era
  of Startup Financing? Journal of Risk and Financial Management, 11(4):80.

Baker, B. (2017). Application of the New York BitLicense to Initial Coin Oﬀerings. Available at SSRN
  3319540.

Baker, M. and Gompers, P. A. (2003). The determinants of board structure at the initial public oﬀering.
  The Journal of Law and Economics, 46(2):569–598.

Bakos, Y. and Halaburda, H. (2018). The role of cryptographic tokens and ICOs in fostering platform
  adoption.

Bakos, Y. and Halaburda, H. (2019). Funding New Ventures with Digital Tokens: Due Diligence and Token
  Tradability. Available at SSRN 3335650.

Barsan, I. (2017). Legal Challenges of Initial Coin Oﬀerings (ICP).

Bellavitis, C., Cumming, D., and Vanacker, T. R. (2019). The Cross-Country Diﬀusion of New
  Entrepreneurial Practices: The Case of Initial Coin Oﬀerings. In Academy of Management Proceedings,
  volume 2019, page 13098. Academy of Management Briarcliﬀ Manor, NY 10510.

Benedetti, H. and Kostovetsky, L. (2018). Digital tulips? Returns to investors in initial coin oﬀerings.
  Returns to Investors in Initial Coin Oﬀerings (May 20, 2018).

Bernstein, S., Korteweg, A., and Laws, K. (2017). Attracting Early-Stage Investors: Evidence from a
  Randomized Field Experiment. The Journal of Finance, 72(2):509–538.

Blaseg, D. (2018). Dynamics of voluntary disclosure in the unregulated market for Initial Coin Oﬀerings.

Blemus, S. (2017). Law and Blockchain: A Legal Perspective on Current Regulatory Trends Worldwide.



                                                    37
Blémus, S. and Guegan, D. (2019). Initial Crypto-asset Oﬀerings (ICOs), tokenization and corporate
  governance. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.03340.

Boreiko, D. and Risteski, D. (2019). Who Invests in Token Sales: One-Shot or Repeated Game? Available
  at SSRN 3318781.

Boreiko, D. and Vidusso, G. (2018). New Blockchain Intermediaries: Do ICO Rating Websites Do Their Job
  Well? Available at SSRN 3263393.

Bourveau, T., De George, E. T., Ellahie, A., and Macciocchi, D. (2018). Initial Coin Oﬀerings: Early
  Evidence on the Role of Disclosure in the Unregulated Crypto Market.

Brav, A. and Gompers, P. A. (2003). The role of lockups in initial public oﬀerings. The Review of Financial
  Studies, 16(1):1–29.

Brummer, C., Kiviat, T., and Massari, J. R. (2018). What Should Be Disclosed in an Initial Coin Oﬀering?
  Cryptoassets, Forthcoming.

Burilov, V. (2018). Utility Token Oﬀerings and Crypto Exchange Listings: how regulation can help?
  Available at SSRN 3284049.

Burilov, V. (2019). Regulation of Crypto Tokens and Initial Coin Oﬀerings in the EU: de lege lata and de
  lege ferenda. European Journal of Comparative Law and Governance, 6(2):146–186.

Burns, L. and Moro, A. (2018). What Makes an ICO Successful? An Investigation of the Role of ICO
  Characteristics, Team Quality and Market Sentiment.

Cai, J. and Gomaa, A. (2019). Initial Coin Oﬀering to Finance Venture Capital: A Behavioral Perspective.
  The Journal of Private Equity, 22(3):93–101.

Canidio, A. (2018). Financial incentives for open source development: the case of Blockchain.

Caponera, A., Gola, C., et al. (2019). Economic and regulatory aspects of crypto-assets. Technical report,
  Bank of Italy, Economic Research and International Relations Area.

Catalini, C. and Gans, J. S. (2018). Initial coin oﬀerings and the value of crypto tokens.

Cerchiello, P., Tasca, P., and Toma, A. M. (2019). ICO Success Drivers: A Textual and Statistical Analysis.
  The Journal of Alternative Investments, 21(4):13–25.

Chanson, M., Risius, M., and Wortmann, F. (2018). Initial Coin Oﬀerings (ICOs): An Introduction to the
  Novel Funding Mechanism Based on Blockchain Technology.

Chen, H., Gompers, P., Kovner, A., and Lerner, J. (2010). Buy local? The geography of venture capital.
  Journal of Urban Economics, 67(1):90–102.

Chen, K. (2019). Information asymmetry in initial coin oﬀerings (ICOs): Investigating the eﬀects of multiple
  channel signals. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 36:100858.

Chiu, I. H. (2018). Decoupling Tokens From Trading: Reaching Beyond Investment Regulation for Regulatory
  Policy in Initial Coin Oﬀerings.

Chiu, I. H. and Greene, E. (2018). Can ICO Markets Oﬀer Insights into Marketising Sustainable or Social
  Finance? Proposals for a Revolutionary Regulatory Framework. Proposals for a Revolutionary Regulatory
  Framework (November 26, 2018).

Chod, J. and Lyandres, E. (2018). A Theory of ICOs: Diversification, Agency, and Asymmetric Information.
  Unpublished manuscript, Boston College.


                                                     38
Chohan, U. W. (2019). Cryptocurrencies and Financial Conduct. Notes on the 21st Century.

Cohney, S., Hoﬀman, D. A., Sklaroﬀ, J., and Wishnick, D. A. (2018). Coin-operated capitalism.

Collomb, A., De Filippi, P., and Sok, K. (2018). From IPOs to ICOs: The Impact of Blockchain Technology
  on Financial Regulation.

Cong, L. W., Li, Y., and Wang, N. (2018). Tokenomics: Dynamic Adoption and Valuation.

Dambre, R. (2018). Initial Coin Oﬀerings and US Securities Regulation: Challenges and Perspectives.

Davydiuk, T., Gupta, D., and Rosen, S. (2018). De-crypto-ing signals in initial coin oﬀerings: Evidence of
  rational token retention. Available at SSRN 3286835.

De Jong, A., Roosenboom, P., and van der Kolk, T. (2018). What Determines Success in Initial Coin
  Oﬀerings? Available at SSRN 3250035.

Dell’Erba, M. (2018). Initial Coin Oﬀerings. A Primer. The First Response of Regulatory Authorities. NYU
  Journal of Law & Business, 14:1109.

Demers, E. and Lewellen, K. (2003). The marketing role of IPOs: Evidence from internet stocks. Journal of
  Financial Economics, 68(3):413–437.

Deng, X., Lee, Y. T., and Zhong, Z. (2018). Decrypting Coin Winners: Disclosure Quality, Governance
  Mechanism and Team Networks. Governance Mechanism and Team Networks (September 25, 2018).

Derrien, F. and Womack, K. L. (2003). Auctions vs. bookbuilding and the control of underpricing in hot
  IPO markets. The Review of Financial Studies, 16(1):31–61.

Dittmar, R. F. and Wu, D. A. (2018). Returns to Initial Coin Oﬀerings: An Empirical Examination. Available
  at SSRN 3259182.

Drobetz, W., Momtaz, P. P., and Schröder, H. (2018). Investor Sentiment and Initial Coin Oﬀerings. Available
  at SSRN 3262980.

Easterbrook, F. H. and Fischel, D. R. (1984). Mandatory disclosure and the protection of investors. Virginia
  Law Review, pages 669–715.

Ellis, K., Michaely, R., and O’Hara, M. (2000). When the underwriter is the market maker: An examination
   of trading in the IPO aftermarket. The Journal of Finance, 55(3):1039–1074.

Enyi, J. and Le, N. (2017). The legal nature of cryptocurrencies in the US and the applicable rules.

Essaghoolian, N. (2019). Initial Coin Oﬀerings: Emerging Technology’s Fundraising Innovation. UCLA L.
  Rev., 66:294.

Ewens, M., Nanda, R., and Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2018). Cost of experimentation and the evolution of venture
  capital. Journal of Financial Economics, 128(3):422–442.

Fahlenbrach, R. and Frattaroli, M. (2019). ICO investors.

Felix, T. (2018). Underpricing in the Cryptocurrency World: Evidence from Initial Coin Oﬀerings.

Feng, C., Li, N., Lu, B., Wong, M., and Zhang, M. (2018). Initial Coin Oﬀerings, Blockchain Technology,
  and White Paper Disclosures.




                                                    39
Fenu, G., Marchesi, L., Marchesi, M., and Tonelli, R. (2018). The ICO phenomenon and its relationships
  with ethereum smart contract environment. In Blockchain Oriented Software Engineering (IWBOSE),
  2018 International Workshop on, pages 26–32. IEEE.

Fisch, C. (2018). Initial coin oﬀerings (icos) to finance new ventures: An exploratory study.

Fisch, C., Masiak, C., Vismara, S., and Block, J. (2019). Motives and profiles of ICO investors. Journal of
   Business Research.

Fisch, C. and Momtaz, P. P. (2019). Venture Capital and the Performance of Blockchain Technology-Based
   Firms: Evidence from Initial Coin Oﬀerings (ICOs). Available at SSRN 3427025.

Flood, J. and McCullagh, A. (2019). Treasury Consultation Paper on ICOs in Australia: The Technology,
  The Market, and The Regulation of ICOs. The Market, and The Regulation of ICOs (February 27, 2019).

Flood, J. and Robb, L. (2017). Trust, Anarcho-Capitalism, Blockchain and Initial Coin Oﬀerings.

Florysiak, D. and Schandlbauer, A. (2018). The Information Content of ICO White Papers. Available at
  SSRN 3265007.

Frick, T. A. (2019). Virtual and cryptocurrencies - regulatory and anti-money laundering approaches in the
   European Union and in Switzerland. In ERA Forum, pages 1–14. Springer.

Gan, J. R., Tsoukalas, G., and Netessine, S. (2019). Inventory, speculators and initial coin oﬀerings. The
  Wharton School Research Paper.

Garratt, R. and van Oordt, M. R. (2019). Entrepreneurial Incentives and the Role of Initial Coin Oﬀerings.
  Available at SSRN.

Gompers, P., Gornall, W., Kaplan, S. N., and Strebulaev, I. A. (2016). How Do Venture Capitalists Make
  Decisions? National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gompers, P. A. (1995). Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture capital. The Journal of
  Finance, 50(5):1461–1489.

Gompers, P. A. and Wang, S. Q. (2017). Diversity in innovation. Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Gornall, W. and Strebulaev, I. A. (2017). Squaring venture capital valuations with reality. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gürcan, B. (2018). The Legal Framework of the Cryptocurrencies and Initial Coin Oﬀerings (ICOs). Available
  at SSRN 3371443.

Gurrea-Martínez, A. and Remolina, N. (2018). The Law and Finance of Initial Coin Oﬀerings.

Gutfleisch, G. (2018). Prospects for Future EU Legislation on Crowdfunding and Initial Coin Oﬀerings.
  Banking & Financial Services Policy Report, 37:4–13.

Hacker, P. and Thomale, C. (2018). Crypto-Securities Regulation: ICOs, Token Sales and Cryptocurrencies
  under EU Financial Law. European Company and Financial Law Review, 15(4):645–696.

Hall, B. H. and Lerner, J. (2010). The financing of R&D and innovation. In Handbook of the Economics of
  Innovation, volume 1, pages 609–639. Elsevier.

Hamrick, J., Rouhi, F., Mukherjee, A., Feder, A., Gandal, N., Moore, T., and Vasek, M. (2018). The
  Economics of Cryptocurrency Pump and Dump Schemes.


                                                     40
Hansmann, H. (1996). The Ownership of Enterprise. Harvard University Press.

Healy, P. M. and Palepu, K. G. (2001). Information asymmetry, corporate disclosure, and the capital markets:
  A review of the empirical disclosure literature. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 31(1-3):405–440.

Hellmann, T. and Puri, M. (2002). Venture capital and the professionalization of start-up firms: Empirical
  evidence. The Journal of Finance, 57(1):169–197.

Hochberg, Y. V. (2011). Venture capital and corporate governance in the newly public firm. Review of
  Finance, 16(2):429–480.

Holoweiko, S. (2018). What is an ICO? Defining a Security on the Blockchain. Defining a Security on the
  Blockchain (December 18, 2018).

Howell, S. (2019). Reducing Information Frictions in Venture Capital: Evidence from New Venture
  Competitions. NBER Working Paper 23874.

Hu, A., Parlour, C. A., and Rajan, U. (2018). Cryptocurrencies: Stylized Facts on a New Investible
  Instrument.

Huang, W., Meoli, M., and Vismara, S. (2018). The Geography of Initial Coin Oﬀerings.

Hughes, R. and Wang, K. (2019). Tokens and Crowdfunding: A Perfect Match? Available at SSRN 3394233.

Jiang, W. (2015). Have Instrumental Variables Brought Us Closer to the Truth. The Review of Corporate
   Finance Studies.

Johnson, W. C. and Yi, S. (2019). Governance in the Absence of Regulation: A Study of Initial Coin
  Oﬀerings. Available at SSRN 3337096.

Kaal, W. and Dell’Erba, M. (2017). Initial Coin Oﬀerings: Emerging Practices, Risk Factors, and Red Flags.

Kaal, W. A. (2018). Initial Coin Oﬀerings: the Top 25 Jurisdictions and Their Comparative Regulatory
  Responses.

Kaplan, S. N., Sensoy, B. A., and Strömberg, P. (2009). Should investors bet on the jockey or the horse?
  Evidence from the evolution of firms from early business plans to public companies. The Journal of
  Finance, 64(1):75–115.

Kassibrakis, S. and Malamud, S. (2019). Pricing Tokens on Industrial Production. Available at SSRN
  3363462.

Kharif, O. (2019). Security Tokens Are the New Crypto But You Probably Cant Aﬀord Them. The
  Washington Post. February 11.

Klöhn, L., Parhofer, N., and Resas, D. (2018). Initial Coin Oﬀerings (ICOs): Economics and Regulation.
  Available at SSRN 3290882.

Koeppl, T. V. and Kronick, J. (2018). Tales from the Crypt-How to Regulate Initial Coin Oﬀerings. CD
  Howe Institute Commentary, 525.

Kutsuna, K. and Smith, R. (2003). Why does book building drive out auction methods of IPO issuance?
  Evidence from Japan. Review of Financial Studies, 17(4):1129–1166.

Lausen, J. (2019). Regulating Initial Coin Oﬀerings? A Taxonomy of Crypto-Assets. In Proceedings of the
  27th European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Stockholm & Uppsala, Sweden.



                                                    41
Lee, J., Li, T., and Shin, D. (2018). The Wisdom of Crowds and Information Cascades in Fintech: Evidence
  from Initial Coin Oﬀerings.

Lee, J. and Parlour, C. A. (2018). Crowdfunding, Initial Coin Oﬀerings, and Consumer Surplus. Available
  at SSRN 3300297.

Lerner, J. and Schoar, A. (2005). Does legal enforcement aﬀect financial transactions? The contractual
  channel in private equity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1):223–246.

Li, J. and Mann, W. (2018). Initial coin oﬀering and platform building.

Li, J. and Mann, W. (2019). Initial coin oﬀerings: Current research and future directions.

Li, J. and Yi, G. (2019). Toward a factor structure in crypto asset returns. The Journal of Alternative
   Investments, 21(4):56–66.

Li, T., Shin, D., and Wang, B. (2018). Cryptocurrency pump-and-dump schemes. Available at SSRN.

Liebau, D. and Schueﬀel, P. (2019). Crypto-Currencies and ICOs: Are They Scams? An Empirical Study.
   An Empirical Study (January 23, 2019).

Lo, Y. C. and Medda, F. (2019). Assets on the Blockchain: An Empirical Study of Tokenomics. Available
  at SSRN 3309686.

Loughran, T. and Ritter, J. R. (2002). Why don’t issuers get upset about leaving money on the table in
  IPOs? The Review of Financial Studies, 15(2):413–444.

Lu, F. (2018). Numeraire Eﬀect, Anchoring, and Technological Literacy in Initial Coin Oﬀering. Anchoring,
  and Technological Literacy in Initial Coin Oﬀering (September 24, 2018).

Lyandres, E., Palazzo, B., and Rabetti, D. (2018). Are Tokens Securities? An Anatomy of Initial Coin
  Oﬀerings. An Anatomy of Initial Coin Oﬀerings (November 18, 2018).

Maas, T. (2019). Initial Coin Oﬀerings: When Are Tokens Securities in the EU and US? Available at SSRN
  3337514.

Maksimovic, V. and Pichler, P. (2001). Technological innovation and initial public oﬀerings. The Review of
  Financial Studies, 14(2):459–494.

Masiak, C., Block, J. H., Masiak, T., Neuenkirch, M., and Pielen, K. N. (2019). Initial coin oﬀerings (ICOs):
  market cycles and relationship with bitcoin and ether. Small Business Economics, pages 1–18.

Maume, P. (2019). Initial Coin Oﬀerings and EU Prospectus Disclosure. Forthcoming, European Business
  Law Review.

McCullagh, A. and Flood, J.      ICOs and cryptotokens: A new fundraising asset class - an australian
  perspective.

Mendelson, M. (2019). From Initial Coin Oﬀerings to Security Tokens: A US Federal Securities Law Analysis.
  Stan. Tech. L. Rev., 22:52.

Mollick, E. (2014). The dynamics of crowdfunding: An exploratory study. Journal of Business Venturing,
  29(1):1–16.

Momtaz, P. P. (2018a). Initial coin oﬀerings.

Momtaz, P. P. (2018b). Initial coin oﬀerings, asymmetric information, and loyal CEOs. Technical report,
  Working paper, University of California Los Angeles.


                                                     42
Momtaz, P. P. (2018c). Token Sales and Initial Coin Oﬀerings: Introduction. Available at SSRN 3277707.

Momtaz, P. P. (2019). Entrepreneurial Finance and Moral Hazard: Evidence from Token Oﬀerings. Available
  at SSRN.

Ofir, M. and Sadeh, I. (2019). ICO vs IPO: Empirical Findings, Market Frictions and the Appropriate
  Regulatory Framework. Market Frictions and the Appropriate Regulatory Framework (February 19, 2019).

Philippi, S., Schuhmacher, M., and Bastian, N. (2019). Quality Signals in Initial Coin Oﬀerings. In Academy
  of Management Proceedings, volume 2019, page 10688. Academy of Management Briarcliﬀ Manor, NY
  10510.

Pilkington, M. (2018). The Emerging ICO Landscape-Some Financial and Regulatory Standpoints.

Popper, N. (2016). Digital gold: Bitcoin and the inside story of the misfits and millionaires trying to reinvent
  money. HarperCollins.

Preston, J. (2017). Initial coin oﬀerings: Innovation, democratization and the SEC. Duke L. & Tech. Rev.,
  16:318.

Rhue, L. (2018a). Is Sunlight an Eﬀective Disinfectant? Transparency, Reputation, and Perceived Trust of
  Ethereum Tokens.

Rhue, L. (2018b). Trust is All You Need: An Empirical Exploration of Initial Coin Oﬀerings (ICOs) and
  ICO Reputation Scores.

Robinson, R. (2017). The new digital wild West: Regulating the explosion of initial coin oﬀerings.

Rodrigues, U. (2019). Financial Contracting with the Crowd. Emory Law Journal, Forthcoming.

Rohr, J. and Wright, A. (2017). Blockchain-Based Token Sales, Initial Coin Oﬀerings, and the
  Democratization of Public Capital Markets.

Sherman, A. E. and Titman, S. (2002). Building the IPO order book: underpricing and participation limits
  with costly information. Journal of Financial Economics, 65(1):3–29.

Sherman, N. J. (2018). A Behavioral Economics Approach to Regulating Initial Coin Oﬀerings. Geo. LJ
  Online, 107:17.

Shroﬀ, N. and Venkataraman, P. (2017). Regulating ICO Tokens and Cryptocurrency in India.

Smith, B. (2019). The Life-Cycle and Character of Crypto-Assets: A Framework for Regulation and Investor
  Protection. Journal of Accounting and Finance, 19(1).

Sockin, M. and Xiong, W. (2018). A Model of Cryptocurrencies.

Stanley, M. (2019). The Application of Behavioral Heuristics to Initial Coin Oﬀerings Valuation and
  Investment. The Journal of The British Blockchain Association, 2(1):7776.

Stastny, P. (2018). Underpricing Eﬀects in ICOs.

Travis, H. (2019). Common Law and Statutory Remedies for Insider Trading in Cryptocurrencies. In AALS
  2019 Annual Meeting Discussion Group Paper on Insider Trading and Cryptoassets.

Vandezande, N. (2019). Regulating initial coin oﬀerings and DAO tokens under the EU’s financial instruments
  framework. Law and Financial Markets Review, pages 1–6.

Venegas, P. (2017). Initial Coin Oﬀering (ICO) Risk, Value and Cost in Blockchain Trustless Crypto Markets.


                                                      43
Verstein, A. (2019). Crypto Assets and Insider Trading Law’s Domain. Iowa Law Review, Forthcoming.

Waxenbaum, S. (2019). The SEC and ICOs: Connections Between Digital Assets and Citrus Groves.
 Available at SSRN 3385064.

Wu, S.-H., Sung, H.-C., Cheng, T.-C., et al. (2019). Measuring ICO Performance Indicators: An Empirical
 Study Via White Papers. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency
 (ICBC), pages 128–132. IEEE.

Yuryev, G. (2018). What can explain the performance of Initial Coin Oﬀerings? Master’s thesis, University
  of Stavanger, Norway.

Zetzsche, D. A., Buckley, R. P., Arner, D. W., and Föhr, L. (2017). The ICO Gold Rush: It’s a Scam, It’s
  a Bubble, It’s a Super Challenge for Regulators. University of Luxembourg Law Working Paper, (11).

Zhang, A., Raveenthiran, A., Mukai, J., Naeem, R., Dhuna, A., Parveen, Z., and Kim, H. (2018). The
  Regulation Paradox of Initial Coin Oﬀerings: A Case Study Approach. Available at SSRN 3284337.

Zingales, L. (1995). Insider ownership and the decision to go public. The Review of Economic Studies,
   62(3):425–448.




                                                   44
                                    Table 1: ICO issuer characteristics


                                             Panel 1: Sample summary
                                                                            N
                              Total sample                                 1,520
                              Completed ICO                                1,266
                              Listed on exchange                           672


                                        Panel 2: ICO Success Measures
                                                         N         Mean         S.d.       Min     Median      Max
   Employment (as of November 2018)                    1520        12.56        35.22      0.00     3.00      716.00
   Employment (as of July 2019)                        1520        14.27        42.15       0         4       1096.00
                            ⇣            ⌘
                              EmpNov2018
   Employment growth = log EmpJuly2019                 1520        0.009        1.17       -3.97      0         5.6
   Issuer failed (as of Nov 2018)                      1520         0.30


                                        Panel 3: Issuer characteristics
                                                             N        Mean         S.d.     Min    Median Max
       Amount raised (USD millions)                          580      22.17        176.87 0.00     7.42     4234.28
       Days from ICO start to first trading date             596      67.15        82.07    0.00   44.00    1071
       Token has apparent utility value                     1,520     0.53
       Had a pre-sale                                       1,520     0.43
       Had a white paper                                    1,520     0.86
       Incentive set aside                                  1,520     0.43
       Founder token vesting schedule                       1,520     0.22
       Had a budget for use of proceeds                     1,520     0.42
       Venture capital-backed                               1,520     0.09
       Stated goal to raise                                 1,520     0.51


Note: This table shows overview statistics about our sample of 1,520 initial coin oﬀerings. Panel 1 enumerates
our whole sample, the number that were completed (i.e., ICO was not canceled mid-sale), and the number
that listed on a cryptocurrency exchange. Subsequently where the sample is smaller than 1,520, data were
not available for the remaining ICOs. Panel 2 summarizes the proxies for ICO success. Employment is
the number of people who identify themselves as employees on LinkedIn or the number of people listed as
employees on the website⇣    where no⌘ LinkedIn profile was available. Employment growth is the diﬀerence in
                          EmpNov2018
logs, specifically: log EmpJuly2019 . We use this measure both because it linearized the raw diﬀerence and
because we use log employment in the analysis. We classify an ICO as failed if the issuer does not have an
active website, the token is not listed on CoinMarketCap, and Internet searches yield no other indication
that it still exists. Panel 3 describes key characteristics we collected about issuers. For all panels, data were
gathered from issuer websites, technical white papers, news articles, and LinkedIn.



                                                       45
                               Panel 4: Issuer founder/CEO characteristics
                                                                                 N      Mean
               Male                                                             1,017   0.96
               Professional background in crypto                                964     0.28
               Professional background in financial services                    964     0.33
               Professional background in computer science                      964     0.48
               Professional background in entrepreneurship                      964     0.57


                          Panel 5: Issuer Github and social media characteristics
                                                      N     Mean       S.d.     Min     Median     Max
   Has Github source code repository                1520       0.52
   Number of repositories                            812    17.00     36.86     0.00       5        610
   Main repository: Number of commits (000s)         783       2.18    7.65     0.00     0.092    140.31
   Main repository: Number of branches               783    11.94     51.32      1         2        946
   Main repository: Number of releases               783    80.83     1410.97    0         0       39214
   Main repository: Number of contributors           783    44.93     138.15     0         3       2224
   Main repository: Months between last              783    15.73     14.07     0.03     15.87    122.93
   commit and July 10, 2019
   Has Telegram group                                451       0.83
   Number of Telegram group members (000s)           357       5.09    9.30     0.01     2.03      88.34
   Has Twitter page                                  451       0.97
   Number of Twitter followers (000s)                431    22.21     53.40     0.01     6.76     741.00


Note: Panel 4 contains characteristics of the CEO or lead founder of issuers, based on data from LinkedIn
and issuer websites. Panel 5 contains data about the issuer’s Github presence and about the issuer’s social
media presence, gathered from Github, Telegram, and Twitter. Github is a web-based repository hosting
service for, primarily, computer code. Repositories contain public source code about a project. The main
repository contains the token/ICO contract. The platform enables open source development, version control,
and broad-based collaboration. The remaining rows include only those ICOs with a Github source code
repository. Telegram is a cloud-based mobile and desktop messaging application with a focus on security
and speed. Accounts are tied only to phone numbers. Its “group” chats permit 100,000 members, and
enable simple message broadcasting. Telegram’s own source code is publicly available and, to some degree,
open-source. As a result of this and perceived independence from large companies and governments, it has
become a preferred platform for many in the crypto community. Data on social media (Telegram, Twitter)
were gathered for a subset of 450 ICOs that listed on an exchange and traded for at least 90 days as of April
2018.




                                                     46
                           Table 2: Token and ICO process characteristics


                                                         N     Mean    S.d.   Min    Median Max
   Token on Ethereum blockchain                          451   0.73
   Token on Waves blockchain                             451   0.05
   Airdrop (token price was $0)                          451   0.14
   Capped (limit on number tokens sold)                  451   0.76
   US investors barred                                   451   0.19
   Future token creation                                 451   0.14
   Dynamic pricing (price changes during ICO)            451   0.34
   Sensitive pricing (price changes during ICO reflect   451   0.09
   demand)
   Auction pricing                                       451   0.05
   Accepted USD as payment                               451   0.10
   Accepted Euros as payment                             451   0.03
   Accepted Bitcoin as payment                           451   0.41
   Accepted Ether as payment                             451   0.66
   Accepted XRP as payment                               451   0.02
   Accepted Litecoin as payment                          451   0.09
   Accepted Waves as payment                             451   0.04


   Met goal if had stated goal                           419   0.52
   Amount raised less stated goal, if any (USD mill)     419   -8.45   36     -279     0     160


   Fraction total token supply sold in ICO               283   0.53    0.32   0.00   0.54    1.00
   Duration of ICO in days                               367   40.0    89.5   0.00   28.0    948
   Number of currencies accepted                         359   2.07    1.76   1.00   1.00    15.0


Note: This table contains summary statistics about the token and ICO process. Data were gathered from
issuer websites, technical white papers, news articles, and LinkedIn.




                                                    47
                            Table 3: Exchange-traded ICO issuer sectors and VC-backed blockchain startup sectors


                                                                  ICO issuers                VC-backed blockchain startups


                                                        Total #         Amount raised            Total #      Amount raised                P-values


                                                       N     Share       N      Ave $        N      Share      N    Ave $          Shares     Amt raised


        Ads, rewards                                   51    0.05       31      18.6         20      0.03     16     4.45           0.07         0.01
        Asset mgmnt & other crypto fin services       174    0.15       92      20.2         132     0.19     109    4.04           0.05         0.00
        Data storage/computing                         67    0.06       42      18.0         38      0.05     30     4.53           0.65         0.04
        Enterprise, health, identity                   73    0.06       26      12.3         112     0.16     83     3.52           0.00         0.00
        Gaming, entertainment, messaging              153    0.14       66      9.12         31      0.04     23     15.2           0.00         0.42
48




        New blockchain protocol                        67    0.06       41      123          17      0.02     15     20.7           0.00         0.55
        Non-crypto marketplace/service                206    0.18       103     11.7         41      0.06     27     6.69           0.00         0.10
        Payments, wallets                             106    0.09       50      18.6         194     0.28     165    4.85           0.00         0.00
        Prediction markets and gambling                23    0.02       16      7.92         5       0.01      3     6.23           0.03         0.77
        Smart contract creation                        56    0.05       28      18.4         11      0.02      7     1.18           0.00         0.23
        Tokenizing real assets                         46    0.04       13      11.3         9       0.01      7     2.32           0.00         0.22
        Trading and crypto exchanges                  106    0.09       42      15.0         89      0.13     67     3.86           0.03         0.00
        Unknown/Other                                 392    0.25       30       4.9         72      .09      58     7.06           0.00         0.58
        All                                           1520              580     22.2         771              610    5.40                        0.02


     Note: The left columns of this table describe sectors of ICO issuers. The sector categories were determined after researching a subset of sixty ICOs
     in detail. Data for the issuers is gathered from white papers and websites. The right part of the panel, “VC-backed blockchain startups”, includes the
     771 blockchain startups that received seed or VC investment as of April, 2018. They have been assigned where possible to one of the 12 sectors. No
     sector applied for 72 (“Other”). “$ amt raised” indicates the amount of financing in nominal U.S. dollars. Data for the VC-backed startups is from
     CB Insights. “N with amt raised” is the number of issuers where we observe the amount raised.
            Table 4: Relationship Between Issuer Characteristics and Employment


        Dependent variable:                 Employment                 Old           Employment
                                                                    Employment         Growth

                                    (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)
        Utility value            0.308⇤⇤⇤    0.341⇤⇤⇤    0.343⇤⇤⇤    0.184⇤⇤       0.125⇤    0.146⇤⇤
                                  (0.102)     (0.106)     (0.106)    (0.078)      (0.068)    (0.060)
        White paper                0.185       0.200       0.210     0.341⇤⇤        -0.156     -0.123
                                  (0.190)    (0.170)      (0.167)    (0.154)      (0.113)    (0.117)
        Incentive pool            0.177⇤       0.148      0.192⇤     0.251⇤⇤⇤       -0.074     -0.050
                                  (0.088)    (0.094)      (0.093)    (0.077)      (0.094)    (0.095)
        Insider vesting          0.230⇤⇤     0.228⇤⇤     0.230⇤⇤     0.265⇤⇤⇤       -0.034     -0.062
                                  (0.105)     (0.104)     (0.096)     (0.081)     (0.056)    (0.060)
        Budget                    0.212⇤     0.219⇤⇤     0.217⇤⇤⇤      0.198         0.014     0.024
                                  (0.102)     (0.092)     (0.072)     (0.117)     (0.058)    (0.084)
        VC equity                0.854⇤⇤⇤    0.838⇤⇤⇤    0.809⇤⇤⇤    0.603⇤⇤⇤     0.251⇤⇤⇤   0.289⇤⇤⇤
                                  (0.125)     (0.134)     (0.130)     (0.129)     (0.080)    (0.085)
        Male                     -0.507⇤⇤      -0.388    -0.440⇤       -0.051       -0.456   -0.448⇤
                                  (0.205)     (0.249)     (0.221)     (0.299)     (0.305)    (0.228)
        Crypto exper.              0.083        0.079      0.024       -0.109      0.192⇤    0.180⇤⇤
                                  (0.111)     (0.122)     (0.106)     (0.118)     (0.092)    (0.082)
        Finance exper.            0.195⇤⇤    0.183⇤⇤       0.115        0.109        0.086     0.061
                                  (0.077)     (0.091)    (0.078)      (0.124)     (0.132)    (0.117)
        Comp. sci. exper.        0.252⇤⇤⇤    0.239⇤⇤⇤    0.238⇤⇤⇤    0.206⇤⇤⇤       0.046      0.071
                                  (0.031)     (0.082)     (0.040)     (0.047)      (0.055)    (0.068)
        Entrep. exper.           0.397⇤⇤⇤    0.387⇤⇤⇤    0.412⇤⇤⇤    0.281⇤⇤⇤       0.116      0.145
                                  (0.107)     (0.098)     (0.085)     (0.078)      (0.100)    (0.106)
        Observations                961          961        940          961          961       940
        R2                         0.168        0.244      0.204        0.185        0.058     0.089
        Quarter Start FE             Y                       Y            Y            Y          Y
        Sector & Country FE                                  Y                                    Y
        Week Start FE                           Y

Note: This table contains regression estimates of the relationship between issuer characteristics and real
outcomes. The dependent variable in Columns 1-3 is the log of one plus number of employees, which is
the number of individuals that identify as being employed by the issuer on LinkedIn as of July 2019. The
dependent variable in Column 4 is the same but collected as of November 2018. The dependent variable
in Columns 5-6 is the diﬀerence in log employment between November 2018 and July 2019. Utility value
indicates that the token is intended to have consumptive value. The following five variables are issuer and
token contract characteristics. Incentive pool means that a fraction of tokens are set aside to compensate
future external developers or contributors to the network. The final five variables refer to the issuer’s main
founder or CEO, if it has one. Quarter/week start fixed eﬀects control for the calendar quarter or week in
which the ICO began. Sector fixed eﬀects control for each of 12 mutually exclusive sectors. Country fixed
eﬀects control for the nine most common countries as well as a dummy for the issuer being dispersed across
at least five countries. Standard errors clustered by quarter (for models with quarter FE) or by week (for
models with week FE) appear in parentheses.
⇤
  p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01




                                                        49
            Table 5: Relationship between Issuer Characteristics and Issuer Failure


                    Dependent variable:                         Failure

                                                  (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)
                    Utility value            -0.070⇤⇤⇤    -0.755⇤⇤⇤    -0.049⇤⇤   -0.097⇤⇤⇤
                                               (0.019)      (0.258)     (0.018)     (0.028)
                    White paper               -0.073⇤⇤       -0.438   -0.091⇤⇤⇤      -0.081
                                               (0.029)      (0.277)     (0.027)     (0.053)
                    Incentive pool           -0.080⇤⇤⇤    -1.017⇤⇤⇤   -0.076⇤⇤⇤   -0.078⇤⇤⇤
                                               (0.017)      (0.350)     (0.018)     (0.023)
                    Insider vesting           -0.032⇤⇤     -0.978⇤⇤    -0.029⇤⇤    -0.032⇤⇤
                                               (0.015)      (0.423)     (0.012)     (0.013)
                    Budget                   -0.058⇤⇤⇤    -0.770⇤⇤⇤    -0.050⇤⇤   -0.062⇤⇤⇤
                                               (0.019)      (0.289)     (0.020)     (0.018)
                    VC equity                -0.079⇤⇤⇤                -0.063⇤⇤⇤   -0.067⇤⇤⇤
                                               (0.013)                  (0.013)     (0.013)
                    Male                       0.059⇤        0.661        0.036       0.051
                                               (0.030)     (0.617)      (0.036)     (0.041)
                    Crypto exper.              -0.025⇤      -0.360     -0.029⇤⇤      -0.024
                                               (0.014)     (0.245)      (0.013)     (0.017)
                    Finance exper.              -0.019      -0.294       -0.002     -0.032⇤
                                               (0.014)     (0.233)      (0.014)     (0.018)
                    Comp. sci. exper.        -0.046⇤⇤⇤    -0.770⇤⇤⇤   -0.049⇤⇤⇤   -0.050⇤⇤⇤
                                               (0.013)     (0.192)      (0.013)     (0.018)
                    Entrep. exper.              -0.029      -0.397       -0.028    -0.042⇤⇤
                                               (0.026)     (0.357)      (0.025)     (0.020)
                    Observations                  961         954          940         961
                    R2                           0.152                    0.179      0.242
                    Pseudo R2                              0.215
                    Quarter Start FE            Y            Y            Y
                    Sector & Country FE                                   Y
                    Week Start FE                                                    Y

Note: This table contains regression estimates of the relationship between issuer characteristics and failure.
The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the issuer failed, which means that the issuer does not
have an active website, the token is not listed on CoinMarketCap, and Internet searches yield no other
indication that it still exists as of November 2018. Column 2 uses a logit model. Utility value indicates that
the token is intended to have consumptive value. The following five variables are issuer and token contract
characteristics. Incentive pool means that a fraction of tokens are set aside to compensate future external
developers or contributors to the network. The final five variables refer to the issuer’s main founder or CEO,
if it has one. Quarter/week start fixed eﬀects control for the calendar quarter or week in which the ICO
began. Sector fixed eﬀects control for each of 12 mutually exclusive sectors. Country fixed eﬀects control
for the nine most common countries as well as a dummy for the issuer being dispersed across at least five
countries. Standard errors clustered by quarter (for models with quarter FE) or by week (for models with
week FE) appear in parentheses.
⇤
   p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01




                                                     50
      Table 6: Relationship between Issuer Characteristics and Listing on an Exchange


                      Dependent variable:                 Listing on an Exchange

                                                   (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)
                      Utility value               0.052        0.307   0.059⇤⇤       0.050
                                                (0.034)      (0.193)    (0.024)     (0.037)
                      White paper                 0.028       0.278      0.057       0.026
                                                (0.050)      (0.262)    (0.054)     (0.062)
                      Incentive pool           0.095⇤⇤      0.460⇤⇤     0.090⇤     0.130⇤⇤⇤
                                                (0.042)      (0.218)    (0.045)     (0.024)
                      Insider vesting          0.180⇤⇤⇤     0.925⇤⇤⇤   0.177⇤⇤⇤    0.160⇤⇤⇤
                                                (0.025)      (0.144)    (0.022)     (0.038)
                      Budget                      0.030        0.149    0.030⇤       0.036
                                                (0.021)      (0.121)    (0.015)     (0.041)
                      VC equity                0.096⇤⇤      0.541⇤⇤     0.094⇤     0.113⇤⇤
                                                (0.042)      (0.233)    (0.050)     (0.045)
                      Male                       -0.020       -0.112     -0.039      0.008
                                                (0.093)      (0.476)    (0.090)     (0.078)
                      Crypto exper.            0.079⇤⇤      0.429⇤⇤⇤   0.066⇤⇤       0.059
                                                (0.031)      (0.158)    (0.030)     (0.036)
                      Finance exper.           0.056⇤⇤      0.281⇤⇤⇤   0.057⇤⇤⇤      0.038
                                                (0.020)      (0.105)    (0.019)     (0.045)
                      Comp. sci. exper.        0.090⇤⇤⇤     0.488⇤⇤⇤   0.083⇤⇤⇤    0.068⇤⇤
                                                (0.018)      (0.043)    (0.018)     (0.033)
                      Entrep. exper.             0.049       0.279⇤       0.045      0.033
                                                (0.033)      (0.166)   (0.032)      (0.027)
                      Observations                 961          900        940        961
                      R2                          0.224                   0.247      0.304
                      Pseudo R2                              0.163
                      Quarter Start FE            Y            Y          Y
                      Sector & Country FE                                 Y
                      Week Start FE                                                   Y

Note: This table contains regression estimates of the relationship between issuer characteristics and listing on
an exchange. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether or not the issuer listed on a cryptocurrency
exchange as of November 2018. Column 2 uses a logit model. Utility value indicates that the token is
intended to have consumptive value. The following five variables are issuer and token contract characteristics.
Incentive pool means that a fraction of tokens are set aside to compensate future external developers or
contributors to the network. The final five variables refer to the issuer’s main founder or CEO, if it has one.
Quarter/week start fixed eﬀects control for the calendar quarter or week in which the ICO began. Sector
fixed eﬀects control for each of 12 mutually exclusive sectors. Country fixed eﬀects control for the nine most
common countries as well as a dummy for the issuer being dispersed across at least five countries. Standard
errors clustered by quarter (for models with quarter FE) or by week (for models with week FE) appear in
parentheses.
⇤
  p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01




                                                      51
                                       Table 7: Eﬀect of Listing Status on Future Employment (IV using ETC)


                                          Period: No Bubble                   Period: Shoulders of Bubble                       Period: Bubble

                                 OLS                      2SLS              OLS                     2SLS               OLS                     2SLS

                                              1st stage     2nd stage                   1st stage     2nd stage                    1st stage     2nd stage

      Dependent variable:    Employment        Listed      Employment    Employment      Listed      Employment    Employment       Listed      Employment

                                  (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)
      Listed on Exchange       1.046⇤⇤⇤                        0.566      1.161⇤⇤⇤                     0.971⇤⇤⇤      1.324⇤⇤⇤                     1.716⇤⇤
                               (0.116)                        (0.523)      (0.111)                     (0.360)        (0.204)                     (0.750)
         ETC Price                            0.095⇤⇤⇤                                  0.251⇤⇤⇤                                   0.223⇤⇤⇤
52




                                               (0.017)                                   (0.033)                                    (0.053)
      Observations                628            628              628        548           548              548         228           228              228
      R2                         0.119          0.080            0.095      0.176         0.097            0.172       0.181         0.203            0.167
      F-stat                                    33.14                                     57.58                                      17.94
      Year Start FE                Y              Y               Y           Y             Y               Y            Y             Y               Y

     Note: This table contains OLS and 2SLS regression estimates of the eﬀect of an ICO becoming listed on an exchange upon labor market outcomes.
     The dependent variable in Columns 1, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 9 is the log of one plus number of employees, which is the number of individuals that identify as
     being employed by the issuer on LinkedIn as of July 2019. The dependent variable in Columns 2, 5, and 8 is an indicator for listing on a cryptocurrency
     exchange. ETC Price is defined as the 90th percentile of ETC between 23 and 43 days after an ICO is started, divided by the average ETC price
     in the 30 days before the ICO start date. Days 23 and 43 cutoﬀs are the 25th and the 50th percentile diﬀerences between the ICO start date and
     the first trading date for those ICOs that have become listed on an exchange. No Bubble is defined as days in which Bitcoin prices are below 6,000
     USD, which is is almost all days before 10/29/2017 and after 11/13/2018 (while the price has since recovered, it did so after the end of our data).
     Shoulders Bubble is defined as days in which Bitcoin prices are between 6,000 and 11,000 USD, which is is almost all days between 10/29/2017 and
     11/29/2017, as well as between 1/30/2018 and 11/13/2018. Bubble is defined as days in which Bitcoin prices are above 11,000 USD, which is almost
     all days between 11/30/2017 and 1/29/2018. Standard errors are in parentheses.
     ⇤
       p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01
  Table 8: Relationship Between Issuer Sector/ICO Characteristics and Real Outcomes


Dependent variable:              Employment   Employment    Failure       Employment          Failure
                                                Growth

                                      (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)        (5)         (6)
Ads, rewards                      0.694⇤⇤⇤        0.201    -0.169⇤⇤⇤
                                   (0.225)      (0.206)      (0.047)
Data storage/computing              -0.138       -0.056      -0.120⇤
                                   (0.219)      (0.186)      (0.068)
Enterprise, health, identity         0.222      0.336⇤⇤       -0.012
                                   (0.161)      (0.118)      (0.038)
Gaming, entert., messag.            -0.077        0.070      -0.099⇤
                                   (0.149)      (0.160)      (0.052)
New blockchain protocol           0.922⇤⇤⇤        0.107    -0.182⇤⇤⇤
                                   (0.113)      (0.174)      (0.028)
Payments, wallets                    0.152        0.142       -0.061
                                   (0.162)      (0.174)      (0.060)
Prediction mkts and gambl.          -0.238       -0.155      -0.117⇤
                                   (0.403)      (0.150)      (0.067)
Smart contract creation           0.381⇤⇤       0.305⇤      -0.132⇤⇤
                                   (0.180)      (0.148)      (0.058)
Tokenizing real assets            0.608⇤⇤⇤      0.269⇤     -0.214⇤⇤⇤
                                   (0.186)      (0.153)      (0.039)
Trading, Crypto exchs.               0.120        0.065     -0.092⇤⇤
                                   (0.102)      (0.140)      (0.042)
Asset mgmnt, crypto fin servi.       0.117      0.290⇤⇤       -0.079
                                   (0.169)      (0.125)      (0.051)
Barred to US                                                           0.533⇤⇤⇤   0.435⇤⇤⇤     -0.010
                                                                        (0.142)    (0.138)    (0.015)
Dynamic pricing                                                        0.307⇤⇤       0.189     -0.031
                                                                        (0.145)    (0.135)    (0.047)
Presale                                                                  -0.043     -0.050     -0.042
                                                                        (0.116)    (0.110)    (0.031)
Stated goal to raise                                                     0.083      0.090      -0.029
                                                                        (0.111)    (0.162)    (0.052)
Airdrop (free)                                                            0.138     -0.083      0.017
                                                                        (0.179)    (0.206)    (0.033)
Accept BTC                                                               0.132       0.220     -0.054
                                                                        (0.229)    (0.272)    (0.069)
Accept ETH                                                              0.507⇤    0.470⇤⇤      -0.028
                                                                        (0.245)    (0.196)    (0.050)
Accept USD                                                                0.120   0.354⇤⇤⇤     -0.030
                                                                        (0.156)    (0.093)    (0.046)
Future token creation                                                    0.183       0.269     -0.015
                                                                        (0.251)    (0.225)    (0.038)
Raised USD (Bill)                                                                 0.872⇤⇤⇤   -0.053⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                   (0.080)    (0.015)
Observations                       1125         1125        1125         451          361        361
R2                                 0.117        0.048       0.106       0.209        0.188      0.125
Quarter Start FE                     Y            Y           Y           Y            Y          Y
Country FE                           Y            Y           Y           Y            Y          Y


                                               53
Note: This table contains regression estimates of the relationship between sector and ICO characteristics and
outcomes. The dependent variable in Columns 1 and 4-5 is the log of one plus number of employees, which
is the number of individuals that identify as being employed by the issuer on LinkedIn as of July 2019. The
dependent variable in Column 2 is the diﬀerence in log employment between November 2018 and July 2019.
The dependent variable in Columns 3 and 6 is an indicator for whether the issuer failed, which means that
the issuer does not have an active website, the token is not listed on CoinMarketCap, and Internet searches
yield no other indication that it still exists as of November 2018. The independent variables in Columns 1-3
are sector fixed eﬀects representing 12 mutually exclusive sectors. The independent variables in Columns 4-6
are key characteristics of the ICO. Barred to US means that buyers from the U.S. were excluded. Dynamic
pricing means that the price changed over the course of the ICO. Future token creation means that the
issuer has the ability per the token smart contract to generate new tokens in the future. Raised USD is the
ultimate amount raised in the ICO in millions of nominal U.S. dollars, which is not available for all ICOs.
Country fixed eﬀects control for the nine most common countries as well as a dummy for the issuer being
dispersed across at least five countries. Quarter start fixed eﬀects control for the calendar quarter or week
in which the ICO began. Standard errors clustered by quarter appear in parentheses.
⇤
  p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01




                                                     54
                              Table 9: Relationship Between Issuer Github, Social Media Characteristics and Outcomes

                   Dependent variable:              Employment      Employment                 Employment                                  Failure
                                                                      Growth


                                                         (1)              (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)       (9)
                   Code on Github(GH)                 1.098⇤⇤⇤        0.307⇤⇤⇤      0.937⇤⇤⇤                            -0.114⇤⇤⇤     -0.085⇤⇤
                                                       (0.165)         (0.056)       (0.229)                             (0.039)       (0.031)
                   Twitter account                      0.156           -0.359        0.108                               0.041         0.106
                                                       (0.323)         (0.369)       (0.322)                             (0.104)       (0.091)
                   Telegram group                     0.729⇤⇤⇤          0.085       0.736⇤⇤⇤                            -0.202⇤⇤⇤    -0.191⇤⇤⇤
                                                       (0.183)         (0.101)       (0.186)                             (0.063)       (0.057)
                   GH repositories (000s)                                                       7.854⇤⇤⇤                                          -0.515⇤⇤
                                                                                                 (1.649)                                           (0.193)
                   GH commits (000s)                                                             0.018⇤⇤                                            -0.001
                                                                                                 (0.007)                                           (0.001)
                   GH main rep branches (000s)                                                    0.724                                          -0.350⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                 (1.709)                                           (0.102)
                   GH main rep releases (000s)                                                  -0.063⇤⇤⇤                                           -0.002
                                                                                                 (0.005)                                           (0.004)
                   GH main rep contrib. (000s)                                                    0.103                                            -0.100⇤
                                                                                                 (0.404)                                           (0.057)
55




                   GH months from last commit                                                   -0.024⇤⇤⇤   -0.031⇤⇤⇤                             0.004⇤⇤      0.004
                                                                                                 (0.004)      (0.005)                              (0.001)    (0.003)
                   Telegram members (000s)                                                                     0.009                                           0.001
                                                                                                              (0.010)                                         (0.002)
                   Twitter followers (000s)                                                                  0.007⇤⇤⇤                                          -0.000
                                                                                                              (0.002)                                         (0.000)
                   Observations                          451             451           433         780          274        451          433           780        274
                   R2                                   0.224           0.074         0.270       0.173        0.333      0.210        0.266         0.081      0.269
                   Quarter Start FE                       Y               Y             Y           Y            Y          Y            Y             Y          Y
                   Sector & Country FE                                                  Y                                                Y


     Note: This table contains regression estimates of the relationship between issuer Github and social media variables and outcomes. The dependent variable in Columns 1, 3
     and 4 is the log of one plus number of employees, which is the number of individuals that identify as being employed by the issuer on LinkedIn as of November 2018. The
     dependent variable in Column 2 is the diﬀerence in log employment between November 2018 and July 2019. The dependent variable in Column 5 is an indicator for whether
     the issuer failed, which means that the issuer does not have an active website, the token is not listed on CoinMarketCap, and Internet searches yield no other indication that
     it still exists. The independent variables are collected from Twitter, Telegram, and Github. Github is a web-based repository hosting service for, primarily, computer code.
     Repositories contain public source code about a project. The main repository contains the token/ICO contract. The platform enables open source development, version control,
     and broad-based collaboration. The remaining rows include only those ICOs with a Github source code repository. Telegram is a cloud-based mobile and desktop messaging
     application with a focus on security and speed. We collect these characteristics for a subset of 451 ICOs that had traded on an exchange for at least 90 days as of April 2018.
     Quarter start fixed eﬀects control for the calendar quarter in which the ICO began. Sector fixed eﬀects control for each of 12 mutually exclusive sectors. Country fixed eﬀects
     control for the nine most common countries as well as a dummy for the issuer being dispersed across at least five countries. Standard errors clustered by quarter appear in
     parentheses.
     ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01
                   Table 10: Relationship Between Issuer Country and Outcomes


          Dependent variable:               Employment                           Failure

                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
          USA                    0.550⇤⇤⇤    0.303⇤⇤⇤     0.094⇤    -0.179⇤⇤⇤      -0.058     -0.028
                                  (0.064)     (0.061)     (0.051)     (0.030)     (0.036)    (0.018)
          China                  0.474⇤⇤       0.287        0.116     -0.103⇤      0.048      0.053
                                  (0.167)     (0.172)     (0.093)     (0.058)     (0.057)    (0.050)
          Canada                 0.758⇤⇤⇤    0.416⇤⇤⇤    0.553⇤⇤⇤    -0.186⇤⇤      -0.058      0.029
                                  (0.199)     (0.116)     (0.142)     (0.065)     (0.055)    (0.040)
          Russia                 0.195⇤⇤       -0.055    -0.221⇤⇤   -0.202⇤⇤⇤      -0.074     -0.039
                                  (0.082)     (0.077)     (0.077)     (0.049)     (0.048)    (0.044)
          Singapore              0.759⇤⇤⇤    0.516⇤⇤⇤      0.159    -0.212⇤⇤⇤   -0.069⇤⇤⇤     -0.021
                                  (0.142)     (0.141)     (0.109)     (0.025)     (0.018)    (0.018)
          Switzerland            1.200⇤⇤⇤    0.905⇤⇤⇤    0.605⇤⇤⇤   -0.258⇤⇤⇤   -0.131⇤⇤⇤   -0.054⇤⇤⇤
                                  (0.129)     (0.127)     (0.104)     (0.020)     (0.014)    (0.014)
          Israel                    0.087      -0.053      -0.299      -0.096      -0.019      0.078
                                  (0.271)     (0.218)     (0.364)     (0.118)     (0.098)    (0.104)
          UK                     0.369⇤⇤⇤      0.179       -0.219   -0.213⇤⇤⇤    -0.109⇤⇤   -0.048⇤⇤⇤
                                  (0.122)     (0.158)     (0.188)     (0.055)     (0.039)    (0.012)
          HK                     0.843⇤⇤⇤    0.533⇤⇤⇤    0.685⇤⇤⇤    -0.160⇤⇤      -0.014      0.009
                                  (0.052)     (0.120)     (0.225)     (0.063)     (0.048)    (0.030)
          > 4 countries            -0.136    -0.378⇤⇤      0.320       -0.050       0.102     -0.097
                                  (0.145)     (0.158)     (0.238)     (0.058)     (0.067)    (0.057)
          Observations              1292        1125         961        1292        1125        961
          R2                        0.100       0.117       0.193       0.094       0.106      0.164
          Quarter Start FE            Y           Y           Y           Y           Y          Y
          Sector FE                               Y                                   Y
          Issuer Controls                                    Y                                 Y

Note: This table contains regression estimates of the relationship between issuer countries and real outcomes.
The dependent variable in Columns 1-3 is the log of one plus number of employees, which is the number of
individuals that identify as being employed by the issuer on LinkedIn as of July 2019. The dependent variable
in Columns 4-6 is an indicator for whether the issuer failed, which means that the issuer does not have an
active website, the token is not listed on CoinMarketCap, and Internet searches yield no other indication
that it still exists. The independent variables consist of indicators for the nine most common countries. We
also create an indicator for the issuer being dispersed across at least five countries. The omitted group is
all other countries besides the nine most common. Issuer controls include all independent variables reported
in Tables 4, 5, and 6. Quarter start fixed eﬀects control for the calendar quarter in which the ICO began.
Sector fixed eﬀects control for each of 12 mutually exclusive sectors. Standard errors clustered by quarter
appear in parentheses.
⇤
  p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01




                                                        56
                                                        Figure 1: Number of ICOs by Country
57




     Note: This figure shows the location of ICO issuers in our sample, which includes all ICOs in TokenData from 2014-18. We observe location for 1,055
     of the ICOs, based on issuer websites and other public material. Of these, 73 are dispersed across at lease five countries and are not shown. The
     remaining 982 are included in the figure, except for the Cayman Islands (3 ICOs), Curacao (1), Cyprus (1), Gibraltar (1), Marshall Islands (1), Saint
     Kitts (1). Countries are grouped by bins of their number of ICOs. The top five countries are shown separately.
                  Figure 2: Number of ICOs and Amount Raised by Quarter
                                      Panel A: Number of ICOs




                                      Panel B: Raised Amount




Note: This figure shows the total quarterly amount raised and number of ICOs. Dark bars represent our
sample, while light bars represent other unique ICOs appearing in either TokenData (our baseline source for
the ICOs) or ICOBench after our sample ends. The light bars help to illustrate the market development.
Panel A shows a bar chart of the number of ICOs that begin in each quarter. The dark bars include all
1,520 ICOs in our sample, while the light bars include 899 ICOs outside our sample. The amount raised is
only available for 580 of the ICOs in our sample, and these are included in the dark bars of Panel B. The
light bars in Panel B comprise 485 ICOs outside our sample for which amount raised is observed.



                                                    58
                                              s
  Initial Coin Oﬀerings: Financing Growth with Cryptocurrency Token Sales




                         Filecoin Case Study Appendix

   Filecoin, which raised more than $200 million in its 2017 ICO, is a project of Protocol
Labs, Inc., a Delaware corporation headquartered in San Francisco. The company kindly
shared with us confidential transaction-level data on an anonymized basis, permitting us to
study the prices paid by diﬀerent types of investors, as well order sizes, means of payment,
vesting schedules and related information. To our knowledge, this is the first such data made
available for academic research.
   Protocol Labs is building a new blockchain (the Filecoin protocol) to host a peer-to-peer
decentralized storage market. The storage infrastructure is called InterPlanetary File Storage
(IPFS), another project of Protocol Labs. Decentralized storage represents an alternative
to incumbent cloud storage providers such as Dropbox, Amazon and Google. Filecoin’s
advocates perceive market power, vulnerability to cyber-attacks, and centralization of control
over others’ data as drawbacks to these centralized services. The Filecoin protocol will be
completely automated, so that once the network goes live, Protocol Labs will have no direct
control, although the company will own a large amount of FIL tokens that will allow it
indirectly to influence the Filecoin storage market.
   Filecoin’s token, which uses the symbol FIL, is a utility token that will provide access
to this marketplace as the only means of customer payment for storage services. Storage
providers (known as storage miners) will earn FIL by storing digital files for clients. FIL is
also a work token, because storage miners must post FIL as collateral in order to pledge their
storage power and be eligible to match with clients. A second type of producer, a retrieval
miner, responds to requests for files by rapidly retrieving and reassembling them. Filecoin
has a number of competitors, including Golem, Storj, Sia, Elastic, and SONM. One way
that Filecoin distinguishes its business model is that its prices are based on a competitive
bidding process among storage miners. Filecoin contends that its model is the only one to
oﬀer incentive compatible storage with cryptographic guarantees for users.

                                             59
       The Filecoin ICO was capped at 200 million FIL tokens, representing 10 percent of
the ultimate supply of 2 billion tokens. Of the remaining tokens, 15 percent are retained
by Protocol Labs for research, engineering, business development, marketing, and other
purposes, five percent are held by the Filecoin Foundation for long-term network governance
and public use data preservation (e.g., storing government climate data), and 70 percent
are reserved for miner rewards. The ICO did not sell FIL, but rather rights to future FIL
through a SAFT, an investment vehicle that attempts to comply with SEC regulations (see
Section 2.1).30 CoinList, a new platform for SEC-compliant token sales, managed the ICO.
CoinList is an AngelList spinoﬀ that emerged from collaboration with Protocol Labs for the
Filecoin sale. Its participation likely helps reduce information asymmetry, just as reputable
underwriters do in IPO markets (Loughran and Ritter 2002).
       Filecoin conducted a pre-sale to oﬀer discounts to select investors, which ended on August
1, 2017.31 Participants in Filecoin’s pre-sale included investors who had previously purchased
equity in Protocol Labs, including Union Square Ventures. Other participants were VCs such
as Sequoia Capital and Andreessen Horowitz, accredited advisors and individual investors,
and Protocol Labs employees. The public sale followed soon after the pre-sale and lasted from
August 10 to September 7. Only accredited investors could participate, allowing Filecoin’s
ICO to be exempt from U.S. securities laws. The pre-sale and registrations for the public
sale helped gauge demand for the public sale, which the issuer had underestimated.
       In the pre-sale, Filecoin raised approximately $52 million from 150 investors. Pre-sale
FIL tokens were oﬀered at $0.75, but investors could obtain discounts for agreeing to vesting
(lock-up) periods, leading to an average price paid of $0.57. In the public sale, the price
charged for each token was determined by a dynamic formula, whereby the price would
equal the total dollar amount raised up to that point divided by $40 million. Therefore,
the public token sale began at a price of $1.30 ($52 million divided by $40 million), and the
FIL subscription prices increased continuously thereafter. Again, discounts were oﬀered to
  30
      See the Filecoin Private Placement Memorandum: https://coinlist.co/assets/index/filecoin_index/
Protocol%20Labs%20-%20SAFT%20-%20Private%20Placement%20Memorandum-
bbd65da01fdc4a15219c49ad20fb9e28681adec9fae744c41cccd124545c4c73.pdf.
   31
      While we use the term “ICO” throughout this paper for simplicity, and the Filecoin project appears in
all rankings of top ICOs, Protocol Labs did not use the ICO term to describe its token sale. Protocol Labs
termed its pre-sale the “Advisor Sale”, and what we call its ICO, the company referred to as a “Public Sale.”
We use the terms “pre-sale” and “ICO” to be consistent with the language elsewhere in the paper.


                                                     60
buyers who agreed to vesting periods. The escalating price over time during the public sale
maximized the final price at the sale’s conclusion, creating a high-water reference point for
the market. This is similar to the common practice of using the price per share in the most
recent equity financing round (e.g., a VC Series D) to value a startup, a practice that can
lead to overvaluation (Gornall and Strebulaev 2017).
       Filecoin’s public sale raised $153.8 million from more than 2,100 investors in over 50
countries, of which $135 million came in the first hour. Under the terms of the public
sale, all buyers in the first hour were ultimately charged an identical price equal to the
weighted average first-hour sale price. Equalization of first-hour prices was done to avoid
a rush in the first minutes of the sale, because Protocol Labs feared investors would not
read the documentation accompanying the purchase process in an eﬀort to benefit from
the lowest prices. After adjustments for individual investors’ choices of vesting discounts,
the first-hour investors paid an average of $2.43 per token. After the first hour, the price
increased gradually over the remaining four weeks of the public sale. Buyers after the first
hour paid a vesting-adjusted weighted-average price of $4.61 per token. Table A.1, Panel
1 summarizes this information. It shows that the pre-sale buyers paid much lower prices
than the buyers in the public sale, especially those who bought in the later stages. Token
buyers could pay in U.S. dollars, Bitcoin, Ether, or Zcash.32 Figure A.1 shows the amount
raised in each currency for the three oﬀer periods. Pre-sale investors paid mostly in U.S.
dollars, while public investors paid mostly in Ether. Very few paid in Bitcoin or Zcash.
The majority of funds were raised in the first hour of the public sale. In Table A.1, Panel
3, we show information about the purchases made by members of the Protocol Labs core
team, advisors, and venture capital investors. Six members of the Protocol Labs core team
and nine angel and VC investors who had previously invested in Protocol Labs equity also
invested during the pre-sale. One core team member and one VC participated in the public
sale. Core team members invested an average of $40,800 each, while the VCs on average
purchased more than $1.7 million worth of tokens each.
  32
    Estimates of the amount raised depend on the exchange rates used. We use the daily U.S. dollar closing
price of each cryptocurrency on CoinMarketCap. Many media reports valued the proceeds of Filecoin’s ICO
at $257 million rather than $206 million, and the diﬀerence represented the appreciation of Ether, Bitcoin,
and Zcash obtained by the company during the ICO period.



                                                    61
   Price discounts for investors who agreed to diﬀerent vesting periods are listed in Table
A.1, Panel 2. The vesting periods will begin after the network launches. All FIL tokens sold
in the ICO are locked up for at least six months after network launch. Pre-sale investors
were not given the six month option; their tokens could be locked up for 12, 24, or 36
months, providing discounts of 7.5, 15, and 30 percent, respectively. Figure A.2 shows the
distribution of vesting choices for each of the three periods of the ICO. A dramatic diﬀerence
is apparent between the long vesting schedules agreed to by most of the strategic investors
in the pre-sale, and the preference for the shortest possible vesting periods in the public sale.
   At the time of this writing, more than two years after the start of the Filecoin ICO,
the FIL tokens have not yet been delivered to investors. Filecoin futures have traded on
Gate.io and Lbank since December 13, 2017, and the futures prices provide an estimate of
the value of the underlying FIL tokens. While the FIL futures traded as high as $27.66 each
in the crypto bull market of late 2017, prices have retreated to a recent level around $4.00.
Even with the sharp decline in prices, mirroring that of the overall crypto market since late
2017, the recent prices of Filecoin imply that its 200 million outstanding tokens have a fair
market value of approximately $800 million, substantially more than the $206 million that
they sold for in 2017. Consistent with the results of this study, Filecoin’s parent company
Protocol Labs saw its headcount increase approximately fivefold, from about 20 employees
at the time of its ICO in July-September 2017 to about 100 by November 2018, according
to conversations with the company’s general counsel.




                                               62
                                             Table A.1: Filecoin



                                             Panel 1: Summary Statistics
                                Num              Avg. num FIL          Avg. USD per           Median USD           Avg.
                             Transactions        per transaction        transaction          per transaction     USD/FIL
 Pre-sale                         210               430,554               $246,217              $49,356              $0.57
 1st Hour of Public Sale          1,690                 33,005            $80,255               $10,000              $2.43
 Rest of Public Sale              1,167                 3,474             $16,000                $3,480              $4.61


                       Panel 2: Vesting Discounts in Advisor Sale (Pre-sale) and Public Sale
 Vesting period:                  6 months                   12 months                24 months                36 months
 Portion of ICO:            Pre-sale      Public         Pre-sale     Public      Pre-sale     Public     Pre-sale     Public
 Vesting Discount:            N/A            0            7.5%        7.5%         15%          15%        30%          20%
 Avg. USD/transaction:        N/A         $58,414       $184,743     $35,970      $277,478     $26,175    $275,841    $61,575


                        Panel 3: Number of Investors During ICO by Investor Type
                                             Core team           Previous PL investors          Others
            Pre-sale                                6                     9                       128
            1st Hour of Public Sale                 0                     1                      1,358
            Rest of Public Sale                     1                     0                       815


                                        Panel 4: Advisor Sale (Pre-sale)
                                                                Avg. Investment in USD
                            Core team                                  $40,835
                            Previous PL investors                     $1,786,440
                            Others                                     $276,760


Note: Panel 1 shows summary statistics about the three periods of Filecoin’s ICO, which are the pre-sale
(Filecoin terms this the “advisor sale”), the first hour of the public sale, and the rest of the public sale.
We show the number of transactions (individual purchases), the average number of FIL tokens issued per
transaction, the average and median USD paid per transaction, and the average price in USD of a FIL
token. Panel 2 shows the discounts oﬀered by vesting horizon; the minimum was six months. For some
vesting horizons the discounts also depended on whether the investment was made during the advisor sale or
during the public sale. Panel 3 shows the number of investors from two specific groups across the three time
periods: Protocol Lab’s “core team”, which includes founders and critical employees, and previous Protocol
Labs investors (including angel and VC investors). Panel 4 shows the average number invested per investor
(converted to USD) across the three groups during the advisor sale.




                                                           63
             Figure A.1: Filecoin ICO investments by currency (millions of USD)




Note: This figure shows the USD equivalent amount invested during the Filecoin ICO. We separately show
the advisor sale, the 1st hour of public sale, and the rest of the public sale. The exchange rates for the 1st
hour of the advisor sale are observed on 8/10/2017 at 4 pm EST (the end of the first hour of the public
sale). For advisor sale and for public sale, exchange rates are the closing price of the currency on 8/1/2017
and 9/7/2017, respectively.



                   Figure A.2: Filecoin ICO investor vesting length (months)




Note: This figure shows what percentage of transactions during the three diﬀerent time periods of the ICO:
advisor sale, first hour of public sale, and the rest of the public sale, chose the 6-month, the 12-month, the
24-month, and the 36-month vesting horizon. Note that investors during the advisor sale didn’t have the
6-month vesting option.



                                                     64
