NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF TEACHER COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
Michael Lovenheim
Alexander Willén
Working Paper 24782
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24782

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018

We are grateful to David Autor, Dan Black, Maria Fitzpatrick, Richard Freeman, John Friedman, Steve
Rivkin, Tim Sass, Mark Steinmeyer, Katharine Strunk, anonymous referees at several journals, and
seminar participants at the Association for Education Finance and Policy annual meeting, the CESifo
Economics of Education Conference, the American Economic Association Annual Meeting, the APPAM
annual meeting, Southern Methodist University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the University
of Mississippi, and the Daniel Patrick Moynihan Syracuse/Cornell Workshop on the Economics of
Education for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Michael Lovenheim and Alexander Willén. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Long-run Effects of Teacher Collective Bargaining
Michael Lovenheim and Alexander Willén
NBER Working Paper No. 24782
July 2018
JEL No. I26,J24,J45,J51
ABSTRACT
Teacher collective bargaining is a highly debated feature of the education system in the US. This paper
presents the first analysis of the effect of teacher collective bargaining laws on long-run labor market
and educational attainment outcomes, exploiting the timing of passage of duty-tobargain laws across
cohorts within states and across states over time. Using American Community Survey data linked
to each respondent’s state of birth, we examine labor market outcomes and educational attainment
for 35-49 year olds, separately by gender. We find robust evidence that exposure to teacher collective
bargaining laws worsens the future labor market outcomes of men: in the first 10 years after passage
of a duty-to-bargain law, male earnings decline by $2,134 (or 3.93%) per year and hours worked decrease
by 0.42 hours per week. The earnings estimates for men indicate that teacher collective bargaining
reduces earnings by $213.8 billion in the US annually. We also find evidence of lower male employment
rates, which is driven by lower labor force participation. Exposure to collective bargaining laws leads
to reductions in the skill levels of the occupations into which male workers sort as well. Effects are
largest among black and Hispanic men. Estimates among women are often confounded by secular
trend variation, though we do find suggestive evidence of negative impacts among nonwhite women.
Using data from the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, we demonstrate that collective bargaining
laws lead to reductions in measured non-cognitive skills among young men.

Michael Lovenheim
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
ILR School, and Department of Economics
Cornell University
264 Ives Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
mfl55@cornell.edu
Alexander Willén
Department of Economics
Norwegian School of Economics
Helleveien 30
5045 Bergen
Norway
alw285@cornell.edu

1. Introduction
Teacher collective bargaining is a prevalent and contentious feature of the US education
system. Over 60% of teachers in the United States currently are covered by a collectivelybargained contract (Frandsen 2016), and recently many state legislatures and courts have
weakened the ability of teachers’ unions to negotiate contracts. For example, in 2011 Wisconsin,
Indiana, Idaho and Tennessee passed legislation that greatly reduced the scope of teacher
bargaining. Michigan passed a public employee right-to-work law that sought to limit teacher
union negotiating power in 2012, and the 2018 Supreme Court decision in Janus v. AFSCME
nationalized right-to-work rules for public sector employees.2 In 2014, the ruling in Vergara v.
California argued that the tenure and teacher retention policies that are a main focus of collective
bargaining violated the constitutionally-guaranteed right to an adequate education for each child
in California.3 These court rulings and legislative actions have reignited a debate over the proper
role of teacher collective bargaining in the US education system. One of the core factors on
which this debate rests is how teacher collective bargaining impacts student outcomes. Despite
the large amount of policy attention directed toward the role of teachers’ unions in education,
there is a lack of empirical research that credibly and comprehensively addresses this question.
A central hurdle facing the prior teachers’ union literature is the lack of student outcome
data linked to exogenous variation in teacher collective bargaining. Much of the cross-sectional
variation in teacher bargaining is driven by state public sector union laws that determine the
obligations of school districts to negotiate with teachers. These laws were passed in the 1960s1980s, when only sparse data were available on student outcomes that could be matched to one’s
school district. The small set of studies that have examined the relationship between teacher
collective bargaining and student outcomes from this time period have used high school dropout
rates (Hoxby 1996; Lovenheim 2009) or state-level SAT scores (Kleiner and Petree 1988). These
analyses reach different conclusions, and their focus on a limited set of performance measures
does not yield a complete picture of the effects of teacher collective bargaining on students.
More recent studies have better student achievement data but lack exogenous variation in teacher
collective bargaining (e.g., Lott and Kenny 2013; Strunk 2011; Moe 2009).
2

Right-to-work laws make it illegal to force employees to join the union or pay union dues as a condition of
employment.
3
This ruling was reversed in 2016 by the California Court of Appeals, and the reversal was subsequently upheld by
the California Supreme Court.

1

In this paper, we present the first evidence in the literature on how teacher collective
bargaining laws affect long-run outcomes of students. We focus on duty-to-bargain (DTB) laws,
which require districts to negotiate with teachers’ unions in good faith. Prior work has shown
extensive evidence that these laws increase union membership and the probability that a district
elects a union to bargain collectively (Frandsen 2016; Lovenheim 2009; Hoxby 1996; Saltzman
1985). We use the timing of the passage of DTB laws, which occurred between 1960 and 1987
(see Figure 1), linked with educational and labor market outcomes among 35-49 year olds in the
2005-2012 American Community Survey (ACS), to provide new evidence on how teacher
collective bargaining impacts a broad array of long-run outcomes.
Critical to our identification strategy is the ability to link ACS respondents to their state
of birth, which allows us to account for any endogenous migration of families across states with
different collective bargaining laws. We employ cross-cohort difference-in-difference event
study models that examine how outcomes changed among students who were differentially
exposed to duty-to-bargain laws that had been in place for different lengths of time based on
what state and in what year they were born. The sources of variation we exploit are within-state
changes in outcomes across birth cohorts as a function of time since passage of a DTB law and
cross-state differences in the timing of when (or whether) these laws were passed.
Identification is complicated by the potential for other policies, secular trends, and
unobserved shocks to affect the outcomes of interest. We show extensive evidence that our
estimates are not being driven by such factors. First, our models include controls for other
important policies during this period to which students may have been exposed. Second, we
explicitly test for the existence of pre-treatment trends in outcomes across cohorts. Third, the
results are robust to directly controlling for pre-treatment trends. Fourth, our results are not being
driven by the general union environment in the state, are not influenced by the urbanicity of the
population, are not correlated with the prevalence of social unrest in the state when our sample
was of school age, are not influenced by the political environment in the state, and are robust to
accounting for region-specific cohort shocks. Fifth, we perform permutation tests in which we
randomly assign the year of duty-to-bargain law passage across states. Finally, our estimates are
not biased by cross-state mobility of those with school-age children. Taken together, these results
provide extensive evidence that supports the causal interpretation of our estimates.
Women’s educational and labor market outcomes were subject to strong secular changes
2

among the cohorts we examine (Goldin, Katz and Kuziemko 2006; Blau and Kahn 2013; Bick
and Bruggeman 2014), and we thus analyze outcomes separately by gender.4 Among men, our
estimates point to negative effects of exposure to teacher collective bargaining laws on the longrun labor market outcomes of students who grew up in states with these laws. These results are
consistent with the “rent-seeking” hypothesis of teacher unionization (Hoxby 1996).5 We present
estimates of DTB law exposure at 5, 10, and 15 years post law passage, and we focus on the 10year estimates because they show the effects among the first cohort that spent nearly the entirety
of its schooling years in a collective bargaining environment.
At 10 years of DTB exposure, male annual earnings decline by $2,134.04 (or 3.93%) and
weekly hours worked are reduced by 0.42 (or 1.09%). These individuals are also 1 percentage
point less likely to be employed, are 0.8 of a percentage point less likely to be in the labor force,
and sort into lower-skilled occupations. However, collective bargaining laws have only a modest
effect on educational attainment. Our estimates therefore suggest that the effect of teacher
collective bargaining on labor market outcomes is driven by declines in human capital
accumulation that do not show up in years of education. This finding motivates our analysis
using the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) that shows declines in noncognitive skills due to collective bargaining exposure.
We further demonstrate that the negative effects of duty-to-bargain laws are particularly
pronounced among black and Hispanic males: annual earnings decline by $3,246 (9.43%), hours
worked per week decline by 0.72 (2.18%), the likelihood of being employed is 1.3 percentage
points lower, and years of schooling and occupational skill are significantly lower at 10 years of
exposure. Collective bargaining laws also lead to worse labor market outcomes among white and
Asian men, but the effects are more modest in magnitude.
We do not find consistent effects of collective bargaining law exposure on female labor
market and educational attainment outcomes. Most of the point estimates are negative, but they
are much smaller than those for men. Further, they show clear evidence of differential pretreatment trends. Thus, our empirical approach does not appear valid for women; we cannot draw

4

These secular trends reflect reduced gender-based discrimination, rising expectations of future labor market
participation among women, increased female collegiate attendance, and expanded female labor market
opportunities.
5
The rent-seeking hypothesis of teachers’ unions states that unions lead to a re-allocation of resources towards
teachers while also making educational resources less productive. See Section 2 for a more in-depth discussion.

3

strong conclusions about how duty-to-bargain laws affect long-run female outcomes with our
approach. Importantly, there is no evidence that the secular trends for women produce similar
trends among men that would threaten our identification strategy. We do find more evidence of
negative effects among black and Hispanic women, which together with the male estimates
suggests DTB laws predominantly affect long-run outcomes among minorities.
A drawback of our setting, common to most studies on long-run program effects, is that
we cannot examine the mechanisms through which our results operate. However, when
examining education policies, we ultimately care about how they impact school quality and the
long-run outcomes of students, which we speak to directly in this paper. That the data do not
exist to examine all of the mechanisms at work in determining long-run effects further augments
the importance of directly estimating impacts on these long-run outcomes themselves.
Though we are unable to comprehensively examine the mechanisms, we show that DTB
laws are associated with higher expenditures on teachers and administrators but do not alter total
expenditures or teacher-student ratios. Prior research also has found evidence that duty-tobargain laws reduce hours worked among teachers (Frandsen 2016) and that reduced bargaining
power leads to lower fringe benefits among teachers (Litten 2017). Given the impossibility of
exploring a comprehensive set of mechanisms, the long-run estimates we produce represent new
evidence on the impact of duty-to-bargain laws that are very important because of the prevalence
of these laws, the contentiousness surrounding them, the recent rise in policies aimed at curbing
teacher collective bargaining rights, and the paucity of evidence on how they affect students.
We also provide supporting estimates showing how DTB laws impact non-cognitive
skills among high school students using the NLSY79. These outcomes indicate whether the
long-run effects we identify are reflective of changes in human capital. Consistent with the labor
market effects, we find that duty-to-bargain law exposure reduces these outcomes among men.
The impacts on non-cognitive measures helps reconcile the fact that we do not see a strong
educational attainment effect despite large reductions in labor market outcomes, since noncognitive skills are likely to affect labor market outcomes more than education outcomes
(Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua 2006; Heckman and Kautz 2012; Heckman, Pinto and Savelyev
2013). These estimates support our long-run findings and indicate that teacher collective
bargaining laws reduce the quality of education students receive.
Taken together, our results suggest that public sector collective bargaining laws for
4

teachers have a negative effect on male long-run labor market outcomes. The effects we find are
economically significant: decreasing male earnings in the 33 duty-to-bargain law states by 3.93%
amounts to $213.8 billion of lost earnings per year. We underscore that these estimates are from
a time period in which the education system was different along many dimensions from today, so
caution should be exercised in extrapolating the results to the current education system.

2. Teacher Collective Bargaining in the US
2.1. Duty-to-Bargain Laws
Prior to 1960, teachers unions in the US were predominantly professional organizations
that had little role in the negotiation of contracts between teachers and school districts. Collective
bargaining occurred in only a handful of large, urban school districts. Beginning with Wisconsin
in 1960, states began passing public sector “duty-to-bargain” (DTB) laws, which mandated that
districts have to negotiate in good faith with a union that has been elected for the purposes of
collective bargaining. These laws gave considerable power to teachers’ unions in the collective
bargaining process. As a result, duty-to-bargain laws led to a sharp rise in teacher unionization
and in the prevalence of collectively-bargained contracts (Lovenheim 2009; Saltzman 1985). In
states that pass a DTB law, the vast majority of school districts elect a union for the purpose of
collective bargaining, and these unions achieve contracts at very high rates (Lovenheim 2009).
Thus, passage of a DTB law leads to a high fraction of teachers being covered by a collectivelybargaining contract over a short period of time.
Between 1960 and 1987, 33 states passed DTB laws, as shown in Figure 1. Most of these
laws were implemented between the late-60s and late-70s. Table 1 shows the year of passage for
each state as well as the set of states without such a law.6 Of the 17 non-DTB states, 10 allow
teachers to collectively bargain if both sides agree to do so. Four states (Alabama, Georgia,
North Carolina, and Virginia) have no state law governing teacher collective bargaining, while
three states (Mississippi, Missouri and Wyoming) outlaw collective bargaining. The states that
have more restrictive collective bargaining laws tend to be located in the South and the West,
which highlights the fact that these laws are not randomly assigned.
The focus of this paper is on how the passage of public-sector DTB laws affects the longrun outcomes of students who attended elementary or secondary schools in those states. We

6

Note that Washington, DC is excluded both from Table 1 and from our analysis.

5

examine duty-to-bargain laws because these laws led to larger increases in unionization and
collective bargaining rates than did the other forms of union laws (Frandsen 2016): non-duty-tobargain union laws do not explicitly require districts to recognize unions and bargain in good
faith, thus allowing them to simply refuse to engage in collective bargaining.7
2.2. Theoretical Predictions
One of the main ways in which duty-to-bargain laws affect students is by increasing the
rate and substance of bargaining between teachers and school districts. Changes in collective
bargaining, in turn, can impact students through three main channels: 1) by altering the inputs to
education production, 2) by affecting teacher effort (and thus effectiveness), and 3) by changing
the composition of teachers. The third mechanism in particular implies that the long-run effects
may be larger than the short-run effects, as it takes time to alter teacher composition.
Models of public sector union behavior provide ambiguous predictions about how teacher
collective bargaining should affect students. The “rent-seeking” model argues that by distorting
the allocation of resources towards teachers, student outcomes may decline. The key predictions
of this model are that teacher collective bargaining should lead to increases in resources going to
teachers and to reductions in the returns to those resources: the resource changes induced by
teachers unions reduce the efficiency of educational inputs, which negatively impacts students.
By protecting teachers from being fired, unions also can reduce teacher effort and lower the
quality of the teacher workforce. Under the rent-seeking model, the decline in effectiveness of
teacher-related resources can produce worse student outcomes.8
In contrast to the rent-seeking model, there are several arguments suggesting that teachers
unions can improve educational outcomes. Empowering teachers could result in higher
achievement from a more efficient allocation of resources, since educational administrators do
not have full knowledge of the education production function. There also could be a “union
voice” effect, whereby giving teachers a voice with which to influence their working
environment makes them more productive (Freeman 1980; Gunderson 2005). A more favorable
working environment could further induce more-productive workers to enter teaching.
7

Our results are similar (though somewhat attenuated) when we use a more expansive definition of collective
bargaining laws that includes the 10 states that allow but do not require districts to negotiate with teachers unions.
8
The rent-seeking model does not guarantee that unionization will lead to lower student achievement. The reason is
that unionization could increase total resources while also making those resources less effective. The net effect on
student outcomes thus is ambiguous.

6

All models of union behavior predict that teachers unions will alter district resource
allocations; just examining how unions affect education inputs such as teacher pay, employment
and per-student spending will not allow one to distinguish between them.9 Where the union
models differ is in their predictions of the direction of any effects on achievement. The
theoretical ambiguities highlighted above underscore the importance of conducting an empirical
investigation on how teacher collective bargaining affects student outcomes.
Duty-to-bargain laws also can affect outcomes through mechanisms other than
unionization and bargaining, per se. Teachers unions engage in statewide advocacy that can
influence all school districts, and there can be union threat effects (Farber 2003) that make nonunionized districts behave like unionized ones to stave off a union vote.
2.3. Prior Research on Teacher Unionization and Collective Bargaining
The majority of research on teachers unions focuses on resource allocation effects.
Collective bargaining can influence several dimensions of school resource allocation decisions:
teachers typically negotiate over wage schedules, hiring and firing policies, health care and
retirement benefits, work rules detailing the hours they are required to be at work and to teach,
class assignments, class sizes and non-teaching duties (West 2015; Moe 2009; Strunk 2009).
Research examining the effect of teacher collective bargaining on district resources has found
mixed results, although data constrains have only allowed an examination of a small subset of
education inputs. Studies that have exploited the rollout of DTB laws have either found positive
effects on teacher salaries and per-student expenditures (Hoxby 1996) or no effects (Lovenheim
2009; Frandsen 2016).10 Recent evidence exploiting the substantial restrictions on collective
bargaining rights in Wisconsin in 2011 finds increases in teacher wage dispersion and exit (Biasi
2017; Roth 2017) as well as modest effects on average wages but a sizable impact on non-wage
compensation (Litten 2017). Results from the 2011 ban on teacher collective bargaining in
Tennessee indicates a reduction in teacher compensation in the form of wages and health care
and shrinkage in the size of the teacher workforce (Quinby 2017).
Of first-order importance in the policy debate over the role of teachers unions in
9

It also is impossible to observe all educational inputs in most datasets. Thus, only examining the effect of unions
on measured resources provides a somewhat limited description of their effect on schools and students.
10
An earlier body of work finds mixed evidence on how unions affect teacher pay. Balfour (1974), Zuelke and
Frohreich (1977), and Kleiner and Petree (1988) find no effect. Eberts and Stone (1986), Moore and Raisian (1987)
and Baugh and Stone (1982) find evidence of a union wage premium ranging from 3%-12%. These studies typically
lack plausibly-exogenous variation in union status. See Cowen and Strunk (2015) for a review of this literature

7

education is how collective bargaining affects student outcomes. The effects on resource
allocation discussed above yield ambiguous predictions for effects on students. There currently is
only a small literature on the effect of teachers’ unions on academic achievement. None of these
studies estimate the effect of collective bargaining on long-run labor market and educational
attainment outcomes, which may differ from any short-run impacts (Ludwig and Miller 2007;
Chetty et al. 2011; Deming et al. 2013; Cohodes et al. 2016). One central reason for this lack of
existing work is data constraints: the teacher unionization movement took hold before consistent
measures of student outcomes were collected. Thus, researchers are forced either to use a small
set of outcomes from older data during the period of DTB law passage or to use data from more
recent time periods that lack exogenous variation in collective bargaining across schools.
Hoxby (1996) and Lovenheim (2009) both use the passage of duty-to-bargain laws to
estimate how teacher collective bargaining affects contemporaneous high school dropout rates.
Hoxby finds that collective bargaining laws lead to an increase in high school dropout rates,
which is consistent with the rent-seeking model of union behavior.11 Using an alternative
unionization measure and a smaller set of states, Lovenheim (2009) finds no such effect.12
Much of the literature that uses more recent data to examine how unions and collective
bargaining affect test scores focuses on measures of contract restrictiveness or union power. Lott
and Kenny (2013) show that states with higher union dues and union expenditures have lower 4th
grade proficiency rates. Strunk (2011) shows that contract restrictiveness is negatively correlated
with test score levels but not with test score growth. The cross-sectional nature of these
comparisons make it unlikely that these studies isolate the causal effect of union strength on
student outcomes, as districts with strong unions tend to be in more urban, lower-income areas.
Moe (2009) examines how changes over time in union contract restrictiveness within school
districts in California relate to changes in student test scores. While he finds that districts with
contracts that become more restrictive experience declines in test score growth, it is unlikely that
the within-district variation in restrictiveness over time is exogenous.13
Our contribution to this literature is to estimate how teacher collective bargaining affects
11
In contrast, Eberts and Stone (1986, 1987) find that teachers’ unions increase school productivity. However, they
lack exogenous variation in union status across schools, which complicates the interpretation of their results.
12
Some prior work examines the link between teachers’ unions and student outcomes using student test score data,
but it typically lacks exogenous variation in union status (e.g., Kleiner and Petree 1988; Eberts and Stone 1987).
13
Evidence from how Wisconsin’s collective bargaining changes (Act 10) affected student outcomes are mixed.
Biasi (2017) and Roth (2017) find increases in student test scores, while Baron (2017) finds large declines.

8

long-run educational and labor market outcomes using an identification strategy that incorporates
exogenous variation in the prevalence of collective bargaining in the state. By linking adults in
different birth cohorts to their state of birth, we exploit timing differences in the passage of dutyto-bargain laws combined with variation in whether states ever pass such a law to overcome the
identification problems and data limitations faced by prior research. Our results therefore provide
the first comprehensive analysis of the causal effect of teacher collective bargaining on student
outcomes, which is of first-order importance given the prevalence of teachers unions and the
ongoing policy debate about their proper role in education.

3. Data
The collective bargaining data we use come from the NBER collective bargaining law
dataset (Valletta and Freeman 1988).14 These data contain, for each state and year since 1955,
collective bargaining laws for each type of public sector worker. We use the laws for teachers to
create an indicator variable for whether a duty-to-bargain law was in place in each state and year.
We combine the collective bargaining information with 2005-2012 American
Community Survey (ACS) data on individuals aged 35-49. Individuals within this age span
typically have completed their education and are on a flat part of their lifetime earnings profile
(Haider and Solon 2006). We observe individuals of each age in each of the eight survey years,
leading to a balanced panel of age observations in our data. Birth cohorts are constructed by
subtracting age from calendar year, and we assume each respondent begins school at the age in
which his assigned birth cohort turns 6.15 The birth cohorts range from 1956 to 1977 and
correspond to students who would have been in school from 1962 (when the 1956 birth cohort
was 6) to 1995 (when the 1977 birth cohort was 18). These schooling years align with the large
rise in duty-to-bargain laws across states in the US shown in Figure 1.
A main advantages of using the ACS is the ability to link adults to their state of birth,
because collective bargaining laws might cause families to migrate across states. These laws also
may cause post-schooling migration patterns to differ, as obtaining more or less skill when
young could affect one’s access to a more national labor market. Using each respondent’s state
14

These data are available at http://www.nber.org/publaw/.
These assumptions lead to some measurement error in treatment assignment because the ACS is conducted each
month and states have different school-age cutoff dates. Using the school-age cutoff dates that prevailed in 1988
(Bedard and Dhuey 2012) and assuming that ACS survey month and birth month are evenly distributed over the
year, we calculate about 27% of the sample will enroll in school the year prior to their assigned birth cohort. This is
likely to bias our estimates towards zero by generating changes in outcomes in the cohort just prior to DTB passage.
15

9

of birth eliminates any problems associated with endogenous mobility. Of course, families can
move across states such that one’s state of birth differs from the state in which he or she attended
school. In Section 5.5, we show that any bias resulting from such mobility is small. We also do
not find evidence that parents are endogenously moving in response to DTB laws prior to a
child’s birth using changes in the observed composition of those born in a given state and cohort.
Because one’s state of birth and birth cohort determine one’s exposure to a duty-tobargain law, we collapse the data to the state-of-birth, year-of-birth, calendar year level.
Aggregation to this level is sensible because the effect of duty-to-bargain laws on student
outcomes is not necessarily limited to unionized districts: these laws can impact all districts in a
state through spillover and union threat effects (Farber 2003). The spillover effects come in part
from union political activities that can impact educational resources and policies in all schools in
the state. Additionally, union threat effects can cause non-unionized districts to begin behaving
like unionized ones in order to stave off a unionization vote.
The ACS contains detailed information on educational attainment and labor market
outcomes. Descriptive statistics of the variables we use are shown in Online Appendix Table A1.16 For educational attainment, we construct a years of education variable. In the 2008-2012
ACS, years of completed schooling are reported directly. In the 2005-2007 ACS waves, we use
completed schooling levels to construct this variable.17 We also use the ACS measures of
whether an individual is currently employed, unemployed or not in the labor force, as well as
labor income in the previous year and hours worked per week. Labor income is the sum of wage,
salary, and self-employed income over the past 12 months. Both income and hours worked are
set to zero for those who do not report any income or working activity.
Finally, we construct a measure of occupational skill. Using the 2005-2012 ACS, we
calculate the proportion of workers in each 4-digit occupation code that has more than a high
school degree (i.e., at least some collegiate attainment). This allows us to rank occupations by
the skill level of those who engage in the occupation in order to examine whether exposure to
teacher collective bargaining leads workers to sort into lower- or higher-skilled occupations.

16

Descriptive statistics by gender and race/ethnicity are shown in Online Appendix Table A-2.
We code educational attainment as follows: 0 for no school completion, 4 for fourth grade completion, 6 for 5th or
6th grade completion, 8 for 7th or 8th grade completion, 9-11 for 9th through 11th grade completion, 12 for 12th
grade completion and less than 1 year of college, 13 for one or more years of college with no degree, 14 for an AA
degree, 16 for a BA degree, 18 for a master’s or professional school degree, and 21 for a doctoral degree.
17

10

4. Empirical Methodology
We exploit within-state, cross-cohort differences in exposure to DTB laws driven by
cross-state variation in the timing of when or whether states passed these laws in a difference-indifference framework. The effect of collective bargaining laws on student achievement is likely
to vary across cohorts for two reasons. The first is that some cohorts are only exposed for part of
their schooling years, which can generate time-varying treatment effects based on the length of
exposure to collective bargaining laws. The second factor that influences the time pattern of
treatment effects is that the laws themselves may have time-varying impacts on resource
allocation (see Lovenheim (2009) and Appendix Table A-9), the composition of teachers, and
teacher effort from unions becoming more powerful or effective over time. There also can be
immediate impacts of DTB law passage on student outcomes. Thus, our main empirical approach
is to estimate event study models separately for men and women that allow us to nonparametrically identify time-varying treatment effects:
=

+
( −

where

( −

( −

+ 18 ≤ −11) +

+ 18 ≥ 21) +

+

+

+

+ 18 = ) +
+

,

(1)

is one of the educational or labor market outcomes listed above for those born in state

s in birth cohort c and in ACS calendar year t. Regressions are weighted by the number of
observations that underlie each birth year-birth state-calendar year-gender cell, and all standard
errors are clustered at the birth state level.
The variable ( −

+ 18) is equal to the number of years of exposure a cohort has had

to a duty-to-bargain law, with C being the birth year and

being the year of passage of the duty-

to bargain law. For example, a cohort that is 19 when a duty-to-bargain law is passed will have
an exposure time of -1, while a cohort that is 10 when it passes will have an exposure time of 8.
This variable takes on a value of zero in states that have never had a duty-to-bargain law.18
Hence, ( −

+ 18 = ) are indicator variables equal to 1 for each relative year to passage of

a duty-to-bargain law between -10 and 20. We also include an indicator for whether time relative

18

In the time period we examine, no state repeals a duty-to-bargain law.

11

to a DTB law is less than or equal to -11 and for whether it is greater than or equal to 21.19 The
coefficients non-parametrically trace out pre-treatment relative trends (for
well as time-varying treatment effects (
such that all

to

). In practice, we omit ( −

to

) as

+ 18 = −1)

estimates are relative to the year prior to DTB passage.

Equation (1) also includes birth cohort-by-calendar year (
calendar year (

), birth state ( ), and

) fixed effects. The birth cohort-by-year fixed effects are identical to age fixed

effects, because birth cohort and calendar year perfectly define age. The cohort-year fixed effects
control for any systematic differences across birth cohorts in each calendar year that may be
correlated with both the prevalence of duty-to-bargain laws and labor market outcomes. The state
fixed effects control for variation in outcomes that are common across birth cohorts within a
state, and the year fixed effects account for national shocks that impact all birth cohorts in the
same year. We also control for the proportion of each state-cohort-year-gender cell that is black,
Asian, Hispanic or “other.” These controls are in the vector X in equation (1).
The parameters of interest in equation (1) are

-

, which show the long-run effects of

DTB laws among cohorts who are first exposed to these laws in relative years 0 to 20. We show
a full set of

estimates in the figures below, but to summarize our findings in a parsimonious

way we present effects at 5 (

), 10 (

) and 15 (

) years in the tables. Effects at 10 years are

our preferred estimates because they show the effects among the first cohort that spent nearly the
entirety of its schooling years in a DTB environment.
Conditional on the controls in the model, the variation in duty-to-bargain law exposure
comes from two sources. The first is within-state differences in exposure over time driven by the
state’s year of DTB law passage. The second is cross-state variation in the timing of when or
whether states passed these laws. The assumptions underlying the identification of parameter

-

are similar to all difference-in-difference analyses: the decision of whether and when to pass
a duty-to-bargain law must be uncorrelated with any prior trends in outcomes across birth
cohorts within each state, and the timing of the law passage cannot coincide with any statespecific shocks that are isolated to the treated cohorts or with other policies that might influence
long-run educational attainment or labor market outcomes.

19

We choose this event window because the sample sizes become small for relative time indicators less than -10 and
greater than 20. Including these “catch-all” relative time indicators allows us to use the full analysis sample, but we
caution that it is rather difficult to interpret the coefficients on these two variables.

12

The

to

estimates in equation (1) allow us to test the assumption that there is no

selection on fixed trends across cohorts. If outcomes are trending in the direction of the estimated
treatment effects prior to passage of DTB laws, it suggests a bias from secular trends. As a
further check on the credibility of this assumption, we estimate parametric event study models in
which the treatment effect is identified relative to a linear pre-treatment trend. The estimates are
very similar to those from equation (1).
The second potential identification problem of unobserved state-cohort specific shocks
correlated with the passage of duty-to-bargain laws is more difficult to investigate. However,
there is much variation in the timing of the passage of these laws, as shown in both Figure 1 and
Table 1, making it very unlikely that there are secular shocks that are systematically correlated
with the timing of DTB passage and only influence the affected cohorts. Permutation tests
further support the contention that unobserved shocks correlated with the timing of the rollout of
DTB laws are not biasing our estimates. We also include a robustness check that includes stateby-year fixed effects. While less precise, these results indicate that our estimates are not being
influenced by state-specific macroeconomic shocks or current statewide policies.
The existence of alternative policies that were passed concurrently with duty-to-bargain
laws is a more serious threat to identification. The 1960s-1980s saw many changes to both
schooling and social policies that could have affected the birth cohorts we analyze. If the rollout
of these policies is correlated with duty-to-bargain passage, it could bias our results. We address
this concern by controlling for exposure to three alternative policies that occurred concurrently
with the DTB movement that also could impact these students’ long-run outcomes: school
finance reform, the earned income tax credit (EITC), and food stamps. We know of no other
policy changes that could plausibly have impacted the declines in labor market outcomes we
document. In the vector X in equation (1), we control for the number of years each birth cohort
would have been exposed to legislative or court-ordered school finance reform (separately) while
in school. The timing of legislative and court-ordered school finance reform are taken from
Jackson, Johnson and Persico (2015), who show these reforms led to large increases in the
outcomes we consider. We also control for average state EITC rates between the ages of 6 and
18 for each cohort, as Bastian and Michelmore (forthcoming) show that these policies positively

13

affect educational attainment.20 Finally, Hoynes, Schanzenbach and Almond (2016) demonstrate
that exposure to the food stamp program when young has long-run effects on health and
economic outcomes. We use the population-weighted average proportion of counties eligible for
food stamps when each birth cohort-state of birth group was between 6 and 18.21 Below, we
show estimates both with and without these controls; they have little effect on our results.

5. Results
Tables 2-4 present baseline estimates of the effect of teacher collective bargaining
exposure on labor market outcomes for men (columns i-iii) and women (columns iv-vi) in
exposure years 5 (

), 10 (

) and 15 (

). These estimates show changes in outcomes relative

to the year prior to DTB passage, which is set to zero in the event study models. Each column in
each panel comes from a separate estimation of equation (1), and we add controls sequentially
across columns. In columns (i) and (iv), we control for birth state, birth cohort and calendar year
fixed effects as well as race/ethnicity. We add controls for state EITC, school finance reform and
food stamp exposure during childhood in columns (ii) and (v), and columns (iii) and (vi) adds
cohort-by-year (i.e., age) fixed effects. We discuss the estimates for men and women in turn
below.
5.1. Baseline Male Estimates
Table 2 presents results for earnings (Panel A) and hours worked (Panel B), both of
which include zeros. Across the first three columns in Panel A, there is clear evidence of a
negative effect of teacher collective bargaining on male earnings that grows with exposure time.
The estimate in column (iii) indicates that attending school in a state with a duty-to-bargain law
for 5 years reduces earnings by $1,728.95 dollars per year. The effect grows to -$2,134.04 in
year 10 and $-2,666.71 in year 15. We focus on the effect at year 10 because it represents
exposure for nearly all schooling years. The reduction in earnings among the 10-year cohorts is
3.93% relative to the mean, which is shown directly below the estimates in the table. The 3.93%

20

Cohodes et al. (2016) and Brown, Kowalski and Lurie (2015) show that the Medicaid expansions of the 1980s and
1990s had large, positive effects on the educational attainment and eventual earnings of youth exposed to these
expansions. However, our birth cohorts are mostly too old to have been impacted by these policy changes.
Furthermore, we cannot control for Medicaid eligibility in this study because eligibility policies and rates are not
available prior to 1980. If anything, this is likely to attenuate our estimates.
21
The food stamp data come from the publicly-available data used by Hoynes, Schanzenbach and Almond (2016),
available at https://assets.aeaweb.org/assets/production/articles-attachments/aer/app/10604/20130375_app.pdf.

14

reduction in annual earnings for each individual translates to a large amount of total earnings lost
because of the prevalence of duty-to-bargain laws in the US. Across all 33 states that have a
duty-to-bargain law in place, our results suggest an annual loss of $213.8 billion dollars due to
male workers having grown up in states that mandate collective bargaining between teachers’
unions and school districts.22 As the 15 year estimates show, this is likely a conservative estimate
of earnings losses due to duty-to-bargain exposure. Furthermore, the estimates in Table 2 are
similar across columns, which is inconsistent with biases from age-specific shocks or from
exposure to other policies when young.
Panel (a) of Figure 2 shows the full set of event study estimates for male earnings.23 We
overlay a linear fit for the pre- and post-treatment periods to see if there are differential pretreatment trends and if there are time-varying treatment effects. In Section 5.4, we show
estimates that test directly for biases associated with any pre-treatment trends. The visual
evidence in Panel (a) of Figure 2 supports our identification strategy: there is no evidence of
differential trends in earnings across pre-treatment cohorts. When duty-to-bargain laws are
passed, earnings decline rather linearly as a function of exposure time. The 5, 10 and 15 year
treatment effect patterns shown in Table 3 thus provide an accurate depiction of how DTB law
exposure affects earnings.
Panel B of Table 2 presents estimates for weekly hours worked. Consistent with the
reduction in earnings, average hours worked decline by 0.424 due to being exposed to DTB laws
for 10 years. This is a 1.09% decline relative to the mean of 38.96 shown in Table A-1. The
estimates are stable across columns and are significant at the 5% level for men. As with earnings,
the negative effect grows linearly in magnitude with years of exposure from a small and not
statistically significant effect at year 5 to -0.668 hours in year 15. Panel (c) of Figure 2 shows
event study estimates for this sample and outcome: there is no evidence of differential pre-

22
We obtain this estimate using total wage income for each state and the percent of the workforce that is male
(53.16%) in 2014, obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Specifically, we multiply 2014 total income in the
33 states by 0.0393*0.5316.
23
The event study estimates are based on an unbalanced panel of states due to the timing of when our outcomes are
measured and the timing of DTB passage. In results available upon request, we have estimated event studies using
the small set of states for which we have sufficient pre- and post-DTB observations. The estimates continue to show
no signs of pre-treatment trends, and the effect sizes are somewhat larger. There is no evidence that the unbalanced
panel we use throughout drives our results and conclusions.

15

treatment trends, and the effect grows linearly with relative treatment time.24
The finding that teacher collective bargaining is associated with fewer working hours
among men suggests that DTB laws may affect the extensive margin of labor supply. Table 3
examines this question in detail, showing estimates of equation (1) where the proportion
employed (Panel A), unemployed (Panel B) and not in the labor force (Panel C) are used as the
dependent variables. Duty-to-bargain laws reduce male employment and increase the proportion
of male workers who are not in the labor force. In Panel A, 10 years of exposure to a duty-tobargain law while in school lowers the likelihood a male worker is employed 1 percentage point,
or 1.22% relative to the mean. The estimates are significant at the 5% level and are similar in
magnitude to the hours worked results. Thus, much of the reduction in hours worked is coming
from the extensive margin.25
There is little evidence of an effect on unemployment. Rather, teacher collective
bargaining laws impact labor force participation: 10 years of exposure to a duty-to-bargain law
reduces the male labor force participation rate by 0.8 of a percentage point. Relative to the mean
labor force non-participation rate, this represents a reduction of 6.56%. As with the results in
Table 2, effects at year 15 are even larger than those at year 10.
Full event study estimates of employment outcomes are shown in Figure 3. Pre-treatment
trends are small and if anything are in the opposite direction of the treatment effects. As with
hours worked in Figure 2, there is a level shift that occurs two years before treatment. But the
estimates in Table 3 reflect only the post-DTB trend break. The figure shows clear effects of
DTB passage on employment and labor force participation that grow over time, but there is no
evidence of an effect on unemployment.
Table 4 presents results for occupational skill and educational attainment. In Panel A, the

24

Event study estimates for hours worked in Figure 2 as well as for employment outcomes in Figure 3 show
evidence of a shift in the year just prior to DTB passage. As discussed in Section 4, some of this shift is due to
misclassification of treatment timing across cohorts because we do not know the year in which respondents entered
school. It is unlikely these level shifts represent systematic shocks because of the time-varying nature of the
treatment. Importantly, all of our event study estimates reported in the tables are relative to year -1, which is set to
zero. Thus, our estimates reflect the change in slope at DTB passage rather than any level shift that occurs prior to
passage. Furthermore, the changes between relative years -2 and -1 are not indicative of broader pre-treatment trends
in the direction of the treatment effect.
25
That there is an extensive margin effect makes it difficult to examine wages, because the treatment is correlated
with a change in the composition of wage earners among men. We therefore focus on earnings, which can more
easily handle changes on the extensive margin due to the inclusion of zeros.

16

dependent variable is the proportion of individuals in one’s occupation that has at least some
collegiate attainment.26 The results suggest that being exposed to a duty-to-bargain law for 10
years decreases the proportion of workers in one’s occupation with at least a college degree by
0.003 (or 0.48% relative to the mean) in our preferred model. While the year 10 effect is not
statistically significantly different from zero at conventional levels (it is significant at the 11%
level), both the year 5 and year 15 estimates are of similar magnitude and are significant at the
10% level. Panel (a) of Figure 4 shows full event study estimates for this outcome. The figure
shows little evidence of pre-DTB differential trends, and there is a reduction in occupational skill
post law passage that accords closely with the estimates in Table 4.27 These results point to
collective bargaining laws negatively affecting the occupational skill level chosen by workers.
The reduced earnings and labor force participation associated with teacher collective
bargaining suggest that human capital accumulation is declining among exposed cohorts. This
reduction could show up in changes in the quantity of education completed, although educational
attainment is a coarse measure of human capital. We examine how exposure to a DTB law
affects years of completed education; estimates on non-cognitive outcomes that provide
alternative measures of human capital are shown in Section 6. Because most people have
finished their formal schooling by their mid-30s, the age ranges included in our analysis allow us
to accurately measure the total amount of education obtained by each ACS respondent.
Panel B of Table 4 shows results for the total number of years of education. Across
columns, the point estimates are negative, modest in magnitude, and are only statistically
significantly different from zero at 15 years. Taking the estimates at face value, they suggest a
0.38% decline in educational attainment at 10 years that increases in magnitude at 15 years of
collective bargaining exposure.28 The event study estimates in Panel (c) of Figure 4 align with

26

The regressions in Panel A of Table 4 are estimated using the individual-level, disaggregated ACS data. This was
done because the dependent variable does not lend itself simply to aggregation at the state-year-cohort level.
27
Figure 4 shows that much of the effect of occupational sorting is a level shift, with much smaller growth in the
magnitude of the effects over time since DTB passage than we document for other outcomes. Thus, the pattern of
effects for this outcome differs from the other labor market outcomes we examine. This likely reflects somewhat
different mechanisms driving the occupational sorting results than the other labor market effects.
28
Examining total years of schooling may miss heterogeneous effects across the distribution of schooling levels. We
have estimated equation (1) using the proportion of respondents with different highest levels of educational
attainment as the dependent variable to check whether total years of schooling is masking shifts at particular parts of
the educational attainment distribution. The estimates for all schooling levels are small in absolute value and only
the effect on “some college” is significant at the 5% level. The small negative effect on reduced years of education

17

the prior results in showing no pre-DTB trends and post-DTB effects that increase linearly in
magnitude with exposure time.
How much of the earnings decline can the educational attainment effects explain? The
10-year estimate is precise enough to rule out an effect larger than -0.124 years of completed
schooling at the 5% level in column (iii), which is 0.92% relative to the mean. Assuming that an
additional year of schooling increases earnings by 10% (Card 1999), changes in completed
schooling can explain at most 31% (0.0124/0.0393) of the earnings effect we find.29 The
earnings effect also is likely driven to some extent by reductions in teacher quality, both from
changes in who becomes a teacher and in teacher effort. Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff (2014)
show that having a one standard deviation higher value-added teacher in one grade increases
earnings at age 28 by 1.3%. Under the assumption that teacher value-added effects are
cumulative across grades, our earnings effect is consistent with a 0.30 (3.93/(10*1.3)) reduction
in teacher value-added.
The lack of strong educational attainment effects is somewhat surprising, especially given
the large labor market effects we document. These results are consistent with some of the prior
literature discussed in Section 2 that has not found an effect of duty-to-bargain law passage on
high school dropout rates (e.g., Lovenheim 2009). The implication of the educational attainment
results is that collective bargaining law exposure affects human capital in ways that are not fully
captured by years of education or degree receipt. Our estimates likely reflect other aspects of
human capital accumulation that do not appear in educational attainment measures, such as noncognitive skills, and they highlight the value of examining labor market measures in order to
draw a more complete picture of how teacher collective bargaining affects long-run outcomes.
We return to this issue in Section 6 when we discuss effects on non-cognitive outcomes.
Our results suggest that male students experience worse long-run labor market outcomes
when exposed to duty-to-bargain laws. As discussed previously, we are unable to fully examine
the mechanisms that underlie this result due to lack of information on teacher productivity and

thus predominantly reflects lower college enrollment, but we cannot rule out small declines that are distributed
evenly throughout the educational attainment distribution. These results are available from the authors upon request.
29
One concern with the estimates in Table 4 is that the ACS changed the way it asked about the total number of
years of schooling in 2008. We estimate equation (1) for the total years of schooling outcome using data only from
2008-2012 in Appendix Table A-3. The estimate is somewhat larger in absolute value but qualitatively similar to the
baseline estimate in Table 4. The estimate in Table 4 also is within the 95% confidence interval of the estimate in
Table A-3.

18

only sparse data on schooling inputs from this time period. Our results are consistent with
Frandsen (2016), who shows that DTB law passage leads to fewer work hours among teachers.
Litten (2017) also finds evidence from the restriction of collective bargaining rights in Wisconsin
that teacher non-wage compensation is reduced. Using the Census/Survey of Governments from
1972-1991, we estimate models of DTB law passage on state average schooling resource
allocations that allow for linear pre- and post-DTB trends as well as a level shift in the year of
passage (see equation 2). Online Appendix Table A-9 presents evidence that DTB passage
increases the total amount spent on teachers, especially relative to a negative pre-passage trend,
but the largest effect is on administrative salary expenditures.30 These expenditures increase
dramatically following law passage, but total expenditures do not change. The shift toward
teaching and administrator salaries come at the expense of support service salaries. That the
effect grows over time matches the pattern of results in the event study models closely. It is
plausible that these changes could reduce school productivity, but we are unaware of research
demonstrating a clear link between spending on school administration and student achievement.
We also find no effect on teacher-student ratios.
5.2. Baseline Female Estimates
Tables 2-4 and Figures 2-4 show results for women as well. The results presented in the
tables are suggestive of a small negative effect of collective bargaining law exposure among
women on labor market outcomes. Importantly, the event study estimates in Figures 2-4 indicate
that these effects are biased by cross-cohort pre-DTB trends that are in the same direction as the
treatment effects. Unlike the results for men, the pre-trends among women indicate that any
negative effects we find are spurious. We therefore urge caution in lending a causal
interpretation to these findings.
The pre-treatment trends among women likely reflect strong secular shifts in female labor
market opportunities over the cohorts we consider (Blau and Kahn 2013; Bick and Bruggeman
2014). The shifts happen to be negatively correlated with the timing of DTB passage, but it is
clear that the forces driving these trends do not affect male outcomes; we find no evidence of a
bias from such trends for males either visually or statistically when we control for cross-cohort
pre-DTB outcome trends in Section 5.4. Thus, our empirical design leads to inconclusive

30

Prior research using these data examine average teacher salaries, not total spending on teachers. This can account
for some of the differences between these estimates and those in Hoxby (1996) and Frandsen (2017).

19

evidence on the effect of duty-to-bargain law exposure on labor market outcomes among women
due to the existence of pre-treatment trends. There is, however, a clear negative effect for men,
for whom we find no evidence of such trends. Motivated by these findings, we focus much of the
remainder of the analysis on men but also present female estimates for completeness.
5.3. Estimates by Race/Ethnicity
We show estimates by race and ethnicity at 10 years in Table 5. Panels A and B present
results for black and Hispanic men and white and Asian men, respectively, and Panels C and D
present similar results for women. Examining results among blacks and Hispanics separately is
of great interest, as urban areas that differentially service minority students were more likely to
unionize first and to have stronger unions.31 Furthermore, the 1980s saw a relative erosion of
labor market outcomes of young black men (Bound and Freeman 1992). This was a time period
in which many of those exposed to a DTB law were entering the labor market, and examining
effects for non-whites versus whites could reveal substantial heterogeneity in treatment effects.
As shown in Panel A, the impact of duty-to-bargain law exposure is particularly large
among black and Hispanic men: at 10 years earnings decline by $3,246 (9.4%), hours worked
decline by 0.72 (2.2%), employment declines by 1.3 percentage points (1.9%), and labor force
participation is reduced by 1.3 percentage points (6.2%). We also find a statistically significant
decline in years of schooling of 0.20 years (1.6%) and a decline in occupational skill. Panel (a) of
Figure 5 presents earnings event study estimates for this sample. Event studies for other
outcomes are presented in Online Appendix Figures A-1 through A-5. For each outcome, preDTB trends are either zero or in the wrong direction (i.e., opposite to the direction of the
treatment effect), and the effect grows with more exposure to a collective bargaining law. In
short, these figures mirror the event study estimates for the male sample as a whole but are larger
in magnitude.
Panel B of Table 5 shows that the estimates are not isolated to black and Hispanic men;
statistically significant adverse effects are present for white and Asian men at 10 years as well,
though they are more modest in magnitude. Earnings among white and Asian men decline by
31
Urban districts were more likely to be represented by the more confrontational AFT rather than the NEA, which
could drive some of our results. It also could be that teachers unions themselves have different effects on non-white
children. Unions could exacerbate racial differences in disciplinary behavior or otherwise lead to differences in how
African American and Hispanic children are treated relative to white and Asian children. Investigating this
mechanism is beyond the scope of the paper, but the reductions in non-cognitive skills we show in Section 6 are
consistent with this mechanism.

20

$1,661 (2.8%) at 10 years of exposure, and employment declines by 0.23 of a percentage point
(0.56%). The other estimates are consistent with a decline in outcomes and are similar in
magnitude to the baseline estimates.
Comparing Panels (a) and (c) of the race-specific event study figures shows that duty-tobargain laws lead to worse labor market outcomes among blacks and Hispanics that grow over
time, while for whites and Asians the effect is more immediate for several of the outcomes.
Hence, the growth in effect sizes with DTB exposure in the baseline estimates is driven
predominantly by black and Hispanic men.
Results in Panels C and D of Table 5 show suggestive evidence of DTB exposure on
outcomes of black and Hispanic women. However, for several outcomes there are differential
pre-treatment trends in the same direction as the treatment effect among these women. These
trends are not present for all outcomes, but the results in Panel C of Table 5 should be interpreted
with caution given the event study results. That there is evidence of a negative effect of DTB
laws among black and Hispanic women indicates that duty-to-bargain laws have large negative
impacts on non-whites. The evidence of effect heterogeneity across race/ethnicity for both men
and women suggest collective bargaining laws exacerbate long-run racial inequality in outcomes.
5.4. Robustness Checks
The baseline estimates support the rent-seeking theory of union behavior, whereby unions
reduce the productivity of public schools and cause a reduction in student achievement as well as
subsequent long-run labor market outcomes. In this section, we explore evidence on whether our
results are driven by other policies, trends or events that are not accounted for by the controls in
equation (1).
We first show results from estimates of parametric event study models that directly
control for pre-DTB trends. We construct a relative time to DTB law variable ( −

+ 18) that

forms the basis for the relative time indicator variables in equation (2).32 This variable takes on a
value of zero in states that do not pass a duty-to-bargain law. We then estimate models of the
following form:
=

+

( −

+ 18) +

(

32

) +

( −

+ 18) ∗ (

)

Similar to the event study estimates, we group relative time observations less than -10 and greater than 20
together. We do so to make this model as similar as possible to equation (1) and to avoid the estimates being unduly
influenced by observations that are far away from the timing of treatment. This ensures we are identified off the 30
year period surrounding duty-to-bargain law passage.

21

+

+

+

+

+

.

(2)

All variables are as previously defined. In equation (2), we allow for a level shift (
slope shift (

) relative to any pre-treatment trend (

) and a

). Thus, this model is not biased by linear

pre-DTB trends, so comparing these estimates to baseline provides some evidence of the
importance of directly controlling for cross-cohort variation prior to DTB law passage.
Results of estimating equation (2) are shown in Table 6. The results align with the event
study estimates and indicate that our results for men are not biased by pre-treatment trends. For
only one outcome is there a significant pre-treatment trend estimate, and it is in the opposite
direction of the treatment effect. Aside from unemployment and years of education, there are
both level and slope shifts that are of similar magnitudes to those in the baseline tables and that
mirror the event study plots. We calculate percent effects after 10 years ((

+

∗ 10)/ ),

which are directly comparable to the percent effects shown in Tables 2-4. These calculations
show estimates that are similar to, if somewhat larger than, the baseline results.33
Panel B shows estimates of equation (2) for women; similar to the event studies there are
pre-treatment trends that undermines the validity of the analysis for women. Conditional on these
linear trends, there is little evidence of an effect of DTB laws on female labor market outcomes.
Online Appendix Tables A-4 and A-5 present additional robustness checks that each
examines how our results and conclusions for men and women, respectively, change when we
control for additional factors in equation (1) that could be correlated with both duty-to-bargain
exposure and long-run outcomes. Throughout, we focus on the 10-year estimates; full event
study results for each specification are available upon request.
In Panel A, we exclude the 14 states that do not have anti-strike penalties associated with
their duty-to-bargain laws.34 Teacher strikes may have an independent effect on student
outcomes, and there is some evidence that resource effects of unions were larger in such states
(Paglayan forthcoming). It also could be the case that states becoming more favorable to
teachers’ unions were becoming more favorable to private sector unions. In Panel B, we control

33

The estimates using equation (2) are larger because they include to some extent the changes in outcomes that
occur between relative periods -2 and -1, which are evident in the event study figures. This illustrates the value of
using a less parametric model (such as equation 1) that can better disentangle changes that occur post treatment from
those that occur just prior to treatment.
34
These states are Wisconsin, Connecticut, Michigan, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Maine, Vermont, Alaska,
Hawaii, Kansas, Pennsylvania, Idaho, Oregon and Montana.

22

for the total unionization rate at age 18 for each birth state-birth cohort.35
The next two panels address the possibility that the rollout of duty-to-bargain laws is
correlated with inner-city violence and white flight that occurred during the 1960s and 1970s.
Such events likely had independent negative effects on long-run outcomes, which could be
driving many of our results. First, we control for the average proportion of people in each state
living in urban areas during each cohort’s schooling years.36 While we do not know if a
respondent grew up in an inner city, the bias stemming from secular shocks occurring within
cities should be correlated with the proportion of individuals living in inner-city areas.
Furthermore, this control helps account for increasing suburbanization that was occurring when
our analysis cohorts were in school. Second, we use data on all riot and collective action protest
events from the Dynamics of Collective Action dataset that includes counts of all such events
from 1955-1995. We count the number of riots as well as the number of protests in which
violence occurred in each state over the time period when each cohort was between 6 and 18.37
This specification is designed specifically to examine the effect that the urban civil unrest in the
1960s and 1970s has on our estimates. Panel D contains the results that include this additional
control. All of the results in Panels A-D are extremely similar to baseline.
In Panel E, we control for both state-of-birth and current state-of-residence fixed effects
(Card and Krueger 1992a,b). The latter set of fixed effects account for the different labor markets
in which workers are located that could be correlated with treatment. We estimate this model
with individual-level disaggregated data, and the results are mostly larger in absolute value than
baseline: not accounting for current state of residence leads to more conservative estimates.
Panel F adds controls for state-by-year fixed effects. These estimates account for any
birth state specific shocks or policies that affect all birth cohorts similarly in a state and year. The
estimates are noisier than in the baseline models, but they are qualitatively similar and somewhat
larger. These results are consistent with our preferred estimates and provide no evidence of bias
from state-by-year specific shocks. Panel G complements these findings by showing estimates in
35

Unionization rates come from CPS Merged Outgoing Rotation Group data collected by Barry Hirsch and David
Macpherson: http://www.unionstats.com.
36
Urban areas include those living in “urbanized areas” or in “incorporated places”/Census Designated Places (areas
with a population of 2,500 or more outside of an urbanized area). This proportion is calculated using the 1960-1990
Decennial Censuses. We use each decennial Census estimate and average across cohorts using the percentage of
their school-age years spent in each decade.
37
This dataset can be found at: http://web.stanford.edu/group/collectiveaction/cgi-bin/drupal/. We obtain similar
results if we control for the number of collective action protest events including nonviolent events.

23

which we control for Census Region-by-cohort fixed effects. Some regions may be experiencing
differential shocks during the time period in which these laws are passed, such as desegregation
in the south. The estimates in Panel G use only within-region and cohort variation, and they are
extremely similar to the baseline results if somewhat larger in absolute value. Finally, in Panel H
we control for the proportion of time in each cohort’s schooling years and state that Democrats
had majority control of the state legislature. We do this in order to account for the potential
correlation between political control of the state legislature and unionization. The similarity of
the estimates suggests we are not picking up political trends of shifts that drive long-run labor
market outcomes.
We also examine the sensitivity of our results to outliers by re-estimating equation (1) 50
times for all of our outcomes, each time dropping a different state from the analysis sample. The
results from this exercise are shown in Online Appendix Figure A-6 for four of our main
outcomes: earnings, hours of work, employment, and labor force participation. Our male
estimates are insensitive to excluding any one state.38
As discussed above, of primary concern in our identification strategy is the existence of
secular trends that differ systematically with treatment exposure. The event study estimates for
men suggest such trends are not biasing our estimates. As an additional test of whether the
timing pattern of DTB passage is driving our results, we perform permutation tests for all of our
outcomes that randomly reassign DTB passage years across states. We do this in two ways: first,
we randomly assign DTB passage dates between 1960 and 1987 across states, and second we
randomly assign DTB passage dates to match the timing distribution shown in Figure 1. Table 7
shows the permutation test results for men. We perform the permutations 300 times for each
outcome and calculate the percentage of times the simulated estimate is less than the actual
estimate. These results therefore represent p-values of the null hypothesis that any combination
of passage dates across states would generate the same pattern of treatment effects. We reject
such a null at either the 5 or 10 percent level for every outcome in both panels. These results
suggest that our baseline estimates are not identified off of secular trends or endogenous timing

38
Because of the geographic concentration of DTB rollout, we lack the power to estimate models separately by
Census region or that drop specific regions. We also lack the power to drop states that never pass DTB laws (many
of which are in the south). The estimates in Panel G of Table A-4 indicates that our results are not driven by regionspecific trends or shocks or by the inclusion of any specific region in our sample, and the estimates in Figure A-6
suggest our results are not being driven by the inclusion of any one state.

24

of DTB passage. That the effects we estimate are linked strongly to both whether a state passes a
DTB law and when it does so supports the validity of our estimation strategy.
A final identification issue comes from measurement error driven by either pre- or postbirth mobility. To assess the importance of pre-birth mobility, we estimate equation (1) using
observed fixed characteristics in the ACS and some state-year level observables that are unlikely
to be affected by teacher collective bargaining. Because we focus on state of birth, these
estimates show whether the composition of people born in a given state and cohort changed with
respect to duty-to-bargain law exposure. Online Appendix Table A-6 shows these results. We
find little evidence of a change in the composition of birth cohorts that would indicate parents are
systematically moving prior to having a child because of duty-to-bargain laws. While there is a
small number of statistically significant coefficients, they are quite close to zero and thus are not
economically significant. The point estimates are also not in a consistent direction that would
indicate a bias from changes in composition driven by DTB law passage.
We next examine the relevance of post-birth mobility, which introduces measurement
error into our DTB exposure variable. In the 1990 Census, 78.4% of 17-year-olds live in the state
of their birth. In order to provide information about how serious any mobility-induced bias
would be, we re-estimate equation (1) under two assumptions. In Panel A of Online Appendix
Table A-7, we show results for men that exclude the 37.7% of respondents who do not live in
their birth state.39 These estimates are extremely similar to the baseline results.
In Panel B, we estimate equation (1) under the assumption that those who live in a state at
age 17 other than their birth state spent all of their schooling years in that other state. Using the
1990 Census, we create a 50x50 matrix that contains the full joint distribution of state-of-birth
and state at age 17. We then create a new dataset that contains 50 observations for each age-yearbirth-state observation. Within each age-year-birth-state group, there is a separate observation for
each potential state a respondent could have lived in at age 17. We then weight each observation
by the proportion of the 1990 Census that was in the given birth state-state at 17 combination.
All DTB and other state-specific variables are calculated using the assumed state at age 17, not
the birth state. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the birth state, state at age 17 level
(Cameron, Gelbach and Miller 2011).40 The results in Panel B are similar to baseline but are

39
40

Estimates for women are shown in Online Appendix Table A-8.
Because this method requires aggregated data, we do not estimate this model for occupational skill.

25

somewhat attenuated. This is expected because we are making the extreme assumption that all
mobility occurs prior to school entry, which introduces measurement error into the exposure
measure. Taken together, the results in Table A-7 suggest that any bias from post-birth mobility
is small.

6. Medium-Term Effects on Non-Cognitive Outcomes
The negative effects of teacher collective bargaining on earnings and labor force
participation suggest that duty-to-bargain laws lead students to obtain less human capital when in
school. We now turn to direct evidence on how collective bargaining influences non-cognitive
outcomes using data from the NLSY79. This is a nationally-representative dataset of students
aged 14-22 in 1979, covering the 1957-1965 birth cohorts. These cohorts thus overlap with much
of the variation in the passage of teacher collective bargaining laws shown in Figure 1.
Non-cognitive skills are measured three ways: the Rotter Locus of Control, the
Rosenberg Self-esteem Scale and the Pearlin Mastery Scale. The Rotter Locus of Control
measures the extent to which students believe they have control over their own lives, with higher
scores indicating less internal control (i.e., lower non-cognitive skills). The Rosenberg Selfesteem Scale is designed to measure a student’s self-worth; higher scores indicate higher selfesteem. Third, the Pearlin Mastery Scale is a measure of the extent to which individuals perceive
themselves in control of forces that significantly impact their lives. Respondents with higher
measures report increased ability to determine the course of their own life.
We estimate models using these outcomes that are similar to equation (2) but that omit
the pre-DTB relative time control due to a lack of a sufficient number of observations. We
restrict our analysis to men because of prior evidence of lack of pre-treatment trends and because
it is among men where we observe negative labor market effects of DTB law exposure. All
outcomes are measured in 1997, so we can only include birth cohort and state of residence at age
14 fixed effects (not birth cohort-year fixed effects). We also control for race, family income and
indicators for both mother’s and father’s educational attainment. Estimates are weighted by the
NLSY79 sample weights and standard errors are clustered at the state level.
We see consistent evidence in Table 8 that exposure to a collective bargaining law
negatively impacts non-cognitive scores among men. All non-cognitive skill measures move in
the direction of declining skill: after 10 years, the Rotter Locus of Control increases by 12.9%,
the Rosenberg Self-esteem Scale declines by 4.6%, and the Pearlin Mastery Scale score is
26

reduced by 1.6%. The years of exposure estimates are statistically different from zero at the 5%
level for the first two measures, while Pearlin Mastery Scale estimates are not significant at even
the 10% level. Together, these results show that students exposed to collective bargaining laws
experience reductions in non-cognitive skills in adolescence and early adulthood.
The results in Table 8 support the earnings and labor market results presented above.
These cognitive and non-cognitive measures have been shown in prior research to be highly
correlated with long-run outcomes (Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua 2006), and they provide more
direct evidence consistent with the rent-seeking hypothesis. Teacher collective bargaining laws
lead to a decline in the productivity of educational inputs, which reduces short-run non-cognitive
outcomes that are still evident into adulthood. Furthermore, these results help explain why the
labor market effects of teacher collective bargaining are larger than the educational attainment
effects: non-cognitive skills affect the former more than the latter (Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua
2006). The sum total of the evidence from the ACS and NLSY79 is remarkably consistent in
showing that teacher duty-to-bargain laws negatively impact male long-run outcomes through
their effects on the quality of education students receive.

7. Conclusion
This paper provides the first comprehensive analysis of the effect of state teacher duty-tobargain laws on student long-run educational attainment and labor market outcomes. We link
adults from the 2005-2012 ACS to their state of birth and exploit the timing of passage of dutyto-bargain laws across cohorts within a state and across states over time. Our estimates show that
exposure to duty-to-bargain laws when 35-49 year old men were of school-age adversely affects
their long-run outcomes. We do not find robust evidence of impacts on women, however.
Our results are consistent with the rent-seeking model of teachers’ unions. Men in cohorts
who were exposed to a duty-to-bargain law in the 10 years after passage earn $2,134.04 (or
3.93%) less per year. A back-of-the-envelope calculation indicates these laws reduce total labor
market earnings by $213.8 billion per year, which suggests our findings have large implications
for earnings in the US due to the prevalence of duty-to-bargain laws. Our results also point to
collective bargaining laws reducing hours worked as well as lowering employment and labor
force participation rates. The negative effects of exposure to duty-to-bargain laws are largest
among black and Hispanic men, although white and Asian men also are adversely impacted. In
particular, yearly earnings decline by 9.43% among black and Hispanic males. We find more
27

evidence of a decline in educational attainment for this group of men as well. Among white and
Asian men, earnings decline by 2.80%. We complement these results with an analysis from the
NLSY79 that shows duty-to-bargain laws reduce non-cognitive outcomes among young men. In
total, our estimates indicate that state duty-to-bargain laws have sizable, negative labor market
consequences for men who attended grade school in states with these laws.
From a policy perspective, these results contribute to the contentious debate occurring in
many states and in the courts about whether to limit the collective bargaining power of teachers.
Of first-order concern in this policy debate is how collective bargaining affects student
outcomes. Our results provide the most comprehensive information to date on this question.
However, there are a couple of caveats to generalizing these findings to current students. First,
the cohorts we analyze were exposed to an educational environment very different from the one
that exists today. For example, school choice as well as teacher, school and student
accountability policies that are currently rather ubiquitous were virtually nonexistent during the
1960s-1980s. Some of the effects of teacher collective bargaining we estimate could be driven by
how teachers’ unions interacted with specific aspects of the educational system that no longer are
relevant. Second, the current collective bargaining law changes in many states alter aspects of
collective bargaining, not the legality of collective bargaining itself. Examination of these policy
changes will lend much insight into whether one can change collective bargaining laws to reduce
the negative impacts on students we find while still providing teachers with the bargaining
benefits they value. We view this as an important set of questions for future research.

28

References
Balfour, Alan G. 1974. “More Evidence that Unions do not Achieve Higher Salaries for
Teachers.” Journal of Collective Negotiations 3(4): 289-303.
Baron, Jason E. 2017. “The Effect of Teachers' Unions on Student Achievement: Evidence from
Wisconsin's Act 10.” Mimeo.
Bastian, Jacob and Katherine Michelmore. Forthcoming. “The Long-Term Impact of the Earned
Income Tax Credit on Children’s Education and Employment Outcomes.” Journal of Labor
Economics.
Baugh, William H. and Joe A. Stone. 1982. “Teachers, Unions, and Wages in the 1970's:
Unionism Now Pays.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 35(3): 368-376.
Bedard, Kelly and Elizabeth Dhuey. 2012. “School-Entry Policies and Skill Accumulation
Across Directly and Indirectly Affected Individuals.” Journal of Human Resources 47(3):
643-683.
Biasi, Barbara. 2017. “Unions, Salaries, and the Market for Teachers: Evidence from
Wisconsin.” Mimeo.
Bick, Alexander and Bettina Bruggeman. 2014. “Labor Supply Along the Extensive and
Intensive Margin: Cross-Country Facts and Time Trends by Gender.” Mimeo.
Blau, Francine and Lawrence Kahn. 2013. “Female Labor Supply: Why is the US Falling
Behind?” American Economic Review 103(3):251-256.
Bound, John and Richard B. Freeman. 1992. “What went Wrong? The Erosion of Relative
Earnings and Employment Among Young Black Men in the 1980s.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107(1): 201-232.
Cameron, Colin A., Jonah B. Gelbach and Douglas L. Miller. 2011. “Robust Inference With
Multiway Clustering.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 29(2): 238-249.
Card, David. 1999. “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings.” In Orley Ashenfelter and
David Card, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 3A. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. 1992a. “Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education
and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States.” Journal of Political Economy
100(1): 1-40.
Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. 1992b. “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings:
A Direct Assessment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1): 151-200.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach,
and Danny Yagan. 2011. “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings?
Evidence from Project Star.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4): 1593-1660.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman and Jonah Rockoff. 2014. “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II:
Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood.” American Economic Review
104(9): 2633-2679.
Cohodes, Sarah, Daniel Grossman, Samuel Kleiner and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2016. “The
Effect of Child Health Insurance Access on Schooling: Evidence from Public Insurance
Expansions.” Journal of Human Resources 51(3): 727-759.
Cowen, Joshua M. and Katharine O. Strunk. 2015. “The Impact of Teachers’ Unions on
Educational Outcomes: What we Know and what we Need to Learn.” Economics of
Education Review 48(October): 208-223.
Deming, David J., Sarah Cohodes, Jennifer Jennings, and Christopher Jencks. 2013. “School
Accountability, Postsecondary Attainment and Earnings.” NBER Working Paper No. 19444.
29

Eberts, Randall W. and Joe A. Stone. 1986. “Teacher Unions and the Cost of Public Education.”
Economic Inquiry 24(4): 631-643.
Eberts, Randall W. and Joe A. Stone. 1987. “Teacher Unions and the Productivity of Public
Schools.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 40(3): 354-363.
Farber, Henry S. 2003. “Nonunion Wage Rates and the Threat of Unionization.” Working Paper
no. 472 (March), Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University.
Frandsen, Brigham. 2016. “The Effects of Collective Bargaining Rights on Public Employee
Compensation: Evidence from Teachers, Fire Fighters, and Police.” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 69(1): 84-112.
Freeman, Richard. 1980. The Exit-Voice Tradeoff in the Labor Market: Unionism, Job Tenure,
Quits, and Separations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 94(4): 643-673.
Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence F. Katz and Ilyana Kuziemko. 2006. “The Homecoming of American
College Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 20(4): 133-156.
Gunderson, Morley. 2005. “Two Faces of Union Voice in the Public Sector.” Journal of Labor
Research 26(3): 393-413.
Haider, Steven and Gary Solon. 2006. “Life-Cycle Variation in the Association between Current
and Lifetime Earnings.” American Economic Review 96(4): 1308-1320.
Heckman, James J. and Tim Krautz. 2012. “Hard Evidence on Soft Skills.” Labour Economics
19(4): 451-464.
Heckman, James J., Rodrigo Pinto and Peter Savelyev. 2013. “Understanding the Mechanisms
Through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes.”
American Economic Review 103(6): 2052-2086.
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud and Sergio Urzua. 2006. “The Effects of Cognitive and
Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of Labor
Economics 24(3): 411-482.
Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond. 2016. “Long-run Impacts
of Childhood Access to the Safety Net.” American Economic Review 106(4): 903-934.
Hoxby, Caroline Minter, 1996. “How Teachers’ Unions Affect Education Production.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(3): 671-718.
Hoxby, Caroline Minter and Andrew Leigh, 2004. “Pulled Away or Pushed out? Explaining the
Decline of Teacher Aptitude in the United States.” American Economic Review 94(2): 236240.
Jackson, C. Kirabo, Rucker Johnson and Claudia Persico. 2015. “The Effect of School Finance
Reforms on the Distribution of Spending, Academic Achievement and Adult Outcomes.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(1): 157-218.
Kleiner, Morris and Daniel Petree. 1988. “Unionism and Licensing of Public School Teachers:
Impact on Wages and Educational Output,” in When Public Sector Workers Unionize,
Richard Freeman and Casey Ichniowski, eds. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press).
Krueger, Alan. 1999. “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114(2): 497-532.
Litten, Andrew. 2017. “The Effects of Public Unions on Compensation: Evidence From
Wisconsin.” Mimeo.
Lott, Jonathan and Lawrence W. Kenny. 2013. “State Teacher Union Strength and Student
Achievement.” Economics of Education Review 35: 93-103.

30

Lovenheim, Michael F. 2009. “The Effect of Teachers’ Unions on Education Production:
Evidence from Union Election Certifications in Three Midwestern States.” Journal of Labor
Economics 27(4): 525-587.
Ludwig, Jens and Douglas L. Miller. 2007. “Does Head Start Improve Children's Life Chances?
Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1):
159-208.
Moe, Terry M. 2009. “Collective Bargaining and the Performance of Public Schools.” American
Journal of Political Science 53(1): 156-174.
Moore, William J. and John Raisian. 1987. “Union-Nonunion Wage Differentials in the Public
Administration, Educational, and Private Sectors: 1970-1983.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics 69(4): 608-616.
Paglayan, Agustina. Forthcoming. “Public-Sector Unions and The Size of Governments.”
American Journal of Political Science.
Quinby, Laura D. 2017. “De-Unionization and the Labor Market for Teachers: From School
Boards to State Politics.” Mimeo
Roth, Jonathan. 2017. “Union Reform and Teacher Turnover: Evidence from Wisconsin's Act
10.” Mimeo.
Saltzman, Gregory M., 1985. “Bargaining Laws as a Cause and Consequence of the Growth of
Teacher Unionism.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 38(3): 335-351.
Valletta, Robert G. and Richard B. Freeman, 1988. “The NBER Public Sector Collective
Bargaining Law Data Set.” Appendix B in Richard B. Freeman and Casey Ichniowski, (eds.),
When Public Employees Unionize. Chicago: NBER and University of Chicago Press.
West, Kristine. 2015. “Teachers’ Unions, Compensation and Tenure.” Industrial Relations 54(2):
294-320.
Zuelke, Dennis C. and Lloyd E. Frohreich. 1977. “The Impact of Comprehensive Collective
Negotiations on Teachers' Salaries: Some evidence from Wisconsin.” Journal of Collective
Negotiations 6(1): 81-88.

31

Table 1: Teacher Duty-to-Bargain Law Passage by State
State
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri

Year of Passage
1971

1977
1966
1970
1976
1971
1972
1985
1974
1976
1971

1970
1970
1966
1966
1973

State
Year of Passage
Montana
1972
Nebraska
1987
Nevada
1970
New Hampshire
1976
New Jersey
1969
New Mexico
New York
1968
North Carolina
North Dakota
1970
Ohio
1985
Oklahoma
1972
Oregon
1970
Pennsylvania
1971
Rhode Island
1967
South Carolina
South Dakota
1971
Tennessee
1979
Texas
Utah
Vermont
1968
Virginia
Washington
1968
West Virginia
Wisconsin
1960
Wyoming

Source: NBER Public Sector Collective Bargaining Law Data Set (Valletta and
Freeman 1988), updated by Kim Reuben to 1996. Blank entries reflect the absence
of a teacher duty-to-bargain law in the state.

32

Table 2: The Effect of Collective Bargaining Laws on Earnings and Hours Worked

Exposure Time
At 5 Years
At 10 Years
At 15 Years
% Effect
At 10 Years

Exposure Time
At 5 Years
At 10 Years
At 15 Years
% Effect
At 10 Years

(i)
-1738.43∗∗∗
(476.59)
-2145.54∗∗∗
(597.60)
-2665.56∗∗∗
(699.07)

Panel A: Earnings
Men
(ii)
(iii)
-1749.87∗∗∗
-1728.95∗∗∗
(475.46)
(475.38)
-2160.91∗∗∗
-2134.04∗∗∗
(601.33)
(601.74)
-2698.04∗∗∗
-2666.71∗∗∗
(707.30)
(708.22)

Women
(v)
-215.31
(366.35)
-238.37
(367.46)
-842.71∗∗
(405.98)

(vi)
-214.25
(367.03)
-238.48
(368.80)
-839.93∗∗
(409.05)

-1.18%

-0.79%

-0.79%

-3.95%

-3.95%

(i)
-0.065
(0.164)
-0.459∗∗
(0.183)
-0.676∗∗∗
(0.222)

Panel B: Hours Worked
Men
(ii)
(iii)
-0.030
-0.022
(0.168)
(0.167)
-0.433∗∗
-0.424∗∗
(0.189)
(0.189)
-0.681∗∗∗
-0.668∗∗∗
(0.219)
(0.217)

(iv)
-0.238
(0.220)
-0.514∗
(0.267)
-1.148∗∗∗
(0.324)

Women
(v)
-0.152
(0.219)
-0.446
(0.273)
-1.134∗∗∗
(0.340)

(vi)
-0.156
(0.221)
-0.452
(0.276)
-1.140∗∗∗
(0.343)

-1.18%

-1.11%

-1.09%

-1.74%

-1.51%

-1.53%

x

x
x

x

x
x

Other Policy Controls
Birth Cohort*Survey Year FE

-3.93%

(iv)
-348.99
(355.43)
-357.26
(376.29)
-899.26∗∗
(412.58)

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49 year
old respondents. 5, 10 and 15 year estimates from the full event study model are shown. Regressions are based
on 6,000 birth state-cohort-year observations. All estimates include birth state, birth cohort and year fixed
effects, as well as controls for racial/ethnic composition of the state-cohort-year-gender cell. Other Policy
Controls include school finance reform, EITC and food stamp measures as described in the text. Regressions
are weighted by the number of individual observations that are used to calculate the averages in each statecohort-year-gender cell. % Effect at 10 Years shows the 10-year effect relative to the mean presented in Table
A-1. Standard errors clustered at the birth state level are in parentheses: *** indicates significance at the
1% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

33

Table 3: The Effect of Collective Bargaining Laws on Labor Market
Participation

Exposure Time
At 5 Years
At 10 Years
At 15 Years
% Effect At 10 Years

Exposure Time
At 5 Years
At 10 Years
At 15 Years
% Effect At 10 Years

Exposure Time
At 5 Years
At 10 Years
At 15 Years
% Effect At 10 Years

(i)
-0.003
(0.003)
-0.011∗∗
(0.004)
-0.014∗∗∗
(0.005)
-1.34%

(i)
0.002
(0.003)
0.002
(0.003)
0.002
(0.004)
3.53%

Panel A:
Men
(ii)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.010∗∗
(0.005)
-0.014∗∗
(0.005)

(iii)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.010∗∗
(0.005)
-0.013∗∗
(0.005)

(iv)
-0.005
(0.005)
-0.013∗∗
(0.006)
-0.027∗∗∗
(0.006)

Women
(v)
-0.004
(0.005)
-0.011∗∗
(0.005)
-0.027∗∗∗
(0.006)

(vi)
-0.004
(0.005)
-0.011∗∗
(0.005)
-0.027∗∗∗
(0.006)

-1.22%

-1.78%

-1.51%

-1.51%

(iv)
0.004∗∗
(0.002)
0.004
(0.003)
0.004
(0.004)

Women
(v)
0.004∗
(0.002)
0.004
(0.003)
0.003
(0.004)

8.31%

8.31%

8.31%

(iii)
0.000
(0.003)
0.008∗∗
(0.004)
0.011∗∗
(0.005)

(iv)
0.002
(0.005)
0.008
(0.006)
0.024∗∗∗
(0.008)

Women
(v)
0.000
(0.005)
0.007
(0.006)
0.023∗∗∗
(0.008)

(vi)
0.000
(0.005)
0.007
(0.006)
0.023∗∗∗
(0.008)

6.56%

6.56%

3.61%

3.15%

3.15%

x

x
x

x

x
x

-1.22%

Panel B: Unemployed
Men
(ii)
(iii)
0.002
0.002
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.001
0.002
(0.004)
(0.004)
0.002
0.002
(0.004)
(0.004)
1.77%

3.53%

Panel C: Not
Men
(i)
(ii)
0.001
0.000
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.009∗∗
0.008∗∗
(0.004)
(0.004)
0.012∗∗∗
0.012∗∗
(0.005)
(0.005)
7.38%

Other Policy Controls
Birth Cohort*Survey Year FE

Employed

(vi)
0.004∗
(0.002)
0.004
(0.003)
0.003
(0.004)

In Labor Force

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data
on 35-49 year old respondents. 5, 10 and 15 year estimates from the full event study model are
shown. Regressions are based on 6,000 birth state-cohort-year observations. All estimates include
birth state, birth cohort and year fixed effects, as well as controls for racial/ethnic composition
of the state-cohort-year-gender cell. Other Policy Controls include school finance reform, EITC
and food stamp measures as described in the text. Regressions are weighted by the number of
individual observations that are used to calculate the averages in each state-cohort-year-gender
cell. % Effect at 10 Years shows the 10-year effect relative to the mean presented in Table A-1.
Standard errors clustered at the birth state level are in parentheses: *** indicates significance
at the 1% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level and * indicates significance at the 10%
level.

34

Table 4: The Effect of Collective Bargaining Laws on Occupational Skill
and Educational Attainment

Exposure Time
At 5 Years
At 10 Years
At 15 Years
% Effect At 10 Years

Exposure Time
At 5 Years
At 10 Years
At 15 Years
% Effect At 10 Years
Other Policy Controls
Birth Cohort*Survey Year FE

Panel A: Occupational Skill
Men
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
-0.003∗
-0.003∗
-0.003∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
-0.003
-0.003
-0.003
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
-0.004∗
-0.004∗
-0.004∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)

(iv)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.003)

Women
(v)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)

(vi)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)

-0.48%

-0.18%

-0.32%

-0.32%

Panel B: Years of Education
Men
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
-0.029
-0.026
-0.025
(0.025)
(0.024)
(0.024)
-0.054
-0.051
-0.051
(0.039)
(0.037)
(0.037)
-0.091∗∗ -0.088∗∗ -0.089∗∗
(0.039)
(0.037)
(0.037)

(iv)
-0.020
(0.027)
-0.019
(0.033)
0.001
(0.043)

Women
(v)
-0.019
(0.027)
-0.017
(0.033)
0.003
(0.043)

(vi)
-0.019
(0.027)
-0.017
(0.033)
0.002
(0.043)

-0.40%

-0.14%

-0.12%

-0.12%

x

x
x

-0.48%

-0.48%

-0.38%

-0.38%

x

x
x

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data
on 35-49 year old respondents. 5, 10 and 15 year estimates from the full event study model
are shown. In Panel B, regressions are based on 6,000 birth state-birth cohort-year observations
and include birth state, birth cohort and year fixed effects, as well as controls for racial/ethnic
composition of the state-cohort-year-gender cell. Regressions are weighted by the number of
individual observations that are used to calculate the averages in each state-cohort-year-gender
cell. Other Policy Controls include school finance reform, EITC and food stamp measures as
described in the text. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the percentage of those in each
respondent’s occupation with more than a high school degree. Estimation of equation (1) is done
using disaggregated data in Panel A and includes birth state, birth cohort and year fixed effects
as well as controls for respondent race/ethnicity. % Effect at 10 Years shows the 10-year effect
relative to the mean presented in Table A-1. Standard errors clustered at the birth state level are
in parentheses: *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level
and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

35

Table 5: The Effect of Collective Bargaining Laws 10 Years Post DTB Passage
on Long-Run Outcomes, by Race/Ethnicity

Exposure Time
At 10 Years
% Effect

Exposure Time
At 10 Years
% Effect

Exposure Time
At 10 Years
% Effect

Exposure Time
At 10 Years
% Effect

Earnings
(i)
-3245.77∗∗
(1571.03)
-9.43%

Panel
Hours
Worked
(ii)
-0.724
(0.525)
-2.18%

A: Black and Hispanic Men
UnNot in
Employed Employed Labor Force
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
-0.013
0.000
0.013
(0.013)
(0.007)
(0.008)
-1.85%
0.00%
6.16%

Years of
Education
(vi)
-0.196∗∗∗
(0.059)
-1.55%

Occup.
Skill
(vii)
-0.009
(0.005)
-1.38%

Earnings
(i)
-1660.73∗∗
(721.34)
-2.80%

Panel B: White and Asian Men
Hours
UnNot in
Worked Employed Employed Labor Force
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
-0.226
-0.007
0.002
0.005
(0.214)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.005)
-0.56%
-0.82%
4.05%
5.02%

Years of
Education
(vi)
-0.037
(0.039)
-0.27%

Occup.
Skill
(vii)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.33%

Earnings
(i)
-781.05
(619.64)
-2.99%

Panel C: Black and Hispanic Women
Hours
UnNot in
Worked Employed Employed Labor Force
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
-1.111∗∗ -0.033∗∗
0.021∗∗∗
0.012
(0.532)
(0.015)
(0.008)
(0.012)
-3.70%
-4.69%
28.39%
5.40%

Years of
Education
(vi)
-0.066
(0.045)
-0.51%

Occup.
Skill
(vii)
-0.007∗∗
(0.003)
-1.20%

Earnings
(i)
48.03
(453.81)
0.15%

Panel D: White and Asian Women
Hours
UnNot in
Worked Employed Employed Labor Force
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
0.008
-0.001
0.001
0.000
(0.282)
(0.007)
(0.002)
(0.007)
0.03%
-0.14%
2.45%
0.00%

Years of
Education
(vi)
-0.017
(0.044)
-0.12%

Occup.
Skill
(vii)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.18%

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49
year old respondents. 5, 10 and 15 year estimates from the full event study model are shown. Regressions
are based on 6,000 birth state-cohort-year observations. All estimates include birth state, year and birth
cohort-by-year fixed effects as well as controls for exposure to school finance reform, food stamps and EITC
when of school age. Regressions are weighted by the number of individual observations that are used to
calculate the averages in each state-birth cohort-year-gender-race cell. % Effects show effects relative to the
mean of each dependent variable. Standard errors clustered at the birth state level are in parentheses: ***
indicates significance at the 1% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level and * indicates significance
at the 10% level.

36

Table 6: Parametric Event Study Estimates of the Effect of Collective Bargaining Laws
on Long-Run Outcomes
Panel A: Men

Relative Years to
DTB Law
I(DTB Law)
Relative Years to
DTB Law*I(DTB Law)
% Effect At 10 Years

Hours
Worked
(ii)
0.031
(0.020)
-0.442∗∗∗
(0.116)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.019)

Employed
(iii)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.010∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.0013∗∗
(0.0005)

-6.49%

-3.51%

-2.68%

Earnings
(i)
-122.39
(57.99)
579.21∗
(323.73)
105.56∗
(60.16)

Hours
Worked
(ii)
-0.072∗
(0.038)
0.027
(0.167)
0.006
(0.038)

6.09%

0.38%

Earnings
(i)
56.33
(78.54)
-1404.81∗∗∗
(509.42)
-176.36∗∗
(80.02)

UnEmployed
(iv)
-0.0001
(0.0003)
0.001
(0.001)
0.0001
(0.0003)
3.04%

Not in
Labor Force
(v)
-0.0004
(0.0003)
0.009∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.0012∗∗∗
(0.0003)
19.20%

Years of
Education
(vi)
-0.005
(0.004)
-0.003
(0.020)
0.001
(0.004)
0.03%

Occup.
Skill
(vii)
0.0005∗∗∗
(0.0002)
-0.0005
(0.0010)
-0.0004∗∗
(0.0002)
-0.94%

Panel B: Women

Relative Years to
DTB Law
I(DTB Law)
Relative Years to
DTB Law*I(DTB Law)
% Effect At 10 Years

Employed
(iii)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.004
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.001)
-2.19%

UnEmployed
(iv)
-0.0001
(0.0004)
0.004∗∗∗
(0.002)
0.00004
(0.00040)
9.31%

Not in
Labor Force
(v)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.0001
(0.0038)
0.0005
(0.0008)
2.67%

Years of
Education
(vi)
0.0001
(0.0043)
0.012
(0.025)
0.001
(0.004)
0.18%

Occup.
Skill
(vii)
-0.0005∗∗
(0.0002)
0.002
(0.001)
0.0006∗∗∗
(0.0002)
1.65%

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (2) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49 year old
respondents. Relative Years to DTB Law is the number of years relative to the passage of a duty-to-bargain law when
each cohort was 6 years old, which is set to zero for states that never pass such a law. I(DTB Law) is an indicator for
whether a duty-to-bargain law has been passed in the state when each cohort was 6 years old. Regressions are based on
6,000 birth state-birth cohort-year observations. All estimates include birth state, year and birth cohort-by-year fixed
effects as well as controls for racial/ethnic composition of the state-cohort-year-gender cell, exposure to school finance
reform, food stamps and EITC when of school age. Regressions are weighted by the number of individual observations
that are used to calculate the averages in each state-cohort-year-gender cell. % Effect At 10 Years shows the calculated
effect 10 years post DTB passage divided by the mean of each dependent variable. Standard errors clustered at the
birth state level are in parentheses: *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level
and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

37

Table 7: P-Values of Permutation Tests At 10 Years for Men
Panel A: Randomly Assigning Passage Dates
Hours
Not in
Earnings Worked Employed Labor Force
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
% Less than Baseline 0.000
0.080
0.053
0.947

Years of
Education
(v)
0.096

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
0.080

Panel B: Randomly Assigning Passage Dates to Match Passage Timing Distribution
Hours
Not in
Years of
Earnings Worked Employed Labor Force Education
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
% Less than Baseline 0.000
0.030
0.027
0.993
0.070

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
0.097

Notes: All estimates include birth state, year and birth cohort-by-year fixed effects, as well
as controls for racial/ethnic composition of the state-cohort-year-gender cell, exposure to school
finance reforms, average state EITC and average food stamp availability during school years.
Regressions are weighted by the number of individual observations that are used to calculate
the averages in each state-cohort-year-gender cell. The table shows the proportion of times
the estimates from the permutation tests on the 10-year estimate are smaller than the baseline
estimate. In Panel (A), we run 300 simulations in which we randomly assign passage dates to
states. In Panel (B), we randomly assign passage dates to states in a way that matches the overall
date-of-passage distribution shown in Figure 1.

38

Table 8: The Effect of Collective Bargaining
Laws on Male Non-Cognitive Skill
Measures, NLSY79

I(DTB Law)
Years Post DTB Law
Mean
% Effect at 10 Years

Rotter
Locus of
Control
0.147
(0.203)
0.094∗∗
(0.034)

Rosenberg
Self-Esteem
Scale
0.316
(0.489)
-0.135∗∗
(0.063)

Pearlin
Mastery
Scale
-0.148
(0.249)
-0.020
(0.026)

8.41
12.9%

22.68
-4.6%

22.29
-1.6%

Notes: Data come from men in the NLSY79, 1957-1965
birth cohorts. All outcomes are measured in 1979. Models
include controls for race and family income, mother’s and
father’s education, as well as state at age 14 and birth cohort
fixed effects. All estimates are weighted by the NLSY79
sample weights. The Rotter Locus of Control measures the
extent to which students believe they have control over their
lives: higher scores indicate less internal control (i.e., selfdetermination). The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale measures
questions of self-worth, with higher scores associated with
higher self-esteem. The Pearlin Mastery Scale measures the
extent to which individuals perceive themselves in control of
forces that significantly impact their lives, with higher scores
indicating more control. Standard errors are clustered at the
state level: ** indicates significance at the 5% level and *
indicates significance at the 10% level.

39

0

Number of States with a Duty−to−Bargain Law
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

Figure 1: The Number of States with Teacher Duty-to-Bargain Laws over Time

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975
Year

1980

1985

1990

1995

Source: NBER Public Sector Collective Bargaining Law Data Set (Valletta and Freeman 1988), updated
by Kim Reuben to 1996.

40

Figure 2: Event Study Estimates - Earnings and Hours Worked
(a) Male Earnings

(b) Female Earnings

(c) Male Hours Worked

(d) Female Hours Worked

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49 year
old respondents. Relative year -1 is omitted, so all estimates are in relationship to this year. Relative year -11
includes all observations with relative time ≤-11 and relative year 21 includes all observations with relative
time ≥21. All estimates include birth cohort-by-year, birth state, and year fixed effects as well as controls
for the racial/ethnic composition of the state-cohort-year-gender cell and exposure to school finance reforms,
state EITC rates, and food stamps. Regressions are weighted by the number of individual observations
that are used to calculate the averages in each state-cohort-year-gender cell. Each point is a relative time
parameter estimate, while the bars extending from each point show the bounds of the 95% confidence interval
calculated from standard errors that are clustered at the state level.

41

Figure 3: Event Study Estimates - Employment Outcomes
(a) Male Employment

(b) Female Employment

(c) Male Unemployment

(d) Female Unemployment

(e) Male Not in Labor Force

(f ) Female Not in Labor Force

42

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49
year old respondents. Relative year -1 is omitted, so all estimates are in relationship to this year. Relative
year -11 includes all observations with relative time ≤-11 and relative year 21 includes all observations with
relative time ≥21. All estimates include birth cohort-by-year, birth state, and year fixed effects as well as
controls for the racial/ethnic composition of the state-cohort-year-gender cell and exposure to school
finance reforms, state EITC rates, and food stamps. Regressions are weighted by the number of individual
observations that are used to calculate the averages in each state-cohort-year-gender cell. Each point is a
relative time parameter estimate, while the bars extending from each point show the bounds of the 95%
confidence interval calculated from standard errors that are clustered at the state level.

43

Figure 4: Event Study Estimates - Occupational Skill and Years of Education
(a) Male Occupational Skill

(b) Female Occupational Skill

(c) Male Years of Education

(d) Female Years of Education

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49 year
old respondents. Relative year -1 is omitted; all estimates are in relationship to this year. Relative year
-11 includes observations with relative time ≤-11 and relative year 21 includes observations with relative
time ≥21. All estimates include birth cohort-by-year, birth state, and year fixed effects as well as Other
controls for school finance reform, EITC and food stamp measures. In Panels (c) and (d), regressions are
based on 6,000 birth state-birth cohort-year observations and include controls for racial/ethnic composition
of the state-cohort-year-gender cell. Regressions are weighted by the number of individual observations that
are used to calculate the averages in each state-cohort-year-gender cell. In Panels (a) and (b), estimation
of equation (1) is done using disaggregated data and includes controls for respondent race/ethnicity. Each
point is a relative time parameter estimate, while the bars extending from each point show the bounds of
the 95% confidence interval calculated from standard errors clustered at the state level.

44

Figure 5: Event Study Estimates by Gender and Race/Ethnicity - Earnings
(a) Black & Hispanic Males

(b) Black & Hispanic Females

(c) White & Asian Males

(d) White & Asian Females

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49
year old respondents. Relative year -1 is omitted, so all estimates are in relationship to this year. Relative
year -11 includes all observations with relative time ≤-11 and relative year 21 includes all observations with
relative time ≥21. All estimates include birth cohort-by-year, birth state, and year fixed effects as well as
controls for exposure to school finance reforms, state EITC rates, and food stamps. Regressions are weighted
by the number of individual observations that are used to calculate the averages in each state-cohort-yearrace-gender cell. Each point is a relative time parameter estimate, while the bars extending from each point
show the bounds of the 95% confidence interval calculated from standard errors that are clustered at the
state level.

45

Online Appendix: Not for Publication

46

Table A-1: Summary Statistics of Analysis Variables

Variable
Age
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Other
DTB
Years Exposed
Average EITC
Court-Ordered School Finance Reform
Legislative School Finance Reform
Food Stamp Exposure
Total Income
Hours Worked
Employed
Unemployed
Not in Labor Force
Years of Education
Occupational Skill Level
High School Degree
Some College
Associates Degree
Bachelors Degree

Men
Mean
Std. Dev.
42.426
4.307
0.010
0.033
0.128
0.096
0.064
0.088
0.010
0.021
0.625
0.484
4.710
5.613
0.001
0.011
1.823
3.922
3.409
4.711
0.625
0.325
54,295.50 8,562.10
38.964
2.112
0.822
0.046
0.057
0.025
0.122
0.036
13.443
0.391
0.619
0.154
0.292
0.062
0.217
0.041
0.081
0.023
0.286
0.060

Women
Mean
Std. Dev.
42.456
4.308
0.010
0.033
0.144
0.106
0.063
0.088
0.010
0.023
0.619
0.486
4.646
5.599
0.001
0.011
1.805
3.903
3.364
4.686
0.621
0.326
30,332.68 4,561.59
29.552
1.685
0.730
0.043
0.048
0.020
0.222
0.038
13.689
0.393
0.559
0.130
0.250
0.061
0.238
0.044
0.109
0.026
0.313
0.065

Notes: Authors’ tabulations from 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49 year old respondents. Tabulations
are weighted by the number of individual observations that are used to calculate the averages in each
state-cohort-year-gender cell.

47

48

White &
Black &
White &
Asian Men
Hispanic Women
Asian Women
Mean
Std. Dev.
Mean
Std. Dev.
Mean
Std. Dev.
42.506
4.300
42.100
4.336
42.537
4.298
0.650
0.477
0.491
0.500
0.648
0.478
4.993
5.650
3.254
5.173
4.962
5.644
0.001
0.012
0.000
0.006
0.001
0.012
1.761
3.841
2.012
4.181
1.758
3.836
3.514
4.753
2.855
4.430
3.480
4.734
0.617
0.326
0.654
0.321
0.613
0.327
59,326.87 9,233.07 26,149.84 5,273.62 31,486.16 4,861.68
40.386
1.948
29.990
3.100
29.420
1.907
0.851
0.042
0.704
0.075
0.737
0.046
0.049
0.024
0.074
0.045
0.041
0.019
0.100
0.032
0.222
0.069
0.222
0.043
0.614
0.154
0.585
0.133
0.553
0.129
13.644
0.397
13.042
0.486
13.870
0.411
0.281
0.064
0.277
0.088
0.243
0.065
0.212
0.043
0.275
0.073
0.227
0.047
0.083
0.025
0.098
0.047
0.112
0.028
0.319
0.063
0.201
0.069
0.344
0.072

Notes: Authors’ tabulations from 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49 year old respondents. Tabulations are weighted by the number of individual observations that
are used to calculate the averages in each state-cohort-year-gender cell.

Variable
Age
Duty-to-Bargain Law
Years Exposed
Average EITC
Court-Ordered School Finance Reform
Legislative School Finance Reform
Food Stamp Exposure
Total Income
Hours Worked
Employed
Unemployed
Not in Labor Force
Occupational Skill Level
Years of Education
High School Degree
Some College
Associates Degree
Bachelors Degree

Black &
Hispanic Men
Mean
Std. Dev.
42.039
4.319
0.503
0.500
3.340
5.216
0.000
0.007
2.121
4.278
2.901
4.468
0.665
0.317
34,434.89 7,630.40
33.196
3.863
0.704
0.089
0.085
0.052
0.211
0.074
0.652
0.151
12.641
0.485
0.332
0.098
0.239
0.077
0.072
0.043
0.155
0.063

Table A-2: Summary Statistics of Analysis Variables By Gender and Race/Ethnicity

Table A-3: The Effect of Collective Bargaining Laws At 10 Years
on Years of Education, 2008-2012 ACS Years Only

Exposure Time
At 10 Years

All Men
(i)
-0.086∗∗
(0.038)

Black &
Hispanic
Men
(ii)
-0.145
(0.088)

White &
Asian
Men
(iii)
-0.072∗∗
(0.035)

All
Women
(iv)
0.026
(0.059)

Black &
Hispanic
Women
(v)
-0.107∗∗
(0.049)

White &
Asian
Women
(vi)
0.052
(0.073)

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2008-2012
ACS data on 35-49 year old respondents. 10-year estimates from the full event study
model are shown. Regressions are based on 6,000 birth state-cohort-year observations.
All estimates include birth state, year, and birth cohort-by-year fixed effects as well
as controls school finance reform, EITC and food stamp measures as described in the
text. Estimates in columns (i) and (iv) include controls for race/ethnicity. Regressions
are weighted by the number of individual observations that are used to calculate the
averages in each state-cohort-year-gender cell. Standard errors clustered at the birth
state level are in parentheses: *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** indicates
significance at the 5% level and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

49

Table A-4: The Effect of Collective Bargaining Laws At 10 Years After
Passage for Men – Robustness Checks
Panel A: Excluding States that Allow
Hours
Earnings
Worked
Employed
Exposure Time
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
-2303.25∗∗∗ -0.561∗∗∗ -0.012∗∗
At 10 Years
(668.61)
(0.196)
(0.005)

Teachers to Strike
Not in
Years of
Labor Force Education
(iv)
(v)
0.010∗∗
-0.042
(0.004)
(0.038)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.002
(0.002)

Panel B: Controlling for Total Union Membership at Age 18
Hours
Not in
Years of
Earnings
Worked
Employed Labor Force Education
Exposure Time
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
-2124.68∗∗∗ -0.407∗∗
-0.009∗
0.008∗∗
-0.051
At 10 Years
(603.01)
(0.185)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.037)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.003
(0.002)

Panel C: Controlling for Proportion Living in Urban Areas
Hours
Not in
Years of
Earnings
Worked
Employed Labor Force Education
Exposure Time
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
-2106.37∗∗∗ -0.421∗∗
-0.010∗∗
0.008∗∗
-0.048
At 10 Years
(624.75)
(0.188)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.037)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.003
(0.002)

Panel D: Controlling for Riots and Violent Protests
Hours
Not in
Years of
Earnings
Worked
Employed Labor Force Education
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
-2162.89∗∗∗ -0.421∗∗
-0.010∗∗
0.008∗∗
-0.053
(590.13)
(0.189)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.037)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.003
(0.002)

Exposure Time
At 10 Years

Panel E: Controlling for Current State Fixed Effects (Individual-level Data)
Hours
Not in
Years of
Occup.
Earnings
Worked
Employed Labor Force Education
Skill
Exposure Time
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
-2495.28∗∗∗ -0.437∗∗
-0.009∗∗
0.008∗
-0.072∗
-0.004
10 Years
(561.39)
(0.185)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.040)
(0.002)
Panel F: Including Birth State-by-Year Effects
Hours
Not in
Earnings
Worked
Employed Labor Force
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
-2218.16∗∗∗ -0.627∗∗
-0.011∗∗
0.012∗∗
(690.71)
(0.253)
(0.005)
(0.005)

Years of
Education
(v)
-0.068∗
(0.037)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.003
(0.002)

Region-by-Cohort Fixed Effects
Not in
Years of
Employed Labor Force Education
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
-0.011∗∗
0.010∗∗
-0.054
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.037)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.003
(0.002)

Panel H: Controlling for Democratic Control of State Legislature
Hours
Not in
Years of
Earnings
Worked
Employed Labor Force Education
Exposure Time
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
-1926.84∗∗∗ -0.334∗
-0.008
0.006
-0.044
10 Years
(639.86)
(0.177)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.038)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.003
(0.002)

Exposure Time
At 10 Years

Panel G: Including Census
Hours
Earnings
Worked
Exposure Time
(i)
(ii)
-2216.91∗∗∗ -0.523∗∗
At 10 Years
(631.54)
(0.225)

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49 year
old respondents. 10-year estimates from the full event study model are shown. All estimates include birth
state, year and birth cohort-by-year fixed effects. Occupational skill results and estimates in Panel E are based
on individual data and control for race/ethnicity. Other outcomes are estimated using aggregated data and
control for racial/ethnic composition of the state-cohort-year-gender cell. Regressions using aggregated data
are weighted by the number of individual observations that are used to calculate the averages in each stateyear-cohort-gender cell. The construction of each analysis sample and control variable is described in the text.
Standard errors clustered at the birth state level are in parentheses: *** indicates significance at the 1% level,
** indicates significance at the 5% level and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

50

Table A-5: The Effect of Collective Bargaining Laws At 10 Years
After Passage for Women – Robustness Checks
Panel A: Excluding States that Allow Teachers to
Hours
Not in
Earnings Worked Employed Labor Force
Exposure Time
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
-377.26
-0.510∗
-0.013∗∗∗
0.008
At 10 Years
(430.54)
(0.292) (0.005)
(0.007)

Strike
Years of
Education
(v)
-0.034
(0.035)

Panel B: Controlling for Total Union Membership at
Hours
Not in
Earnings Worked Employed Labor Force
Exposure Time
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
-205.10
-0.434
-0.011∗∗
0.007
At 10 Years
(344.29)
(0.276) (0.005)
(0.006)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.001
(0.002)

Age 18
Years of
Education
(v)
-0.017
(0.033)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.002
(0.002)

Panel C: Controlling for
Hours
Earnings Worked
Exposure Time
(i)
(ii)
-206.96
-0.433
At 10 Years
(355.69)
(0.264)

Proportion Living in Urban Areas
Not in
Years of
Employed Labor Force Education
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
-0.011∗∗
0.007
-0.016
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.032)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.002
(0.002)

Panel D: Controlling
Hours
Earnings Worked
(i)
(ii)
-237.42
-0.442
(369.05)
(0.272)

for Riots and Violent Protests
Not in
Years of
Employed Labor Force Education
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
-0.011∗∗
0.007
-0.017
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.033)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.002
(0.002)

Exposure Time
At 10 Years

Panel E: Controlling for Current
Hours
Earnings Worked
Exposure Time
(i)
(ii)
-342.45
-0.413
At 10 Years
(323.43)
(0.263)

Exposure Time
At 10 Years

Panel F: Including
Hours
Earnings Worked
(i)
(ii)
-235.67
-0.466
(389.14)
(0.317)

State Fixed Effects (Individual-level Data)
Not in
Years of
Occup.
Employed Labor Force Education
Skill
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
-0.011∗
0.008
-0.032
-0.001
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.033)
(0.002)
Birth State-by-Year Effects
Not in
Years of
Employed Labor Force Education
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
-0.011∗
0.010
-0.015
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.035)

Panel G: Including Census Region-by-Cohort Fixed
Hours
Not in
Earnings Worked Employed Labor Force
Exposure Time
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
-272.98
-0.460
-0.011∗∗
0.008
At 10 Years
(378.26)
(0.286) (0.005)
(0.007)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.002
(0.002)

Effects
Years of
Education
(v)
-0.018
(0.028)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.002
(0.002)

Panel H: Controlling for Democratic Control of State Legislature
Hours
Not in
Years of
Earnings Worked Employed Labor Force Education
Exposure Time
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
-181.48
-0.353
-0.010∗
0.005
-0.018
At 10 Years
(356.55)
(0.271) (0.005)
(0.006)
(0.033)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.002
(0.002)

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 3549 year old respondents. 10-year estimates from the full event study model are shown. All estimates
include birth state, year and birth cohort-by-year fixed effects. Occupational skill results and estimates in
Panel E are based on individual data and control for race/ethnicity. Other outcomes are estimated using
aggregated data and control for racial/ethnic composition of the state-cohort-year-gender cell. Regressions
using aggregated data are weighted by the number of individual observations that are used to calculate
the averages in each state-year-cohort-gender cell. The construction of each analysis sample and control
variable is described in the text. Standard errors clustered at the birth state level are in parentheses: ***
indicates significance at the 1% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level and * indicates significance
at the 10% level.

51

Table A-6: The Correlation of Duty-to-Bargain Exposure with Fixed Individual
Characteristics and State Observables Unrelated to Collective Bargaining
Panel A: Men

Relative Years to DTB
I(DTB)
Relative Years to DTB)
*I(DTB)

Age (x100)
(i)
-0.000∗
(0.000)
0.000∗
(0.000)
0.000∗
(0.000)

Black
(ii)
0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.010∗∗
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.001)

Hispanic
(iii)
0.0005∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.006)
0.001
(0.002)

Asian
(iv)
0.0003∗∗∗
(0.0002)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.0002
(0.0001)

Other
Race
(v)
-0.0000
(0.0002)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.0001
(0.0001)

Fraction
Homeowner
(vi)
0.0002
(0.0006)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.0002
(0.0006)

Fraction
State Male
(vii)
-0.0010∗∗∗
(0.0003)
0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.0008∗∗
(0.0003)

Other
Race
(v)
0.0002
(0.0002)
-0.001∗
(0.0007)
0.0001
(0.0002)

Fraction
Homeowner
(vi)
0.0009∗∗∗
(0.0003)
-0.004
(0.003)
-0.0001
(0.0003)

Fraction
State Male
(vii)
-0.0010∗∗∗
(0.0003)
0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.0008∗∗
(0.0003)

Panel B: Women

Relative Years to DTB
I(DTB)
Relative Years to DTB)
*I(DTB)

Age
(i)
-0.000∗
(0.000)
0.000∗
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)

Black
(ii)
0.004∗
(0.002)
0.006
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.002)

Hispanic
(iii)
0.001
(0.002)
0.0003
(0.005)
0.001
(0.001)

Asian
(iv)
0.0004∗∗
(0.0001)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.0001
(0.0001)

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (2) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49 year old
respondents. Relative Years to DTB Law is the number of years relative to the passage of a duty-to-bargain law when
each cohort was 6 years old, which is set to zero for states that never pass such a law. I(DTB Law) is an indicator for
whether a duty-to-bargain law has been passed in the state when each cohort was 6 years old. All estimates include
state, year and birth cohort-by-year fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by the number of individual observations
that are used to calculate the averages in each state-cohort-year-gender cell. State-specific outcomes are averaged over
the individual ACS observations, which is why the male and female estimates differ numerically for these outcomes.
Standard errors clustered at the birth state level are in parentheses: *** indicates significance at the 1% level, **
indicates significance at the 5% level and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

52

Table A-7: The Effect of Collective Bargaining Laws At 10 Years on
Long-Run Outcomes for Men – Accounting for Mobility
Panel A: Dropping Those
Hours
Earnings
Worked
Exposure Time
(i)
(ii)
-2206.06∗∗
-0.604∗∗
At 10 Years
(1060.57)
(0.303)

Exposure Time
At 10 Years

Who do not Live in State of Birth
Not in
Years of
Employed Labor Force Education
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
-0.007
0.010∗
-0.080
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.049)

Panel B: Weighting by Childhood Mobility
Hours
Not in
Earnings
Worked Employed Labor Force
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
-1817.32∗∗∗ -0.163
-0.004
0.003
(653.11)
(0.181)
(0.003)
(0.003)

Years of
Education
(v)
-0.037
(0.038)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.005∗∗
(0.002)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS
data on 35-49 year old respondents. 10-year estimates from the full event study model are
shown. All estimates include state, year and birth cohort-by-year fixed effects, as well as
controls for the racial/ethnic composition of the state-cohort-year-gender cell, exposure to
school finance reforms, average state EITC and average food stamp availability during school
years. Regressions are weighted by the number of individual observations that are used to
calculate the averages in each state-cohort-year-gender cell. In Panel (A), we exclude the
37.7% of respondents who do not live in their state of birth. In Panel (B), we expand the data
to be at the state of birth-cohort-potential migration state level and weight each observation
by the proportion of 17 year olds in the 1990 census who were born in the birth state and lived
in the migration state. All variables are defined using the migration state. Standard errors
clustered at the birth state level in Panel (A) and two-way clustered at the birth state and
migration state in Panel (B) are in parentheses: *** indicates significance at the 1% level, **
indicates significance at the 5% level and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

53

Table A-8: The Effect of Collective Bargaining Laws At 10 Years
on Long-Run Outcomes for Women – Accounting for
Mobility
Panel A: Dropping Those
Hours
Earnings Worked
Exposure Time
(i)
(ii)
-133.99
-0.368
At 10 Years
(377.78)
(0.298)

Exposure Time
At 10 Years

Who do not Live in State
Not in
Employed Labor Force
(iii)
(iv)
-0.013∗∗
0.009
(0.006)
(0.007)

of Birth
Years of
Education
(v)
-0.003
(0.048)

Panel B: Weighting by Childhood Mobility
Hours
Not in
Years of
Earnings Worked Employed Labor Force Education
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
-442.57
-0.252
-0.005
0.003
-0.014
(369.62)
(0.219) (0.004)
(0.005)
(0.029)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)
-0.0001
(0.003)

Occup.
Skill
(vi)

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS
data on 35-49 year old respondents. 10-year estimates from the full event study model
are shown. All estimates include state, year and birth cohort-by-year fixed effects, as well
as controls for the racial/ethnic composition of the state-cohort-year-gender cell, exposure
to school finance reforms, average state EITC and average food stamp availability during
school years. Regressions are weighted by the number of individual observations that are
used to calculate the averages in each state-cohort-year-gender cell. In Panel (A), we exclude
the 37.7% of respondents who do not live in their state of birth. In Panel (B), we expand
the data to be at the state of birth-cohort-potential migration state level and weight each
observation by the proportion of 17 year olds in the 1990 census who were born in the birth
state and lived in the migration state. All variables are defined using the migration state.
Standard errors clustered at the birth state level in Panel (A) and two-way clustered at the
birth state and migration state in Panel (B) are in parentheses: *** indicates significance
at the 1% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level and * indicates significance at the
10% level.

54

Table A-9: The Relationship Between Duty-to-Bargain Laws and School
Resources

Independent Variable
Relative Years to DTB
I(DTB)
(Relative Years to DTB)
*I(DTB)

Teacher
Salary
Expenditures
(i)
-0.038∗∗∗
(0.011)
0.080
(0.066)
0.038∗∗∗
(0.010)

Dependent Variable: Log
Administrative
Other
Salary
Salary
Expenditures
Expenditures
(ii)
(iii)
-0.064
0.053∗∗∗
(0.038)
(0.012)
0.470∗
-0.196∗∗∗
(0.269)
(0.066)
0.089∗∗
-0.044∗∗∗
(0.022)
(0.007)

of
TeacherStudent
Ratio
(iv)
-0.005
(0.003)
0.044
(0.031)
-0.005
(0.009)

Operating
Expenditures
per Student
(v)
-0.005
(0.020)
0.057
(0.059)
0.008
(0.009)

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (2) as described in the text using 1972-1991 Census/Survey of
Governments Data. The data vary at the state-year level and all estimates include state and year fixed
effects. Regressions are weighted by total enrollment in each state. Relative Years to DTB Law is the
number of years relative to the passage of a duty-to-bargain law, which is set to zero for states that
never pass such a law. I(DTB Law) is an indicator for whether a duty-to-bargain law has been passed in
the state. All outcome variables are in logs, and salary expenditures reflect total expenditures on each
category including part-time and full-time teachers. Standard errors clustered at the state level are in
parentheses: *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level and *
indicates significance at the 10% level.

55

Figure A-1: Event Study Estimates by Gender and Race/Ethnicity - Hours
Worked
(a) Black & Hispanic Males

(b) Black & Hispanic Females

(c) White & Asian Males

(d) White & Asian Females

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49
year old respondents. Relative year -1 is omitted, so all estimates are in relationship to this year. Relative
year -11 includes all observations with relative time ≤-11 and relative year 21 includes all observations with
relative time ≥21. All estimates include birth cohort-by-year, birth state, and year fixed effects as well as
controls for exposure to school finance reforms, state EITC rates, and food stamps. Regressions are
weighted by the number of individual observations that are used to calculate the averages in each
state-cohort-year-race-gender cell. Each point is a relative time parameter estimate, while the bars
extending from each point show the bounds of the 95% confidence interval calculated from standard errors
that are clustered at the state level.

56

Figure A-2: Event Study Estimates by Gender and Race/Ethnicity - Employment
(a) Black & Hispanic Males

(b) Black & Hispanic Females

(c) White & Asian Males

(d) White & Asian Females

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49
year old respondents. Relative year -1 is omitted, so all estimates are in relationship to this year. Relative
year -11 includes all observations with relative time ≤-11 and relative year 21 includes all observations with
relative time ≥21. All estimates include birth cohort-by-year, birth state, and year fixed effects as well as
controls for exposure to school finance reforms, state EITC rates, and food stamps. Regressions are
weighted by the number of individual observations that are used to calculate the averages in each
state-cohort-year-race-gender cell. Each point is a relative time parameter estimate, while the bars
extending from each point show the bounds of the 95% confidence interval calculated from standard errors
that are clustered at the state level.

57

Figure A-3: Event Study Estimates by Gender and Race/Ethnicity - Not in
Labor Force
(a) Black & Hispanic Males

(b) Black & Hispanic Females

(c) White & Asian Males

(d) White & Asian Females

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49
year old respondents. Relative year -1 is omitted, so all estimates are in relationship to this year. Relative
year -11 includes all observations with relative time ≤-11 and relative year 21 includes all observations with
relative time ≥21. All estimates include birth cohort-by-year, birth state, and year fixed effects as well as
controls for exposure to school finance reforms, state EITC rates, and food stamps. Regressions are
weighted by the number of individual observations that are used to calculate the averages in each
state-cohort-year-race-gender cell. Each point is a relative time parameter estimate, while the bars
extending from each point show the bounds of the 95% confidence interval calculated from standard errors
that are clustered at the state level.

58

Figure A-4: Event Study Estimates by Gender and Race/Ethnicity - Occupational Skill
(a) Black & Hispanic Males

(b) Black & Hispanic Females

(c) White & Asian Males

(d) White & Asian Females

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49
year old respondents. Relative year -1 is omitted, so all estimates are in relationship to this year. Relative
year -11 includes all observations with relative time ≤-11 and relative year 21 includes all observations with
relative time ≥21. All estimates include birth cohort-by-year, birth state, and year fixed effects as well as
controls for exposure to school finance reforms, state EITC rates, and food stamps. Each point is a relative
time parameter estimate, while the bars extending from each point show the bounds of the 95% confidence
interval calculated from standard errors that are clustered at the state level.

59

Figure A-5: Event Study Estimates by Gender and Race/Ethnicity - Years of
Education
(a) Black & Hispanic Males

(b) Black & Hispanic Females

(c) White & Asian Males

(d) White & Asian Females

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49
year old respondents. Relative year -1 is omitted, so all estimates are in relationship to this year. Relative
year -11 includes all observations with relative time ≤-11 and relative year 21 includes all observations with
relative time ≥21. All estimates include birth cohort-by-year, birth state, and year fixed effects as well as
controls for exposure to school finance reforms, state EITC rates, and food stamps. Regressions are
weighted by the number of individual observations that are used to calculate the averages in each
state-cohort-year-race-gender cell. Each point is a relative time parameter estimate, while the bars
extending from each point show the bounds of the 95% confidence interval calculated from standard errors
that are clustered at the state level.

60

Figure A-6: Sensitivity of Results to Excluding Each State - Men
(a) Income

(b) Hours Worked

(c) Employment

(d) Not in Labor Force

Notes: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text using 2005-2012 ACS data on 35-49
year old respondents. Each point represents a point estimate excluding a given state from the regression
and the lines extending from each point show the 95% confidence interval calculated using standard errors
that are clustered at the state level.

61

