                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    INFLATION EXPECTATIONS AS A POLICY TOOL?

                                       Olivier Coibion
                                     Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                         Saten Kumar
                                      Mathieu Pedemonte

                                      Working Paper 24788
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24788


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2018




We are grateful to Jane Ryngaert, Ha Thu Bui and Jacob Weber for research assistance on this
project. We thank Kate McCarthy at Deloitte for providing us with survey data from the Deloitte
European CFO Survey. We thank Geoff Kenny for sharing time series of eurozone consumers’
inflation expectations and Philippe Andrade for sharing inflation swap data. We thank Ricardo
Reis and participants of the 2018 Sintra conference for feedback. This research was funded in
part by the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Saten Kumar, and Mathieu Pedemonte. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Inflation Expectations as a Policy Tool?
Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Saten Kumar, and Mathieu Pedemonte
NBER Working Paper No. 24788
June 2018
JEL No. C83,D84,E31

                                         ABSTRACT

We assess whether central banks may use inflation expectations as a policy tool for stabilization
purposes. We review recent work on how expectations of agents are formed and how they affect
their economic decisions. Empirical evidence suggests that inflation expectations of households
and firms affect their actions but the underlying mechanisms remain unclear, especially for firms.
Two additional limitations prevent policy-makers from being able to actively manage inflation
expectations. First, available surveys of firms’ expectations are systematically deficient, which
can only be addressed through the creation of large, nationally representative surveys of firms.
Second, neither households’ nor firms’ expectations respond much to monetary policy
announcements in low-inflation environments. We provide suggestions for how monetary policy-
makers can pierce this veil of inattention through new communication strategies. At this stage,
there remain a number of implementation issues and open research questions that need to be
addressed to enable central banks to use inflation expectations as a policy tool.

Olivier Coibion                                 Saten Kumar
Department of Economics                         Auckland University of Technology
University of Texas at Austin                   School of Economics
2225 Speedway                                   55 Wellesley St
Austin, TX 78712                                Auckland, 1010, New Zealand
and NBER                                        saten.kumar@aut.ac.nz
ocoibion@gmail.com
                                                Mathieu Pedemonte
Yuriy Gorodnichenko                             Department of Economics
Department of Economics                         University of California at Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880                            mpedemonte@berkeley.edu
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and IZA
and also NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
1.      Introduction

Policy-makers have long understood the importance of communication strategies and the management of
economic expectations. Since the early 1990s, central banks have become increasingly open in discussing
their actions, objectives and views about the economy. This shift was motivated by the idea that clear
communication can help reduce financial and economic volatility in response to central banks’ decisions
as well as augment the tool set of monetary policy (Blinder et al. 2008). For example, statements about the
expected path of future short-term interest rates can affect contemporaneous long-term interest rates and
therefore influence current economic conditions even in the absence of any immediate policy change.

The onset of the Great Recession and the constraints imposed by the zero-lower-bound (ZLB) on interest rates
have brought these less traditional tools to the forefront of policy-making. Along with quantitative easing
policies, forward-guidance about the path of future interest rates has become one of the primary tools through
which central bankers try to affect economic outcomes. Discussion has also focused on alternative policies
that can affect the economy contemporaneously through expectational channels, such as raising the inflation
target or adopting nominal-GDP/price-level targets. At the heart of these policies lies a mechanism hinging
on the inflation expectations of agents: convincing them that inflation will be higher in the future should, in
the absence of interest rate policy offsets due to the zero bound, lower their perceptions of current real interest
rates and therefore induce households and firms to increase their spending today. Higher expected inflation
can also lead firms to immediately raise their prices in anticipation of rapidly declining relative prices, and
workers may similarly bargain for larger nominal wage increases. Thus, policies directly impacting agents’
inflation expectations can be used to stabilize economic conditions when traditional policy tools are limited.

Many policy-makers have been resistant toward this approach, likely because a central tenet of monetary
policy-making over the last thirty years is that they should strive to “anchor” inflation expectations, rather
than vary them for stabilization purposes. Yet many theoretical models suggest that communications policies
that move expectations can be very powerful at the zero-bound, helping policy-makers stabilize both prices
and output. Should policy-makers therefore reconsider their trepidation toward these types of policies? Can
they work? Do households and firms really respond to changes in their inflation expectations? If so, is it
feasible for policy-makers to affect these expectations in a way that enables them to treat expectations
management as another policy tool? This paper provides a synthesis of what we know about these questions.

Our starting point is that it is important to draw a distinction between the inflation expectations of
professional forecasters or financial market participants and those of households and firms. Central bank
discussions and communications often focus on the former, and with good reason. How financial markets
perceive the path of future monetary policy drives contemporaneous long-term interest rates and therefore


                                                                                                                 1
provides a direct transmission mechanism of monetary policy actions to households’ and firms’ decisions,
even at the zero bound on short-term nominal interest rates. The new communications strategies pioneered
by central banks since the 1990s have largely been successful in anchoring the long-run inflation
expectations of financial markets in advanced economies. Descriptions of policy-makers’ views of the
economy and their expectations of future policy decisions through policy statements, speeches, and post-
meeting press briefings have helped reduce financial market volatility.

However, theory suggests that the primary mechanism whereby inflation expectations affect households’
decisions is through their perceived real interest rate, which depends not just on the nominal interest rates
faced by agents but also on their expectations of future inflation. Similarly, firms’ expectations of inflation
should matter not only for their pricing and wage-setting decisions but also for their investment and hiring
decisions via the role of perceived real interest rates and more broadly because of the relationship between
inflation and real economic activity. Because our interest is in evaluating the scope for using the inflation
expectations channel as a policy tool, our focus must be on the expectations of households and firms.

Importantly, the inflation expectations of these different agents are not interchangeable. We document a
number of dimensions along which they differ. For example, while professional forecasters and financial
market participants have inflation expectations that appear well-anchored (close to the inflation target on
average with little cross-sectional variation), this is unambiguously not the case when it comes to
households and firms. To shed light on whether the expectations channel can be a useful policy tool, it is
therefore important to understand how the inflation expectations of households and firms are formed and
how/whether they affect their economic decisions.

We review evidence on how various forces (shopping experience, salience of prices, informational
interventions, etc.) influence the inflation expectations of households and firms. In contrast to professional
forecasters and financial markets who seem to track macroeconomic developments closely and respond to
policy shocks relatively quickly, households and firms are remarkably inattentive to inflation dynamics in
developed countries that have experienced low inflation rates for several decades. In contrast, economic
agents in high-inflation environments (e.g., Iran, Ukraine, Uruguay, Argentina, Israel) seem to pay
considerable attention to inflation, indicating that the inattention to inflation and monetary policy conditions
on the part of households and firms in advanced economies is likely a result of the successful monetary
policies of the last thirty years. In the absence of much aggregate variation in inflation, these agents appear
to have become reliant on the prices of goods they observe on a frequent basis, such as gasoline and food
prices, to make inferences about broader price movements. As a result of the volatility in these prices and
the heterogeneity of people’s consumption baskets, we observe much more volatility in the inflation
expectations of households and firms than we do for more informed agents like professional forecasters,

                                                                                                              2
more disagreement both in terms of their beliefs about future as well as past inflation, and more uncertainty
in their forecasts. In short, their expectations look anything but anchored.

This inattention to inflation and monetary policy on the part of households and firms in advanced economies
could imply that their inflation expectations simply do not matter for their economic decisions, thereby
rendering the inflation expectations channel ineffectual. This is, however, demonstrably incorrect. We
review the burgeoning literature on inflation expectations and economic decision-making and argue that
the evidence strongly suggests that there is indeed a causal and economically significant effect of inflation
expectations on the economic choices of both households and firms. In the case of households, the evidence
supports theoretical predictions that, at least at the ZLB, an exogenous increase in the inflation expectations
of households leads them to increase their consumption, which should ultimately lead to higher inflation as
well through general equilibrium effects.

For firms, inflation expectations clearly affect economic decisions but the mechanism through which this
effect operates is not fully established yet. For example, evidence from New Zealand where there was no
ZLB suggests that when firms raise their inflation expectations, they then tend to raise their employment
and investment with little change in their prices. Newer evidence from Italy during a ZLB period suggests
instead that raising the inflation expectations of firms there leads them to raise their prices but reduce their
employment. Further work that clarifies both the direct effects of changes in inflation expectations on
economic decisions, as well as their general equilibrium consequences, will be necessary before they can
effectively be used as a direct policy tool.

Furthermore, there are two additional important issues that need to be addressed before the active management
of inflation expectations is added to the roster of policy-makers’ stabilization tools. The first is a simple
measurement issue: do we know what agents’ inflation expectations are? We discuss available surveys of
inflation expectations of households and firms from many countries, focusing on how the surveys are
conducted and how we can interpret their results. While household surveys are widely available and generally
of high quality, surveys of firms’ expectations are much more limited in availability, scope, and quality. We
document a number of dimensions along which different surveys of firms depart from ideal survey design and
argue that these limitations make the current measurement of firms’ inflation expectations a binding constraint
for their use in policy-making: if we cannot measure the policy instrument, it is unlikely to be a good candidate
as a tool for economic stabilization. Because of the unique challenges associated with surveying firms, this
constraint is unlikely to be relaxed without a concerted effort on the part of statistical agencies and/or central
banks to implement new, large-scale surveys of firms in their countries.




                                                                                                                3
The second major challenge to the use of inflation expectations as a policy tool is the abysmal track record
of the typical communication strategies of central banks in affecting households’ and firms’ inflation
expectations. We document this record in a number of ways, building on recent work that studies the
inattention of economic agents, and in particular their lack of knowledge about inflation dynamics and
monetary policy. We document, for example, that large policy change announcements in the U.K., U.S. and
eurozone seemed to have only limited effects on the beliefs of households and firms, despite widespread
news coverage. Only financial market participants and professional forecasters seem to pay much attention
to the actions of monetary policy-makers. While this inattention to aggregate inflation and monetary policy
in advanced economies may itself be a reflection of the success of policy-makers in keeping inflation low
and stable over the last thirty years, it nonetheless presents a challenge for any policy-maker that now seeks
to break through this veil of inattention.

Despite this inattention to monetary policy on the part of households and firms, recent evidence suggests
that when households and firms are provided with explicit information about inflation or monetary policy,
their inflation expectations respond very strongly. This indicates that there is scope for new and improved
communication strategies on the part of policy-makers to use inflation expectations as a more direct policy
tool for stabilization purposes. Furthermore, the magnitudes of the changes in inflation expectations from
the provision of simple messages about recent inflation rates or the central bank’s target dwarf the estimated
effects of other policies like quantitative easing or forward guidance on nominal interest rates. This suggests
that communications focused on the inflation expectations of households and firms should lead to much
larger changes in perceived real interest rates—and therefore effects on economic activity—than policies
that are currently used. A layered communication strategy, i.e. one that treats households/firms and financial
markets differently, could therefore serve as a useful complement to current strategies that are almost
exclusively targeting the latter.

Policy-makers can also vary the type of information provided depending on what the desired effect on
expectations may be. Because households and firms adjust their beliefs in response to new information like
Bayesians (i.e. putting some weight on the provided signal), policy-makers can emphasize different facts
depending on whether they would like expectations to rise or fall. For example, providing information about
the inflation target systematically moves agents’ forecasts toward that target value. But policy-makers can
emphasize other numerical values (e.g., recent inflation rates or price movements of specific goods) if they
want to push expectations in a different direction. Because providing households and firms with these types
of information has only short-lived effects on expectations (they generally die off within six months),
policy-makers can generate transitory effects on expectations through short-lived communications
campaigns or longer-lived effects through repeated exposure of agents to news. Central banks have


                                                                                                             4
employed similar methods with financial markets (e.g. doing vs not doing forward guidance, changing the
expected duration of zero interest rates, changing the nature of the guidance from time-dependent to state-
dependent, etc.). The same principles of altering communications to the circumstances can be applied to a
new layer of communications targeting households and firms.

Finally, we recommend that policy-makers exploit new ways of transmitting information to the public besides
the traditional news media, and more in the spirit of public health campaigns that target specific subsets of the
population. Much as corporate marketers and politicians are now exploiting new means of targeting narrower
groups of individuals with messages tailored for specific groups, central banks could also target their
information treatments more precisely through social media, targeted ad campaigns, etc. Such a targeted
strategy can help generate larger movements in expectations by identifying and concentrating on populations
that are relatively less informed or whose expectations tend to respond more to new information.

More targeted information treatments by monetary policy-makers could also help address one of the
fundamental challenges associated with currency unions: the one-size-fits-all nature of traditional monetary
policies. Consider, for example, a union in which the “North” is booming while the “South” is in recession.
The central bank cannot accommodate both through changes in its interest rate instrument. However,
targeted and differentiated communications strategies within each region could be used to try to lower
inflation expectations in the North while raising them in the South, thereby generating lower perceived real
interest rates in the region that needs monetary accommodation (South) while raising perceived real rates
in the region that needs contractionary policy (North). Precise communications strategies could also be used
to target specific industries or subgroups of the population. Layered communications strategies could
therefore be used not only during zero bound periods but as a more general tool to address geographic or
other economic imbalances within a common currency area. Indeed, Hayo and Neuenkirch (2014) and
Ehrmann et al. (2013) find that subjective and objective knowledge about the ECB is positively correlated
with the central bank’s trust and credibility.

Because communication strategies that directly affect inflation expectations could ultimately provide policy-
makers with a new and powerful stabilization tool during ZLB periods, address regional divides within
currency areas even outside the ZLB, and enhance central bank credibility, their potential usefulness is high.
We still lack a nuanced understanding of the mechanism through which inflation expectations affect decisions,
clear measures of these expectations, and proven strategies to change them, so this policy tool is not yet ready
for prime-time. But now is the time to make progress on all three fronts so that it can be deployed in the next
crisis. With it, monetary policy-making may finally become more like a scalpel and less like a hammer.




                                                                                                               5
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 documents differences in the properties of inflation
expectations across different types of agents, like households, firms, professional forecasters and financial
market participants, to illustrate how they are not interchangeable. It also provides stylized facts on how
the inflation expectations of households and firms are formed. Section 3 discusses recent empirical evidence
on the effect of inflation expectations on households’ and firms’ economic decisions, which provides the
basis for the potential use of inflation expectations as a policy tool but also illustrates the limitations to our
current knowledge about the transmission of expectations to economic decisions. Sections 4 and 5 discuss
two additional challenges that potentially limit the scope of such policies: measurement issues due to limited
survey availability/quality (section 4) and the general insensitivity of households’ inflation expectations to
monetary policy decisions and announcements (section 5). Section 5 then proposes guidelines for new
communication strategies that address these limitations. Section 6 concludes.



2.       Characteristics and Determinants of Inflation Expectations

How are inflation expectations formed? Whose expectations should we care about? These have been
perennial questions in macroeconomics and they do not have a simple answer. But they arise regularly in
monetary policy discussions, as well as in many other settings.1

Whose expectations matter depends, of course, on the context. In the case of pricing decisions, it is the
expectations of firms that are at stake. For consumption and savings decisions, household expectations are
more relevant. In the determination of financial asset valuations, marginal investors are likely those whose
expectations are most important. If the expectations of these different agents are the same, as they are in
standard macroeconomic models, this distinction becomes moot. But in practice, this is very unlikely to be
the case.

To illustrate these differences, Panel A of Figure 1 plots the time series of mean inflation 1-year ahead
expectations in the U.S. for households (Michigan Survey of Consumers), professional forecasters (CPI
forecasts from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) run by the Federal Reserve Bank of

1
  See for example Fed Chairwoman Janet Yellen’s (2016) speech: “Another gap in our knowledge about the nature of
the inflation process concerns expectations… Yet another unresolved issue concerns whose expectations--those of
consumers, firms, or investors--are most relevant for wage and price setting, a point on which theory provides no
clear-cut guidance. More generally, the precise manner in which expectations influence inflation deserves further
study. Perhaps most importantly, we need to know more about the manner in which inflation expectations are formed
and how monetary policy influences them”. ECB Vice-President Vítor Constâncio (2017) has expressed a similar
view: “For policy-makers, this [recent research] seems to suggest that there is an important role of the central bank in
shaping the expectations of the general public, not only that of financial markets. It also suggests that more research
is needed to understand the different factors that shape the inflation expectations of individual households…” See
Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Kamdar (forthcoming) for a survey.

                                                                                                                      6
Philadelphia) and financial markets (Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland). While these three measures of
expectations tracked each other closely through the early 1990s, we can observe large wedges appearing
between household expectations and those of professionals and financial market participants thereafter. For
example, household expectations have averaged around 3.5% since the early 2000s while those of
professionals averaged around 2%.

This difference is not unique to households. In April 2018, we conducted a survey of firms in the U.S.,
using panelists from a prominent nationally-representative survey of firms in manufacturing and services.
Hundreds of top executives were asked to report their point forecasts for CPI inflation over the next twelve
months. 55% reported that they simply did not know. Of the remaining respondents, the average forecast
was 3.7%, well above what professional forecasters and financial market participants were expecting but
close to the forecasts of households.2

Panel B reports equivalent forecasts of one-year-ahead inflation expectations as for the U.S. but now for
households in the euro area (the European Commission survey of households, see Duca et al. 2017),
professional forecasters (Survey of Professional Forecasters run by the European Central Bank (ECB)) and
financial markets (1-year inflation swaps, ICAP and Thompson/Reuters). As in the U.S., household
inflation expectations deviate systematically from the expectations of professionals and financial market
participants. A similar feature can also be found in New Zealand (see Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Kumar
(forthcoming); henceforth CGK), the first country to adopt inflation targeting over twenty-five years ago
and in which inflation has remained relatively low and stable since. One might expect individuals there to
provide an upper bound on how anchored inflation expectations can be, yet as can be seen in Table 1,
households and firms in New Zealand still have expectations which deviate dramatically from those of
professional forecasters. Households at the time, for example, were predicting inflation of well above 3%
while firms in New Zealand surveyed in CGK displayed even higher mean forecasts of inflation. In contrast,
professional forecasters were predicting inflation around only 2%.

Differences across groups are not limited to mean forecasts. As is well-known, disagreement about inflation
among households dwarfs that among professional forecasters (e.g. Mankiw, Reis and Wolfers 2003). For
example, in the U.S. in March 2018, the cross-sectional standard deviation of inflation forecasts across
households in the Michigan Survey of Consumers was 3.0% but was only 0.4% in the SPF. Again, surveys of
firms yield similar results as for households. In the April 2018 survey we ran of U.S. firms, we found a cross-


2
 While our analysis focuses on one-year-ahead inflation expectations of households and firms, long(er)-run inflation
forecasts of these agents are strikingly similar to short-term inflation forecasts of these agents (e.g., Armantier et al.
2013, Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Kumar (forthcoming), Kumar et al. 2015). In a typical case, if a firm (household)
expects inflation to be X% next year, it has approximately X% expectation for inflation 3 or 5 year into the future.

                                                                                                                        7
sectional standard deviation of 4.1% in inflation forecasts. Table 1 illustrates the same feature for New
Zealand: disagreement among households and firms is an order of magnitude larger than it is among
professional forecasters. Hence, along either metric, it is clear that one should not expect the inflation
expectations of professional forecasters or those of financial market participants to be representative of the
beliefs of households and firms. This does not imply that the expectations of the former are unimportant or
irrelevant to monetary policy-making, but simply that if the channel we are interested in stems from the
decisions of households and firms as well as their expectations—as in the case of the inflation expectations
channel—then it is important to focus specifically on the expectations of these agents and not assume that
they are well-represented by more readily-available measures. In this section, we consider a number of factors
that, based on previous research, play an important role in how households and firms form their expectations.



2.1         Priors and perceptions of inflations

A particularly striking feature of household and firm beliefs over inflation, and one that was documented
as early as Jonung (1981), is that they not only disagree about future inflation but they display almost the
same amount of disagreement about recent inflation dynamics. Indeed, the strongest predictor of a
household’s inflation forecast is typically what they believe inflation has been over the recent past,
something which is in principle readily available and which some other types of agents, like professional
forecasters, do not disagree about. This finding has been documented in detail for households (see Ranyard
et al. (2008) for a survey of this literature) and more recently for firms (e.g., CGK, Kumar et al. 2015).
Table 1, for example, shows that the beliefs of households and firms in New Zealand about recent rates of
inflation are disconnected from actual values and subject to similar disagreement among these agents,
despite widespread availability of data on inflation. In a survey of German consumers in 2015, Dräger and
Nghiem (2018) find that approximately 50% of respondents believed that inflation over the previous twelve
months had been 5% or above, at a time when actual inflation was 0.3%. Duca et al. (2017) document a
similar finding for the entire euro area: in 2015, the average perceived inflation rate among surveyed
households across all euro-member countries was just under 5%.3

This inattention to recent inflation dynamics, however, varies with the economic environment. Households
in high-inflation countries, like in Argentina, tend to be much better informed than households in low-
inflation countries about inflation (Cavallo et al. 2017). A similar result obtains for firms: while firms in
low-inflation environments tend to appear quite uninformed about recent inflation dynamics, this is much



3
    The perceived inflation rate stays high even after removing outliers, see Arioli et al. (2017).

                                                                                                            8
less the case in higher-inflation countries like Uruguay (Frache and Lluberas 2017), Iran (Afrouzi et al.
2018), or Ukraine (Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2015b). This suggests that a full understanding of how
households and firms form their expectations requires models that explicitly formalize how agents
endogenously choose to allocate their attention to different variables in light of their economic
circumstances (e.g., Reis 2006a, 2006b, Gorodnichenko 2008, Afrouzi 2018).

The economic environment that agents perceive to have experienced can shape their views in very long-lasting
ways. For example, Ehrmann and Tzamourani (2012) and Malmendier and Nagel (2016) document that
people who lived through a high inflation have systematically higher inflation expectations and stronger
dislike for inflation than people who did not have this experience.4 This gradual adjustment of beliefs to new
economic settings carries over to how they respond to economic shocks and various informational treatments.
For example, Armantier et al. (2016), Cavallo et al. (2017), and Binder and Rodrigue (2017) run experiments
on households in which they are provided with new information and find that the adjustment of beliefs to new
information is consistent with Bayesian updating. That is, economic agents update their beliefs depending on
the strengths of their priors and signals. This behavior is consistent with economic agents being rational but
facing informational rigidities. A particularly important source of signals about aggregate price levels
emphasized by households and firms is the set of prices that they observe in their daily lives.



2.2      Shopping experience

Shopping naturally offers people an opportunity to observe prices. Because prices and inflation rates can
vary widely across households (e.g., Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Hong 2015, Kaplan and Schulhofer-
Wohl 2017, Johannsen 2014), people may extrapolate their own experiences to the aggregate economy.
Consistent with this view, Bryan and Venkatu (2001), D’Acunto et al. (2018) and others document that
women tend to have higher inflation expectations than men because women tend to do grocery shopping
more frequently: once one conditions on exposure to frequent prices changes in stores, the systematic
differences in inflation expectations between men and women disappear. In a similar spirit, Cavallo et al.
(2017) found that recent shopping experience has a strong influence on inflation expectations: people tend
to assign high weights to goods that they just purchased. Kumar et al. (2015) also find that shopping
experience is a major source of information for firm managers in New Zealand when these managers form
their inflation expectations. Johannsen (2014) reports that groups which experience more dispersed rates of



4
 More generally, there is a large literature (e.g., Souleles 2004, Ehrmann, Pfajfar, and Santoro 2017) relating inflation
expectations/perceptions and various demographic characteristics of households.

                                                                                                                       9
inflation also tend to disagree more about inflation, consistent with shopping experiences parlaying into the
inflation expectations of individuals.

Although consumers’ inflation expectations appear to display excess sensitivity to price changes of products
in their consumption baskets, consumer prices are not equal in influencing inflation expectations. For
example, Harris et al. (2009), Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015a), Wong (2015), and others find that U.S.
consumers are sensitive to gasoline prices above and beyond what is justified by the share of expenditures
on gasoline.5 Panel A of Figure 2 illustrates this excess sensitivity of U.S. household inflation expectations
relative to professional forecasters by plotting the two against the level of gasoline prices. There is a striking
correlation between movements in the level of gasoline prices and the households’ inflation expectations.
On the other hand, the relationship between gasoline prices and predictions of professional forecasters is
much weaker. The same pattern holds in the euro area, as illustrated in Panel B of Figure 2.6

Relatedly, food prices also appear to have a disproportionately significant effect on inflation expectations
of households (e.g., Clark and Davig 2008). Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015b) document that Ukrainian
households’ and firms’ inflation expectations react strongly to changes in the exchange rate of the hryvnia
(Ukrainian currency) and the U.S. dollar. Afrouzi et al. (2018) document a similar finding in Iran. A
common theme across these studies is that salient prices of frequently-purchased, homogenous goods
appear to strongly influence inflation expectations. One may rationalize this influence by appealing to costs
of collecting and processing information: economic agents use easy-to-collect/digest prices correlated with
inflation to inform themselves about aggregate inflation.



2.3      Media

Another natural source of information about inflation is media coverage of inflation. For example, Carroll
(2003) documents that more intensive newspaper coverage of inflation dynamics closes the gap between the


5
  Central bankers are aware of this sensitivity. Yellen (2016): “[T]he longer-run measure of inflation expectations from
the Michigan Survey has historically exhibited some sensitivity to fluctuations in current gasoline prices…” and “[A]
monthly survey conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shows a noticeable decline over the past two
years in household expectations for inflation three years ahead. However, these readings on shorter-term expectations
may also be influenced by current gasoline prices.” Carney (2013) made a similar observation, “[W]e’ve seen a bit in
the past when you have a coincident survey [of the general public’s inflation expectations] with something as obvious
and important to people as energy prices move, you get these spikes.”
6
  One would expect a weaker relationship between gas prices and household inflation expectations in the euro area
than in the U.S. for at least two reasons. First, gasoline taxes are much higher in Europe, so a $1 increase in oil leads
to a smaller percentage increase in gasoline prices in Europe than in the U.S. In addition, diesel is much more common
in Europe than the U.S. (as is public transportation), making the price of basic gasoline less of a common price signal
to households than in the U.S.

                                                                                                                      10
inflation expectations of households and those of professional forecasters. Subsequent work (e.g., Dräger
2015, Lamla and Maag 2012) finds similar effects for other countries. Using in-depth interviews of firm
managers, Kumar et al. (2015) document that media is the main source of information for managers when
they form inflation expectations. The available evidence, however, suggests that, in low-inflation countries,
media coverage may be a relatively weak force in moving inflation expectations.7 For example, Pfajfar and
Santoro (2013) find that exposure to news about inflation leads consumers to a more likely revision of inflation
expectations but a revised forecast is not systematically closer to a professional forecast.



2.4      Knowledge about Monetary Policy

An additional factor that can affect agents’ forecasts is their understanding of monetary (and fiscal) policy.
While there is an extensive literature studying how monetary policy affects the economic expectations of
financial market participants and professional forecasters, evidence for the effects on households and firms
is more limited.8 Previous work has found that households who are more informed about the central bank’s
objectives or who have greater trust in the central bank tend to have better behaved inflation forecasts (e.g.
Kamada, Nakajima, and Nishiguchi, 2015, Christelis et al. 2016). But informed/trusting households seem
to be in short supply. Binder (2017), for example, uses a variety of polling data to show that most U.S.
households are unaware of the Federal Reserve’s leadership and objectives. In a similar spirit, Kumar et al.
(2015) document that, among firm managers in New Zealand, only thirty percent can correctly identify the
name of the Reserve Bank Governor (out of four choices) and 31% can identify the central bank’s main
objective as being to keep inflation low and stable (out of five choices). This result also extends to Europe.
For example, van der Cruijsen et al. (2015) find that just over half of Dutch survey respondents correctly
identified as a true statement (out of only two options) that the ECB targets a rate of inflation of close to
but just below 2%.

In parallel surveys of U.S. firms and households in April 2018, we asked respondents what inflation rate
the U.S. Federal Reserve was trying to achieve in the long run. The survey of firms was done through the


7
  Haldane (2017) made a similar observation: “Studies have examined the factors that influence how the media
intermediate central bank messages. There is mixed evidence on how well the media performs this task. There is
evidence the media leads to a better understanding of the ECB’s monetary policy. But in the US and Germany, there
is evidence the media may sometimes impair communication and bias opinion.”
8
  In evaluating effects of central banks’ policies on inflation expectations, the literature has largely focused on whether
inflation targeting makes inflation expectations of financial markets and professional forecasts less sensitive to
macroeconomic news shocks (e.g., Beechey et al. 2011, Gurkaynak et al. 2010). More recent studies examine how
forward guidance changed expectations of these agents (e.g., Campbell et al. 2012, Andrade et al. 2015). Other work
has sought to establish whether inflation targeting regimes have more anchored expectations of professional
forecasters (Pierdzioch and Rülke 2013, Dovern et al., 2012).

                                                                                                                        11
same nationally-representative panel of executives in manufacturing and services in the U.S. as described
in section 2 (i.e. from a pre-existing private survey of firms). The survey of households is described in more
detail in Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber (2018) but reflects a pilot study with about 1,500 responses
from U.S. households participating in the AC Nielsen Homescan project. In each case, respondents were
asked to report a point value as their answer but had the option to decline to answer. For comparison, we
also report the distribution of beliefs about the RBNZ’s inflation target from the survey of firms in New
Zealand described in Kumar et al. (2015).

The resulting distributions of answers from each survey are plotted in Figure 3. In both U.S. surveys,
respondents had the ability to select “I don’t know” as a possible answer. In the case of U.S. firms, over
60% of respondents selected this option. Around 25% correctly selected 2% as the Federal Reserve’s
inflation target, with the vast majority of remaining respondents providing an answer greater than 2%. U.S.
households yielded a similar distribution: around 20% correctly picked 2% while over 50% responded that
they did not know or thought that the Fed’s inflation target was 10% or more per year. These results reflect
even less knowledge about monetary policy than in New Zealand, where around 35% answered 2% and
approximately 50% were in the correct range of the RBNZ’s inflation target range of 1-3% per year.

In Panel B, we also report results from a survey in Uruguay (described in Coibion, Frache, Gorodnichenko
and Lluberas 2018) in which a representative sample of firms were asked about the central bank’s inflation
target, which is currently a range of 3% to 7%. Uruguay has experienced relatively high inflation in recent
decades9 and, as reported in Frache and Lluberas (2017), firms there are relatively more informed about
inflation than firms in New Zealand. Consistent with this view, we find that firms in Uruguay are relatively
well informed about the inflation target there: only about 5% report that they don’t know the target and less
than 20% picked a value for the target outside the target range. This provides further support for the notion
that economic agents in higher and more volatile inflation environments are more informed about inflation
and monetary policy.



2.5     Summary and Discussion

Different agents face different incentives and costs to acquiring and processing information. It should
therefore not be surprising to find systematic differences across agents in terms of how they form their
expectations. The inflation expectations of households and firms, in particular, deviate in systematic ways



9
 According to the Uruguayan National Institute of Statistics, Uruguay had an annual inflation rate of 6.6% in 2017.
Between 2008 and 2018, the average inflation rate was 8.2% and the range was 6.6% to 9.8%.

                                                                                                                12
from those of professional forecasters and financial market participants. As a result, those interested in
identifying economic mechanisms that rely on the decisions and beliefs of households and firms should
focus on the expectations of these agents and not assume that they are well-approximated by other more
readily-available survey measures. They are not.

The inattention of households and firms to inflation and monetary policy in advanced economies is likely
a reflection of policy-makers’ success in stabilizing inflation around a low level for decades. This stability
has reduced the benefit to being informed about aggregate inflation, leading many to rely on readily
available price signals to make inferences about aggregate inflation. This inattention to aggregate
information about inflation and monetary policy, however, need not imply that their beliefs do not affect
their decisions. The channels running from expectations to actions are what we now turn to.



3       Do Inflation Expectations Affect Economic Decisions?

For inflation expectations to be useful as a policy tool, it is essential to know whether they affect economic
decisions, as suggested by theory. In this section, we summarize and extend recent empirical evidence on
the ways in which inflation expectations affect the economic decisions of both households and firms.



3.1     Consumers’ Decisions and their Inflation Expectations

The standard (and primary) channel through which inflation expectations are expected to affect households’
economic decisions is via a consumption Euler equation, which relates the expected growth in consumption
to the expected real interest rate:


                     𝑐     𝐸𝑐         𝜎𝑖    𝐸𝜋          𝐸𝑐      𝜎     𝐸 𝑖        𝜋


or equivalently that current deviations of consumption from long-run levels (𝑐 ) depend on whether current
and future real interest rates (𝑖     𝐸𝜋     ) are expected to be above or below normal. An increase in
expected inflation 𝐸 𝜋       lowers the perceived real interest rate (for a fixed nominal interest rate 𝑖 , as
would be the case at the ZLB), thereby reducing the incentive to save and raising current consumption.

A large body of work now exists which tests this mechanism using household surveys of consumption and
expectations. While early work on this found little evidence that high inflation expectations were associated
with higher desired consumption (Bachmann, Berg and Sims (2015) using the Michigan Survey of


                                                                                                           13
Consumers), subsequent work has found much more positive evidence. For example, using inflation
expectations from the New York Fed’s Survey of Consumer Expectations, Crump et al. (2015) estimate a
value of 0.8 for intertemporal elasticity of substitution σ. Dräger and Nghiem (2018) find similar results for
German households using a survey developed by the University of Hamburg. D’Acunto, Hoang, and Weber
(2016) use survey data from the harmonized Survey of Consumers for German households and find that
households with higher inflation expectations are more likely to report that now is a good time to buy.
Ichiue and Nishiguchi (2013) find evidence consistent with the Euler equation using household survey data
in Japan during the ZLB period. Pooling data from seventeen European countries, Duca et al. (2017) also
find when households expect inflation to go up, they tend to be more positive toward spending on consumer
durables.10 Finally, Armantier et al. (2015) use an incentivized experiment to show that households act upon
their reported inflation expectations which is consistent with Malmendier and Nagel (2016) documenting
that inflation experiences shape not only inflation expectations but also financial choices of consumers
(e.g., consumers who have lived through high inflation tend to invest less in nominal bonds and tend to
borrow through fixed-rate mortgages).

One limitation faced by this literature is that causality from higher inflation expectations to higher desired
levels of consumption does not automatically follow from the positive correlations between the two. A
particularly striking paper therefore is by D’Acunto, Hoang, and Weber (2016), who use the pre-announced
increase in the VAT in Germany in 2005 as a source of exogenous variation in inflation expectations of
German households relative to those of other European countries. They find that the rise in inflation
expectations of German households relative to comparable households in neighbouring countries was
associated with higher reported willingness to spend by these households, despite no differences in their
expectations of future income and other forces. Jointly, these results therefore suggest that there is a causal
chain running from higher inflation expectations to higher consumption levels, at least in the absence of
offsetting interest rate responses such as during the zero-bound.



3.2     Firms’ Decisions and their Inflation Expectations

With respect to how inflation expectations affect firms’ decisions, empirical evidence is significantly more
limited. This primarily reflects the fact that survey data on firms’ inflation expectations is less readily




10
  Related work has studied how inflation expectations affects other decisions they face, for example the composition
of their assets (Vellekoop and Wiederholt 2017).

                                                                                                                 14
available, as discussed in more detail in section 4. Nonetheless, recent work has begun to systematically
exploit existing surveys of firms’ expectations.

Particularly relevant is CGK. They implement a sequence of nationally representative surveys of firm
managers in New Zealand starting in 2013. These surveys inquire as to managers’ expectations of future
inflation as well as other macroeconomic and firm-specific expectations, such as their expected hiring,
pricing and investment decisions over the next six months. To assess the causal effect of inflation
expectations on firms’ decisions, they conduct the following experiment. In one of the waves of the survey,
some managers were provided with information about the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s (RBNZ)
inflation target while others—the control group—were provided no such information. Six months later, a
follow-up survey was done to assess what actions firms had taken over the previous six months in terms of
their prices, wages, hiring and investment. In addition, firms were asked again about their inflation
expectations. Because the provision of information about the RBNZ’s inflation target strongly affected
inflation expectations but did not lead to changes in managers’ expectations of other macroeconomic
variables, this treatment (being provided information about the RBNZ’s inflation target) can be interpreted
as generating exogenous variation in inflation expectations which can then be used to assess the causal
effect of these expectations on firms’ economic decisions.

CGK document several findings from this experimental design. First, the provision of information led to a
large and immediate downward revision of inflation expectations for firms who were initially uninformed
about the target (i.e. those who thought the target was 4% or more). Second, this effect had almost
completely dissipated within six months, suggesting that the provision of this type of information affects
beliefs only for a limited duration. Cavallo et al. (2017) document a similar short-lived effect for consumers.
Third, treated firms did not change their prices or wages in ways that were statistically or economically
different from firms in the control group, despite the pronounced difference in their beliefs about inflation.
Fourth, treated firms significantly reduced their hiring and investment relative to the control group. In other
words, the exogenously generated reduction in inflation expectations led to a significant decline in firms’
use of inputs into the production process, providing direct evidence of a causal mechanism running from
firms’ inflation expectations to their economic decisions.

A closely related paper that also provides evidence of a causal link from inflation expectations to firms’
decisions is Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Ropele (2018, CGR henceforth). These authors exploit a quasi-
experiment in a survey of firm expectations in Italy. In 2012Q3, the survey randomly divided firms into two
groups. One group (1/3 of respondents) was asked about their inflation expectations at different horizons,
before being asked the remaining questions in the survey. The other group (2/3 of respondents) were first told
what the most recent rate of inflation was in both Italy and the eurozone before being asked about their

                                                                                                            15
inflation expectations. Importantly, this split of firms was sustained over the next five years and firms in the
treatment group were told the most recent values of inflation in each quarter of the survey. Unlike the one-
time experimental provision of information considered in CGK, the Italian case provides an example of a
repeated and long-lived information treatment that generates significant and persistent differences in inflation
expectations across firms over time. Because firms are asked about their economic decisions in each wave
(price changes and employment), this design can be used to study how exogenous variation in inflation
expectations affects prices and employment decisions over time. The sample covers a ZLB period thus
providing a direct assessment of how firms can respond to attempts to raise inflation expectations.

This alternative quasi-experiment generates a number of results that mirror those found by CGK in New
Zealand. First, the selective treatment of some firms with information about recent inflation is a strong
instrument for inflation expectations of firms, generating pronounced exogenous variation in inflation
expectations. Second, the effects of the information treatment are again short-lived: information treatments
die out after about six months, very similar to that found in CGK. Hence, persistent differences between
the beliefs of the two groups of firms only happen because of the repeated treatment of firms with new
information. Third, CGR find a limited effect of inflation expectations on prices: firms with higher inflation
expectations charge higher prices over the first few months but these effects dissipate rapidly and the
passthrough is limited (for a one percentage point increase in inflation expectations, firms raise prices by
at most 0.2 percentage points). Andrade et al. (2018), using inflation expectations data from a representative
survey of manufacturing firms in France, similarly document that higher inflation expectations are followed
by rising prices on the part of firms.

Despite these similarities, CGR find a dramatically different effect in how inflation expectations translate
into the employment decisions of firms: firms with higher inflation expectations reduce their employment
over the next year, the opposite reaction from that found in New Zealand. They also report reduced plans
for future investment plans over the same horizon. These results apply to various subsamples based on
firms’ size, location, sector, and export status.

One possible explanation for why this difference occurs suggested by CGR is that, unlike in New Zealand,
changes in the inflation expectations of firms in Italy are associated with changes in their other economic
expectations: higher inflation expectations from the treatment lead Italian firms to become more pessimistic
about the overall economy both contemporaneously and in the future, more pessimistic about the business
conditions facing their specific firm, more pessimistic about their ability to access credit, and more
uncertain about the future. Firms with exogenously higher inflation expectations also report that they feel
a greater need to raise prices because they foresee higher prices for raw materials but a need to reduce prices
because of lower demand for their products. In short, an increase in inflation expectations from the

                                                                                                             16
information treatment in Italy is perceived like a negative supply shock to the economy and the firm,
whereas firms in New Zealand do not materially change their expectations of other macroeconomic
variables when they exogenously change their inflation expectations.

These results suggest several important policy implications. First, the mapping from inflation expectations
to firms’ actions appears to depend on context (e.g. macroeconomic conditions, the ability of the central
bank to stabilize the economy, etc.) and may have unintended effects. For example, CGR estimates indicate
that raising inflation expectations at the ZLB can result in lower employment and investment, which is
counter to predictions of standard macroeconomic models. Second, shaping inflation expectations can
influence inflation directly: if a firm can be convinced that inflation will be higher in the future, it may raise
prices in response thus generating a higher inflation now. Again, the link between inflation expectations
and pricing decisions of firms should be explored further, but results in CGR imply that such direct effects
on inflation may be possible and thus management of inflation expectations can offer a new tool to control
inflation and more broadly the economy.



3.3     Summary and Discussion

The previous two sections show that there is clear empirical evidence supporting causal effects from inflation
expectations to economic decisions of households and firms, although the specific channels and mechanisms
remain in doubt for firms. Furthermore, we have focused only on the direct effects of these policies on each
type of agent and abstracted from the general equilibrium effects each of their responses would subsequently
induce. Despite these caveats, these results suggest that, in principle, there is scope for policy-makers to affect
inflation expectations for stabilization purposes. For this to be successful, however, requires two additional
ingredients. First, policy-makers must be able to measure inflation expectations of these agents to gauge how
much policy action is needed. Second, policy-makers need specific communication tools to affect these
expectations. In the next two sections, we consider issues associated with each of these dimensions.



4       Measuring Inflation Expectations

The ability of policy-makers to gauge their effect on inflation expectations hinges on the availability of
high-quality surveys of households’ and firms’ expectations. To what extent do existing surveys meet the
standards one would expect? The answer depends largely on the type of agent.

Household surveys have long been in existence for most advanced economies. For example, the U.S. has
the Michigan Survey of Consumers and the New York Fed’s Survey of Consumer Expectations (SCE). The

                                                                                                                17
United Kingdom has the Barclays Basix and Bank NOP surveys. The European Commission organizes a
harmonized survey of households for all European Union countries, although these are implemented by the
statistical agencies of member nations. In each case, surveys are done monthly or quarterly using a large
(generally greater than a thousand) representative group of households. The Bank of Japan runs the Opinion
Survey. Households are asked to provide a point estimate for future price changes or assign weights to
different ranges of possible outcomes. Questions are generally phrased in terms of “overall prices in the
economy” although some (like the New York Fed’s SCE) emphasize inflation rates of a specific price index.
These surveys are generally viewed as being of very high quality due to their large and representative cross-
samples as well as their high-frequency and long availability.

In contrast, the availability of surveys of firms in most countries is much more limited (Table 2). There are
few surveys that ask for quantitative inflation expectations of firms and those that do tend not to be
nationally representative. The phrasing of questions varies widely, as does the way in which respondents
can respond (e.g. point estimates vs ranges, sizes of bins offered, etc.). In contrast to households, there has
been little work done to characterize the sensitivity of firms’ responses to different types of survey
questions. It remains unclear how important it is to have a representative sample of firms across industries
and size. There is even ambiguity about whether one can or should measure firms’ expectations of aggregate
inflation by asking them about their expectations of their own firm’s price changes or unit costs.

In the next few sections, we provide new results on the extent to which these different factors matter for the
interpretation of survey responses, then draw some conclusions about how well currently available surveys
across countries actually measure the inflation expectations of firms in those countries. To assess the
sensitivity of answers to survey design, we will primarily rely on a sequence of firm surveys done in New
Zealand between 2013 and 2017. These surveys are discussed in detail in Kumar et al. (2015) and CGK. Over
3,000 firms were first surveyed in 2013Q4 and three follow-up surveys were done over the next two years on
subsets of these firms. A new panel of over 2,000 firms was drawn in 2016Q2 with a single follow-up survey
being done on a subset of these firms six months later. To evaluate various elements of survey design, we
provided random subsets of firms with different formulations of questions about inflation, allowing us to study
how these questions affect responses. In what follows we provide key takeaways from our analysis.



4.1     Point Forecasts vs Distributions

While there are numerous benefits of having access to an economic agent’s distribution of subjective
expectations (Manski 2004), respondents may have a hard time understanding questions about distributions
of their beliefs and may exhibit a lower response rate (Kleinjans and van Soest 2010). We find that managers

                                                                                                            18
have high consistency in their responses to questions eliciting point estimates of future inflation11 and
questions eliciting probability distributions of future inflation12 (see Appendix Table A1). Specifically, the
correlation between the point prediction and the mean implied by the reported distribution is about 0.9,
which is considerably higher than the corresponding magnitude for household surveys. Thus, although
consumers often struggle with answering probability distribution questions (Fischhoff and Bruine de Bruin
1999, Bruine de Bruin et al. 2000), firm managers answer coherently across the two types of questions and
bias is unlikely in the distribution-type questions for this type of economic agents.



4.2      Wording of Inflation Forecast Questions

Currently available surveys of consumers and firms display considerable heterogeneity in the wording of
questions used to elicit inflation expectations. The definitions of inflation range from “the change in the
prices you pay” to “inflation as measured by the Consumer Price Index”. Few even use the word “inflation”.
Although this may seem to be a trivial difference in the wording, Armantier et al. (2013) and Bruine de
Bruin et al. (2012) document that the phrasing of inflation questions matters for how households interpret
and respond to questions.

In one wave of the New Zealand survey, firms were randomly assigned to answer versions of the inflation
expectation questions formulated in terms of “prices overall in the economy”, “overall inflation rate”, and
“inflation rate (specifically the Consumer Price Index)”. We find that firm managers do not appear to have
systematic biases or exhibit difficulties with interpreting the questions: first and second moments of the
responses are similar across the wordings (Appendix Table A2). Thus, managers’ answers about inflation
do not appear to be disproportionately sensitive to the language used in the question.



4.3      Expectations of Aggregate vs Respondent-Specific Variables

While the objective of many surveys is to measure firms’ expectations of aggregate inflation, some surveys
attempt to measure these expectations by asking firms to report their projected dynamics of firm-level
variables such as their own prices or their own unit costs. For example, the Atlanta Fed’s Business Inflation
Expectations (BIE) survey asks firms about their expectations of future changes in their unit costs rather

11
   The point forecast is based on the following question: “During the next twelve months, by how much do you think
prices will change overall in the economy? Please provide an answer in percentage terms.”
12
   Specifically, participants are asked “Please assign probabilities (from 0-100) to the following range of overall price
changes PER YEAR in the economy over the next twelve months for New Zealand: (note that the probabilities in the
column should sum to 100).”

                                                                                                                      19
than their expectations of aggregate inflation. This measure is conceptually different from inflation, but it
may be associated with similar results in aggregate. To establish whether this difference in the objects of
inflation expectation questions is material for measuring aggregate inflation expectations, we asked firms
in the New Zealand survey to report their expectations about their future unit costs and expectations about
aggregate inflation.

We find (Appendix Table A3) that the mean (median) response about firm-specific variables is consistently
lower than the mean (median) response about aggregate inflation. This pattern applies not only to expected
changes but also to perceived inflation (that is, inflation that happened in the previous twelve months) and
actual changes in firm-level variables (that is, actual change in unit costs or prices in the previous 6 or 12
months). The dispersion of inflation expectations and perceptions tends to be larger than the dispersion in
expected or actual changes in firm-level variables. Most importantly, we observe that firm-level responses
about unit costs or prices are effectively uncorrelated with their expectations and perceptions of aggregate
inflation.13

We find similar patterns in the U.S. when we compare the distribution of responses about unit costs in the
BIE survey and the distribution of point predictions about aggregate inflation in the survey of firms that we
ran in April 2018 (Figure 4). Specifically, in the April 2018 wave of the surveys, the BIE responses are
generally centered at 2.3 percent (standard deviation is 1.4), while the mean response (after censoring
responses greater than 10 percent) of inflation expectations in our survey is 3.6 percent (standard deviation
is 2.0). That is, the distribution of responses about aggregates is tangibly shifted to the right and is more
dispersed.

Our results suggest that whether a survey asks respondents to report firm-specific or aggregate measures of
price change may influence both the level and heterogeneity of responses. These differences are important
because both moments are informative about how agents form expectations and how successful central
banks are in anchoring inflation expectations. Furthermore, we document that asking firm managers about
changes in unit costs or prices of their firms can bear little connection to what firms project for
macroeconomic variables.




13
  Interestingly, the BIE had two special questions in the July-2015 and September-2014 waves to elicit firms’
expectations about aggregate inflation so that we can compare responses about aggregate and firm-level variables.
Similar to the survey in New Zealand, expected changes in unit costs are lower and less dispersed than changes in the
CPI or “prices overall in the economy”. Although the magnitudes of the differences are somewhat smaller, we argue
below that some of the compression in the moments is due to the particular survey design of the BIE inflation
expectation questions.

                                                                                                                  20
4.4     Sensitivity of Inflation Expectations to the Design of Questions

In the baseline structure of probability questions in our survey of New Zealand managers, we present
respondents with a broad spectrum of possible outcomes ranging from “More than 25%” to “Less than -
25%” (which is similar to the wide grid of possible inflation outcomes in the Survey of Consumer
Expectations run by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York). In contrast, other surveys often present fewer
and/or narrower options. For example, an occasional question about core CPI in the BIE survey has a top
bin of “4 percent and above”, while the bottom bin is “zero or less” (that is, price decline).14 Relatedly,
point forecasts are often formulated as multiple-choice questions where the number of options is fairly
constrained. For example, the Business Outlook Survey run by the Bank of Canada offers only four options
for point predictions of CPI inflation: “less than 1%”, “between 1% and 2%”, “between 2% and 3%”, and
“above 3%”. Given considerable variation in point predictions of managers in New Zealand and more
generally households in the U.S. and other countries, such limited scales of possible answers may prime
respondents to report predictions in the middle of the provided range or lump responses at the boundaries
of the range thus possibly biasing reported inflation expectations.

To assess the quantitative importance of variation in the scale provided in questions eliciting expectations
of firm managers, we randomized a set of questions presented to firms. Specifically, the first group of firms
is presented with the CPI question in the Atlanta Fed’s BIE format. The second group is presented with a
grid as in the New Zealand survey (NZ grid).

For each question and firm, we compute the mean and standard deviation (a measure of uncertainty) implied
by the reported density. Then we calculate moments across firms for these two statistics. We find (Appendix
Table A4) that using a larger number of bins covering a broader set of possibilities for the core CPI inflation
rate yields results similar to those of the percent change in general level of prices (our baseline question
about “change in prices overall”). Using the same question in the BIE format produces a mean forecast
similar to the mean in the baseline format of the question. However, the cross-sectional dispersion of
implied means across firms is considerably smaller than in the NZ grid (1.30 vs. 2.37). Furthermore, the
implied uncertainty (measured as the standard deviation of the reported probability distribution) is nearly
four times smaller in the BIE format than in the NZ grid (0.26 vs. 0.94). This pattern suggests that the BIE
format can overstate the degree of anchoring of inflation expectations in the sense of Kumar et al. (2015).




14
  The wording of the occasional BIE question for core CPI inflation is “Please indicate what probabilities you would
attach to the various possible percentage changes to the CORE (excluding food and energy) CONSUMER PRICE
INDEX over the next twelve months (values should sum to 100%).” Firms assign probabilities to 10 bins running
from “4 percent or more” to “will decline” at 0.5 percentage point increments.

                                                                                                                 21
To understand the source of these differences across the grids as well as the variables used to measure
inflation expectations, we plot the average (across firms) densities for the different formats of survey
questions. Figure 5 demonstrates that managers assign much greater probability to outcomes outside the
range of the BIE grid. Specifically, when we use the NZ grid, managers give 24 percent probability to
inflation being greater than 6 percent which is greater than the mid-point of the top bin of the BIE grid. If
we cumulate probability across NZ bins to match the top bin in the BIE grid, managers give nearly 50
percent probability of inflation being greater than 4 percent for the NZ grid and 33 percent for the BIE grid.
That is, although there is considerable lumping of responses at the top bin of the BIE grid, this lump is
smaller than the cumulative probability managers assign on the NZ grid. This pattern is consistent with
responses being affected by the menu of options in the BIE survey question and some of the probability
mass being shifted toward the center of the offered menu.15

In summary, the distribution of probability questions (or multiple-choice questions for point predictions)
should be calibrated to match the distribution of unconstrained point forecasts. If the grid of possible
outcomes is constrained or not properly centered, elicited inflation expectations may paint a distorted
picture. Specifically, inflation expectations may be less responsive to shocks and may appear more
anchored than they actually are.



4.5      Designing a Sampling Frame of Managers

A basic question for the design of a survey of price-setters is the sampling frame and the representativeness
of the sample of respondents. In household surveys, previous work has documented that expectations differ
systematically along different characteristics of individual respondents, such as their age, gender, education,
and income. As a result, household surveys aim to create a distribution of respondents which is
representative along these observable characteristics. With firm managers, it is less clear whether one
should want a sample which mimics the population of managers along these same characteristics, or
whether one would want a sample which matches the distribution of the characteristics of the firms for
which they are employed.

To assess this question, we consider how expectations of manager respondents in the New Zealand survey
correlate with both observable characteristics of respondents (age, gender, income, and education) versus


15
   Relatedly, we see that responses on the BIE grid are such that the probability of deflation (in this case only one
option: “less than 0%”) is almost zero. For the NZ grid, on average probability of deflation is approximately 5 percent.
Note that the NZ grid is centered at zero while the BIE grid is centered at 2 percent. As a result, respondents to the
BIE grid may be primed to avoid reporting extreme outcomes like deflation.

                                                                                                                     22
the observable characteristics of the firms (age, size, industry, markups, etc.) at which they are employed.
We find (Appendix Table A5) that while some of personal characteristics are significantly correlated with
respondents’ expectations, the predictive power of these characteristics is low (𝑅        0.1). In contrast, the
explanatory power of firms’ variables (along with industry fixed effects) is quite high (𝑅         0.8). When
we include both firm characteristics and individual characteristics in the regression, much of the explanatory
power coming from individual characteristics disappears whereas the firm characteristics continue to have
significant predictive power. In other words, there seems to be very little value added in ensuring that
respondents mimic the demographic characteristics of managers overall. Instead, a well-designed survey
should capture the distribution of firm characteristics among the population of firms in the economy.



4.6     How Do Existing Surveys Fare?

These results highlight a few characteristics that well-designed surveys of firms’ inflation expectations
should exhibit: 1) because firm characteristics matter for expectations, surveys should use stratified random
sampling from the universe of firms and have broad coverage of industries and firm sizes, 2) questions on
inflation expectations should ask for point forecasts or present a sufficiently broad set of quantitative bins
as to characterize the full distribution of beliefs, and 3) questions on inflation expectations should ask about
firms’ beliefs regarding aggregate inflation, not firm-specific concepts. From the broader literature on
survey design, surveys should also have a large number of respondents and should avoid all forms of
priming of respondents, e.g. providing them with additional information before asking questions.

How do existing surveys of firms conform to these guidelines? Overall, quite poorly. Table 3 summarizes
major surveys of firms’ expectations currently available for a range of countries and how they fare along
these metrics. Most surveys fail along several dimensions. Many, like the Canadian Conference Board or
the Livingston survey in the U.S (now run by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia), use a sampling
frame that is not nationally representative (“convenience sampling”). Many of these same surveys consist
almost exclusively of larger firms in the economy, with relatively small cross-sections (50-80 respondents
per wave is common). Convenience sampling and relatively small cross-sections also characterize surveys
in the Czech Republic, New Zealand, Poland and Sweden. The BIE survey run by the Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta is limited to the six states that are included in the Sixth District of the Federal Reserve system
and does not ask firms explicit questions about aggregate inflation. The U.K. survey of firms run by the
Confederation of British Industry similarly does not ask firms about their expectations of aggregate inflation
and covers only a subset of industries.




                                                                                                             23
Another common stumbling block for surveys of firms is “priming” of answers, either by providing
respondents with information or using bins that limit the scope of possible answers. The survey of firms
run by the Bank of Italy, as described in section 3.2, provides most firms with information about recent
inflation in Italy and the euro area before asking them about inflation. Firms who are provided with this
information display much less disagreement and have forecasts that track recent inflation much more
closely than firms who are not. The Business Outlook Survey run by the Bank of Canada offers only four
options for point predictions of CPI inflation: “less than 1%”, “between 1% and 2%”, “between 2% and
3%”, and “above 3%”.

The European Commission reports results of a “harmonized” survey of firms across all members of the
European Union. These surveys are run by the national statistical institutes of each member country, but a
minimum number of questions were made consistent across countries by the European Commission (EC)
and aggregated values of these questions are then provided to the EC by member statistical institutes.
Unfortunately, different surveys are used for different industries (e.g. there is one survey for the industrial
sector and a different survey for the service sector). In addition, the harmonized survey questions that refer
to aggregate inflation are only qualitative in nature (i.e. will prices “go up”, “go down” or “stay the same”?),
making them of limited practical use for measuring the level of firms’ inflation expectations.

The Bank of Japan’s “Tankan” survey, which began including questions on aggregate inflation in 2014,
covers 10,000 firms on average per wave, making it the largest survey of firms anywhere (Muto 2015).16
While the survey asks firms to provide quantitative forecasts of inflation, it gives them the opportunity to
respond “I don’t know.” Approximately 20 percent of respondents choose “I don’t know (or have a clear
view)” for 1-year ahead inflation forecasts and around 40 percent make that choice for 3-year and 5-year
ahead inflation forecasts. The survey of U.S. firms that we ran in April 2018 similarly gave respondents the
option of choosing “I don’t know” and about 55% responded that way. Unfortunately, those who choose “I
don’t know” are almost certainly not a random subset from the overall distribution of beliefs, making the
resulting mean forecasts a biased representation of actual forecasts of firms. While we cannot quantify the
resulting bias at this stage, the high fraction of respondents who select it suggests that this feature should
be avoided in future survey designs and instead surveys should nudge respondents to provide e.g. ranges.

To the best of our knowledge, the surveys of firms which best match our desiderata are those in Ukraine
and Uruguay. The National Bank of Ukraine runs a survey of around 1,000 firms per quarter (see Coibion
and Gorodnichenko 2015b), selected in a nationally representative way, and these firms are asked well-


16
  The Tankan survey of the Bank of Japan is also exceptional in that it reports an average response rate of 99% (Muto
2015).

                                                                                                                  24
defined questions about inflation expectations. The central bank of Uruguay also runs a well-designed
survey of firms on a quarterly basis. While the cross-section of approximately 300 respondents per wave is
somewhat small, it has an extensive panel dimension which can be particularly useful for researchers and
has quantitative questions on inflation expectations at different horizons (see Frache and Lluberas 2017).
The fact that no major advanced economy has a survey of firms that compares to those in Ukraine and
Uruguay is striking and a major stumbling block to the use of inflation expectations as a policy tool.



4.7     Summary and Discussion

Most advanced economies have well-designed representative surveys of households’ inflation expectations.
In contrast, most existing surveys of firms’ inflation expectations appear to suffer from fundamental design
flaws that call into question the resulting measurements. Whether it be that firms are not asked about
aggregate inflation (Atlanta Fed’s BIE survey, U.K. survey), firms are not randomly selected or
representative of the broader distribution of firms (e.g., U.K. or Sweden), questions about inflation are not
quantitative or too restrictive to be informative (e.g. Bank of Canada, European Commission), or any of the
other shortcomings described above, few surveys of firms are sufficiently well-designed as to be very
informative about the inflation expectations of firms in their respective economies. At a minimum, these
limitations in available surveys should give policy-makers pause before using them as an explicit guide in
policy decisions.

Filling this important measurement gap will require the development of nationally representative firm level
surveys by government authorities. Even administratively-run “mandatory” surveys of firms tend to achieve
response rates of only 70-80% (see Bloom et al. 2017). Privately administered surveys achieve much lower
response rates and still require enormous expenses due to the difficulty of inducing business executives to
respond, unlike household surveys. As a result, this gap cannot be filled by academics relying on research
grants. Only central banks and statistical agencies have the resources and authority to create the type of
large-scale, high-frequency and nationally representative surveys of firms needed to provide high-quality
measures of firms’ inflation expectations appropriate for policy-making. If Ukraine and Uruguay can create
such surveys, we see no reason why major advanced economies cannot do so as well.



5       Breaking through the Veil of Inattention

Above and beyond measurement issues, a necessary condition for policy-makers to be able to use inflation
expectations as a stabilization tool is that economic agents’ beliefs respond to the policies and announcements.

                                                                                                             25
Indeed, as Blinder (2018) observes, there should be a sender and a receiver for communication to be effective.
Since expectations are not directly under the control of policy-makers, they should be thought of as indirect
instruments that can be moved through the more direct tool of communication strategies. In this section, we
review previous experiences with monetary policy announcements and their effects on inflation expectations.
Even large monetary policy announcements during and since the Great Recession had little if any discernible
impact on households and firms’ views about the future. We then provide some suggestions as to how policy-
makers could revise their communications strategies to more directly and successfully alter the economic
expectations of different agents.



5.1     Monetary policy announcements and expectations

Monetary policy announcements have effects on financial markets that occur within minutes. Central
bankers now often conduct extensive question-and-answer sessions with the media after policy meetings.
Forecasters and analysts can be immediately found on the news explaining the potential implications of
monetary policy actions. Does this instantaneous diffusion of news following large policy announcements
affect the economic perspectives of households and firms?

In this section, we consider the extent to which consumers, professional forecasters and financial markets
in the U.S., U.K. and euro area reacted after some important announcements from the monetary authorities
during and following the last financial crisis. The objective is to try to evaluate if these announcements had
an impact on agents’ inflation expectations or other indicators that might indicate that this type of
communication has some effect on their behavior.



5.1.1   The Case of the U.S.

We focus on four episodes in which the Federal Reserve undertook significant policy actions. The first is
the interest rate cut in August 2007. We then consider the announcements of Quantitative Easing (QE) 1 in
November 2008 and QE2 in November 2010. Finally, we consider the announcement of the 2% inflation
target by the Federal Reserve in January 2012.

We begin with the response of professional forecasters to this news to provide a benchmark for how
relatively attentive agents are likely to respond to these policy announcements. Our source of information
is the Survey of Professional Forecasters from Bloomberg, in which forecasts can be updated as frequently
as daily. We count the monthly changes in predictions from the forecasters to see if they react to this news
by changing their analyses. Figure 6 shows the number of changes in the predictions from professional

                                                                                                           26
forecasters. We see that in general there is an increase in the number of changes in the prediction of
forecasters around these announcements. The changes are particularly striking for QE1, QE2 and the 2%
inflation target. This seems to indicate that professional forecasters are reacting to the announcement. In
the same spirit, we can assess how financial markets reacted after these changes. We use the TED spread
as a measure of credit risk and the 5-year inflation swap to gauge the response of financial market
participants. We can use daily data which can better isolate these announcements from other events that
might have happened in that period. Figure 7 shows the TED spread and the 5-year inflation swap in a 2-
month window around the events. As with professional forecasters, we observe clear reactions in financial
markets. 5-year inflation swaps react after these events with QE2 and the inflation targeting announcement
yielding particularly large effects. The TED spread shows smaller changes that might be possible
considering that these are periods of high uncertainty.

The response of the expectations of professional forecasters and financial markets to the inflation targeting
announcement is somewhat surprising. As already discussed, these agents are very well-informed when it
comes to inflation dynamics and the objective of the central bank, so one might have expected very little
effect on their beliefs from the Federal Reserve’s formal adoption of a target that had long been already
understood in the financial community as an informal target. These movements in expectations therefore
represent a lower bound of what we would expect to see for households and firms given how much less
informed the latter appear to be when it comes to inflation and monetary policy.

To evaluate consumers’ reaction, we use the Survey of Consumers (MSC) conducted by the University of
Michigan. Looking at the average response of households in the MSC in Figure 8, we find little visible
response to any of the announcements. Binder (2017) similarly notes that household inflation expectations
in the U.S. did not appear to respond in a meaningful way to the Federal Reserve’s announcement of an
inflation target. Consistent with the general inattention paid by households to inflation in general, this
suggests that even the adoption of a formal inflation target on the part of the Federal Reserve did not feed
into household inflation expectations and they appear to be, at least in the current environment, look largely
invariant to monetary policy announcements and decisions.

To assess how such inattention to what should be large and visible economic announcements can occur, we
consider responses to the following question in the MSC: “During the last few months, have you heard of
any favorable or unfavorable changes in business conditions?” We use this question to evaluate how
consumers are receiving information about different types of policies. Answers are separated by the type
of news. We focus on monetary news to see if announcements are reaching households. To quantify the
exposure of these announcements, we use a measure of how the media covered these events. This measure
is constructed by counting all the news articles that have the phrase “Federal Reserve” in the New York

                                                                                                           27
Times (“Fed news”). We have monthly data for both measures. Figure 9 plots time series of monetary news
and Fed news for a 13-month window around the announcements. We can see that these big announcements
seem to have been covered by the media (or at least the New York Times), as we see a reaction of the
amount of news related to the Federal Reserve. Despite this upsurge of news reports, we see little reaction
in terms of households reporting receiving more information about monetary policy. The percentage of
households who heard about monetary news changes little and in some cases we even see declines around
the main event. Jointly, this indicates that the increased news coverage in major news media sources is
either not seen by most households or ignored by them when they read the news.



5.1.2   The Case of the U.K.

Like in the U.S., there were a number of notable policy announcements made by the Bank of England
following the financial crisis. We focus on the following three: Quantitative Easing in March 2009 (QE1),
October 2011 (QE2) and July 2012 (QE3). We use the Bank of England’s Survey on Consumer
Expectations, a quarterly survey conducted by the Bank of England since 2001 of a representative group of
consumers aged 16 years or older. This survey not only includes questions about inflation expectations but
also asks respondents about their opinions regarding the work of the Bank of England.

As illustrated in Panel A of Figure 10, there is little indication that inflation expectations rose sharply around
the time of these events, much as was the case in the U.S. When we examine the evolution of consumers’
expectations about the interest rate (Panel B), we also see that there are no changes around the
announcements. Between the second quarter of 2009 and 2010, the survey included another question asking
respondents whether they had heard about quantitative easing policies. Following the announcement of
QE1, we find that the proportion of consumers that declare that they have no idea about the evolution of
interest rates remains constant or increases. About 50% of the respondents stated that they have not heard
at all about that policy. Less than 20% said that they have heard a lot about it. This shows that even if this
was an exceptional policy, U.K. consumers seemed to be largely unaware of it.



5.1.3   The Case of Eurozone

Finally, we explore what happened with big ECB policy announcements, focusing on four specific
episodes: the purchasing of Spanish and Italian bonds (August 9, 2011), 0% interest rate and “whatever it
takes” (July 26, 2012), Quantitative Easing (March 9, 2015), and QE tapering (December 8, 2016). Turning
first to financial market responses, we examine how the 5 years inflation swap and the difference between

                                                                                                               28
the 10-year and 2-year German bund reacted around these announcements. We use daily data and a two-
month window as in the U.S. For these variables we see some reactions around the day of these
announcements (Figure 11). In the case of the 5 years inflation swap we see moderate changes the day of
the events, especially the day of the announcement of the 0% interest rate. In the case of the German bund
spread we see bigger changes around the events, with direction that depends on the type of the news.

On the other hand, households’ inflation expectations appear to be rather insensitive to the announcements
(Figure 12). For example, the ECB’s announcement of its quantitative easing program in March 2015 had
no discernible effect on mean one-year-ahead inflation expectations of eurozone consumers, which is
similar to the behavior of U.S. consumers in response to the QE announcement by the Federal Reserve.

While we do not have access to time-series data on inflation expectations of U.S. firms, we use a unique
survey of firms run by Deloitte to study the evolution of firms’ expectations in Europe. This survey of Chief
Financial Officers (CFOs) across countries in Europe (both within the eurozone and outside of it) begins in
2015S2 and continues on a semi-annual basis thereafter. This time period includes the QE Tapering
announcement which had a discernible effect on financial markets. The Deloitte Survey does not inquire as
to CFOs’ inflation expectations, but it does ask about their expected capital expenditures and employment
over the following twelve months as well as how uncertain they are about the economic outlook. As a result,
we can assess whether this announcement had any effect on CFOs’ other economic expectations. We report
mean responses for countries in the euro area for which we have access to the Deloitte Survey (Germany,
France, Italy, Spain, and Finland) and selected non-euro countries (Turkey, Poland, Russia, Sweden, and
Norway) for comparison. There is little discernible pattern around the time of the announcements (Figure
13). For most economic variables, firms do not seem to become significantly more optimistic or pessimistic
than those outside the eurozone. There is a non-trivial decline in optimism about future capital expenditures,
but a similar albeit smaller decline also takes place in non-euro countries, making it difficult to argue that
the effect stems primarily from the policy announcement.

In short, across geographic areas, we find little evidence that households and firms respond strongly to
monetary policy announcements, even when these receive pronounced coverage in the main media outlets.
These results are notably different from what has been previously documented for fiscal policies. D’Acunto
et al. (2016), for example, find that an announcement related to increases in value added taxes in Germany
had a strong effect on consumers’ inflation expectations and on their spending decisions. Similarly, Kueng
(2016) finds that spending of high-income households increases strongly in response to announcements that
raise their expected after-tax lifetime permanent income in the U.S.




                                                                                                           29
5.2     Policy solutions to break the veil of inattention

Given this apparent inattention paid to inflation and monetary policy by households and firms in advanced
economies that have experienced low inflation for decades, how can policy-makers possibly affect their
expectations in order to achieve more stable economic outcomes? Fortunately, a growing literature on the
effects of information on agents’ beliefs provides a basis for new communication strategies for policy-makers.



5.2.1   Communication to the public can work

While the veil of inattention may give the appearance that policy-makers will never be able to affect agents’
expectations sufficiently to affect their economic decisions, recent experimental evidence suggests
otherwise. Specifically, a number of recent papers use information treatments to households and firms and
find that these treatments have large and immediate effects on agents’ inflation expectations. For example,
Armantier et al. (2016) use randomized control trials to provide information about professionals’ inflation
forecasts to households and find that, relative to a control group that received no such treatment, their
inflation forecasts respond strongly to the information and in the expected direction. This effect is
particularly strong for households whose beliefs are initially further from the mean and who are more
uncertain about inflation. Binder and Rodrigue (2017) find a similar result in a separate experiment
providing information about recent inflation or about the central bank’s inflation target to households.

This strong response of inflation expectations to information treatments is not limited to households. CGK
document a similar finding for firms in New Zealand: providing managers with information about inflation
or monetary policy can lead to large changes in the inflation forecasts of managers, especially those who
are most uninformed. The strength of this effect can also be seen in the unique experiment provided by the
Bank of Italy’s randomized provision of information about recent inflation to Italian firms. As described in
section 3.2, starting in 2012Q3, some firms in this survey were asked about inflation without being provided
any additional information whereas other firms in the survey were first told about recent inflation values.
As can be seen in Figure 14, this provision of information to agents led to large deviations in inflation
expectations across the two groups of firms depending on recent inflation dynamics in Italy, with treated
firms having expectations that tracked inflation much more closely as well as displaying much less
disagreement amongst themselves about the path of future inflation. Another experiment in this spirit is
described in Frache and Lluberas (2017). They document that Uruguayan firms have to obtain information
about recent inflation when renegotiating wages at fixed times during the year. They find that when firms
undergo this information treatment, their forecasts of inflation improve significantly relative to firms that
do not have to acquire information about inflation that month.

                                                                                                           30
5.2.2      Simple messages are better

How strongly agents respond to new information depends on the nature of the information provided to
them, the source of that information, and how much they already know. As a result, we should expect some
forms of information treatment to be more powerful than others, which is precisely what this line of research
has documented. For example, Armantier et al. (2016) find that providing households with information
about professionals’ forecasts of inflation (which they generally don’t know or observe) has larger effects
on their inflation expectations than providing them information about food inflation (which they are
generally more confident about). Binder and Rodrigue (2017) find that effects on households’ beliefs when
providing information about recent inflation or the Federal Reserve’s inflation target are approximately the
same. CGK find similar effects on inflation expectations when treating firms with information about the
central bank’s inflation target, recent inflation dynamics or the forecasts of professional forecasters.
However, providing participants with information about the forecasts of other firms has much smaller
effects on their beliefs, consistent with them viewing these as providing less reliable information. CGR find
that Italian firms which receive information about recent inflation respond approximately as much to this
information as firms which are told about the ECB’s inflation target.

If agents’ beliefs are so sensitive to information about recent inflation and the inflation target in
experiments, why don’t central bankers’ policy announcements have more discernible effects on the
expectations of households and firms, as documented in section 5.1? One reason is that these agents may
not be exposed to this news, a possibility to which we return below. But it could also be the case that the
way in which the news is presented to them is not comprehensible to them. To assess this possibility,
Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber (2018) provide different information treatments to U.S. households,
including not just simple statements about recent inflation or the central bank’s target (as done in previous
work), but also by providing randomized subsets of households with either the FOMC statements or USA
Today’s news coverage of the FOMC announcements or FOMC forecasts. They find that providing
households with FOMC statements has no statistically significant marginal effect on agents’ beliefs relative
to simply telling them about recent inflation dynamics (Table 4). This is consistent with Hernandez-Murillo
and Shell (2014) showing that statements by the FOMC have become increasingly difficult to understand
over time and now require a Ph.D. to fully understand.17 Reading news coverage of FOMC decisions has
an even smaller effect on households’ inflation forecasts than reading FOMC statements. This suggests that
policy-makers cannot rely on news media to make their policy decisions and announcements sufficiently
clear for the general population to process. Simply providing FOMC forecasts is as powerful as giving


17
     Bulir, Jansen, and Cihak (2012) document that other central banks tend to have equally complex communication.

                                                                                                                31
recent inflation figures. The current “Fed-speak” approach is not a particularly successful communication
strategy with respect to the general public.

At the same time, Table 4 illustrates the potential power of a layered communication strategy that
successfully reaches households. Providing information to these agents about recent inflation or the central
bank’s inflation target moves average inflation expectations (and therefore perceived real interest rates) by
around 2 percentage points on average. In contrast, estimates of the effects of quantitative easing and
forward guidance point to effects on long-term interest rates of around 50 basis points (e.g., Chodorow-
Reich 2014 ). The effect of communication treatment on perceived real interest rates is therefore an order
of magnitude larger than the types of policies currently used at the ZLB.

A successful communication strategy that aims to affect the expectations of firms and households should
therefore consist of much more accessible messages.18 Multi-layered presentation (that is, presentation of
the same material in a sequence of messages with different levels of complexity) of a central bank’s policies
may be a more effective way to reach the public as is shown in randomized control trials (Haldane and
McMahon, 2018).



5.2.3    Target the message to the scenario

In a communication campaign, a central bank has a choice over which message to share with the public.
For example, with forward guidance policies, policy-makers first make a choice over whether or not to
engage in such a policy at different times. They then choose whether to engage in a time-dependent or state-
dependent approach. With the former, they face a choice of an expected duration to announce while under
the latter they must decide on what state-contingencies to announce. With a layered communication strategy
targeting the inflation expectations of households and firms, policy-makers would similarly have flexibility
over the intensity of the communication campaign as well as the nature of the communication. The growing
empirical evidence on how households and firms react to information treatments strongly supports the
notion that they respond in a Bayesian manner, i.e. forming new beliefs that depend both on their original
belief and the signal they receive. Hence, policy-makers can push inflation beliefs either up or down


18
   For comparison, Mervyn King (2007) delivers a representative central banker’s view of communications:
“Explaining our analysis at some length is a richer source of information for markets than code words or statements
about the future path of interest rates. Less weight should be placed on the short statements that are published with the
announcements of our decisions because such statements, as we have seen elsewhere, run the risk of becoming
monetary policy by code word. They do not help markets understand how we are likely to react to future data.” Our
results suggest that, when it comes to firms and households rather than financial markets, monetary policy by “code
word” may be a much more successful strategy. More elaborate messages, however, can help with a more positive
coverage of policy decisions by the media (Berger, Ehrmann, and Fratzscher 2011).

                                                                                                                      32
depending on which information they choose to provide. Clearly no policy institution will want to release
information that is factually incorrect, but there are different facts that they can choose to emphasize.

To illustrate this point, consider the case of Italy in 2014. Inflation was running below 1% and expectations
of firms were around 1.5%. Giving firms information about recent inflation tended to lower their inflation
expectations, as is evident from the difference in beliefs between firms that were told this information and
firms that were not (Figure 14). But giving them information about the ECB’s inflation target of just below
2% would have tended to raise them. By choosing which information to stress, policy-makers can therefore
guide expectations in a direction that helps stabilize economic outcomes. Because economic conditions
change over time, the message will likely need to change as well.



5.2.4   Repeat the message

Another lesson from the recent literature using experimental treatments is that the effect of information on
households’ and firms’ beliefs is short-lived. For example, CGK perform an experiment in which firm
managers were provided with information about the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s inflation target. As
discussed above, this information had a large and immediate effect on the reported inflation forecasts of
relatively uninformed managers. However, when these were surveyed again six months later, the beliefs of
the treated group were not meaningfully different than those of the control group who did not receive the
information. The effect of the information treatment on beliefs had fully dissipated within six months.

Other work has found similar transitory effects of information treatments. For example, CGR use the fact
that information treatments to Italian firms vary over time with the level of inflation to assess how long-
lived the effects of each information treatment are. They find that while the contemporaneous effects on
inflation expectations are large, these fade quickly and appear to have dissipated after around six months,
similar to the finding in CGK. Frache and Lluberas (2017) similarly find large forecast revisions each time
firms in Uruguay are forced to renegotiate wages and acquire information about inflation. Since this
happens every six months on average, this again implies that information treatments on firms have only
short-lived effects. Cavallo et al. (2017) also report that the effects of informational treatment for consumers
dissipate within six months.

The transitory nature of information treatments on inflation expectations of firms and households implies
that policy-makers need to pursue a repeated set of announcements when they seek to affect these agents’
expectations in a persistent manner. One-time announcements may have immediate and long-lived effects
on the expectations of professional forecasters and financial market participants; they have no such effects


                                                                                                             33
on other agents’ expectations. Policy-makers can therefore consider pursuing systematic communication
campaigns that repeatedly target the relevant audience when that audience involves firms or households.



5.2.5   Take the message direct to the target audience

In an early contribution, Berger, Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2011) asked, “The commercial success of a
private firm crucially depends on its ability to reach its customers and to convey a favorable image of its
products and corporate identity—but does the same apply to policy institutions?” After studying media
coverage of the ECB’s decisions, their answer is a conditional yes with the effectiveness of policy
communication being potentially clouded by the media. Indeed, the weak responses of household and firm
expectations to significant monetary policy announcements documented in section 5.1 indicates that relying
on traditional media channels to diffuse policy messages is unreliable. First, the media tends to
disproportionately cover negative news (Hamilton 2004). Second, many households do not follow standard
news outlets. Third, even when they are exposed to media articles on monetary policy, households do not
respond strongly to their news content compared to simpler messages, as shown in Table 4. Having a
significant impact on the inflation expectations of these agents will therefore require more targeted
“marketing” strategies.

There is an extensive history of policy-making institutions developing messages meant to shape the general
public’s opinion that can help serve as a guide. Public health messages have long advertised the dangers of
certain behaviours through aggressive advertising campaigns in magazines, billboards and television. Each
year, there are seasonal campaigns to induce people to take the flu shot or, in the case of the U.S., to induce
people to sign up for health care during “open season”. Campaigns like these are not limited to health issues
however. For example, following the passage of the 2001 Bush tax cuts, the Internal Revenue Service sent
letters to American taxpayers letting them know they would be receiving a check in the mail as a result of
the policy and that this check was not considered taxable income. The introduction of the euro to the public
was similarly preceded by an extensive publicity campaign by the ECB.

The growth of social media can facilitate this targeted approach. Much like corporate advertising and
political messages are now targeted to well-defined audiences that are likely to respond to the information,
central banks could pursue ad-based communication strategies that focus on specific groups. Such an
approach would avoid working through the news media, which much of the population does not follow




                                                                                                            34
closely or does not treat as very informative, as illustrated in Table 4. Ads with clear narratives could break
through this intermediation flow and allow the central bank to directly reach new audiences.19

Targeted messages that reach the relevant audience can also help reduce regional disparities in economic
activity in a way that aggregate policy actions (like interest rate changes) cannot. This can therefore help
mitigate one of the major limitations of common currency areas, namely the inability to “tailor” policy to
local conditions. Consider for example the hypothetical case of a currency bloc with one region that is
booming (call it the North) and one that is in recession (call it the South), such that aggregate interest rate
changes cannot simultaneously stabilize both regions. A campaign that raises inflation expectations in the
South but lowers them in the North via targeted messages to each can thereby lower real interest rates in
the former while raising them in the latter.



6        Conclusion

The onset of the zero-bound on interest rates generated a need for new monetary policy strategies. One such
commonly discussed approach is a more active management of inflation expectations. If policy-makers can
alter agents’ inflation expectations, then perceived real interest rates can be altered even in the absence of
changes in nominal interest rates, presumably leading to changes in consumption and investment decisions.
Furthermore, shaping inflation expectations of price-setters can have a direct effect on price changes, thus
providing another channel to control inflation. Our reading of recent evidence makes us cautiously
optimistic about the future of this policy option, although it is not yet ready for full deployment. There is
now robust evidence on the causal effect of inflation expectations on the decisions of households and firms,
which suggests that this tool has potential. However, we note several caveats. First, the specific mechanisms
linking inflation expectations and economic decisions are not yet clearly identified, which we view as a call
to academics for continuing this burgeoning research agenda. Second, we lack high-quality surveys of
firms’ expectations, which we similarly view as a call for statistical agencies to develop and field new
nationally representative surveys of firms. Third, in low-inflation environments, central banks face the



19
  In a recent speech, Haldane (2017) emphasizes the importance of narratives: ““[W]hen it comes to assessing the
impact of central bank actions on the trust and understanding of the public, little if any attention has been paid to some
of the richer informational channels through which news might spread between people. For example, the recent work
of George Akerlof and Robert Shiller has emphasized the role of “popular narratives” in shaping the public’s
expectations and decisions. Story-telling is the ultimate communications device. History is no more than a sequence
of stories. These stories spread word by word, mail by mail, Tweet by Tweet. They obey the same laws of motion as
epidemics, with viral spread beyond a tipping point. And in a world of modern media, these popular narrative
epidemics are probably spreading further and faster than ever previously. This matters for individuals’ feelings and
decisions and, potentially, for macro-economic behavior.”

                                                                                                                       35
inattention of households and firms to monetary policy announcements, which calls for new
communications strategies on the part of central banks.

The current era of low interest rates combined with a possible recession in the coming years suggests that
the need for non-traditional monetary policies is likely to grow. Limited fiscal space resulting from the last
recession will make the issue of having a wide range of non-traditional monetary tools even more pressing,
both because fiscal stimuli are unlikely to be forthcoming and growing debt levels are likely to raise new
concerns about the solvency of some national governments. Pursuing new research on expectations, fielding
new surveys and developing innovative communications strategies are steps that we can take now in
anticipation of future challenges to monetary policy.

But the management of expectations by policy-makers has scope that extends well beyond getting around
the zero-bound constraint on interest rates. Because communication can be targeted to different regions,
different industries and different groups, this policy tool can in principle be used to affect economic activity
in a much more precise and targeted manner than the bludgeon of nominal interest changes. While central
banks have long focused on financial markets and how monetary policy actions affect and pass through the
financial system, expectations management represents a policy tool to precisely and directly affect
consumers and firms while side-stepping the financial system. While this is unlikely to be a panacea for all
of our economic woes, the development of such a tool could be exceptionally useful for economic
stabilization, especially when fiscal policy-makers are missing in action.

Finally, improved and layered communication strategies would ultimately enhance the credibility of central
banks and help protect their independence. It is short-sighted to believe that simply being successful in
keeping inflation low and stable is sufficient to ensure that the central bank is credible and its independence
insured. If most economic agents are unaware of the central bank’s success, then how can it be viewed as
having credibility? Yet the irony of the Lucas critique is that successfully generating a low-inflation
environment reduces the incentives of agents to track inflation. As they optimally choose to become more
inattentive to aggregate inflation dynamics, the central bank will generally can be viewed as less credible
over time, not more. A layered communication strategy that directly targets the beliefs of households and
firms can therefore serve not only to enhance economic stability but also to sustain the credibility of the
central bank and thereby help protect its independence.




                                                                                                             36
References

Afrouzi, Hassan 2018 “Strategic Inattention, Inflation Dynamics and the Non-Neutrality of Money,”
manuscript.
Afrouzi, Hassan, Saeed Bayat, Omid Ghaderi and Ali Madanizadeh 2018. “Inflation expectations under
volatile inflation: Evidence from firms in Iran,” Manuscript.
Andrade, Philippe, Gaetano Gaballo, Eric Mengus, and Benoit Mojon, 2015. “Forward Guidance and
Heterogeneous Beliefs,” Working paper 573, Banque de France.
Andrade, Philippe, Olivier Coibion, Erwan Gautier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2018. “Inflation
Expectations and the Decisions of Firms: Evidence from France,” Manuscript.
Arioli, Rodolfo, Colm Bates, Heinz Dieden, Ioana Duca, Roberta Friz, Christian Gayer, Geoff Kenny,
Aidan Meyler, and Iskra Pavlova, 2017. “EU consumers’ quantitative inflation perceptions and
expectations: an evaluation,” Occasional Paper Series 186, European Central Bank.
Armantier, Olivier, Wandi Bruine de Bruin, Simon Potter, Giorgio Topa, Wilbert Van der Klaauw, and
Basit Zafar, 2013. “Measuring Inflation Expectations,” Annual Review of Economics 5(11): 1-29.
Armantier, Olivier, Scott Nelson, Giorgio Topa, Wilbert van der Klaauw, and Basit Zafar, 2016. “The Price
Is Right: Updating Inflation Expectations in a Randomized Price Information Experiment,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 98(3): 503-523.
Armantier, Olivier, Wändi Bruine de Bruin, Giorgio Topa, Wilbert Klaauw, and Basit Zafar, 2015.
“Inflation Expectations And Behavior: Do Survey Respondents Act On Their Beliefs?” International
Economic Review 56: 505-536.
Bachmann, Rudiger, Tim Berg, and Eric Sims 2015 “Inflation Expectations and Readiness to Spend: Cross
Sectional Evidence,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1): 1-35
Beechey, Meredith J., Benjamin K. Johannsen, and Andrew T. Levin. 2011. “Are Long-Run Inflation
Expectations Anchored More Firmly in the Euro Area Than in the United States?” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 3(2): 104-29.
Berger, Helge, Michael Ehrmann, and Marcel Fratzscher, 2011. “Monetary Policy in the Media,” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking 43(4): 689-709.
Binder, Carola and Rodrigue, Alex, 2017. “Household Informedness and Long-Run Inflation Expectations:
Experimental Evidence.” Manuscript. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3040706.
Binder, Carola, 2017. “Fed speak on main street: Central bank communication and household
expectations,” Journal of Macroeconomics 52(C): 238-251.
Blinder, Alan, Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, Jakob De Haan, and David-Jan Jansen 2008 “Central
Bank Communication and Monetary Policy: A Survey of Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Economic
Literature 46(4): 910–945.
Blinder, Alan S. 2018. “Through a Crystal Ball Darkly: The Future of Monetary Policy Communication.”
AEA Papers and Proceedings 108: 567-571.



                                                                                                      37
Bloom, Nicholas, Steven J. Davis, Lucia Foster, Brian Lucking, Scott Ohlmacher and Itay Saporta-Eksten,
2017. “Business-Level Expectations and Uncertainty,” Manuscript.
Bruine de Bruin, Wandi, Baruch Fischhoff, Susan Millstein and Bonnie Halpern-Felsher, 2000. “Verbal
and Numerical Expressions of Probability: It’s a Fifty-Fifty Chance,” Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes 81: 115-131.
Bruine de Bruin, Wandi, Wilbert Van der klaauw, Giorgio Topa, Julie S. Downs, Baruch Fischhoff, and
Olivier Armantier, 2012. “The effect of wording on consumers’ reported inflation expectation,” Journal of
Economic Psychology 33: 749-757.
Bryan, Michael F., and Guhan Venkatu, 2001 “The Demographics of Inflation Opinion Surveys.”
Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
Bulir, Ales, David-Jan Jansen, and Martin Cihak, 2012. “Clarity of Central Bank Communication About
Inflation,” IMF Working Papers 12/9, International Monetary Fund.
Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano, 2012.
“Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
2012(43, Spring): 1-80.
Carney,     Mark,      2013.     Press     Conference,  24th    October      2013.      Available      at
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2013/the-uk-at-the-heart-of-a-renewed-
globalisation-press-conference-transcript.
Carroll, Christopher D., 2003. “Macroeconomic Expectations of Households and Professional
Forecasters,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1): 269–298.
Cavallo, Alberto, Guillermo Cruces, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia, 2017. “Inflation Expectations, Learning,
and Supermarket Prices: Evidence from Survey Experiments,” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 9(3): 1-35.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, 2014. “Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy on Financial Institutions.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 45(1):155–227.
Clark, Todd E., and Troy A. Davig, 2008. “An Empirical Assessment of the Relationships Among Inflation
and Short- and Long-Term Expectations,” Research Working Paper RWP 08-05, Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City.
Coibion, Olivier, Serafin Frache, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Rodrigo Lluberas, 2018. “Causal Effects of
Information Treatments for Uruguayan Firms,” Manuscript.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2015a. “Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well After All?
Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7:
197-232.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2015b. “Inflation Expectations in Ukraine: A Long Path to
Anchoring?” Visnyk of the National Bank of Ukraine 223: 6-21.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Saten Kumar, forthcoming. “How Do Firms Form their
Expectations? New Survey Evidence,” American Economic Review.



                                                                                                      38
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Gee Hee Hong, 2015. “The Cyclicality of Sales, Regular and
Effective Prices: Business Cycle and Policy Implications,” American Economic Review 105(3): 993-1029
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber, 2018. “Monetary Policy Communications
and Their Effects on Household Inflation Expectations,” Manuscript.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Rupal Kamdar, forthcoming. “The Formation of Expectations,
Inflation and the Phillips Curve,” Journal of Economic Literature.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Tiziano Ropele, 2018. “Inflation Expectations and Firm
Decisions: New Causal Evidence,” manuscript.
Constancio, Vitor, 2017. “Understanding and Overcoming Low Inflation,” Remarks at the Conference on
“Understanding inflation: lessons from the past, lessons for the future?”, Frankfurt am Main, 21 and 22
September                           2017.                           Available                         at
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2017/html/ecb.sp170922_2.en.html.
Christelis, Dimitris, Dimitris Georgarakos, Tullio Jappelli, and Maarten van Rooij, 2016. “Trust in the
Central Bank and Inflation Expectations,” DNB Working Papers 537, Netherlands Central Bank, Research
Department.
Crump, Richard, Stefano Eusepi, Andrea Tambalotti, and Giorgio Toppa 2015 “Subjective Intertemporal
Substitution,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports N 734
D’Acunto, Francesco, Ulrike Malmendier, Juan Ospina, and Michael Weber, 2018. “Salient Price Changes,
Inflation Expectations, and Household Behavior,” manuscript.
D'Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber, 2016. “The Effect of Unconventional Fiscal
Policy on Consumption Expenditure,” CESifo Working Paper Series 6059, CESifo Group Munich.
Dovern, Jonas, Ulrich Fritsche, and Jiri Slacalek, 2012. “Disagreement among Forecasters in G7
Countries,” Review of Economics and Statistics 94(4), 1081-1096.
Dräger, Lena, and Giang Nghiem, 2018. “Are Consumers’ Spending Decisions in Line with the Euler
Equation?” Gutenberg School of Management and Economics & Research Unit “Interdisciplinary Public
Policy” Discussion Paper Series, 1802.
Dräger, Lena, 2015. “Inflation Perceptions and Expectations in Sweden – Are Media Reports the Missing
Link?” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 77(5): 681-700.
Duca, Ioana, Geoff Kenny, and Andreas Reuter, 2017. “Inflation Expectation, Consumption and the Lower
Bound: Empirical Evidence from a Large Micro Panel,” Manuscript.
Ehrmann, Michael, and Panagiota Tzamourani, 2012. “Memories of High Inflation,” European Journal of
Political Economy 28(2): 174-191.
Ehrmann, Michael, Damjan Pfajfar, and Emiliano Santoro, 2017. “Consumers' Attitudes and Their Inflation
Expectations,” International Journal of Central Banking 13(1): 225-259.
Ehrmann, Michael, Michel Soudan and Livio Stracca, 2013 “Explaining European Union Citizens’ Trust
in the European Central Bank in Normal and Crisis Time,” Journal of International Money and Finance,
47, 286-303.



                                                                                                     39
Fischhoff, Baruch, and Wandi Bruine de Bruin 1999, “Fifty-Fifty = 50%?” Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 12: 149-163.
Frache, Serafin, and Rodrigo Lluberas, 2017. “New Information and Inflation Expectations among Firms,”
Manuscript.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, 2008. “Endogenous information, menu costs and inflation persistence,” NBER
Working Paper 14184.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Andrew Levin, and Eric T. Swanson. 2010. “Does Inflation Targeting Anchor Long-
Run Inflation Expectations? Evidence from the U.S., UK, and Sweden,” Journal of the European Economic
Association 8(6): 1208–1242.
Haldane, Andrew. 2017. “A Little More Conversation, A Little Less Action,” Speech given at the Federal
Reserve of San Francisco, March 31, 2017. Available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-
/media/boe/files/speech/2017/a-little-more-conversation-a-little-less-action.pdf.
Haldane, Andrew, and Michael McMahon. 2018. “Central Bank Communications and the General Public.”
AEA Papers and Proceedings 108: 578-583.
Hamilton, James. 2004 “All the News That’s Fit to Sell: How the Market Transforms Information into
News”. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Harris, Ethan S., Bruce C. Kasman, Matthew D. Shapiro, and Kenneth D. West. 2009. “Oil and the
Macroeconomy: Lessons for Monetary Policy,” U.S. Monetary Policy Forum Report. Available at
http://www-personal.umich.edu/~shapiro/papers/USMPF-2009.pdf.
Hayo, Bernd and Edith Neuenkirch, 2014 “The German Public and its Trust in the ECB: The role of
knowledge and information search,” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 115(3), 781-807.
Hernandez-Murillo, Ruben, and Hannah Shell, 2014. “The Rising Complexity of the FOMC Statement,”
Economic Synopses, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, issue 23.
Ichiue, Hibiki, and Shusaku Nishiguchi, 2013. “Inflation Expectations and Consumer Spending at the Zero
Bound,” Bank of Japan Working Paper No. 13-E-11.
Johannsen, Benjamin, 2014. “Inflation Experience and Inflation Expectations: Dispersion and
Disagreement Within Demographic Groups,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-89, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Jonung, Lars, 1981 “Perceived and Expected Rates of Inflation in Sweden,” American Economic Review
71(5): 961-968
Kamada, Koichiro, Jouchi Nakajima, and Shusaku Nishiguchi, 2015. “Are Household Inflation
Expectations Anchored in Japan?” Bank of Japan Working Paper No. 15-E-08.
Kaplan, Greg, and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, 2017. “Inflation at the Household Level,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 91(C): 19-38.
King, Mervyn, 2007. “The MPC Ten Years On”. Lecture given on May 2nd, 2007. Available at
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2007/the-mpc-ten-years-on.pdf.
Kleinjans, Kristin, and Arthur van Soest, 2010. “Rounding, Focal Point Answers and Nonresponse to
Subjective Probability Questions,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 29(4): 567-585.

                                                                                                    40
Kueng, Lorenz, 2016. “Tax News: The Response of Households Spending to Changes in Expected Taxes,”
NBER Working Paper No. 20437.
Kumar, Saten, Hassan Afrouzi, Olivier Coibion, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2015. “Inflation Targeting
Does Not Anchor Inflation Expectation: Evidence from Firms in New Zealand,” Brooking Papers on
Economic Activity 46(Fall): 151-225.
Lamla, Michael J., and Thomas Maag, 2012. “The Role of Media for Inflation Forecast Disagreement of
Households and Professional Forecasters,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44(7): 1325-1350.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel. 2016. “Learning from Inflation Experiences,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 131(1): 53-87
Mankiw, N. Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers. 2004. “Disagreement about Inflation
Expectations,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003 (18): 209-270.
Manski, Charles, 2004. “Measuring Expectations,” Econometrica 72: 1329-1376.
Muto, Takashi, 2015. “Results of a Survey on Inflation Outlook of Firms in the Bank of Japan’s ‘Short
Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan,’” Bank for International Settlements IFC Bulletin 39-18.
Pfajfar, Damjan, and Emilio Santoro, 2013. “News on Inflation and the Epidemiology of Inflation
Expectations,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 45(6): 1045-1067.
Pierdzioch, Christian, and Jan-Christoph Rülke, 2013. “Do Inflation Targets Anchor Inflation
Expectations?” Economic Modelling 35(C): 214-223.
Ranyard, Rob, Fabio Del Missier, Nicolao Bonini, Darren Duxbury, and Barbara Summers, 2008.
“Perceptions and Expectations of Price Changes and Inflation: A Review and Conceptual Framework,”
Journal of Economic Psychology 29(4): 378-400.
Reis, Ricardo, 2006a. “Inattentive Producers,” Review of Economic Studies 73(3): 793-821.
Reis, Ricardo, 2006b. “Inattentive consumers,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53(8): 1761-1800.
Souleles, Nicholas, 2004. “Expectations, Heterogeneous Forecast Errors, and Consumption: Micro
Evidence from the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Surveys,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 36(1):
39-72.
Ungar, Meyer, and Ben-Zion Zilberfarb, 1993. “Inflation and its Unpredictability- Theory and Empirical
Evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 25(4): 709-720.
Van der Cruijsen, David-Jan Jansen, and Jakob de Haan. 2015. “How Much does the Public Know about
the ECB’s Monetary Policy? Evidence from a Survey of Dutch Consumers,” International Journal of
Central Banking 11(4): 169-218
Vellekoop, Nathanael, and Mirko Wiederholt, 2017. “Inflation Expectations and Choices of Households,”
Manuscript.
Wong, Benjamin, 2015. “Do Inflation Expectations Propagate the Inflationary Impact of Real Oil Price
Shocks? Evidence from the Michigan Survey,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 47(8): 1673-1689.
Yellen, Janet, 2016. “Macroeconomic Research After the Crisis.” Speech given at “The Elusive 'Great'
Recovery: Causes and Implications for Future Business Cycle Dynamics” 60th annual economic conference

                                                                                                    41
sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts. Available at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20161014a.htm.
Yellen, Janet, 2016. “The Outlook, Uncertainty, and Monetary Policy” Speech given at the Economic Club
of       New       York,       New       York.       March       29,      2016.        Available     at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20160329a.htm.




                                                                                                    42
                   Table 1. Comparison of inflation forecasts across economic agents
                                                       Professional
                                      Central Bank                      Households                 Firms
                                                        Forecasters
    Panel A. Inflation expectations in the USA
    2018Q1           Mean                  1.9              2.2            3.0                       3.7
                     St.Dev.              (0.2)            (0.4)          (2.6)                     (2.6)

    Panel B. Inflation expectations in New Zealand
    2016Q4           Mean                 1.7                    1.6               2.8               2.7
                     St.Dev.                                    (0.2)             (2.6)             (2.4)
    2016Q2             Mean                    1.6               1.3               2.3               2.8
                       St.Dev.                                  (0.2)             (2.1)             (2.3)
    2014Q4             Mean                    1.1               1.7               3.1               4.5
                       St.Dev.                                  (0.3)             (2.0)             (2.8)
    2014Q3             Mean                    1.6               1.9               3.5               4.1
                       St.Dev.                                  (0.2)             (2.4)             (2.5)
    2014Q1             Mean                    1.9               2.0               3.7               6.1
                       St.Dev.                                  (0.3)             (2.1)             (2.7)
    2013Q4             Mean                    1.3               2.0               3.6               5.3
                       St.Dev.                                  (0.2)             (2.4)             (3.2)
    Panel C. Inflation perceptions in New Zealand
    2016Q4           Mean                                                          2.4              n.a.
                     St.Dev.                                                      (2.4)             n.a.
    2016Q2             Mean                                                        1.8               2.6
                       St.Dev.                                                    (1.5)             (2.1)
    2014Q4             Mean                                                        2.9               3.9
                       St.Dev.                                                    (2.2)             (2.4)
    2014Q3             Mean                                                        2.9              n.a.
                       St.Dev.                                                    (2.0)             n.a.
    2014Q1             Mean                                                        2.9               5.5
                       St.Dev.                                                    (1.8)             (3.3)
    2013Q4             Mean                                                        3.1               4.4
                       St.Dev.                                                    (2.0)             (3.5)
Notes: The sources of data for Panel A are as follows: “Central bank” are from FOMC Projections materials (March
21, 2018; PCE deflator; available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcprojtabl20180321.htm),
“Professional Forecasters” are from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF; CPI; 2018Q1), “Households” are
from the Michigan Survey of Consumers (MSC; “prices in general”; 2018Q1), and “Firms” are from the PMI Markit
Survey (“prices in general”; April 2018). Panels B and C are taken from Kumar et al. (forthcoming). “Central Bank”
forecasts (CPI) are from Monetary Policy Statements of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. “Professional Forecasters”
are from Consensus Economics (CPI). “Households” are from the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s Survey of
Households (the survey elicits inflation expectations only from households who can define inflation). “Firms” are
from the survey run in Kumar et al. (forthcoming). St.Dev. reports the cross-sectional standard deviation
(disagreement) of forecasts. St.Dev. for Central Bank in Panel A reports the difference between the upper and lower
ends of central tendency.


                                                                                                                43
                                                                      Table 2. Selected Surveys and Firms’ Inflation Expectations
                                                       Price                                          Start
Country        Institution         Respondents                             Sampling        Freq.                Bins       Horizon                                            Question
                                                     Definition                                       date
             Conf. Board of                            Prices in                                                                          Do you expect prices, in general, in Canada to increase over the next six months
Canada                                Firms                               Convenience     Quarterly   1997       9         6 months
                Canada                                 general                                                                                                          at an annual rate of

                                                                                                                                          The firm’s expectation for the average annual rate of inflation over the next two
Canada        Central bank            Firms         Inflation (CPI)          Quota        Quarterly   1997       4           1 year
                                                                                                                                                   years as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) is: …

 Czech                                                                                                                                     What year-on-year consumer price change in per cent do you expect in the next
              Central bank            Firms         Inflation (CPI)      Representative   Quarterly   1999      open      1 and 3 years
Republic                                                                                                                                                                  12 months?
  EU           European                               Prices for          Probabilistic                       (up/down/                    By what percentage you would say that prices will increase for the consumer in
                                      Firms                                               Monthly     1985                   1 year
Members       Commission                              consumers             sample                              same)                                                the next 12 months?
                                   Mnfg. Firms,                           Probabilistic
  Iran        Central Bank                             Inflation                          Quarterly   2016      open         1 year             What do you think the [yearly] inflation will be during the next year?
                                   ≥100 workers                             Sample
           Ungar and Zilberfarb                                                                                                           The cumulative inflation rate (not monthly average), in %, which is expected for
 Israel                               Firms         Inflation (CPI)      Representative   Quarterly   1980      open      1-4 quarters
                 (1993)                                                                                                                              the following periods is as follows: The next 12 months
                                                                                                                                          The last [month] consumer price inflation, measured by the 12-month change in
                                                                          Probabilistic
 Italy        Central bank            Firms            Inflation                          Quarterly   1999      open         1 year       the harmonized index of consumer prices was equal to [IT] in Italy and to [EA]
                                                                            sample
                                                                                                                                                       in the euro area. What do you think it will be in Italy.
                                                                                                                                          What are your institution's expectations of the annual % change in general prices (as
                                                      Prices in           Probabilistic                                    1, 3, and 4
 Japan        Central bank            Firms                                               Quarterly   2014       10                       measured by the CPI) for one year ahead, three years ahead, and five years ahead,
                                                    general (CPI)           sample                                            years
                                                                                                                                                                              respectively?
 New                                Firms and                                                                             3 months and
              Central bank                          Inflation (CPI)       Convenience     Quarterly   1987      open                                  What annual % change do you expect in the CPI for the:
Zealand                            professionals                                                                             1 year
                                                                                                                                               In … [month with the latest data is available] of the current year, the CPI
                                                                             Sector
Poland        Central bank            Firms             Prices                            Quarterly   2008       5           1 year       (inflation) was equal to x% in annual terms. In the enterprise's opinion, during the
                                                                         representation
                                                                                                                                                                        next 12 months prices:
 South                              Firms and                                                                                              What do you expect the average headline inflation rate (as measured by the %
              Central bank                          Inflation (CPI)       Convenience     Quarterly   2000      open         1 year
 Africa                             consumers                                                                                                               change in the CPI) to be during the year
                                  Firms with ≥200
Sweden        Central Bank                          Inflation (CPI)         Random        Quarterly   2000      open         1 year                                               n.a.
                                      workers
                                                                                                                                            What has been the % change over the past 12 months in the general level of
           Confed. of British                         Prices of
  UK                                  Firms                               Convenience     Quarterly   2008       4           1 year       output prices in the UK markets that your firm competes in, and what is expected
               Industry                              competition
                                                                                                                                                                to occur over the next twelve months?
                                                                                                                                              How do you think the level of consumer prices will change in the next 12
Ukraine       Central bank            Firms            Inflation            Random        Quarterly   2006       8           1 year
                                                                                                                                                                              months?
                                                    Individual unit       Non-random                                                      Projecting ahead, to the best of your ability, please assign a percent likelihood to
 USA           Atlanta Fed            Firms                                               Monthly     2011       5           1 year
                                                         costs             (regional)                                                               the following changes to unit costs over the next 12 months.
           Livingston, Philly                                                              Semi-
 USA                               Large Firms      Inflation (CPI)       Convenience                 1946      open         1 year                                               n.a.
                  Fed                                                                      Annual
Uruguay       Central bank            Firms         Inflation (CPI)      Representative   Monthly     2009      open         1 year                 What do you believe is going to be the change in the CPI?
                                  Manufacturing                              Sector                                                       What is your expectation for inflation (producer prices) rate over the next 12
Turkey        Central Bank                          Inflation (PPI)                       Monthly     1987      open         1 year
                                     Firms                               representation                                                                       months (as an annual percentage)?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   44
                                                                           Table 3. Selected Surveys and Firms’ Inflation Expectations
                                                             Representat     Heterogenous       Monthly or Quarterly       Large Sample            No        Quantitative       Many/wide            Distributional
   Country                       Institution                                                                                                                                                                              Aggregate Inflation
                                                             ive Sample         sample              Frequency               Size (>350)         Priming       Question            bins                 question

    Canada              Conference Board of Canada                ✖                 ✔                                            ✔                 ✔               ✖                                                               ✔
                                                                                                          ✔                                                                          ✔                     ✖

    Canada                       Central bank                     ✖                 ✔                     ✔                      ✖                 ✖               ✖                 ✖                     ✖                       ✔

Czech Republic                   Central bank                     ✔                 ✔                     ✔                      ✖                 ✔               ✔                 -                     ✖                       ✔

 EU Members                 European Commission                   ✔                 ✔                     ✔                      ✔                 ✔               ✖                 ✖                     ✖                       ✔

      Iran                       Central Bank                     ✔                 ✖                     ✔                      ✔                 ✔               ✔                 -                     ✖                       ✔

     Israel              Ungar and Zilberfarb (1993)              ✔                 ✖                     ✖                      ✖                 ✖               ✔                 -                     ✖                       ✔

      Italy                      Central bank                     ✔                 ✖                     ✔                      ✔                 ✖*              ✔                 -                     ✖                       ✔

     Japan                       Central bank                     ✔                 ✔                     ✔                      ✔                 ✔               ✖                 ✔                     ✖                       ✔

 New Zealand                     Central bank                     ✖                 ✖                     ✔                      ✖                 ✔               ✔                 -                     ✖                       ✔

     Poland                      Central bank                     ✖                 ✔                     ✔                      ✖                 ✖               ✖                 ✖                     ✖                       ✔

  South Africa                   Central bank                     ✖                 ✖                     ✔                      ✔                 ✔               ✔                 -                     ✖                       ✔

    Sweden                       Central Bank                     ✖                 ✖                     ✔                      ✖                 ✔               ✔                 -                     ✖                       ✔

      UK              Confederation of British Industry           ✖                 ✔                                            ✔                                 ✔                 -                                             ✖
                                                                                                          ✔                                        ✔                                                       ✖

    Ukraine                      Central bank                     ✔                 ✔                     ✔                      ✔                 ✔               ✖                 ✔                     ✖                       ✔

      USA                        Atlanta Fed                      ✖                 ✖                     ✔                      ✖                 ✖               ✖                 ✖                     ✖**                     ✖

      USA                Livingston, Philadelphia Fed             ✖                 ✖                     ✖                      ✖                 ✔               ✔                 -                     ✖                       ✔

    Uruguay                      Central bank                     ✔                 ✖                     ✔                      ✖                 ✔               ✔                 -                     ✖                       ✔

    Turkey                       Central Bank                     ✔                 ✖                     ✔                      ✔                 ✔               ✔                 -                     ✖                       ✔

Notes: Column “Representative sample” indicates whether firms in a survey are representative of the group that is being surveyed. Column “Heterogeneous sample” indicates if a sample of firms covers various types (size,
sector, etc.) of firms so that the resulting sample represents or resembles the population of firms in the economy. Column “Large Sample Size” indicates if a survey has more than 350 firms with non-missing responses.
Column “No priming” indicates whether a survey does not provide information to firms before eliciting expectations, does not restrict the sample in any particular way (e.g., does not exclude firms that do not understand the
concept of inflation), and does not restrict possible responses (e.g., does not present firms with a limited set of possible responses). Column “Quantitative question” indicates if firms are free to report an unrestricted inflation
forecast (i.e., responses are not restricted to a binned/range/multiple-choice menu). Column “Many/wide bins” indicates whether a survey allows firms to choose from a wide and detailed range of possible responses if
quantitative response are not available. Column “Distributional question” indicates whether a survey elicits a probability distribution for future inflation. Column “Aggregate Inflation” indicates whether a survey asks firms to
report an aggregate measure of inflation, changes in prices overall, etc. (rather than firm’s unit costs or prices). * last month annual inflation is given to 2/3 of the firms and firms are not allowed to report “extreme” values. **
distributional questions are asked in occasional modules



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     45
                                Table 4. Treatment effects
              Dependent variable: Revision of one-year-ahead inflation forecast

           Control group                                                       1.350***
                                                                              (0.233)
           Treatment groups (coefficients are relative to control)
                Irrelevant 2% figure                                           0.265
                                                                              (0.343)
                Past inflation                                                -1.954***
                                                                              (0.366)
                Inflation target                                              -1.411***
                                                                              (0.341)
                FOMC inflation forecast                                       -2.004***
                                                                              (0.384)
                FOMC statement                                                -2.272***
                                                                              (0.335)
                USA Today coverage of FOMC statement                          -0.950**
                                                                              (0.397)


           Observations                                                         1,484
           R-squared                                                            0.049



Notes: The table reports estimated effects of providing information (indicated in the left column) to
households participating in the AC Nielsen Homescan panel. For treatment “Irrelevant 2% figure”,
households are informed that population in the U.S. grew 2% over the last three years. The dependent
variable is equal to (post-treatment one-year-ahead inflation expectations) minus (pre-treatment one-
year-ahead inflation expectations). Pre-treatment expectations are computed as the implied mean of
expected inflation distribution over the next year. Post-treatment expectations are elicited as point
forecasts. Source: Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber (2018). Robust standard errors are reported
in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                                        46
                                   Figure 1. One‐Year‐Ahead Inflation Expectations for Different Agents
                                                         Panel A: United States




                           11
                                                                              Asset Prices (Cleveland Fed)
                                                                              Households (MSC)


                           10
                                                                              Professional forecasters (SPF)
                           9
                           8                                                  Firms
                    percent per year
                    4    5 3
                           2
                           1
                           0 6    7




                                       1980    1985     1990     1995      2000    2005    2010      2015

                                                             Panel B: Euro-Area
                           10 11




                                                                                     Asset Prices (swap)
                                                                                     Households (EC)
                                                                                     Prof. forecasters (SPF)
                           9
                           8
                   percent per year
                    4   5  3
                           2
                           1
                           0 6   7




                                       2000   2002    2004   2006   2008    2010   2012   2014    2016      2018

Notes: Panel A reports U.S. time series for expectations of financial markets (reported by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland),
households (Michigan Survey of Consumers), professional forecasters (Survey of Professional Forecasters run by the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia), and firms (run on an established panel of firms). Panel B reports eurozone time series for expectations of
financial markets (inflation swaps, ICAP and Thompson Reuters), households (European Commission, reported in Duca et al. 2017),
and professional forecasters (Survey of Professional Forecasters run by the European Central Bank).
                                                                                                                                47
                                                     Figure 2. Household Inflation Expectations and Gasoline (Petrol) Prices
                                                                                  Panel A: U.S.



                                                                          4




                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                            Households (MSC)
                     inflation expectations, percent per year (detrended)                   SPF




                                                                                                                                                         gasoline price, $ per gallon (detrended)
                                                            2                               Gasoline price (right axis)




                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                 -2




                                                                                                                                                              -1
                                               -4




                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                              1990      1995            2000          2005      2010       2015

                                                                                                           Panel B: Euro area




                                                                                                                                                         .4
                                                                          6




                                                                                            Households (EC)
                     inflation expectations, percent per year (detrended)




                                                                                            SPF (ECB)
                                                                                            Petrol price (right)


                                                                                                                                                         petrol price, euro per liter (detrended)
                                                              4




                                                                                                                                                                                        .2
                                                 2




                                                                                                                                                                      0
                         -2          0




                                                                                                                                                         -.2




                                                                              2000   2002     2004    2006     2008   2010   2012   2014   2016   2018

Notes: The figure reports time series of inflation expectations of households and professional forecasters as well as gasoline (petrol)
prices. All series are linearly detrended.


                                                                                                                                                                                                    48
                                                 Figure 3. Beliefs about Central Bank’s Inflation Target
                                                         Panel A: Beliefs in the U.S. and New Zealand

                                                     Firms: New Zealand



                            .6
                                                     Firms: USA
                   share of responses                Households: USA
                            .2
                            0     .4




                                             0      1       2     3     4     5     6     7     8       9   10+   DK

                                                                 Panel B: Beliefs in Uruguay
                               .4       .3
                     share of responses
                            .2 .1
                               0




                                             0       1      2     3     4     5     6     7     8       9   10    DK

Notes: The figure shows the distribution of how households and firms perceive inflation targets of central banks. DK means “do not
know”. 10+ includes responses of 10% or more. Inflation target in the U.S. is 2% (light shaded area, Panel A). Inflation target in New
Zealand is 1% to 3% (dark shaded area, Panel A). Inflation target in Uruguay is 3% to 7% (shaded area, Panel B).


                                                                                                                                    49
                            Figure 4. Comparison of Surveys of Firms’ Expectations in the U.S..
           .3

                               Firm survey (inflation)
                               BIE (unit cost)
           .2
    fraction
           .1
           0




                -5    -4     -3      -2     -1 0      1     2    3     4    5   6   7                            8      9      10
                                          expected inflation or unit cost change, %


Notes: The figure shows the distribution of responses in the Business Inflation Expectations (BIE) survey run the Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta and in a survey of firms we ran using a pre-existing nationally representative panel of firms in the U.S. (“Firm survey”). The
BIE survey asks respondents to report their expected change in unit costs (the question is “Projecting ahead, to the best of your ability,
please assign a percent likelihood to the following changes to unit costs over the next 12 months.”). Possible answers are: “Unit costs
down (<-1%)”, “Unit costs about unchanged (-1% to 1%)”, “Unit costs up somewhat (1.1% to 3%)”, “Unit costs up significantly (3.1%
to 5%)”, and “Unit costs up very significantly (>5%)”. Our survey asks respondents to report their point predictions for one-year-ahead
inflation (the question is “What do you think will be the inflation rate (for the Consumer Price Index) over the next 12 months? Please
provide an answer in an annual percentage rate.”).




                                                                                                                                       50
                         Figure 5. Effects of bins on reported distributions of expected inflation.




                 80
                                                                                                               NZ grid
                                                                                                               BIE grid
                 60
             density
               4020
                 0




                       -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                       expected change in core inflation, %

Notes: The figure report average (across firms) probabilities assigned to expected inflation intervals for different survey designs of the
probability distribution questions.




                                                                                                                                       51
                                            Figure 6. Change in forecasts in Bloomberg’s SPF.


                35            Panel A: August 2007: Cut 50bp                               Panel B: November 2008: QE1




                                                                             40
                         30
       change in prediction




                                                                    change in prediction
                                                                                    30
                  25




                                                                            20
            20




                                                                     10
       15       10




                                                                             0
                     2006m7       2007m1   2007m7    2008m1    2008m7 2007m10                 2008m4   2008m10   2009m4   2009m10
                              Panel C: November 2010: QE2                                  Panel D: January 2012: 2% IT
                40




                                                                             40
        20 25 30 35
       change in prediction




                                                                    change in prediction
                                                                     10     20      30
                15




                                                                             0




                   2009m10        2010m4   2010m10   2011m4    2011m10 2011m1                 2011m7   2012m1    2012m7   2013m1


Notes: These figures show the number of changes in predictions made by professional forecasters in a given month according to the
survey of professional forecasters conducted by Bloomberg. The vertical lines show relevant events or announcements related to the
Federal Reserve. Panel A shows the 50-basis-point cut in the policy rate on August 17, 2007. Panel B shows the announcement of the
first quantitative easing policy on November 25, 2008. Panel C shows the announcement of the second quantitative easing policy on
November 3, 2010. Finally, Panel D shows the announcement of the 2% inflation target by the Federal Reserve on January 25, 2012.




                                                                                                                                    52
                              Figure 7. Reaction of financial markets to Fed announcements.

         2.5       Panel A: August 2007: Cut 50bp                                                Panel B: November 2008: QE1




                                                                                             3




                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                              TED




                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                              5y Eπ




                                                                   5y expected inflation




                                                                                                                                      5y expected inflation
                                                                                                                                                        2.5
               2




                                                                                 2.5
    TED spread




                                                                       TED spread




                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                          2.45
       1.5




                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                        2
         1




                                                                                                                                       1
                                                               2.4


                                                               1.5
         .5




                                                                                                                                      .5
          18jul2007      07aug2007    27aug2007       16sep2007                        26oct2008      15nov2008   05dec2008   25dec2008
                   Panel C: November 2010: QE2                                                   Panel D: January 2012: 2% IT
         .17




                                                                                                                                      2.6
                                                                                        .6
                                                                  2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8
     .14 .15 .16




                                                                  5y expected inflation




                                                                                                                                      5y expected inflation
                                                                                   .55




                                                                                                                                                       2.5
    TED spread




                                                                      TED spread
                                                                            .5




                                                                                                                                              2.4
                                                                     .45




                                                                                                                                       2.3
         .13




                                                               .4
         .12




                                                               2.3




                                                                                                                                      2.2
          04oct2010      24oct2010    13nov2010       03dec2010                       26dec2011       15jan2012   04feb2012    24feb2012


Notes: These figures show the TED spread (black, thick line) and the 5-year forward inflation rate expectation (red, thin line) at a daily
frequency. Source: FRED. Panel A shows the 50-basis-point cut in the policy rate on August 17, 2007. Panel B shows the announcement
of the first quantitative easing policy on November 25, 2008. Panel C shows the announcement of the second quantitative easing policy
on November 3, 2010. Finally, Panel D shows the announcement of the 2% inflation target by the Federal Reserve on January 25, 2012..




                                                                                                                                                              53
                                           Figure 8. Inflation expectations in MSC.

                      Panel A: August 2007: Cut 50bp                          Panel B: November 2008: QE1
              7




                                                                      7
              6




                                                                      6
                  5




                                                                          5
          percent




                                                                  percent
             4




                                                                     4
              3




                                                                      3
              2




                                                                      2
              1




                                                                      1
                2006m7    2007m1     2007m7      2008m1     2008m7 2007m10        2008m4     2008m10     2009m4     2009m10
                      Panel C: November 2010: QE2                             Panel D: January 2012: 2% IT
              7




                                                                      7
              6




                                                                      6
                  5




                                                                          5
          percent




                                                                  percent
             4




                                                                     4
              3




                                                                      3
              2




                                                                      2
              1




                                                                      1




               2009m10    2010m4    2010m10      2011m4     2011m10 2011m1        2011m7     2012m1      2012m7      2013m1


Notes: These figures plot the weighted average for the inflation expectation of consumers in the Michigan Survey of Consumers. Panel
A shows the 50-basis-point cut in the policy rate on August 17, 2007. Panel B shows the announcement of the first quantitative easing
policy on November 25, 2008. Panel C shows the announcement of the second quantitative easing policy on November 3, 2010. Finally,
Panel D shows the announcement of the 2% inflation target by the Federal Reserve on January 25, 2012.




                                                                                                                                  54
                              Figure 9. News heard by people in MSC and media coverage of the Fed.


                      Panel A: August 2007: Cut 50bp                            Panel B: November 2008: QE1




                                                               80 100 120 140




                                                                                                                          100 120 140 160
                                                                           .3
          .25
      Monetary news




                                                            Monetary news
                 .2




                                                                      .2
                                                              Fed news




                                                                                                                          Fed news
         .15




                                                             .1
    .1




                                                            60




                                                                                                                          80
          .05




                                                            40




                                                                                                                          60
                                                                        0
              2006m7       2007m1   2007m7   2008m1   2008m7              2007m10 2008m4 2008m10 2009m4 2009m10
                      Panel C: November 2010: QE2                               Panel D: January 2012: 2% IT
                                                            160




                                                                                                                          160
           .15




                                                                         .15
                              Mon news
                              Fed news
                                                               100 120 140




                                                                                                                          140
    Monetary news




                                                            Monetary news
              .1




                                                                      .1




                                                                                                                          100 120
                                                               Fed news




                                                                                                                          Fed news
     .05




                                                             .05
                                                            80




                                                                                                                          80
                                                            60




                                                                                                                          60
           0




                                                                         0




             2009m10 2010m4 2010m10 2011m4 2011m10                         2011m1 2011m7    2012m1 2012m7 2013m1


Notes: The black, thick line shows the share of consumers that say that have heard an economic news story related to monetary policy
in the Michigan Survey of Consumers. The red, thin line shows the amount of news articles in a month in the New York Times that
contained “Federal Reserve” according to Lexis-Nexis. Panel A shows the 50-basis-point cut in the policy rate on August 17, 2007.
Panel B shows the announcement of the first quantitative easing policy on November 25, 2008. Panel C shows the announcement of the
second quantitative easing policy on November 3, 2010. Finally, Panel D shows the announcement of the 2% inflation target by the
Federal Reserve on January 25, 2012.




                                                                                                                                            55
                                                        Figure 10. UK case.


                                          Panel A. Inflation Expectations
                                       QE1                QE2            QE3
              4  3.5
         percent
           3  2.5
              2




                 2007q1           2009q1             2011q1             2013q1            2015q1             2017q1
                              Panel B. Expectations About Interest Rate
              .8




                                       QE1                QE2            QE3                                    Rise
                                                                                                                Stay
                                                                                                                Fall
                                                                                                                No idea
              .6
         share
           .4 .2
              0




                 2007q1           2009q1             2011q1             2013q1            2015q1             2017q1

Notes: Panel A shows the weighted average of inflation expectations in the Bank of England/TNS Inflation Attitudes Survey. As
respondents have to answer in bins, we take the middle point for each middle bin. For the bin “Go Down” we impute a value of -1 and
for “Go up by 5% or more” we impute 6%. Panel B shows the results of the question regarding the expectations of interest rates of
respondents in the same Survey. “Rise” adds the ratio of respondents that answer “Rise a lot” or “Rise a little”, “Stay” corresponds to
the answer “Stay about the same”, “Fall” aggroups the answers “Fall a little” and “Fall a lot” and “No Idea” is the ratio of respondents
that answers that. QE1 corresponds to the first quantitative easing (QE) policy conducted by the Bank of England in March 2009. QE2
is May 2012 and QE3 is in November 2012.


                                                                                                                                     56
                                        Figure 11. Financial markets and ECB policy announcements.

               Panel A: ECB Buying ITA/ESP Bonds                                            Panel B: 0% rate and Whatever it takes
           2.5




                                                                                             1.7




                                                                                                                                                    1.2 1.25 1.3 1.35 1.4 1.45
                                                                                            2.3
                                                                    10y-2y German bunds




                                                                                                                                                        10y-2y German bunds
                    2.4




                                                                                        1.6
     5y inflation swap




                                                                       5y inflation swap
                                                                                    2.2
             2.3




                                                                               1.5

                                                                         2.1
    2.2




                                                                      1.4
           2.1




                                                                    1.3

                                                                                             2
              04jul2011          24jul2011   13aug2011   02sep2011                            04jun2012         24jun2012   14jul2012   03aug2012
                                    Panel C: QE                                                                Panel D: QE tapering
    1.5 1.55 1.6 1.65 1.7 1.75




                                                                                                  1.8




                                                                                                                                               1.2
                                                                                    .6
                                                                10y-2y German bunds




                                                                                                                                               10y-2y German bunds
                                                                                                                                                              1.1
                                                                                                         1.7
                                                                              .55
           5y inflation swap




                                                                                          5y inflation swap
                                                                                                  1.6




                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                        .5


                                                                                         1.5




                                                                                                                                                  .9
                                                                  .45




                                                                                                                        5y inflation swap
                                                                                                                        10y-2y German bunds
                                                                                                  1.4




                                                                                                                                               .8
                                                                .4




                 06feb2015       26feb2015   18mar2015   07apr2015                                07nov2016 27nov2016       17dec2016   06jan2017


Notes: This panel shows the 5-years inflation swap and the difference between the 10-year German bund and 2-year German bund at a
daily frequency. All data are from Bloomberg. Panel A shows the movements around the purchasing of Spanish and Italian bonds on
August 9, 2011. Panel B shows the movements around when the ECB set the policy interest rate at 0% on July 5, 2012 and when ECB
president Mario Draghi announced that the ECB was prepared to do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro on July 26, 2012. Panel C
plots the movements around the quantitative easing policy conducted by the ECB on March 9, 2015 and Panel D plots around the
announcement of the quantitative easing tapering on December 8, 2016.




                                                                                                                                                                                 57
                                          Figure 12. Households’ inflation expectations and ECB policy announcements.

                                  7
                                      Panel A: ECB Buying ITA/ESP Bonds Panel B: 0% rate and Whatever it takes




                                                                                                            7
      Mean Inflation Expectations




                                                                                Mean Inflation Expectations
                            6




                                                                                                      6
                      5




                                                                                                5
                4




                                                                                          4
         3




                                                                                   3
                  2




                                                                                           2
                          2010m7            2011m1    2011m7    2012m1    2012m7 2011m7                            2012m1   2012m7   2013m1    2013m7
                                                  Panel C: QE                                                       Panel D: QE tapering
                                  7




                                                                                                            7
      Mean Inflation Expectations




                                                                                Mean Inflation Expectations
                            6




                                                                                                      6
                      5




                                                                                                5
                4




                                                                                          4
         3




                                                                                   3
                     2




                                                                                                 2




                             2014m1         2014m7   2015m1    2015m7    2016m1                           2016m1   2016m4   2016m7   2016m10   2017m1


Notes: This figure shows the mean one-year-ahead inflation expectation in the eurozone according to Duca et al (2017). Panel A shows
the movements around the purchasing of Spanish and Italian bonds on August 9, 2011. Panel B shows movements around when the
ECB set the policy interest rate at 0% on July 5, 2012 and when president Mario Draghi announced that the ECB was prepared to do
“whatever it takes” to preserve the euro on July 26, 2012. Panel C plots the movements around the quantitative easing policy conducted
by the ECB on March 9, 2015. Panel D plots the movements around the announcement of the quantitative easing tapering on December
8, 2016.




                                                                                                                                                        58
                            Figure 13. Expectations of Chief Financial Officers and ECB policy announcements.

                                                     Panel A: CAPEX outlook
                  1.5




                                                                          1.5
            average score




                                                                    average score
                      1




                                                                              1
                .5




                                                                        .5
                  0




                                                                          0
                  -.5




                                                                          -.5
                      2015h2 2016h1 2016h2 2017h1 2017h2 2018h1               2015h2 2016h1 2016h2 2017h1 2017h2 2018h1

                                                  Panel B: Employment outlook
                                                          Germany                                                Norway
                  1.5




                                                                          1.5
                                                          France                                                 Sweden
                                                          Italy                                                  Poland
                                                          Spain                                                  Russia
            average score




                                                                    average score
                      1




                                                                              1
                                                          Finland                                                Turkey
                .5




                                                                        .5
                  0




                                                                          0
                  -.5




                                                                          -.5




                      2015h2 2016h1 2016h2 2017h1 2017h2 2018h1               2015h2 2016h1 2016h2 2017h1 2017h2 2018h1

                                                        Panel C: Uncertainty
                  1.5




                                                                          1.5
            average score




                                                                    average score
                      1




                                                                              1
                .5




                                                                        .5
                  0




                                                                          0
                  -.5




                                                                          -.5




                      2015h2 2016h1 2016h2 2017h1 2017h2 2018h1               2015h2 2016h1 2016h2 2017h1 2017h2 2018h1



Notes: These figures show the simple country average in the Deloitte Survey of Chief Financial Officers (CFOs) around the
announcement of the QE tapering in December 2016. Panel A shows the result to the question that asks about the evolution of CAPEX
of the company in the next 12 months. The lines indicate the average score where if they answer “Decrease significantly” we computed
-2, if CFOs answer “Decrease somewhat” -1, 0 for “No change”, 1 if the answer is “Increase somewhat” and 2 if the CFOs answer
“Increase significantly”. Panel B shows the average score for a similar question about the number of employees. The coding of scores
is the same. Finally, Panel C plots the answer for the question where CFOs were asked to rate the overall level of uncertainty that the
firm is facing. It takes on -2 if the answer is “Very low level of uncertainty”, -1 for “Low level…”, 0 for “Normal level…”, 1 for “High
level…” and 2 for “Very high level of uncertainty”.



                                                                                                                                     59
                                         Figure 14. Inflation expectations after treatment in Italy.

                    4
    actual/expected inflation, percent
      0        1    -1   2        3




                               2006q1       2009q1                   2012q1                        2015q1                       2018q1

                                                  actual                       treatment (past inflation)
                                                  control                      treatment (ECB target)


Notes: The blue, dashed line shows the actual inflation rate in Italy. The thick, black, solid line shows one-year-ahead inflation
expectations of firms in the control group. The long-dash, green line shows inflation expectations of the firms treated with recent inflation
statistics (that is, firms are told recent inflation rate before firms are asked to report their inflation expectations). The thin, red line shows
inflation expectations of the firms treated with the ECB’s inflation target (that is, firms are told the ECB inflation target before firms are
asked to report their inflation expectations). Source: Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Ropele (2018).




                                                                                                                                               60
Appendix Tables




                  61
                                Appendix Table A1. Point estimate vs. mean implied by the probability distribution.

                                                                               Wave 6                                             Wave 7
                                                                 (1)            (2)              (3)                 (4)             (5)              (6)
Panel A. Moments
                                                                Mean           Median          St.dev.             Mean           Median            St.dev.
Mean forecast implied by the distribution, 𝐹 𝜋                  2.59            1.40            2.48               2.65            1.20              2.69
Point forecast, 𝐹 𝜋                                             2.75            2.00            2.34               2.74            2.00              2.38

Panel B. Regression
Dependent variable, 𝐹 𝜋                                         OLS            Huber          Quantile             OLS             Huber            Quantile
   Regressor, 𝐹 𝜋                                              0.982***        0.965***        0.966***           1.074***         1.086***          1.024***
                                                              (0.013)         (0.007)         (0.023)            (0.015)          (0.015)           (0.009)
   Constant                                                   -0.111**        -0.010           0.007             -0.297***        -0.336***         -0.119**
                                                              (0.052)         (0.025)         (0.058)            (0.062)          (0.058)           (0.057)
Observations                                                    2,032           1,987           2,032              1,399            1,371             1,399
R2                                                              0.863           0.930                              0.900            0.918


  Notes: The sample is from CGK. 𝐹 𝜋            ∑ 𝜋 𝜔 , where i indexes respondents, t indexes time, j indexes inflation bins, 𝜔 is the weight assigned
  to bin j by manager i at time t, 𝜋 is the midpoint of bin j. 𝐹 𝜋 is the point prediction. All moments and regressions are computed using employment-
  based sampling weights. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * shows statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels
  respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                62
                                Appendix Table A2. Responses to baseline and alternative formulations of inflation expectation questions.

                                                                                                                                                               Inflation backcast,
                                                                                   Inflation forecast,                      Inflation forecast,
                                                                                                                                                                   previous 12
                  Variation in the wording                        N                 one-year ahead                          5-10-years ahead
                                                                                                                                                                     months
                                                                           Mean       St.dev.   Uncertainty         Mean       St.dev.   Uncertainty            Mean      St.dev.
                                                                 (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)              (5)         (6)         (7)                 (8)        (9)
    A. “By how much do you think prices will/have                679       3.72        2.55        1.02             3.29        2.49        1.04                3.42       2.22
    change(d) overall in the economy”

    B. “What will be/has been the overall inflation rate         681        3.73       2.54          1.04            3.31       2.50         1.11               3.40       2.27
    over the next/last 12 months”

    C. “What will be/has been the inflation rate                 680        3.71       2.53          1.04            3.31       2.46         1.04               3.43       2.26
    (specifically the Consumer Price Index) over the
    next/last 12 months”


Notes: Notes: The table reports basic moments for inflation forecasts solicited via different wordings (shown in the left column) in the following questions

During the last twelve months, by how much do you think prices changed overall in the economy? Please provide an answer in percentage terms.

During the next twelve months, by how much do you think prices will change overall in the economy? Please provide an answer in percentage terms

During the next 5-10 years, by how much do you think prices will change overall in the economy? Please provide an answer in percentage terms.


with the corresponding versions soliciting probability distributions. Uncertainty is computed as 𝜎          ∑ 𝜋    𝐹 𝜋         𝜔     where 𝐹 𝜋         ∑ 𝜋 𝜔 , i indexes
respondents, t indexes time, j indexes inflation bins, 𝜔   is the weight assigned to bin j by manager i at time t, 𝜋 is the midpoint of bin j. The sample is from CGK.




                                                                                                                                                                                     63
                         Appendix Table A3. Expectations of future inflation vs. future changes in own prices.
                                                                                                                     Correlation with
                                                                                N      Mean     Median    St.dev.   expected/perceived
                                                                                                                         inflation
                                                                               (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)             (5)
Panel A. Survey of firm managers, New Zealand
Wave 3
  Expected inflation, 12-month ahead                                          1,601     4.48     4.00      2.97           1.00
  Expected change in own unit cost, 12-month ahead                            1,601     2.80     2.00      3.01           -0.01

Wave 6
  Expected inflation, 12-month ahead                                          2,032     2.75     2.00      2.35           1.00
  Expected change in own unit cost, 6-month ahead                             2,032     1.27     1.00      1.88           -0.08
  Expected change in own price (main product), 6-month ahead                  2,032     0.55     0.50      1.11           -0.01
  Expected change in own price (main product), 12-month ahead                 2,032     0.59     0.50      1.17           -0.04

   Perceived inflation, previous 12 months                                    2,032     2.58     2.00      2.08           1.00
   Change in own unit cost, previous 12 months                                2,032     1.37     1.00      2.11           -0.11
   Change in own price (main product), previous 6 months                      2,032     0.56     0.50      1.28          -0.001

Wave 7
  Expected inflation, 12-month ahead                                          1,399     2.74     2.00      2.38           1.00
  Expected change in own unit cost, 6-month ahead                             1,399     0.46     0.00      1.47           0.02
  Expected change in own price (main product), 6-month ahead                  1,399     0.35     0.10      0.82           0.02
  Expected change in own price (main product), 12-month ahead                 1,399     0.21     0.00      0.98           0.09

Panel B. Business Inflation Expectations survey, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
   July 2015
       Expected change in unit cost, 12-month ahead                       221           1.98     1.94      1.48             -
       Expected change in CPI, 12-month ahead                             221           2.59     2.00      2.14             -

   September 2014
       Expected change in unit cost, 12-month ahead                            190      2.06     2.05     1.59              -
       Expected change in CPI, 12-month ahead                                  190      3.68     3.00     2.84              -
     Notes: The table reports basic moments of expected inflation for various survey designs. The sample in Panel A is from CGK.

                                                                                                                                         64
               Appendix Table A4. Effects of bin size and distribution on reported inflation expectations.

                                                                                                                 Correlation
                                                                                                                  with the
 One-year ahead forecast                               N       mean      median      st.dev.   uncertainty      change in the
                                                                                                                general level
                                                                                                                  of prices

                                                       (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)           (5)               (6)

 Change in prices overall                            2,032     2.59        1.40       2.48         0.92              1.00


 Core CPI
      Baseline NZ grid (dispersed/many bins)         1,011     2.58        1.40       2.37         0.94              0.90
      BIE grid (concentrated/few bins)               1,021     2.26        2.10       1.30         0.26              0.85


Notes: The table compares basic moments of expected inflation across survey designs. Mean in column (2) reports average implied
mean expected inflation across firms. Median in column (3) reports the median implied expected inflation across firms. St. dev. in
column (4) reports cross-sectional variation of implied means across firms. Uncertainty (column 5) is the average (across firms)
standard deviation of reported probability distributions. Column (6) reports correlation between i) the implied mean for change in
prices overall and ii) a given alternative measure of inflation expectations. The sample is from CGK.




                                                                                                                                     65
                               Appendix Table A5. Predictors of inflation expectations.

                                                                     (1)          (2)         (3)
               Firm characteristics
                Log(Age)                                             0.203***                 0.231***
                                                                     (0.045)                  (0.078)
                Log(Employment)                                      0.600***                 0.797***
                                                                     (0.108)                  (0.127)
                Labor’s share of costs                               -0.009*                  0.000
                                                                     (0.005)                  (0.007)
                Foreign trade share                                  0.013***                 0.008*
                                                                     (0.004)                  (0.004)
                Number of Competitors                                -0.009***                -0.006
                                                                     (0.002)                  (0.004)
                Avg. margin                                          -0.002                   0.012**
                                                                     (0.004)                  (0.005)


               Manager characteristics
                Age                                                               0.003       -0.002
                                                                                  (0.008)     (0.005)
                Female                                                            0.177       -0.036
                                                                                  (0.190)     (0.093)
                Education:
                    Some college                                                  1.018***    0.320***
                                                                                  (0.257)     (0.112)
                    College                                                       0.689***    0.087
                                                                                  (0.198)     (0.108)
                    Graduate (MA+)                                                0.033       -0.089
                                                                                  (0.210)     (0.135)
                Tenure                                                            0.074***    0.003
                                                                                  (0.016)     (0.009)
                Income                                                            0.003**     -0.001
                                                                                  (0.002)     (0.001)


               Industry FE                                           Y            Y           Y
               Observations                                          2,960        1,380       1,371
               R2                                                    0.838        0.076       0.901
               R2 (industry fixed effects only)                      0.812        -           0.872
Notes: The table reports results for the Huber robust regression. The dependent variable is the 12-month ahead inflation
forecast from Wave #1 survey. Industry fixed effects are for 3-digit industries. The omitted category for manager’s
education is “high school diploma or less.” Sample weights are applied to all specifications. The sample is from CGK.
Robust standard errors (clustered at the 3-digit ANZ SIC level) are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes
statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively




                                                                                                                     66
