                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DOES DIVERSITY MATTER FOR HEALTH? EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM
                               OAKLAND

                                           Marcella Alsan
                                           Owen Garrick
                                          Grant C. Graziani

                                        Working Paper 24787
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w24787


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
We thank Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas and theJune  2018Board and Reviewers who provided important
                                                  J-PAL
feedback that improved the design and implementation of the experiment; Ran Abramitzky, Ned Augenblick,
Jeremy Bulow, Kate Casey, Arun Chandrasekhar, Raj Chetty, Stefano DellaVigna, Mark Duggan,
Karen Eggleston, Erica Field, Matthew Gentzkow, Gopi Shah Goda, Susan Godlonton, Jessica Goldberg,
Michael Greenstone, Guido Imbens, Seema Jayachandran, Damon Jones, Supreet Kaur, Melanie Morten,
Maria Polyakova, Matthew Rabin, Al Roth, Kosali Simon, Ebonya Washington, Crystal Yang and
seminar participants at UC Berkeley, Stanford, Cornell, MIT, UCLA, UCSB, Harvard Kennedy School,
University of Chicago, and IFPRI for their helpful comments. Javarcia Ivory, Matin Mirramezani,
Edna Idna, Anlu Xing and especially Morgan Foy provided excellent research assistance. We thank
the administration at Stanford, SIEPR, and J-PAL particularly Lesley Chang, Rhonda McClinton-Brown,
Dr. Mark Cullen, Dr. Douglas K. Owens, Ann Dohn, Ashima Goel, Atty. Ann James, Atty. Tina Dobleman,
Nancy Lonhart, Jason Bauman, Sophie Shank, James Turitto, Florian Grosset and Luke Sonnet. A
working paper version of this paper was submitted for pre-publication re-analysis to the Abdul Latif
Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL), where a code replication exercise was conducted on the analysis.
For more details about J-PAL's replication work visit https://osf.io/be432/. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Marcella Alsan, Owen Garrick, and Grant C. Graziani. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Diversity Matter for Health? Experimental Evidence from Oakland
Marcella Alsan, Owen Garrick, and Grant C. Graziani
NBER Working Paper No. 24787
June 2018, Revised August 2019
JEL No. C93,I12,I14

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the effect of physician workforce diversity on the demand for preventive care among African-American
men. In an experiment in Oakland, California, we randomize black men to black or non-black male
medical doctors. We use a two-stage design, measuring decisions before (pre-consultation) and after
(post-consultation) meeting their assigned doctor. Subjects select a similar number of preventives in
the preconsultation stage, but are much more likely to select every preventive service, particularly
invasive services, once meeting with a racially concordant doctor. Our findings suggest black doctors
could reduce the black-white male gap in cardiovascular mortality by 19%.


Marcella Alsan                                        Grant C. Graziani
Stanford Medical School                               University of California, Berkeley
Center for Health Policy/PCOR                         530 Evans Hall
117 Encina Commons, Room 218                          Berkeley, CA 94720
Stanford, CA 94304                                    gcgraziani@berkeley.edu
and NBER
malsan@stanford.edu

Owen Garrick
Bridge Clinical Research
333 Hegenberger Road
Suite 208
Oakland, CA 94621
owen.garrick@bridgeclinical.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24787
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2497
                                        I. Introduction


African-American men have the lowest life expectancy of any major demographic group in

the United States (Arias, Heron, and Xu 2017) and live on average 4.5 fewer years than

non-Hispanic white men (Murphy et al. 2017). Reasons for this disparity are multifactorial

and include lack of health insurance, lower socioeconomic status, and structural racism (IOM

2003). Approximately 60% of the dierence in life expectancy between black and white men

is attributable to chronic diseases, which are amenable to primary or secondary prevention

(Harper, Rushani, and Kaufman 2012; Silber et al. 2014). Some examples are poorly con-

trolled hypertension (associated with stroke and myocardial infarction), diabetes (associated

with end organ disease including kidney failure), and delayed diagnosis of cancers. These

data suggest at least part of the mortality disparity is related to underutilized preventive

healthcare services.

   One frequently discussed policy prescription put forth by the Institute of Medicine (IOM)

as well as the National Medical Association (NMA), the Association of American Med-

ical Colleges (AAMC), and the American Medical Association (AMA) to address racial

health disparities is to diversify the healthcare profession by increasing the number of under-
                          1
represented minorities.       Blacks comprise approximately 13% of the U.S. population but only

4% of physicians and less than 7% of recent medical school graduates (AAMC 2014, AAMC

2016). Evidence on whether patient and physician racial concordance improves satisfaction

and health outcomes is mixed, perhaps due to methodological or contextual dierences. Re-

cent studies have found that gender- or race-match between doctors and patients in a hospital

setting reduces mortality (Greenwood, Carnahan, Huang 2018; Hill, Jones, and Woodworth

2018) yet in the outpatient setting, the results are less clear. Meghani et al. (2009) perform

a meta-analysis of thirty observational studies in public health and medicine concerning four

racial and ethnic groups. They conclude that the evidence in favor of patient-doctor concor-

dance in medical care is inconclusive and recommend additional research. We advance this

literature by providing experimental evidence on whether and to what extent diversity in the

physician workforce improves medical decisions and outcomes among minority populations.

   Our study builds upon several ndings in economics.             First, randomized trials in de-

velopment economics have demonstrated puzzlingly low demand for high return preventive

healthcare services among low-income populations (for a review see Dupas 2011; Banerjee

and Duo 2011, Chapter 3). Similar patterns are found in the U.S.  compared to non-


   1 See Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care (IOM 2003); Ad-
dressing Racial Disparities in Health Care: A Targeted Action Plan for Academic Medical Centers (AAMC
2009); Major Minority Physician Associations Come Together (NMA 2018); and Reducing Disparities in
Health Care (AMA 2018).



                                                  1
Hispanic white men, African-American men are six percentage points less likely to visit the

doctor and eight percentage points less likely to report receipt of the u shot; insurance and

education do not fully explain these gaps (Blewett et al. 2018a).

   Many factors likely contribute to this puzzle including lack of information, inadequate or

low quality healthcare supply, and misperceptions about the etiology of disease. Given the

prominent history of neglect and exploitation of disadvantaged populations by health author-

ities, mistrust of the medical establishment is sometimes invoked as a contributing factor.

Evidence consistent with historical abuse dampening demand and increasing mistrust has

been found specically among African-American men in the immediate aftermath of the U.S.

Public Health Service syphilis experiment in Tuskegee, Alabama, (Alsan and Wanamaker

2018) and persisting decades after colonial medical campaigns in Central Africa (Lowes and

Montero 2018).   Recent studies in public health demonstrate that African-American men

continue to score higher on medical mistrust measures than other groups (Kinlock et al.

2017, Nanna et al. 2018, Hammond et al. 2010).

   Second, contributions in cultural economics have highlighted how norms of behavior are

inuenced by social identity (Akerlof and Kranton 2000; Benjamin, Choi, and Strickland

2010). Most notably, Tabellini (2008) shows how cooperation can be sustained in a one-shot

prisoner's dilemma among agents who perceive a non-economic benet from cooperating with

those closer in social distance. Third, natural experiments in labor and education have un-

derscored how diversity, or lack thereof, may be particularly relevant in asymmetrical power

relationships. For instance, Glover, Pallais, and Pariente (2017) nd that minority workers

exert less on the job eort in grocery stores with biased majority managers.       Additional

evidence on how diveristy aects hiring and job performance can be found in Stoll, Raphael,

and Holzer (2004); Giuliano, Levine, and Leonard (2009); Hjort (2014); and Bertrand et al.

(2018). A spate of studies has found that same race or same gender teachers are positively

correlated with grades and career path, potentially through a role model eect (Ehrenberg,

Goldhaber, and Brewer (1995); Dee (2004); Dee (2005); Bettinger and Long (2005); Carrell,

Page, and West (2010); Fairlee, Homann, and Oreopoulos (2014); and Lusher, Campbell,

and Carrell (2018)).

   There are several ways in which racial diversity could play a role in medicine, specically

as it relates to the patient-doctor relationship. Taste-based discrimination (Becker 1957) on

the part of the patient or doctor could imply that individuals are averse to interacting with

those who do not share their racial background. On the other hand, internalized racism, or

negative beliefs about one's racial group, could lead to the opposite phenomenon. Third, a

common racial background might facilitate communication  a critical component of clinical

care as both patient and physician have potentially life-saving information to exchange.



                                              2
Fourth, and not mutually exclusive, concordance may foster trust leading to cooperation

(i.e. compliance with doctors' advice or willingness to engage). As noted by Arrow (1963),

...it is a commonplace that the physician-patient relation aects the quality of the medical

care product.

   In this study, we examine whether doctor race aects the demand for preventive care

among African-American men. We induce exogenous variation by randomly assigning sub-
                                        2
jects to black and non-black doctors.       Our experiment was conducted in Oakland, California,

where we recruited over 1,300 black men from about 20 local barbershops and two ea mar-

kets. At these recruitment sites, subjects lled out baseline questionnaires and received a

coupon for a free health screening. To facilitate our experiment, we set up a clinic to provide

preventive services to the subjects. The clinic was staed with fourteen black and non-black

male doctors from the Bay Area as well as a diverse team of receptionists. Doctors and sta

were told the study was designed to improve the take-up of preventive care among black men

in Oakland, but not specically informed about the role of doctor race. Subjects learned of

their (randomly) assigned doctor via tablet in the privacy of their own patient room.

   The experiment proceeded in two stages and cross-randomized doctor race with incentives

for the u vaccine at the individual level.         In the pre-consultation stage, patients were

introduced to their doctor via the tablet by way of text and photo, both standardized

as described in Section II. Subjects were then provided the opportunity to select which,

if any, of the four advertised cardiovascular screening services they would like to receive.

These services included body mass index (BMI) measurement, blood pressure measurement,

diabetes screening, and cholesterol screening. The last two tests required a blood sample, and

subjects were made aware of this feature. After making their selections for cardiovascular

screening, subjects were informed they could also elect to receive a u shot, administered

by their assigned doctor.     For subjects randomized to receive a u incentive to encourage

vaccine selection, the incentive amount was also listed.          We conjectured that if subjects

disliked doctors who did not share their racial background, those randomly assigned to

non-black doctors would, on average, demand fewer preventives simply based on the tablet

photo.

   In the second stage, subjects met their assigned doctor in person. We refer to this stage

throughout the paper as post-consultation (since decisions occur         after   interacting with their

doctor). Subjects could revise their choice of preventives during this stage, after which the

doctor administered the selected services. We therefore measure how black vs. non-black

doctors aect demand between the pre- and post-consultation stages, which we refer to as


   2 Throughout the paper, we use black to refer to African-Americans and non-black to refer to Cau-
casian and Asian-Americans.



                                                   3
the   delta, since it represents the change in selected services across the two periods.     These are

two choice events occurring after randomization and both represent experimental outcomes.

Following the patient-doctor interaction, subjects lled out feedback forms and exited the

clinic.

      It is important to note that the study provided only        preventive   (i.e. care recommended

during a state of relatively good health to avoid future illness  such as screenings and immu-

nizations) as opposed to     curative   (i.e. care needed during a state of illness to restore health)

interventions. Individuals often have imperfect knowledge regarding the health benets of

prevention, perhaps because they have been misinformed, never informed, or informed by
                                                              3
someone they don't trust, which can dampen demand.                Hence the role of study doctors was

limited to information provision on the benets of receiving care even when not feeling sick

and then providing those chosen.

      Approximately half of the subjects we recruited from the community visited our clinic.

Those who presented were negatively selected relative to those who completed the barbershop

survey but did not come to the clinic.         Subjects who redeemed the clinic coupon were 13

percentage points more likely to be unemployed (compared to 18% among non-participants)

and 19 percentage points more likely to have a high school education or less (compared

to 44% among non-participants).          In terms of health and healthcare utilization, they had

signicantly lower self-reported health, were less likely to have a primary care physician, and

more likely to have visited the emergency room.

      Once at the clinic, subjects randomly assigned to a black doctor elected to receive the

same number of preventive services as those assigned to a non-black doctor in the pre-

consultation stage. In sharp contrast, we nd that subjects assigned to black doctors, upon

interacting with their doctor, are 18 percentage points more likely to take up preventives

relative to those assigned to non-black doctors.          These ndings are robust to corrections

for correlated error structures within doctor; the inclusion of xed eects for clinic date,

eld sta, and recruitment location; as well as various permutations of the study doctors,

including dropping the best black and worst non-black doctor.

      Why would black male subjects randomly assigned to black male doctors elect to receive

more services upon interacting with them? We provide several pieces of evidence that better

communication between black subjects and black doctors explains our results, and discuss

alternative mechanisms below. First, in our controlled study environment, the role of the

doctor was circumscribed to informing subjects about the benets of preventive services,

and then providing those chosen. Second, for non-invasive tests (those that do not require

blood or an injection), both non-black and black doctors shifted out demand in the post-

      3 According to the CDC, up to 40% of annual deaths in the U.S. are deemed preventable (CDC 2014).



                                                    4
consultation stage relative to the pre-consultation stage, though the eect was larger for

the latter. Yet, for invasive tests, those that carry more risk and thus likely require more

trust in the person providing the service, only subjects assigned to black doctors responded:

increasing their take-up of diabetes and cholesterol screenings by 20 and 26 percentage points

(49% and 71%), respectively. Third, subjects are more likely to talk to their assigned doctor

about health issues if the assigned doctor is African-American, a result which is particularly

strong among those who obtain an invasive exam.

    The experimental ndings highlighting improved communication for black male patients

paired with black male doctors are consistent with those collected in a non-experimental

manner. We surveyed 1,490 black and white adult males who matched our sample in terms

of educational attainment. The respondents were asked to select a doctor of a particular race

based on accessibility, quality, and communication. With respect to quality (i.e. which doctor

is the most qualied) black and white respondents both selected doctors of the same race

about 50% of the time. However, for questions regarding communication, in particular which

doctor would understand your concerns, the proportion of respondents choosing doctors of

their own racial background jumped to nearly 65% for blacks and 70% for whites.

    An alternative interpretation of our results is that the estimated treatment eect is

picking up an attribute correlated with the race of the doctor in our sample and which

aects the outcome of interest. A prominent candidate for a hard-to-measure characteristic
                                                          4
that may correlate with doctor race is quality.               The non-experimental ndings cited above

demonstrate black male respondents believe that non-black doctors are as qualied as black

doctors. Yet, actual doctor quality within the context of our study could vary.

    We address the possibility of dierential quality across doctor race in the study setting

in several ways. First, doctors were balanced on observables in age, experience, and medical

school rank:     characteristics we collected from their resumes.             Moreover, all of the non-

black doctors, but only 67% of black doctors, practiced internal medicine. In addition, we

created a survey for the study doctors designed to assess their typical patient characteristics,

their persuasiveness, and their current medical knowledge using questions typically found on

medical credentialing exams. Interestingly, the non-black study doctors were more likely to

state their patients comply with medical advice and that they are able to persuade both

white   and   black adult male patients to take up testing they had initially refused.

    If black doctors were higher quality than non-black doctors we might have expected them

to be rated higher on feedback forms, yet black and non-black doctors were rated equally



   4 This could arise if, for example, black doctors are more qualied than non-black doctors in the population
and we failed to draw our sample from an area of overlapping support  or if the distributions were similar,
but we drew from dierent tails.



                                                      5
(highly). This compression likely reects the design. Dierences in quality that would stem

from diagnostic or treatment skills were not elicited in our study, which narrowly focused

on encouraging the take-up of preventives. Furthermore if black doctors were higher quality,

they should perform better with        all   patients and on   all   tests.   Although our recruitment

eorts were focused on African-American men, 12 clients identied as from another racial
                           5
or ethnic background.          Among this out-of-sample group, individuals were 20 percentage

points   less   likely to choose invasive services in the post-consultation stage when randomized

to black doctors (a nding that is more extreme than 97% of bootstrap coecients on draws

of 12 in-sample subjects).        Moreover for the in-sample subjects, the dierences in post-

consultation preventive test take-up were much more muted for non-invasive screenings (e.g.

blood pressure) than for exams that required blood (e.g. cholesterol). Thus, in order for an

attribute correlated with the race of black doctors to be driving our results, it must manifest

only   when treating African-American male patients and          especially    for invasive exams.

   This leads to another competing explanation, perhaps black male doctors exerted more

eort with patients who shared their racial background. Since communication requires some

amount of eort, this is not an interpretation to which we object (though we note if com-

munication is more natural within concordant pairs, black doctors might be expending less

eort to achieve the same or better results  i.e. communication may be more ecient).

Time spent with patients has been used as a proxy for provider eort (Das et al.                 2016).

Equating time spent with eort is problematic in our setting because it reects many dif-

ferent factors. A longer time spent could simply reect the treatment eect (i.e. subjects

elect to receive more services from black doctors), low quality (i.e.              diculty performing

the services), or communication (i.e. a better patient-doctor connection facilitating credible

information exchange). We nd that black doctors indeed spent more time with subjects,

but this nding is driven by the treatment eect  the dierence in visit lengths is small

and statistically insignicant after adjusting for the selected services. If we examine another

potential proxy for eort, the allocation of services to the highest need subjects, we fail

to nd evidence that doctors of either race were expending eort to target interventions.

Lack of targeting also reects our instruction to the study doctors to try and encourage all

patients to take up preventives.

   Although years of experience in the medical eld do not dier by race of doctor, it is

possible that black male doctors have more familiarity with serving black male patients.

This sorting would be consistent with national statistics on doctor-patient pairings as well

as with the tendency for minority physicians to work in medically underserved areas with


   5 To avoid conict, we provided services for the handful of people from other backgrounds who were
consented in to the study but deleted them from the main analytical sample.



                                                   6
more low-income and minority patients (Komaromy et al. 1996; Walker, Moreno, Grumbach

2012). Our study doctor survey reveals that black doctors were more likely to have seen at

least ve black adult male patients a week, though this experience does not predict doctor

xed eects. In addition, in the context of our own experiment, non-black physicians did not

close the gap with black doctors vis-à-vis post-consultation preventive care take-up over

time.

   Lastly, we do not nd evidence for the controversial hypothesis that subjects or doctors

were discriminating against each other. First, there was no race-preference elicited in the

pre-consultation (tablet) stage. Second, the comments and ratings on feedback forms were

consistently positive for both sets of doctors. As for provider-level discrimination, all doctors

who were involved in the study knew the goal was to improve the preventive care of black

men (though were blind to the notion that their race was being randomized, thus we could

not administer implicit association tests). Taste-based discrimination by doctors would again

be inconsistent with non-black doctors being rated as highly as black doctors. We also failed

to nd evidence that doctors of dierent races were using distinct thresholds to test patients

for disease, consistent with Chandra and Staiger (2010).

   Racial concordance between subjects and doctors appears to be a particular component

of social distance that is inuential in aecting demand. Alternative concordance measures,

such as whether subjects and assigned doctors share approximately the same age or educa-

tional attainment, do not predict healthcare demand in any meaningful way. Nor does race

interact with these other concordance measures. Such ndings should be interpreted with

caution since these characteristics were not randomized.

   Similar to prior scholarship on incentives for preventives among low-income communi-

ties, (Banerjee et al. 2010; Cohen and Dupas 2010; Thornton 2008) we nd that nancial

incentives for the u shot increased demand for the vaccine: by 19 percentage points for a $5

incentive and 30 percentage points for a $10 incentive in the pre-consultation stage. Yet not

all those who selected an incentivized u shot actually received it: about 18% of subjects

randomized to black doctors and 26% randomized to non-black doctors declined the shot

in the post-consultation stage (many cited contraindications). And regardless of incentive

level, black doctors increased demand in the post-consultation stage  convincing about

26% of subjects who initially turned down an incentive and refused a u shot to obtain it,

suggesting subsidies and (meeting with) black doctors are not perfect substitutes.

   In the setting of imperfect information regarding the benet of healthcare, demand curves

cease to be a sucient statistic for welfare calculations (Pauly and Blavin 2008; Baicker,

Mullainathan, and Schwartzstein 2015; Chetty, Looney, and Kroft 2009). Furthermore, we

incentivized take-up for only one preventive yet demand for every preventive was aected



                                               7
by a black doctor treatment. Thus, to make progress on valuation, we combine published

estimates on the health value of interventions oered in our clinic with results from our

study.   The health value estimates come from cost-eectiveness simulations in which the

screen-positive population obtains and complies with guideline-recommended therapy. Using

this approach, we calculate that black doctors would reduce mortality from cardiovascular

disease by 16 deaths per 100,000 per year, accounting for 19% of the black-white gap in

cardiovascular mortality (Kahn et al. 2010; Dehmer et al. 2017; Murphy et al. 2017; and

Harper, Rushani, and Kaufman 2012). If these eects extrapolate to other leading causes of

death amenable to primary or secondary prevention, such as HIV/AIDS or cancer, the gains

would be even larger.

   These calculations presume that there is a supply of African-American male doctors who

could screen and treat black male patients.         This might not be a safe assumption.           Black

males are especially under-represented in the physician workforce, comprising about 12%

of the U.S. male population but only 3% of male doctors (AAMC (2014); Census Bureau

(2013)).   According to a recent report by the AAMC (2015), the number of black male

medical students has been roughly constant since 1978 (when 542 matriculated into medical

school compared to 515 in 2014).         Returning to the non-experimental results, black male

respondents were 26 percentage points less likely than white respondents to state that a

doctor who matched their race and sex was available to them.

   The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the experimental

design and the hypotheses tested. Section III describes the data, empirical approach, and

the characteristics of study subjects. Section IV presents the main ndings and Section V

explores potential mechanisms and validity concerns. Section VI discusses health benets

and Section VII concludes.




              II. Experimental Design and Hypotheses Tested


                                             A. Design


The experiment was conducted in Oakland, California, in the fall and winter of 20172018

(see Figure 1 for study design and ow). We recruited men from 19 black barbershops as

well as two ea markets in and around the East Bay (about 88% of all recruited were at

barbershops). Field ocers (FO) approached men in the barbershops to enroll in the study.
                                                                                                        6
After obtaining written informed consent, the subject was given a short baseline survey.


   6 Protocol information and links to the pre-analysis plan as well as other study documents are provided
in the Online Appendix. Field ocers were mostly minority or rst-generation college students planning to
apply to medical school. FOs were encouraged to approach men who were black, the majority of clientele



                                                   8
The baseline survey included questions on socio-demographics, healthcare, and mistrust.

For completing the survey, the men received a coupon (worth up to $25) for their haircut or,

at the ea market, a cash incentive. After completing the baseline survey, the subjects were

given a coupon to receive a free health screening for blood pressure, BMI, cholesterol, and

diabetes at the clinic we operated on eleven Saturdays (see Appendix Figure 1). Subjects

were encouraged to come to the clinic promptly, and subjects who did not have transport

could receive a ride to the clinic courtesy of Uber. Field ocers used their own smart phones

to obtain the rides. Attendance at the clinic was encouraged with a $50 incentive.

    Upon arrival at the clinic, subjects who had a valid coupon were escorted into a waiting

room where a ticket number was dispensed. Once their ticket number was called, they were

led to a private patient room by a receptionist ocer (RO). ROs wore crimson polo shirts

with a Stanford - Bridge Clinical logo and khaki pants.               The RO would then provide the

subject with a tablet, which randomized the subject to a u vaccine incentive and to a black

or non-black doctor. Fourteen doctors participated in the experiment, including eight non-

black and six black. We recruited study doctors using electronic and print advertisements

to Alameda-Contra Costa Medical Association as well as with announcements at various

meetings throughout the Bay Area. We only refused one physician who completed the steps

for the application, due to liability concerns.

    SurveyCTO programmed in-form randomization using a computerized random assign-

ment algorithm for the tablets.          At least four doctors were on site every Saturday (for

reference, the median number of physicians at a community health center is ve (Ku et al.

2015)). Note that the tablet was the rst time subjects learned about the opportunity to

receive a u vaccine, since it was not advertised. This design decision was based on our focus

groups, where men expressed fear about the vaccine and we were concerned that advertising

the shot would reduce attendance. The RO would collect the coupon and give the subject his

$50 participation incentive, then instruct the subject on how to use the tablet. Two practice

questions were answered by the subject with the RO present to make sure they could operate

the tablet. Fourteen subjects were illiterate and needed to have the RO read the tablet to

them. We test for robustness to dropping those observations in Section IV. The RO then

exited the patient room and allowed the subject to make their medical decisions in private.

    The tablet introduced the subject to their assigned doctor and emphasized the doctor


at the recruitment barbershops. However, they were also instructed they should not confront anyone who
insisted on taking the survey and receiving the free haircut even if they do not appear to meet study criteria
(i.e. individuals who self-identied as African-American males and who were at least 18 years of age). The
net eect is that we were very successful at recruitment in the short amount of time (over 1,300 subjects
in about three months) but 14 individuals who came to the clinic did not meet study criteria and were
removed from the main analysis  see Figure 1. These out-of-sample subjects are used in the exploration
of mechanisms discussed below.



                                                      9
would be providing the services:


           Your assigned doctor for today is Dr. [Last Name]. On the next page, you
       will be asked to select the services you wish to receive from Dr. [Last Name]. Dr.
       [Last Name] will administer all the services that you choose.
In addition, the same generic information about doctor training was provided:


          Dr. [Last Name] is a medical doctor licensed to practice in the state of Cali-
       fornia and currently practicing in the Bay Area.
The text was accompanied by a large headshot photo of the doctor in a white coat with a red

background. Doctors were told the purpose of the photos was for identication cards and

were not aware that the photos were shown to subjects on a tablet in the pre-consultation

stage.   Tablet screenshots can be found in Figure 2.    To protect the identity of the study

doctors, there are no photos in the gure. The screenshots are not shown to scale, the tablet

screen was approximately 10 inches. As described further below, subjects seemed to read

the text on the tablet since they responded to information about the incentive for a u shot

and whether the test required a blood sample.

   The next screen listed four services in a random order (blood pressure measurement,

body mass index measurement, cholesterol testing, and diabetes testing) as well as the doctor

photo and queried the subjects on which services they would like to receive. The need for a

nger prick of blood for diabetes and cholesterol was clearly demarcated. Selecting none of

the above was also an option.

   The following screen apprised the subject that they could also obtain the u shot, which

would protect you and your community.       Those randomized to receive an incentive were

then informed they would obtain $5 or $10 for selecting the u shot. The doctor's photo was

shown for a third time and the subject was asked whether they would like to receive a shot

from   Dr. [Last Name].   If the subject responded armatively, a list of screening questions

would appear for contraindications. Subjects were informed the $5 or $10 incentive would

be given regardless of whether they had a contraindication. This was necessary to encourage

reporting of any condition which could make u vaccination potentially dangerous (e.g.

allergic response).   However, subjects who were reluctant to receive the shot in the rst

place could lie about having a problem. The RO returned to the patient room, collected the

tablet, recorded the responses, and handed a clipboard to the assigned doctor. It's possible

that subjects could have doubted information on the tablet, such as whether the assigned

doctor would actually meet them.      Yet many seemed to believe (and respond) to the u

shot incentive by choosing it and our results on this subset are similar  results available on

request.


                                              10
                                                                                                      7
    Study doctors were instructed to encourage patients to receive all preventives.                       The

doctors, subjects, and eld sta were not informed that doctor race was being randomized,

though they could have inferred it. They were explicitly told that the purpose of the study

was to improve the take-up of preventive health screening services for African-American men

(the study was ocially labeled the Oakland Men's Health Disparities Project). Doctors

were aware that subjects were randomized, so that they would only meet with subjects

assigned to them. Due to the nature of the malpractice coverage we were able to provide,

study doctors were instructed not to provide medical care other than the services that were

covered by the study. Subjects were also informed that the doctors were only able to provide

the set of preventives listed on the tablet. If subjects had alarming values on any of their

tests, there was an emergency protocol in place.                After the visit was completed, subjects

lled out a feedback form.        They were then escorted out of the clinic by an RO and the

ride-sharing service was called if needed. The study was approved by the IRB committee of

Stanford and by the IRB committee at NBER for the non-experimental sample. The IRB

committees at Berkeley and MIT ceded authority to Stanford.



                    B. Conceptual Framework and Hypotheses Tested


The experimental design allows us to test two competing hypotheses, which are formal-

ized in the Online Appendix.           The model follows Pauly and Blavin (2008) and Baicker,

Mullainathan, and Schwartzstein (2015), allowing patients to have false beliefs about the

benets of preventive care leading to underutilization (i.e. demanding less than what is pri-

vately optimal). This assumption mirrors what we observed in the eld with many patients

expressing false beliefs or present-bias. For example, one subject had been diagnosed with
                                                           8
diabetes in the past but refused to believe it."              Others thought u shots caused sickness,

or that other non-proven remedies could ward o illness instead, echoing ndings in Pettey

et al. (2016). Several said that they would get the shot later. One patient made a possible

reference to the syphilis experiment in Tuskegee stating he did not want the u shot out of

fear of being experimented on. We note that this subject's belief was accurate in the sense

that he indeed was an enrollee in our study, and therefore part of an experiment. It also

reects many ndings from the medical literature which suggest that African-Americans are

wary of participating in clinical trials and part of this hesitation may be related to Tuskegee

(Murthy, Krumholz, Gross 2004; Braunstein et al. 2008; Schar et al. 2010).

   7 Similar to Coman and Niehaus (2018) who study homophily in the context of the seller-buyer relation-
ship, we did not provide a specic script for the doctors to use in their meetings. A script could have limited
communication and made doctors appear less genuine/trustworthy in what was a real clinical encounter.
   8 Disbelief of diabetes diagnosis has been associated with medication non-adherence among African-
American patients (Shiyanbola, Brown, and Ward 2018).



                                                      11
   If, in addition to the discomfort associated with testing, individuals have a strong aversion

for doctors who do not share their race (as in Becker 1957), then simply learning their doctor

is African-American via a photo on the tablet in the pre-consultation stage is hypothesized

to increase demand relative to the control group.

   In the post-consultation stage, we assume a doctor provides information sucient for

the patient to correct his false belief, yet whether that information is considered credible or

comprehensible depends on the social distance between the two agents (Tabellini 2008). If

homophily facilitates the successful transmission of information between doctor and patient,

then dierences across subjects assigned to doctors of dierent races would only be detected

after the consultation. Finally, there is the possibility that both forces are at work: aversion

to a particular race of doctor in the pre-consultation stage reinforced by a lower perceived

benet, on average, from the same, in the post-consultation stage, leading to a widening of

the take-up gradient across doctors.




          III. Empirical Strategy and Sample Characteristics


The purpose of the study is to estimate the causal eect of doctor race on the preventive

healthcare decisions of African-American men. We begin by presenting an overview of our

estimation framework and the data used in the study. We then turn to describing charac-

teristics of the study sample.



                                 A. Estimating Equations


Using experimental data, we estimate the following equation:



                   Yi = α + β1 · 1BlackM
                                  i
                                         D
                                           + β2 · 1$5
                                                   i + β3 · 1i
                                                             $10
                                                                 + Γ0 Xi + i               (1)



where i is an individual subject. Yi is the demand for preventives during various stages of the
experiment. 1i          , 1$5
                           i , and 1i
               BlackM D             $10
                                        are indicators for random assignment to a black doctor,

a ve dollar u incentive, and a ten dollar u incentive, respectively. Xi are characteristics

of the subject and are included in some specications to improve precision.        In addition,

to explore mechanisms, characteristics are interacted with randomized components.          The

results from our analysis of Equation 1 will show that the u incentives only consistently

aect demand for the u.

   In addition, we stack the data where each each observation is a subject-by-preventive

service and we fully interact the black doctor treatment with indicator variables for each

service. This allows us to test whether the treatment eect varies across services.



                                              12
      When estimating standard errors for the main treatment eect of interest, we approach

the data as if our design involved randomizing clusters of patients to a particular doctor

instead of individual assignment of subjects to doctors of a given race (Abadie et al. 2017;

Bertrand, Duo, and Mullainathan 2004). These standard errors are likely incorrect given the

small number of clusters (Cameron and Miller 2015); therefore, we also report randomization
                                                 14                                  9
                                                  
inference (RI) p-values using all 3,003               combinations of doctor race.       When examining
                                                 6
interactions between having a black doctor and other covariates, we generate plots of the

joint distribution of RI draws (see Heÿ 2017)  available on request. The mode of inference

decision involves a Type I and Type II error tradeo and our focus is on minimizing the

former.

      To further probe mechanisms, we collected non-experimental data from a survey of 1,490

other black and white male respondents whose education prole mirrored that of our exper-

imental sample. The sampling frame was a panel of respondents managed by Qualtrics. We

designed the survey to capture whether the preference for a racially concordant provider is

unique to black male respondents and whether it varies across healthcare domains. Speci-

cally, we estimate the following equations:



                   1RaceM
                    i
                          D=k
                              = α + β1 · 1RaceResp=k
                                          i          + Γ0 Xi + i                                    (2a)

                   1RaceM
                    i
                          D=RaceResp
                                     = α + β1 · 1BlackResp
                                                 i         + Γ0 Xi + i                              (2b)

                   1RaceM
                    il
                          D=RaceResp
                                     = α + β1 · 1BlackResp
                                                 i         + λl · 1Domain
                                                                   l      + Γ0 Xi + il               (2c)



      where   i   indicates respondent,   k   signies race (black or white) and     l   is one of the do-

mains cited by the World Health Organization (WHO) as features of a responsive health

system: access, quality, and communication (Gostin et al. 2003).              Xi   in the above refers to

respondent's age, education, and income.              Equation 2a examines whether respondents are

relatively more likely to prefer doctors who share their racial background, where               RaceM D
and    RaceResp      are either both black or both white. Equation 2b tests whether the prefer-

ence for racial concordance diers between black and white respondents. Finally, Equation

2c investigates whether the importance of concordance diers across domains as well as by

race of the respondent.



                                    B. Sample Characteristics


We rst examine characteristics of the subjects who chose to come to the clinic, then proceed

to check that observable characteristics are balanced across arms before turning to our main

     9 There are 14 doctors in the experiment, six of whom comprise the treated group. We thus permute
14
  
      combinations of physician-level treatment holding the number of treated units (6) constant.
 6


                                                       13
ndings.

   Recruitment and Participation  To examine participation in the experiment, we modify
Equation 1, regressing Xi on a dummy for Clinic Presentation. These results are gathered
             10
in Table 1.       In general, those who came to the clinic were older, had lower self-reported

health, visited the emergency room more in the past two years, and were less likely to have a

primary care physician (PCP) compared to those that did not come. The selected men also

had lower reported income; were less likely to be married; were more likely to be receiving

unemployment, disability, or Supplemental Security Income; were 19 percentage points more

likely to have a high school diploma or less; and were 13 percentage points more likely to be

unemployed.

    Recall that the visit to the clinic was incentivized and barriers associated with not having

a car or a license were alleviated by providing free transport to and from the clinic. The

combined reduction in transport barriers and incentive to attend likely contributed to this

pattern of participation.

    Balance    Treatment groups are well-balanced on observables with two exceptions (see

Table 2). The cell containing subjects who were randomized to a non-black doctor and $10

incentive for u are more likely to be uninsured and less likely to have good self-assessed

health. The only signicant joint       F -test is on self-reported health, but including these two
covariates, among others, in Equation 1 does not alter our results (see discussion below).

Appendix Table 1 demonstrates that the groups are also well-balanced when examining

randomization to a black doctor or a u incentive amount separately.




                                 IV. Experimental Results


Main Results       We now turn to our experimental results and the principle aim of our anal-

ysis. Do black male subjects randomized to black male doctors demand more preventives?

Table 3 presents the main results conditioning only on the randomized treatments: doctor

race and u incentive. Baseline results with only the black doctor treatment can be found

in Section IV. In the pre-consultation stage, across every test oered, the race of the doctor

in the photo did not inuence demand in any signicant way (see Table 3 Panel (A)). These

results are also apparent when comparing the means of pre-consultation take-up among black

and non-black doctors in Figure 3 (the pair of vertical bars on the left side of each gure).

Such ndings are inconsistent with racial aversion playing a major role in take-up decisions.

Rather, they are supportive of pre-consultation case 3 of the model in the Online Appendix

  10 Our main clinic sample includes all of those who identify as African-American and are at least 18 years
of age on the baseline survey as well as approximately 9% who skipped the demographic questions but were
recruited in a black barbershop. In Section IV we assess sensitivity to various sample restrictions.



                                                     14
 in which subjects do not add doctor-related costs to their utility calculation or add it

equally across doctor race types.

      We nd that the incentive inuences pre-consultation demand for the u shot. Approx-

imately 20% of subjects selected the u shot on the tablet in the absence of an incentive.

A $5 incentive increased u take-up by about 19 percentage points, and a $10 incentive

increased it by 30 percentage points. With a $10 incentive, almost 50% selected the u shot

on the tablet, though, as mentioned previously, not all subjects who initially chose u shots

received it since subjects could revise their decision, usually by endorsing a contraindication.

The responsiveness of pre-consultation demand to information about the incentive suggests

that subjects were attending to the tablet.

      In the post-consultation stage of the experiment, the eect of being randomized to a black

doctor is statistically signicant and, as we calculate below, medically meaningful particularly

for invasive exams. Table 3 Panel (B) Column (1) shows that subjects randomized to a black

doctor are 11 percentage points more likely to demand a blood pressure measurement, an

increase of 15% compared to the non-black doctor mean.                   According to the estimates in

Panel (B) Column (2), the eect of a black doctor on BMI take-up is 16 percentage points

or 27%. Note that, for both of these tests, subjects assigned to non-black doctors are also

demanding more exams (see Figure 3 Panels (A) and (B)); however, those assigned to black

doctors do so more frequently. The RI p-values are much lower than in Panel (A) (e.g. 0.22

for BMI compared to a minimum of 0.43 across all tests in the pre-consultation panel), but

are not below the conventional levels of statistical signicance.

      Moving to the invasive tests  those that required blood samples from the subject or

involved an injection  the results demonstrate an even larger relative eect of black doctor

assignment on demand for preventives among black male patients. In contrast to the non-

invasive services, subjects assigned to non-black male doctors were not, on average, more

likely to agree to the invasive services after meeting the doctor (See the light (gray) bars in

Figure 3 Panels (C)(F)). A subject randomly assigned to a black doctor was 20 percentage

points (49%) more likely to agree to a diabetes screening and 26 percentage points (71%)

more likely to accept a cholesterol screening (Table 3 Panel (B) Columns (34)).                        With

respect to the u vaccine, which was cross-randomized with an incentive, subjects randomly

assigned to a black male doctor were 10 percentage points more likely (56%) to agree to the

u shot   conditional   on nancial incentives oered in the pre-consultation stage to choose the
   11
u.

      Columns (6) and (7) explore the eect of having a black doctor on two composite mea-


   11 See Thirumurthy, Asch, and Volpp (2019) for a discussion on the uncertain eects of nancial incentives
in health.



                                                      15
sures, the share of the four non-incentivized exams (all screenings except the u shot) and

the share of invasive exams (cholesterol, diabetes, and u).            Overall, the treatment eect

increases take-up by 18 and 19 percentage points, respectively. These results are consistent

with the conceptual framework in which all doctors relay basic information regarding the

benets of preventive care yet social distance acts to discount information from a discordant

source (post-consultation case 1).

    Figure 4 Panel (A) plots the post-consultation black vs. non-black doctor dierence in

take-up by exam.      The gure reveals the percent dierence between black and non-black

doctors is positively correlated with the invasiveness of the test. Blood pressure is a non-

invasive test and was performed in the patient room. Therefore, it is unsurprising that this

low risk and low hassle test had the lowest black doctor eect relative to non-black doctors.

BMI measurement required the doctor to escort the subject down the hallway to a public

room where there was a scale and height machine. The doctor used both devices to measure

the height and weight of the subject and then calculated the BMI. Cholesterol and diabetes

tests required a nger prick of blood (usually two separate sticks).               The cholesterol and

diabetes tests also took longer than other tests  on average, visit lengths for subjects who

selected diabetes tests were about six minutes longer; a cholesterol screening added about

three minutes. For more invasive tests, the results suggest there was a greater advantage to

being assigned a black doctor.

    Table 3 Panel (C) presents the dierence between post- and pre-consultation demand

(i.e. the delta). This is similar to conditioning on the rst choice, which, per above, was not

statistically dierent across race of male doctor, and is a direct measure of how much demand

changes after meeting the randomly assigned doctor. For instance, in Column (4), subjects

assigned to a black doctor were 25 percentage points more likely to select a cholesterol
                                                                                                   12
screening after meeting their physician than those assigned to a non-black doctor.                      To

benchmark the eects shown in Panel (C), we follow DellaVigna and Kaplan (2007) and

calculate persuasion rates as a measure for how much subjects changed their behavior upon

exposure to a black doctor. Figure 4 Panel (B) demonstrates that the persuasion rate is high

relative to studies surveyed in DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010).

    The above results suggest the treatment eect for invasive exams is stronger than for non-

invasive ones. To investigate this further, we stack the data to create a subject-preventive

panel, fully absorbing the black doctor coecient by interacting it with indicators for every

service (see Table 4). This specication allows us to test the joint signicance of the black

doctor*invasive interactions as well as the dierential eects of the black doctor treatment for


  12 Appendix Figure 2 plots the histogram of delta as a share of the four non-incentivized tests (i.e. ex-
cluding the u).



                                                   16
invasive exams. The results are shown in the bottom four rows. Consistent with the above,

in the pre-consultation stage the      F -tests   for the interaction of black doctor with invasive

exams and its dierence with non-invasive exams are around one and not signicant. The last

two columns examine post-consultation and delta outcomes, respectively, and demonstrate

a consistent additional marginal eect of black doctor and invasive exams which diers

signicantly from non-invasives, particularly in Column (3).

   Robustness     In Appendix Table 2, we probe whether our results are sensitive to the

inclusion of covariates thought to inuence health, such as subject age (and its square),

having a regular PCP, insurance, the clinic visit date, education, income, and self-assessed

health. The results are very similar to those presented in Table 3 and Figure 3. We also

selected covariates via double lasso, but failed to nd consistent predictors of take-up other

than our treatment variables (Duo 2018; Belloni, Chernozhukov, and Hansen 2014).

   As a robustness check, we include dierent xed eects (RO, date, and recruitment lo-

cation (Appendix Table 3 Panel (A)) and dierent samples (i.e.               including everyone who

consented regardless of their race or ethnicity, excluding those who could not read, including

only those who responded to every demographic question (Appendix Table 3 Panel (B)));

again the results are very similar. We also show that the results are not sensitive to dropping
                                                            13
indicators for u incentive levels (Appendix Table 4).           Finally, race appears to be a special

facet of social distance  sharing the same age or educational background as doctors does

not seem to positively inuence take-up (see Table 5). Caution should be used in interpret-

ing these results as neither education nor age was randomly assigned. In sum, the results

presented thus far reveal that, for African-American men in our study, the opportunity to

meet with a black male doctor has a consistent, large, and robust positive eect on the

demand for preventives.




                                        V. Mechanisms


In this section, we explore potential mechanisms for our results. We do so in ve ways: rst,

by using data from the physician notes and subject feedback forms to further our understand-

ing of the clinical encounter; second, by examining heterogeneity across subjects; third, by

using non-experimental evidence from an additional survey we conducted on approximately

1,500 black and white men concerning preferences over doctors; fourth, by using publicly

available, nationally representative data from a survey of health utilization; and fth, using

survey responses and background information from the study doctors. We begin by examin-


  13 In unreported results, we do not nd evidence that knowing another subject at the clinic, a practice
question we asked to ensure subjects could operate the tablet, aected demand.



                                                    17
ing the role of communication. Then we discuss other possible interpretations of our results

including physician eort, quality, and discrimination.



                 A. Communication Between Patients and Doctors


Our primary data sources for understanding what transpired during the clinical encounter are

doctors' notes on the patient and subject feedback forms about their clinical experience. As

mentioned above, doctors were instructed to provide only the advertised services to subjects.

In Table 6 Panel (A) Column (1) we nd evidence that subjects assigned to black doctors

were 10 percentage points more likely to try and talk to their doctor about issues unrelated to

the preventive care. The doctors also indicated whether there was anything notable about

the patient encounter on the patient les. Subjects were 11 percentage points more likely

to have this section lled in if their assigned doctor was black (Column (3)). We analyzed

the content of these notes by having three students who were blinded to the treatment hand

code them as related or unrelated to the screening. Subjects assigned to black doctors were

9 percentage points more likely to discuss personal matters or health issues unrelated to the

screening (Column (5)).

   Although the aforementioned results lack precision, they suggest that communication

was an important feature of the concordant patient-doctor interaction.       Indeed, when we

interact black doctor with an indicator for the subject receiving any invasive exam (even

numbered columns in Panel (A) Table 6) the interaction terms are positive and large in

magnitude. Thus, the relationship between black doctor and communication was strongest

among subjects who obtained an invasive exam.

   Qualitative evidence from the subject feedback forms and doctors' notes also support

the mechanism of improved communication and the correction of false beliefs. One subject

randomized to a black doctor wrote: Dr. XXYY was excellent, he talked me into getting

a u shot and the conspiracy theories. I said `Oh!' Great visit and putting me on track to

monitor my sugar and cholesterol. Thanks!      As for the doctors' notes, a frequent phrase

was initially refused but agreed after counseling.   Finally, we note that the experimental

results on communication are robust to controlling for the time spent with subjects (see

Appendix Table 5 Panel (A)). Thus, per minute communication was more likely to occur

between racially concordant doctors.

   In Table 7, we test whether subjects assigned to black doctors were more responsive to

the treatment based on their baseline demographic characteristics (Panel (A)), study clinic

experience (Panel (B)), or past healthcare experience (Panel (C)). We focus on invasive

exams because of the evidence from Table 3 that black doctors aected demand for these

services most. We fail to nd strong evidence of an important interaction eect between black



                                              18
doctor and either low income (reported household income below $5,000), age (an indicator

for younger than 40), or low education (an indicator for a high school degree or less). The

absence of a statistically signicant nding in this latter case is interesting, since, if black

doctors were simply better at providing information to the less well-informed, the results

would presumably be strongest among those with lower levels of education. Though it does

comport with our conceptual framework that emphasizes how the source of the information

and the connection between source and recipient, not just the information itself, matters for

clinical decision-making.

    In contrast, both Panels (B) and (C) reveal important interactions between the black

doctor treatment and either hassle costs associated with the study clinic or limited prior

healthcare experience, respectively. In particular, subjects who were randomized to a black

doctor but had longer wait times (an indicator for over an hour) demanded more services

than those exposed to a similarly lengthy wait time, but who were assigned to a non-black

doctor. Subjects who experienced high congestion (greater than nine people in the waiting

room, the 50th percentile) or those who were recruited from farther away locations (longer

than 18 minutes by car, the 50th percentile) also elected to receive more services when
                                                                14
randomized to a black doctor than a non-black doctor.

    African-Americans visit the emergency room more often than non-Hispanic whites, which

some have linked to lack of insurance, lower socioeconomic status, and mistrust that pre-

cludes healthcare utilization until an advanced stage of illness (Arnett et al. 2016, Brown

et al. 2012). Panel (C) demonstrates that those who use the emergency room more often

increased their demand for services when randomized to a black doctor. This result is par-

ticularly strong for the uninsured: in unreported results, the coecient on the interaction

between black doctor and number of ER visits is roughly seven times greater if a subject re-
                                 15
ported having no insurance.           Similarly, those who had no recent screening had a heightened

response.

    Research in medicine nds that black men have higher levels of medical mistrust than

their white counterparts, and this mistrust is correlated with delays in care, lower healthcare

utilization, and worse health outcomes (Kinlock et al. 2017, Nanna et al. 2018, Hammond et

al. 2010). As discussed above, we nd that subjects increased their demand of all preventive

services when assigned to a black doctor, and this eect was heightened if the screening test



   14 The wait time and congestion interactions have fewer observations due to missing data for the rst two
clinic days. These variables are balanced across black and non-black doctor treatment.
   15 We also asked a question about usual source of care in the baseline survey, but many subjects selected
multiple options making their responses dicult to interpret. As in Zhou et al. (2017), we nd that the
uninsured use the ER at a similar rate to the insured, though they have fewer total hospital admissions and
doctor visits. Results available on request.



                                                    19
was invasive. More invasive procedures, such as taking blood or providing injections, require

a higher degree of trust between doctor and patient. We examine whether men who scored

higher on our medical mistrust measure responded dierently to the black doctor treatment

than other groups.     In Column (3) of Panel (C) we nd that subjects were 5 percentage

points more likely to obtain preventive services per a one unit increase in medical mistrust

(on a collapsed scale of 13, see Data Appendix for details) when randomized to a black

vs.    non-black doctor.   For the uncollapsed physician mistrust measure (scale of 15), 50

subjects said they would not at all trust doctors to make decisions on their behalf. These

high-mistrust subjects were 14 percentage points (clustered s.e. 0.066) more likely to take

up invasive exams after meeting with a black doctor than the least mistrustful group who

completely trusted their doctor.

      An additional source of data we use to inform mechanisms is from a survey we conducted

on 1,490 African-American and white (self-identied) males. We matched the survey sample

to the recruited participants in terms of education, so that approximately half of the survey

respondents had a high school education or less. Given a choice between a black, white, or

Asian male doctor, respondents were asked to choose which doctor ranked the highest across

three WHO domains: quality, communication, and accessibility. The results are reported in

Table 8.

      First we examine respondent preferences for a doctor of the same race, i.e. concordance

(Equation 2a). In Column (1), we nd that black respondents were more likely than white

respondents to select black male doctors as the most qualied. Column (2) demonstrates that

white respondents selected white doctors more often than black respondents. This nding

is consistent across other domains, whereby both sets of respondents were relatively more

likely to choose a concordant physician rather than a discordant physician (see Columns (4)

and (5) and Columns (7) and (8)).

      Second, we examine whether preferences for concordance vary across race (Equation 2b).

Column (3) tests whether respondents were more or less likely to rate concordant doctors

as most qualied. We nd that white respondents were 6 percentage points more likely to

select white doctors as most qualied than black respondents select black doctors as the

most qualied. Both sets of respondents view concordance as important for communication

(about 69%, see Column (6)) and there is no dierence between the two groups. Turning

to accessibility, responses from the two groups dier signicantly (Column (9)), a point we

return to when discussing external validity.

      Third, we estimate Equation 2c, which tests whether concordance is stronger for some

domains than others.       In Column (10) we nd that black and white respondents were 17

percentage points more likely to select a concordant doctor when the question was about



                                               20
communication as opposed to when the question referred to quality.         The importance of

concordance for communication was similar across respondent race.

   Figure 5 summarizes the results from Table 8. The gure plots the percent of respondents

from a given race selecting a doctor of their own race across the three domains. We nd a

slight preference for concordance when it comes to quality, though both sets of respondents

are very close to the (red) 50 percent line, indicating that, on average, respondents were

as likely to select concordant physicians as they were to select discordant physicians.      In

sharp contrast, for questions related to communication, both black and white respondents

shift rightwards: reecting a clear preference for concordant doctors. Nearly 65% of black

respondents and 70% of white respondents reported that a doctor of their own race would

understand their concerns best.

   To understand whether these patterns are also found in nationally representative data,

we use the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), which queries individuals on charac-

teristics of their doctor as well as utilization (Blewett et al. 2018b). Respondents were more

likely to see a doctor of their own racial/ethnic group  though that varies across the race

of the respondent. Specically, 85% of white respondents and 71% of Asian respondents re-

ported their usual medical provider was of the same race (see Appendix Table 6). Although

more black respondents report their doctor is black than respondents of other backgrounds,

only 26% of black respondents said they had black doctors.       The pattern for Hispanics is

similar.   This may reect under-representation of African-Americans and Hispanics in the

physician workforce, a point we return to when discussing external validity below.

   Appendix Table 7 reports correlations between patient-doctor concordance and three

outcomes: whether a respondent would go to their doctor for preventive care, whether they

think their doctor listens to them carefully, and whether their doctor's instructions were

easy to understand. The sample is limited to adult males. The estimating equation includes

indicators for patient and doctor race/ethnicity as well as concordant interactions. Results

should be interpreted with caution given that patients are not randomly assigned to doctors

or vice-versa.   Nevertheless, the interaction between black male patient and black doctor

is consistently positive and signicant, indicating that said patients are more likely to seek

out preventive care, feel their concerns are understood, and comprehend medical advice

when paired with a black doctor. The main eect of black doctor is negative though not

consistently signicant  a nding that does not support dierential quality of doctors

across race. See also the next subsection for further evidence on (lack of ) dierential quality

across race.




                                              21
                                 B. Threats to Internal Validity


In this section, we consider whether doctor race represents a causal eect.                   Race is not

randomly assigned in the population. Thus, in the sample of doctors we hired, race could be

correlated with a characteristic that inuences the ability of doctors to encourage subjects

to take up preventives (i.e. our outcome of interest). Prominent potential omitted variables

include quality and eort, which are hard to measure outside of the clinic context.                       In

addition, with a nite number of physicians, the ndings might be driven by outliers in

either group. Finally, there is the concern that either subjects or doctors discriminate. We

discuss each of these possible interpretations in turn.

    Physician Quality      Physician quality is thought to inuence patient outcomes, but is

acknowledged to be complex and dicult to measure, particularly in primary care (Young,

Roberts, and Holden 2017; AHRQ 2016).                Some measures of quality include malpractice

complaints, physician report cards, and training characteristics. In this study, we use all of

the aforementioned, plus an additional survey we designed to assess typical patient panel

characteristics as well as persuasiveness and content knowledge of our study doctors.

    Turning to the quality metrics, rst, all doctors were vetted by a medical liability company

and Stanford attorneys as a requirement of their participation. Second, after the encounter,

we asked subjects to ll out a feedback form before leaving the clinic.                 They rated their

experience on a scale of 1 to 5 and then asked whether they would recommend their doctor

to a friend.    As seen in Table 6 Panel (B) Columns (3) and (5) there are no statistical

dierences between ratings and recommendations among those assigned to black or non-

black doctors. We interpret these results with caution however, given that the satisfaction

measures were all very high and without much variation. For instance, the mean experience

rating was about 4.8 with 85% of subjects characterizing it as excellent (a rating of 5) and
                                                                       16
99% saying they would recommend their doctor to a friend.

    Third, we gleaned details of doctors' training from their resumes and a study doctor

survey querying them on their patient demographics, overall persuasiveness, and working

medical knowledge using board style questions.             The doctors were unblinded by the time

of the survey. Characteristics such as experience, medical school rank, and board question

performance were similar across groups, though black male doctors were less likely to be

trained in internal medicine than their non-black counterparts (see Table 9 Panel (A)). Non-

black study doctors were more likely to state their patients comply with medical advice and



  16 Patients may provide feedback based on a dierent maximand and satisfaction scores do not systemati-
cally covary with other quality metrics (Chandra et al. 2016). There may also be bias in patient satisfaction
scores, though this would be at odds with results in the pre-consultation stage (Garcia et al. 2019; Sotto-
Santiago, Slaven, Rohr-Kirchgraber 2019; Poole 2019).



                                                     22
that they are able to persuade patients from all backgrounds to take up testing they had

initially refused (see Table 9 Panel (B)). African-American doctors were more likely to see

racially concordant male patients, ndings consistent with nationally representative data

(Appendix Table 6).

    To further analyze quality, we modify Equation 1 replacing the black doctor indicator

with a xed eect for each study doctor. We then examine what explains the correlation

between doctor attributes and the xed eect estimates (see Table 10).                      Physician race

explains approximately 45% of the cross-sectional variation and is highly signicant.                     In

Column (2) we add experience with black male patients, although the coecient is positive

it one-sixth the size of race and is not itself signicant. We also fail to nd any signicant

eect when interacting this variable with doctor race.                In Columns (3) to (5) we include

doctor race with and an indicator for a top 10 medical school, years of experience, and

internist, respectively.    All do little to explain the variation in xed eects.             Column (6)

includes all the aforementioned covariates in the same specication. Comparing Column (1)
                                                                 17
and (6), race accounts for about 86% of the R-squared.

    If race of doctor in the study was highly correlated with quality, then we should nd black

doctors perform better on subjects from all backgrounds. Twelve individuals did not identify

as African-American, but were still seen at the clinic because they had been consented to

participate during recruitment. These clients were randomized across eight of the fourteen

study doctors, equally balanced by race, and were 20 percentage points               less   likely to choose

invasive services from black doctors in the post-consultation stage. We compare this result

to a placebo test where we randomly select 12 in-sample subjects and regress the share of

services received on black doctor. We nd that the coecient on black doctor for the out-of-

sample group is lower than 97 percent of these bootstrap coecients (see Figure 6).To the

extent that quality is a relatively stable attribute of a clinician, this nding is inconsistent

with a correlation between doctor race and quality confounding the interpretation of our

results. These results may understate racial discordance given that the subjects were still

recruited from black barbershops. In Appendix Figure 3 Panel (A) we do not nd a signicant

dierence in the length of black study doctors' notes with this sample, however, we do nd

that non-criteria subjects are much       less   likely to talk to black doctors (Appendix Figure 3

Panel (B)).



  17 Additionally, the R-squared with all of the control variables except the black doctor indicator is equal
to 0.183. Thus, black doctor represents 41% of the residual variation ((0.516 - 0.183) / (1 - 0.183)). We
also tested whether physicians improved over time at the clinic. Specically, we collapsed the data to the
physician-visit date level and regressed the post-consultation take-up on black doctor and a count of the
visit day number for each doctor. The coecient on visit day number is -0.004 and insignicant; the black
doctor coecient is 0.187 (s.e. 0.048).



                                                    23
   As an additional measure of within study quality, we tabulate the number of mechanical

errors on the medical devices by doctor. There were very few errors in total and they did

not vary across race. Finally, we nd no dierences in online ratings of the study doctors

on the site vitals.com. On a scale of 1 to 5, the average black doctor score was 4.4 and the

average non-black doctor score was 4.6, though not all of the doctors were rated on the site.

   Physician Eort       Another potential explanation is that black doctors exerted more

eort when working with black patients than non-black doctors. Similar to quality, physician

eort is dicult to measure.       Often, time spent with the patient is used as a metric, but

in our study this equivalence is complicated.            As mentioned in the introduction, a longer

time could reect the treatment eect (i.e. subjects elect to receive more services from black

doctors), low quality (i.e. diculty performing the test), or communication (i.e. a better

patient-doctor connection facilitating credible information exchange). In Table 6 Panel (B)

Column (1) we nd that black doctors spent approximately four more minutes with subjects.

However, this nding is mainly related to our treatment eect of black doctor on invasive

exam take-up. Indeed when we condition on such take-up (Panel (B) Column (2)) neither the

main eect of black doctor nor the interaction with invasive are signicant, though invasive
                                                            18
testing does lengthen the encounter by 12 minutes.

   We also examine whether study doctors exerted more eort by targeting services to the

those at increased risk for disease (as dened by national guidelines  see Data Appendix for

details). Such targeting would require clinical acumen and eort since doctors were provided

no information on the subjects' medical histories prior to their brief encounter. Results in

Appendix Table 8 fail to nd evidence of targeting.

   Outliers    A third possibility is that our results are driven by outliers. As noted above,

there are no prominent dierences in observables (if anything, the set of black doctors at-

tended lower ranked medical schools and were slightly less likely to be internists, see Table

9). To test whether any particular physician is driving our results, we estimate the black

doctor eect dropping one doctor at a time.              The results gathered in Appendix Figure 4

demonstrate that the results are remarkably stable across the leave-one-out estimates. If we

drop the best black doctor, we obtain a consistent coecient of 0.120 (cluster s.e. 0.043).

In the most stringent condition, we omit the best black and the worst non-black doctor

and still nd a treatment eect near 11 percentage points.               The randomization inference

procedure also addresses this concern.

   Discrimination      A fourth possibility is that subjects derive disutility from non-black

doctors thus decreasing demand. Our results suggest this is unlikely. First, if aversion for a


  18 Likewise, Appendix Table 5 Panel (B) Column (1) controls for each individual test and shows that visits
with black doctors were about one minute longer, though not signicantly so.



                                                    24
particular race was strong, we would have expected to observe this in the pre-consultation

stage, when subjects were rst introduced to the doctor by tablet photo. As previously noted,

though, we nd no statistical dierences in the pre-consultation tablet selections (Table 3).

Second, in the post-consultation stage, we nd that, on average, subjects assigned to non-

black doctors increased their demand relative to the pre-consultation stage (see light (gray)

bars in Figure 3), just not as much of an increase as with black doctors (and not at all with

invasive exams).

   Discrimination by non-black doctors could manifest as higher risk thresholds to test

African-American patients for disease. Chandra and Staiger (2010) note the Beckerian in-

tuition of taste-based prejudice implies that providers may consciously or unconsciously

use a higher benet threshold before providing care to minority patients (for example, rec-

ommending a treatment to non-minority patients if it prolongs their life by at least three

months, but only treating minority patients if it prolongs their life by at least ve months).

Yet the distributions of test results conditional on testing, presented in Figure 7, are in-

distinguishable across race groups, suggesting both sets of doctors were following protocol

and oering preventives to all subjects. Lastly, we note that if discrimination by patients or

doctors were an important part of the explanation for our results, we would have expected

variation in subject feedback across doctor race and lower scores for non-black doctors. In-

stead we nd that the average ratings were very high and there was no dierence across

doctor race.

   We qualitatively examine the subject comments regarding the clinical experience by

visualizing the occurrence of specic words using the WordStat content analysis software.

The plots of the subject comments are indistinguishable across those assigned to black and

non-black physicians (Appendix Figure 5).      The same analysis focused on doctors' notes

(Appendix Figure 6) illustrates the centrality of the word PCP for non-black doctors and

patient for black doctors. We examined the nature of this dierence and found that non-

black doctors were often recording reasons for refusals  the most common being that the

subject said that he would obtain preventives from his PCP. In fact, for patients seeing

non-black doctors, 60% of the references to PCP in the doctor notes are in the context of

an excuse (e.g. cholesterol and u shot from PCP), whereas this occurs in only 14% of the

references to PCP by black doctors.



                            C. Threats to External Validity


In order to benchmark our results and assess their relevance for the larger discussion on

reducing health disparities in the U.S., it's important to compare our study doctors and

sample to the general population, bearing in mind that extrapolation should be done with



                                              25
caution.

   Subjects    In terms of demographic characteristics, our clinic study subjects were more

likely to be uninsured (28%) and unemployed (31%), as compared to black men in the U.S.
                                      19
(about 17% and 7%, respectively).          For the entire study sample, including those who did

not come to the clinic, the average uninsured rate was 26% and the unemployment rate was

24%. However, the study samples are very similar in terms of average age and education

relative to the rest of the U.S. (43 years and 58% with a high school education or less in the

U.S. versus 43 years and 63% with a high school education or less in the clinic sample and

43 years and 53% for all recruited).

   Turning to health characteristics, the average value for systolic blood pressure was 132.7

mm Hg consistent with stage 1 hypertension (distributions of medical screening results are
                                                                   2
displayed in Figure 7). The average BMI value was 27.4 kg/m            consistent with an overweight

categorization. The average hemoglobin A1c was 5.8%, consistent with a diagnosis of pre-

diabetes. About 1.4% of the sample had a hypertensive crisis  a critically high value of

blood pressure requiring urgent care, 4.4% were morbidly obese, and 3.1% of the subjects

had a hemoglobin A1c value in the seriously elevated range (i.e. >9%).

   In terms of disease prevalence, about 30% of the screened study sample had values of

blood pressure, BMI, and cholesterol consistent with hypertension, obesity, and dyslipidemia,

respectively; and 15% had hemoglobin A1c levels diagnostic of diabetes.              Some subjects

indicated that they were on medications for these conditions; we only include them in the

estimate if they chose to receive a screening.        Despite our sample having higher rates of

unemployment and uninsurance, these gures are unfortunately very similar to the prevalence

of the aforementioned conditions among black men in the U.S. more broadly, as seen in Figure

8. If anything our screened study sample was slightly healthier than the average African-

American male in the U.S. Specically, the prevalence of high blood pressure in black men

in the U.S. is 41%, compared to 30% for white men, the prevalence of hypercholesterolemia

is 33% for black men compared to 37% for white men, and the prevalence of diabetes is 18%

for black men vs.    9% for white men (Fryar et al.       2017; Hales et al.     2017; CDC 2017b;

and CDC 2017c). These comparisons suggest that our ndings are not due to a sample of

individuals with worse health on average (Simon et al. (2016)).

   Doctors     How representative were the doctors hired for our study? All doctors who

participated knew the clinic provided preventive services to black men, many of whom lacked

alternative medical options.     Therefore, these doctors are plausibly drawn from the           least

  19 Calculations on the U.S. population come from 2016 1-year American Community Survey data (Ruggles
et al. 2017). Our study sample also appears more disadvantaged compared to ACS summary statistics for
Alameda County.



                                                 26
prejudiced   part of the distribution. The doctors also gave up their Saturdays in exchange

for a xed hourly compensation that they received through direct deposit or check.                  The

compensation was competitive with the market rate for moonlighting physicians in the Bay

Area. Doctors of both races attended highly ranked medical schools. Across all 14 study

doctors, eight graduated from schools ranked in the top 10 of the U.S. News Research

Rankings, a much higher share of graduates relative to the population at large. Black doctors

in the study graduated from slightly lower ranked schools, consistent with the national data

(see Appendix Figure 7).

   One way our study was unique, however, was that subjects had easy access to a black

male doctor once randomized to them.            Several studies report that minority doctors are

more likely than white doctors to work in underserved areas and see patients who share

their racial background (Moy and Bartman 1995; Komaromy et al. 1996; Cantor et al. 1996;

Walker, Moreno, Grumbach 2012). Yet despite this allocation, there remains a dierence in

access. Returning to our non-experimental evidence in Figure 5, by far the largest divide

between black and white male respondents is with regards to accessibility of a doctor who

is of their same race and sex background (37% vs.             62%).   In Table 8 Column (9), black

male respondents were 26 percentage points less likely to respond that a black male doctor

is available near them than white males report white male doctors are available, conditional
                                   20
on age, income, and education.

   As stated in the introduction, African-Americans comprise only 4% of practicing physi-

cians in the U.S. Both African-American and Hispanic physicians are signicantly under-

represented if comparing the ratios of the share of the recent medical school graduates to

their share in the U.S. population. Non-Hispanic white physicians approach a ratio of one

and Asian physicians approach a ratio of four (see Appendix Figure 8).                  Moreover, the

pipeline of African-American medical school graduates is relatively at  hovering around

6% for the last decade, an increasingly lower share of the African-American population (see

Appendix Figure 9). This aspect of the study was also noted by one of the subjects: Really

excited about the black male doctors!!!




                                    VI. Health Valuation


In behavioral hazard models, individuals may underuse medical care due to misperceptions;

thus the demand curve ceases to be a sucient statistic for welfare calculations (Pauly and

Blavin 2008; Baicker, Mullainathan, and Schwartzstein 2015; Chetty, Looney, and Kroft


  20 In the baseline survey, we asked how much choice individuals had in where they go for medical care 
only 37% of respondents answered that they had a great deal of choice.



                                                   27
2009).        In addition, most of the preventives we oered were not cross-randomized with

incentives. Thus, we value the eect of a black doctor in preventing cardiovascular-disease-

related deaths using recently published medical studies (Kahn et al.                  2010, Dehmer et al.
         21
2017).        Since these models are concerned with the eect of screening on health, we combine

their estimates with the coecient on black doctor in the post-consultation stage.

    We nd that black doctors reduce myocardial infarctions by 1,072 per 100,000 and

cardiovascular-related deaths by 622 per 100,000 (or 15.6 per year) for black men over about

a 40-year time horizon. The dierence in annual age-adjusted mortality rates for cardiovas-

cular disease between non-Hispanic white (268.4 per 100,000) and non-Hispanic black males

(350.3 per 100,000) in the U.S. is 81.9 per 100,000 (Murphy et al.                  2017).   Therefore, the

treatment eect we estimate for black doctors could reduce this gap by approximately 19%.

To the extent preventive services reduce ER visits, our intervention could translate into cost

savings for hospitals as well (see Garthwaite, Gross, and Notowidigdo (2018)).

    The dierence in annual age-adjusted mortality rates for inuenza and pneumonia be-

tween non-Hispanic white and non-Hispanic males in the United States is 2.7 per 100,000

(20.3 versus 17.6). Flu vaccination for adults over the age of 18 is estimated as averting 2.7

deaths per 100,000 per year (based on CDC 2016 and CDC 2017a). Multiplying the treat-

ment eect of black doctors by the ecacy of u vaccination to prevent u deaths among

adults, we obtain 0.27, which is roughly 10% of the gap in mortality for this cause of death.

    Harper, Rushani, and Kaufman (2012) calculate that 41% of the life-expectancy gap be-

tween black and white males in 2008 was due to cardiovascular disease and diabetes. There-

fore, our estimates of the black doctor treatment eect suggest the overall life-expectancy

gap between black and white males exclusive of infant mortality could be reduced by approx-

imately 8% or 5 months from cardiovascular disease and diabetes alone. If we extrapolate the

screening benet to other preventable leading causes of death and health disparities among

African-American men (i.e. HIV and cancer), the life expectancy gain could be even larger

since these chronic illnesses account for another 26% of the black-white male life expectancy

gap. Certain types of cancer or cancer-related deaths can be prevented through care and

treatment adherence (e.g. HPV vaccine, tobacco cessation, earlier stage diagnoses).

  21 Both Kahn et al.     and Dehmer et al.    perform a Monte-Carlo simulation on a representative U.S.
population to compare screening to a no screening condition, and assume that those who screen positive
receive guideline-recommended therapy.     Since both studies were published relatively recently, treatment
ecacy is likely to reect the current state of care, though varying the fraction of screen-positive who obtain
and follow appropriate treatment recommendations will alter the results, particularly if this fraction also
interacts with doctor race. The Dehmer et al. study assumes only 90% of those oered screening take it
up, thus we divide by 0.9 to make the results consistent with the Kahn et al. study. The Dehmer et al.
study also provides estimates of the eects of screening subdivided by race and sex. Such stratication is
not available in Kahn et al. Further details on the studies and the calculation can be found in the Online
Appendix.



                                                      28
   The assumption that all who screen positive receive appropriate care is an upper bound on

the marginal impact of the screening eect of black doctors on lives saved. However, a more

realistic assumption of leakage (or lack of compliance) conditional on screen positive exams

could deliver even larger   dierential   eects of doctor race on lives saved since compliance

with recommendations conditional on having a disease might also vary with concordance

(Traylor et al. 2010).




                                    VII. Conclusion


In this study, we examine the eect of diversity of the physician workforce on the demand

for preventive care among African-American men using a randomized trial. We nd that,

when patients and doctors had an opportunity to meet in person, patients assigned to a

black doctor increased their demand for preventives, particularly those which were invasive.

These ndings were stronger among subjects who had limited prior experience with routine

medical care. Data from the clinical encounter demonstrate that subjects brought up more

issues and were more likely to seek advice from black doctors, as reected in the doctors'

notes.

   These ndings are consistent with a framework in which agents underestimate the benet

of preventive care, and thus have low demand.        Physicians, through their counseling and

rapport with patients, which varies by social distance, can help correct false beliefs and

increase demand. Subsidies also increase demand, though we nd nancial incentives do not

completely substitute for information from a trusted source.       Some subjects who selected

u shots initially, encouraged by the incentive, declined to actually receive them (often

citing contraindications). Moreover, black doctors continued to increase demand even among

subjects who initially refused a u shot despite a nancial incentive.

   Our back of the envelope calculations suggest the increased demand induced by black doc-

tors could reap substantial health benets. Specically, we calculate that increased screening

could lead to a 19% reduction in the black-white male cardiovascular mortality gap and an

8% decline in the black-white male life expectancy gap. Given the current supply of black

doctors, a more diverse physician workforce might be necessary to realize these gains.




                                                29
                                          References

 [1] Abadie, Alberto, Susan Athey, Guido W. Imbens, Jerey Wooldridge. 2017. When
          Should You Adjust Standard Errors for Clustering? NBER Working Paper, 24003.

 [2] Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 2016. The Challenges of Measur-
          ing Physician Quality. Accessed June, 2018. https://www.ahrq.gov/professionals/
          quality-patient-safety/talkingquality/create/physician/challenges.html

 [3] Akerlof, George A., and Rachel E. Kranton. 2000. Economics and Identity.              Quarterly
          Journal of Economics    115(3): 71553.

 [4] Alsan, Marcella, and Marianne Wanamaker. 2018. Tuskegee and the Health of Black
          Men.    Quarterly Journal of Economics       133(1): 40755.

 [5] American        Medical    Association.     2018.      Reducing     Disparities   in     Health
          Care.     Accessed    June,     2018.        https://www.ama-assn.org/delivering-care/
          reducing-disparities-health-care.

 [6] Arias, Elizabeth, Melonie Heron, and Jiaquan Xu. 2017. United States Life Tables,
          2014. National Vital Statistics Reports 66(4): 163.

 [7] Arnett, M. J., R.J. Thorpe, D. J. Gaskin, J. V. Bowie, and T. A. LaVeist. 2016. Race,
          Medical Mistrust, and Segregation in Primary Care as Usual Source of Care: Find-
          ings from the Exploring Health Disparities in Integrated Communities Study.          Jour-
          nal of Urban Health   93(3): 45667.

 [8] Arrow, Kenneth J. 1963. Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care.
          American Economic Review       53(5): 94173.

 [9] Association of American Medical Colleges. 2009. Addressing Racial Disparities in
          Health Care: A Targeted Action Plan for Academic Medical Centers.

[10] Association of American Medical Colleges. 2014. Diversity in the Physician Workforce:
          Facts and Figures 2014.

[11] Association of American Medical Colleges. 2015. Altering the Course: Black Males in
          Medicine.

[12] Association of American Medical Colleges. 2016. Diversity in Medical Education: Facts
          and Figures 2016.

[13] Baicker, Katherine, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein. 2015. Behavioral
          Hazard in Health Insurance.    Quarterly Journal of Economics       130(4): 162367.

[14] Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duo, Rachel Glennerster, and Dhruva Kothari. 2010. Im-
          proving Immunisation Coverage in Rural India: Clustered Randomised Controlled
          Evaluation of Immunisation Campaigns with and without Incentives.             BMJ      340:
          19.

[15] Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duo. 2011.          Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of
          the Way to Fight Global Poverty. 4170. New York: PublicAairs.
[16]   Becker, Gary. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago
          Press.


                                                   30
[17] Belloni,   Alexandre,   Victor   Chernozhukov,     and   Christian     Hansen.   2014.    High-
        Dimensional Methods and Inference on Structural and Treatment Eects                 Journal
        of Economic Perspectives, 28(2):    2950.

[18] Benjamin, Daniel J., James J. Choi, and A. Joshua Strickland. 2010. Social Identity
        and Preferences.    American Economic Review      100(4): 191328.

[19] Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. How Much Should
        We Trust Dierences-in-Dierences Estimates?          Quarterly Journal of Economics
        119(1): 24975.

[20] Bertrand, Marianne, Sandra E. Black, Sissel Jensen, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2018.
        Breaking the Glass Ceiling? The Eect of Board Quotas on Female Labour Market
        Outcomes in Norway.      Review of Economic Studies     0: 148.

[21] Bettinger, Eric P., and Bridget T. Long. 2005. Do Faculty Serve as Role Models?
        The Impact of Instructor Gender on Female Students.       American Economic Review:
        Papers and Proceedings     95(2): 1527.

[22] Blewett, Lynn A., Julia A. Rivera Drew, Risa Grin, Miriam King, and Kari C.W.
        Williams. 2018a. IPUMS Health Surveys: National Health Interview Survey, Ver-
        sion 6.3 [National Health Interview Survey, 20072017]. Minneapolis: University of
        Minnesota.

[23] Blewett, Lynn A., Julia A. Rivera Drew, Risa Grin, Kari C.W. Williams, and Daniel
        Backman. 2018b. IPUMS Health Surveys: Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, Ver-
        sion 1.0 [Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, 20052015]. Minneapolis: University of
        Minnesota.

[24] Braunstein, Joel B., Noëlle S. Sherber, Steven P. Schulman, Eric L. Ding, and Neil R.
        Powe. 2008. Race, Medical Researcher Distrust, Perceived Harm, and Willingness
        to Participate in Cardiovascular Prevention Trials.     Medicine    87(1): 19.

[25] Brown, Lindsay E., Ryan Burton, Brian Hixon, Manasi Kakade, Parul Bhagalia, Cather-
        ine Vick, Andrew Edwards, and Mary T. Hawn. 2012. Factors Inuencing Emer-
        gency Department Preference for Access to Healthcare.       Western Journal of Emer-
        gency Medicine    13(1): 4105.

[26] Cameron, A. Colin, and Douglas L. Miller. 2015. A Practitioner's Guide to Cluster-
        Robust Inference.    Journal of Human Resources      50(2): 31772.

[27] Cantor, Joel C., Erika L. Miles, Laurence C. Baker, and Dianne C. Barker. 1996. Physi-
        cian Service to the Underserved:         Implications for Armative Action in Medical
        Education.   Inquiry   33(2): 16780.

[28] Carrell, Scott E., Marianne E. Page, and James E. West. 2010. Sex and Science: How
        Professor Gender Perpetuates the Gender Gap.          Quarterly Journal of Economics
        125(3): 110144.

[29] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2014. Up to 40 Percent of Annual Deaths
        from Each of Five Leading US Causes are Preventable. https://www.cdc.gov/
        media/releases/2014/p0501-preventable-deaths.html.




                                                  31
[30] Centers     for   Disease   Control   and   Prevention.    2016.   Flu   Vaccination   Coverage,
        United States,      2015-16 Inuenza Season.          https://www.cdc.gov/u/uvaxview/
        coverage-1516estimates.htm.

[31] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2017a. Estimated Inuenza Illnesses, Med-
        ical Visits, Hospitalizations, and Deaths Averted by Vaccination in the United
        States. https://www.cdc.gov/u/about/disease/2015-16.htm.

[32] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2017b. National Diabetes Statistics Report,
        2017: Estimates of Diabetes and Its Burden in the United States. https://www.
        cdc.gov/diabetes/data/statistics-report/index.html.

[33] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2017c. High Cholesterol Facts. https:
        //www.cdc.gov/cholesterol/facts.htm.

[34] Chandra, Amitabh, and Douglas Staiger. 2010. Identifying Provider Prejudice in
        Healthcare NBER Working Paper, 16382.

[35] Chandra, Amitabh, Amy Finkelstein, Adam Sacarny, and Chad Syverson. 2016. Health
        Care Exceptionalism? Performance and Allocation in the US Health Care Sector.
        American Economic Review           106(8): 211044.

[36] Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. Salience and Taxation: Theory and
        Evidence.     American Economic Review         99(4): 114577.

[37] Coman, Lucas, and Paul Niehaus. 2018. Pathways of Persuasion. Working Paper.

[38] Cohen, Jessica, and Pascaline Dupas. 2010. Free Distribution or Cost-Sharing?               Ev-
        idence from a Randomized Malaria Prevention Experiment.                 Quarterly Journal of
        Economics       125(1): 145.

[39] Das, Jishnu, Alaka Holla, Aakash Mohpal, and Karthik Muralidharan. 2016. Quality
        and Accountability in Health Care Delivery: Audit-Study Evidence from Primary
        Care in India.     American Economic Review        106(12): 376599.

[40] Dee, Thomas. 2004. Teachers, Race, and Student Achievement in a Randomized Ex-
        periment.     Review of Economics and Statistics        86(1): 195210.

[41] Dee, Thomas. 2005. A Teacher like Me: Does Race, Ethnicity, or Gender Matter?
        American Economic Review           95(2): 15865.

[42] Dehmer, Steven P., Michael V. Maciosek, Amy B. LaFrance, and Thomas J. Flot-
        temesch. 2017. Health Benets and Cost-Eectiveness of Asymptomatic Screening
        for Hypertension and High Cholesterol and Aspirin Counseling for Primary Preven-
        tion.   Annals of Family Medicine       15(1): 2336.

[43] DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ethan Kaplan. 2007. The Fox News Eect: Media Bias and
        Voting    Quarterly Journal of Economics        122(3): 1187234.

[44] DellaVigna, Stefano, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2010. Persuasion: Empirical Evidence
        Annual Review of Economics          2: 64369.

[45] Duo, Esther. 2018. Machinistas Meet Randomistas: Useful ML Tools for Empirical
        Researchers. Lecture, NBER Summer Institute, Cambridge, MA.




                                                   32
[46] Dupas, Pascaline. 2011. Health Behavior in Developing Countries.            Annual Review of
        Economics   3: 42549.

[47] Ehrenberg, Ronald G., Daniel D. Goldhaber, and Dominic J. Brewer. 1995. Do Teach-
        ers' Race, Gender, and Ethnicity Matter? Evidence From the National Education
        Longitudinal Study of 1988.    Industrial and Labor Relations Review         48(3): 54761.

[48] Fairlie, Robert W., Florian Homann, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2014. A Community
        College Instructor Like Me:     Race and Ethnicity Interactions in the Classroom.
        American Economic Review       104(8): 256791.

[49] Fryar, Cheryl D., Yechiam Ostchega, Craig M. Hales, Guangyu Zhang, and Deanna
        Kruszon-Moran. 2017. Hypertension Prevalence and Control Among Adults: United
        States, 20152016. NCHS Data Brief, 289.

[50] Garcia, Luis C., Sukyung Chung, Lily Liao, Jonathan Altamirano, Magali Fassiotto,
        Bonnie Maldonado, Paul Heidenreich, et al. 2019. Comparison of Outpatient Sat-
        isfaction Survey Scores for Asian Physicians and Non-Hispanic White Physicians.
        JAMA Network Open        2(2): 110.

[51] Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2018. Hospitals as Insurers
        of Last Resort.   American Economic Journal: Applied Economics             10(1): 139.

[52] Giuliano, Laura, David I. Levine, and Jonathan Leonard. 2009. Manager Race and the
        Race of New Hires.   Journal of Labor Economics         27(4): 589631.

[53] Glover, Dylan, Amanda Pallais, and William Pariente. 2017. Discrimination as a Self-
        Fullling Prophecy: Evidence from French Grocery Stores.           Quarterly Journal of
        Economics   132(3): 121960.

[54] Gostin, Lawrence, James G. Hodge Jr., Nicole B. Valentine, and Helena Nygren-Krug.
        2003. The Domains of Health Responsiveness: A Human Rights Analysis. World
        Health Organization, EIP Discussion Paper 53.

[55] Greenwood, Brad N., Seth Carnahan, and Laura Huang. 2018. PatientPhysician Gen-
        der Concordance and Increased Mortality among Female Heart Attack Patients.
        PNAS   115(34): 856974.

[56] Hales, Craig M., Margaret D. Carroll, Cheryl D. Fryar, and Cynthia L. Ogden. 2017.
        Prevalence of Obesity Among Adults and Youth: United States, 20152016. NCHS
        Data Brief, 288.

[57] Hammond, Wizdom P., Derrick Matthews, Dinushika Mohottige, Amma Agyemang,
        and Giselle Corbie-Smith. 2010. Masculinity, Medical Mistrust, and Preventive
        Health Services Delays Among Community-Dwelling African-American Men.                 Jour-
        nal of General Internal Medicine       25(12): 13008.

[58] Harper, Sam, Dinela Rushani, and Jay S. Kaufman. 2012. Trends in the Black-White
        Life Expectancy Gap, 20032008.        JAMA 307(21):     22579.

[59] Heÿ, Simon. 2017. Randomization Inference with Stata: A Guide and Software.             Stata
        Journal   17(3): 63051.




                                                 33
[60] Hill, Andrew, Daniel Jones, and Lindsay Woodworth. 2018. A Doctor Like Me:
        Physician-Patient Race-Match and Patient Outcomes. Working Paper.

[61] Hjort, Jonas. 2014. Ethnic Divisions and Production in Firms.      Quarterly Journal of
        Economics    129(4): 18991946.

[62] Institute of Medicine. 2003.   Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Dispar-
        ities in Health Care. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
[63] Kahn, Richard, Peter Alperin, David Eddy, Knut Borch-Johnsen, John Buse, Justin
        Feigelman, Edward Gregg, et al. 2010. Age at Initiation and Frequency of Screening
        to Detect Type 2 Diabetes: A Cost-Eectiveness Analysis.       Lancet   375: 136574.

[64] Kinlock, Ballington, Lauren J. Parker, Janice V. Bowie, Daniel L. Howard, Thomas
        A. LaVeist, and Roland J. Thorpe Jr. 2017. High Levels of Medical Mistrust Are
        Associated With Low Quality of Life Among Black and White Men With Prostate
        Cancer.   Cancer Control    24(1): 727.

[65] Komaromy, Miriam, Kevin Grumbach, Michael Drake, Karen Vranizan, Nicole Lurie,
        Dennis Keane, and Andrew B. Bindman. 1996. The Role of Black and Hispanic
        Physicians in Providing Health Care for Underserved Populations.         New England
        Journal of Medicine   334(20): 130510.

[66] Ku, Leighton, Bianca K. Frogner, Erika Steinmetz, and Patricia Pittman. 2015. Com-
        munity Health Centers Employ Diverse Stang Patterns, Which Can Provide Pro-
        ductivity Lessons for Medical Practices.    Health Aairs   34(1): 95103.

[67] Lowes, Sara, and Eduardo Montero. 2018. The Legacy of Colonial Medicine in Central
        Africa. Working Paper.

[68] Lusher, Lester, Doug Campbell, and Scott Carrell. 2018. TAs Like Me: Racial Interac-
        tions between Graduate Teaching Assistants and Undergraduates.        Journal of Public
        Economics    159: 20324.

[69] Meghani, Salimah H., Jacqueline M. Brooks, Trina Gipson-Jones, Roberta Waite, Lisa
        Whiteld-Harris, and Janet A. Deatrick. 2009. PatientProvider Race-Concordance:
        Does It Matter in Improving Minority Patients' Health Outcomes?          Ethnicity and
        Health   14(1): 10730.

[70] Moy, Ernest, and Barbara Bartman. 1995. Physician Race and Care of Minority and
        Medically Indigent Patients.    JAMA 273:   151520.

[71] Murphy, Sherry L., Jiaquan Xu, Kenneth D. Kochanek, Sally C. Curtin, and Elizabeth
        Arias. 2017. Deaths: Final Data for 2015. National Vital Statistics Reports, 66(6).

[72] Murthy, Vivek H., Harlan M. Krumholz, and Cary P. Gross. 2004. Participation in
        Cancer Clinical Trials:     Race-, Sex-, and Age-Based Disparities.     JAMA   291(22):
        27206.

[73] Nanna, Michael, Ann Marie Navar, Pearl Zakroysky, Qun Xiang, Anne C. Goldberg,
        Jennifer Robinson, Veronique L. Roger, et al. 2018. Association of Patient Percep-
        tions of Cardiovascular Risk and Beliefs on Statin Drugs With Racial Dierences in
        Statin Use: Insights From the Patient and Provider Assessment of Lipid Manage-
        ment Registry.   JAMA Cardiology     (published online).


                                               34
[74] National    Medical     Association.       2018.    Major   Minority    Physician   Associations
        Come Together.        Accessed June,       2018. https://www.nmanet.org/news/398042/
        Major-Minority-Physician-Associations-Come-Together.htm.

[75] Pauly, Mark V., and Fredric E. Blavin. 2008. Moral Hazard in Insurance, Value-Based
        Cost Sharing, and the Benets of Blissful Ignorance.           Journal of Health Economics
        27: 140717.

[76] Pauly, Mark V., and Fredric E. Blavin. 2008. Moral Hazard in Insurance, Value-Based
        Cost Sharing, and the Benets of Blissful Ignorance.           Journal of Health Economics
        27: 140717.

[77] Pettey, Christina M., Jean C. McSweeney, Katharine E. Stewart, Mario A. Cleves, Elvin
        T. Price, Seongkum Heo, and Elaine Souder. 2016. African Americans' Perceptions
        of Adherence to Medications and Lifestyle Changes Prescribed to Treat Hyperten-
        sion.   Sage Open   6(1).

[78] Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek.
        2017. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 7.0 [American Community
        Survey, 2016]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.

[79] Schar, Darcell P., Katherine J. Mathews, Pamela Jackson, Jonathan Hosuemmer,
        Emeobong Martin, and Dorothy Edwards. 2010. More than Tuskegee: Understand-
        ing Mistrust about Research Participation.           Journal of Health Care for the Poor and
        Underserved    21(3): 87997.

[80] Shiyanbola, Olayinka O., Carolyn M Brown, and Earlise C Ward. 2018.  `I Did Not
        Want to Take That Medicine': African-Americans' Reasons for Diabetes Medication
        Nonadherence and Perceived Solutions for Enhancing Adherence.                 Patient Prefer-
        ence and Adherence      12: 40921.

[81] Silber, Jerey H., Paul R. Rosenbaum, Richard N. Ross, Bijan A. Niknam, Justin M.
        Ludwig, Wei Wang, Amy S. Clark, et al. 2014. Racial Disparities in Colon Cancer
        Survival: A Matched Cohort Study.              Annals of Internal Medicine   161(12): 84554.

[82] Simon, Kosali K., Angshuman Gooptu, Seth Freedman, and Victoria Perez. 2016. Se-
        curing the Right to Health Care and Well Being: Ten Years Later. In The Covenant
        with Black America: Ten Years Later. Edited by Tavis Smiley. Smiley Books.
[83] Sotto-Santiago,   Sylk,    James      E.    Slaven,    and   Theresa    Rohr-Kirchgraber.      2019.
        (Dis)Incentivizing Patient Satisfaction Metrics: The Unintended Consequences of
        Institutional Bias.   Health Inequity     3(1): 138.

[84] Stoll, Michael A., Stephen Raphael, and Harry J. Holzer. 2004. Black Job Applicants
        and the Hiring Ocer's Race.           Industrial and Labor Relations Review      57(2): 267
        287.

[85] Tabellini, Guido. 2008. The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives.              Quarterly
        Journal of Economics         123(3): 90550.

[86] Thirumurthy, Harsha, David A. Asch, and Kevin G.Volpp. 2019. The Uncertain Eect
        of Financial Incentives to Improve Health Behaviors           JAMA 321(15):      14512.




                                                    35
[87] Thornton, Rebecca L. 2008. The Demand for, and Impact of, Learning HIV Status.
       American Economic Review        98(5): 182963.

[88] Traylor, Ana H., Julie A. Schmittdiel, Connie S. Uratsu, Carol M. Mangione, and
       Usha Subramanian. 2010. Adherence to Cardiovascular Disease Medications: Does
       Patient-Provider Race/Ethnicity and Language Concordance Matter?        Journal of
       General Internal Medicine     25(11): 11727.

[89] Walker, Kara O., Gerardo Moreno, and Kevin Grumbach. 2012. The Association
       Among Specialty, Race, Ethnicity, and Practice Location Among California Physi-
       cians in Diverse Specialties.   Journal of the National Medical Association   104(0):
       4652.

[90] Young, Richard A., Richard G. Roberts, and Richard J. Holden. 2017. The Challenges
       of Measuring, Improving, and Reporting Quality in Primary Care.   Annals of Family
       Medicine    15(2): 17582.

[91] Zhou, Ruohua A., Katherine Baicker, Sarah Taubman, and Amy Finkelstein. 2017. The
       Uninsured Do Not Use the Emergency Department More  They Use Other Care
       Less.   Health Aairs   36(12): 211522.




                                              36
                                               Table 1: Participation in Experiment
                                   (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)                     (6)             (7)
                                                                PANEL A: Health and Medical Care
                             Self-Reported     Any Health                                  Nights                 Medical       Has Primary
                                                             Hospital Visits ER Visits
                                 Health         Problem                                   Hospital                Mistrust          MD
     Clinic Presentation         -0.126          0.033           0.244         0.513       -0.332                  -0.011         -0.072
                                (0.025)         (0.028)         (0.469)       (0.183)     (0.746)                 (0.042)         (0.029)

     Mean                          0.81           0.57             4.74         1.24         1.93                  1.64            0.69
     Observations                 1,148           1,241            935          1,031        1,041                 1,232           1,096
                                                                     PANEL B: Socio-demographics
                                                                                         ≤ High School
                               Uninsured           Age           Married    Unemployed                          Low Income       SSI/DI/UI
                                                                                           Education
     Clinic Presentation          0.038           3.411           -0.053        0.129        0.190                 0.198            0.113
                                 (0.027)         (0.811)         (0.022)       (0.025)      (0.029)               (0.027)          (0.024)

     Mean                          0.24           41.06           0.20             0.18            0.44            0.25            0.18
     Observations                 1,074           1,241           1,201            1,176           1,141           1,171           1,198
37




     Note : Table reports results from a regression of various baseline characteristics on clinic presentation. Observation count varies due to
     missing responses in the baseline survey. Reported mean is among subjects that did not present to the clinic. See Data Appendix for
     other variable denitions. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                                              Table 2: Balance
                                   (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)           (7)       (8)
                                 Mean          Non-Black       Non-Black        Black           Black           Black
                                                                                                                             p-value      N
                                 (S.D.)         MD - $5        MD - $10        MD - $0         MD - $5        MD - $10
     Self-Reported Health          0.72         -0.033           -0.181          0.007          -0.016           0.004        0.067       563
                                  [0.45]        (0.066)         (0.067)        (0.065)         (0.064)         (0.063)
     Any Health Problem            0.62         -0.026            0.036         -0.015          -0.025          -0.021        0.940       614
                                  [0.49]        (0.068)         (0.065)        (0.069)         (0.067)         (0.066)
     ER Visits                     1.69          -0.149           0.867         -0.212           0.145          -0.391        0.247       511
                                 [3.54]         (0.434)         (0.609)        (0.443)         (0.558)         (0.419)
     Nights Hospital               1.20          -0.392           0.839          1.956          -0.214           0.230        0.249       511
                                  [3.52]        (0.415)         (0.734)        (1.490)         (0.466)         (0.663)
     Medical Mistrust              1.61           0.162          -0.046          0.032           0.016          -0.034        0.430       611
                                  [0.74]        (0.105)         (0.100)        (0.105)         (0.105)         (0.100)
     Has Primary MD                0.63          -0.042           0.033         -0.059           0.008          -0.019        0.838       537
                                  [0.49]        (0.074)         (0.070)        (0.073)         (0.070)         (0.071)
     Uninsured                     0.22           0.042           0.146          0.112           0.057           0.010        0.223       517
                                  [0.42]        (0.066)         (0.067)        (0.070)         (0.064)         (0.062)
     Age                          44.96          -1.051          -0.100         -0.261          -1.109          -0.495        0.990       620
                                 [14.76]        (1.973)         (2.001)        (1.982)         (2.048)         (1.944)
     Married                       0.14           0.043          -0.037          0.069          -0.015           0.024        0.348       586
38




                                  [0.35]        (0.052)         (0.045)        (0.055)         (0.047)         (0.050)
     Unemployed                    0.32          -0.045          -0.008         -0.051           0.008           0.025        0.853       570
                                  [0.47]        (0.066)         (0.066)        (0.065)         (0.065)         (0.065)
     ≤ High School Education       0.62          0.006           -0.006         -0.029           0.055           0.034        0.886       556
                                  [0.49]        (0.070)         (0.070)        (0.072)         (0.068)         (0.068)
     Low Income                    0.47          -0.026          -0.033         -0.043           0.022          -0.042        0.936       571
                                  [0.50]        (0.072)         (0.071)        (0.072)         (0.070)         (0.069)
     Attrition                     0.03           0.022           0.045          0.031           0.015          -0.029        0.129       684
                                  [0.18]        (0.033)         (0.034)        (0.034)         (0.031)         (0.025)
     Note : Column (1) reports the mean and standard deviation. Columns (2)(6) report regression coecients and standard errors for each
     randomization group relative to the omitted group (Column (1), the non-black doctor and no incentive group). Column (7) shows the
     p-value associated with the F-statistic testing whether the treatment arms are jointly equal to zero. Observation count varies due to
     missing responses in the baseline survey. Attrition is an indicator for the 47 subjects that did not complete the study because they left
     before the clinic encounter (3 of the 50 subjects who attrited self-identied as a race/ethnicity other than African-American or as a female
     and are therefore excluded). See Data Appendix for other variable denitions. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard deviations
     in brackets.
                     Table 3: Pre-Consultation, Post-Consultation, and Delta Demand for Preventives
                                                        (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)
                                                      Blood                                                   Flu                         Share of
                                                                 BMI           Diabetes     Cholesterol                  Share Four
                                                     Pressure                                             Vaccination                    Invasives
                                                                                    PANEL A: Pre-Consultation
     Black Doctor                                     0.025      0.023           0.050       0.010         -0.009           0.027         0.017
                                                     {0.045}    {0.043}         {0.048}     {0.052}       {0.039}          {0.040}       {0.039}
     $5 Incentive                                     0.028      -0.059          0.085        0.067          0.192          0.030         0.115
                                                     {0.037}    {0.041}         {0.045}      {0.030}        {0.047}        {0.022}       {0.028}
     $10 Incentive                                    -0.023     -0.009          0.028        -0.014         0.299          -0.004        0.104
                                                     {0.037}    {0.035}         {0.028}      {0.039}        {0.031}        {0.020}       {0.027}
             RI: Black Dr          Study Est.
     Prob(| β               |>|β                |)    0.635      0.645           0.431        0.875         0.850           0.637          0.746
     Control Mean                                      0.56      0.50             0.37         0.35          0.20           0.44            0.36
                                                                                    PANEL B: Post-Consultation
     Black Doctor                                     0.107      0.161           0.204        0.256         0.100           0.182         0.186
                                                     {0.074}    {0.099}         {0.062}     {0.071}       {0.037}          {0.064}       {0.046}
39




     $5 Flu Incentive                                 0.044      0.019           0.110        0.065          0.221          0.059         0.132
                                                     {0.036}    {0.056}         {0.047}      {0.036}        {0.039}        {0.032}       {0.030}
     $10 Flu Incentive                                -0.026     -0.010          0.054        -0.004         0.219          0.003         0.090
                                                     {0.038}    {0.028}         {0.045}      {0.040}        {0.026}        {0.028}       {0.028}
             RI: Black Dr          Study Est.
     Prob(| β               |>|β                |)    0.251      0.220           0.039       0.023           0.047          0.036          0.017
     Control Mean                                      0.72      0.60             0.42        0.36            0.18          0.53            0.37
                                                                                    PANEL C: Delta (Post - Pre)
     Black Doctor                                     0.082      0.138           0.154       0.246           0.108          0.155         0.169
                                                     {0.100}    {0.101}         {0.059}     {0.072}         {0.050}        {0.077}       {0.051}
     $5 Flu Incentive                                 0.017      0.078           0.024        -0.002         0.029          0.029         0.017
                                                     {0.052}    {0.043}         {0.022}      {0.029}        {0.035}        {0.026}       {0.016}
     $10 Flu Incentive                                -0.003     -0.001          0.026        0.010          -0.080         0.008         -0.015
                                                     {0.028}    {0.028}         {0.047}      {0.055}        {0.030}        {0.028}       {0.039}
             RI: Black Dr          Study Est.
     Prob(| β               |>|β                |)    0.468      0.277           0.051         0.005         0.098          0.116          0.016
     Control Mean                                      0.16      0.11            0.05           0.01         -0.02          0.08           0.01
     Observations                                      637        637             637           637           637            637            637
     Note : Table reports OLS estimates of Equation 1. The outcome varies by column heading. Control mean refers to subjects randomized
     to a non-black doctor for the non-u screenings and to subjects randomized to a non-black doctor and no incentive for the u
     vaccination. Robust standard errors clustered at the doctor level in curly brackets.         Prob refers to the randomization inference p -value
                                                                14
                                                                 
     from permuting doctor race for each of the 3,003                 combinations.
                                                                6
      Table 4: Heterogeneity by Invasiveness of Preventive Service
                                                             (1)             (2)             (3)

                                                            Pre             Post           Delta

Body Mass Index                                            -0.062          -0.114          -0.052
                                                          {0.032}         {0.025}         {0.026}
                                                           -0.210          -0.358          -0.148
Cholesterol
                                                          {0.019}         {0.077}         {0.076}
                                                           -0.185          -0.293          -0.108
Diabetes
                                                          {0.027}         {0.064}         {0.061}
                                                           -0.213          -0.395          -0.182
Flu
                                                          {0.030}         {0.053}         {0.057}
                                                           0.022           0.103           0.081
Black MD * BP
                                                          {0.044}         {0.075}         {0.099}
                                                           0.017           0.157           0.140
Black MD * BMI
                                                          {0.043}         {0.097}         {0.102}
                                                           0.008           0.254           0.245
Black MD * Cho
                                                          {0.052}         {0.071}         {0.072}
                                                           0.051           0.205           0.154
Black MD * Dia
                                                          {0.048}         {0.061}         {0.058}
                                                           0.002           0.109           0.107
Black MD * Flu
                                                          {0.040}         {0.039}         {0.051}
Black Doctor * Invasive Test Interactions = 0               1.257           7.434           4.364
        RI     Study
Prob(F > F          )                                       0.482           0.058           0.151
Sum of Invasives = Sum of Non-Invasives                     0.054           4.366           9.921
       RI     Study
Prob(F > F          )                                       0.829           0.088           0.008
Observations                                                3,185           3,185           3,185
Note : Table reports OLS estimates. The outcome variable is individual test take-up by stage. The
omitted category is blood pressure. Robust standard errors clustered at the doctor level in curly
brackets. Indicators for incentive levels are included but not reported. The two F-tests test the joint
signicance of the black doctor*invasive interactions   (Black Doctor * Invasive Test Interactions = 0)
as well as the dierential eects of the black doctor treatment for invasive exams   (Sum of Invasives
= Sum of Non-Invasives). The cholesterol, diabetes, and u tests are considered invasive as they
require a blood draw or an injection. Prob indicates randomization inference p -value based on
                         14
                           
F -tests using the 3,003 6 combinations of doctors.




                                                  40
                          Table 5: Demand for Preventives
                       with Alternative Concordance Measures
                          (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)               (6)
          X=                Age, 5 Years              Age, 10 Years                   Education
                         0.008         -0.005      0.015        -0.019        0.002           -0.024
X
                        {0.030}       {0.039}     {0.026}      {0.034}       {0.052}         {0.098}
                                       0.008                    0.037                         -0.018
X * Black Doctor
                                      {0.053}                  {0.048}                       {0.118}
                                       0.165                    0.153                         0.157
Black Doctor
                                      {0.051}                  {0.059}                       {0.057}
Observations              620          620           620         620           556                556
Note : Table reports OLS estimates of Equation 1. The outcome is the delta share of the invasive
screenings.    Columns (1) and (2) explore age concordance (i.e.      doctor and subject born within
ve years of each other), Columns (3) and (4) examine concordance within a wider age window
(i.e.   doctor and subject born within 10 years of each other), and Columns (5) and (6) explore
concordance across educational attainment (i.e.    subject has at least a bachelor of arts degree).
Indicators for incentive levels are included but not reported. Robust standard errors clustered at
the doctor level in curly brackets.




                                                41
Table 6: Communication, Time Spent, and Satisfaction with Doctor
                               (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)       (5)          (6)
                                                     PANEL A: Communication
                                 Subject Talk              Doctor Notes about
       Outcome =                                                                 Non-Preventive Notes
                                   to MD                        Subject
                                           0.115                       0.167                  0.100
Black Doctor * Invasive
                                          {0.088}                     {0.072}                {0.057}
                              0.100        0.006           0.111       0.004     0.089        0.024
Black Doctor
                             {0.150}      {0.132}         {0.130}     {0.159}   {0.076}      {0.105}
                                           0.039                       -0.149                 -0.079
Invasive Test
                                          {0.053}                     {0.070}                {0.042}
Control Mean                   0.35         0.35     0.32      0.32       0.08                 0.08
Observations                   637          637      637       637         637                 637
                                           PANEL B: Time Spent and Satisfaction
                                                            Subject Rating of
       Outcome =             Length Visit, Minutes                              Subject Recommend MD
                                                              Experience
                                           0.399                       -0.110                 -0.015
Black Doctor * Invasive
                                          {1.363}                     {0.140}                {0.026}
                              4.384        2.253           -0.019      0.049    -0.0005       0.006
Black Doctor
                             {1.730}      {1.307}         {0.053}     {0.134}   {0.009}      {0.026}
                                           11.996                      0.116                  0.036
Invasive Test
                                          {1.234}                     {0.125}                {0.022}
Control Mean                  20.53        20.53           4.80          4.80     0.99         0.99
Observations                   498          498            574           574      597          597
Note : Table reports OLS estimates from a modied version of Equation 1. Even columns include
an interaction between black doctor and an indicator for whether the subject chose any invasive
preventive service (cholesterol, diabetes, or u). Indicators for incentive levels are included but not
reported. See Data Appendix and text for variable denitions. Robust standard errors clustered at
the doctor level in curly brackets.




                                                     42
                       Table 7: Heterogeneity by
        Demographics, Hassle Costs, and Medical Care Experience
                                    (1)                       (2)                     (3)
                                              Outcome = Delta Share Invasives
                                                 PANEL A: Demographics

            X=                 Low Income          ≤ High School Education      Younger than 40

                                  0.061                      -0.043                  0.020
Black Doctor * X
                                 {0.091}                    {0.071}                 {0.039}
                                  0.031                      0.044                   0.014
X
                                 {0.031}                    {0.057}                 {0.013}
                                  0.130                      0.180                   0.160
Black Doctor
                                 {0.037}                    {0.037}                 {0.051}
Observations                       571                    556                         620
                                                  PANEL B: Hassle Costs

            X=               Long Wait Time             High Congestion          Long Commute

                                  0.157                      0.150                   0.093
Black Doctor * X
                                 {0.050}                    {0.034}                 {0.077}
                                  -0.033                     -0.042                  -0.020
X
                                 {0.019}                    {0.012}                 {0.026}
                                  0.135                      0.115                   0.126
Black Doctor
                                 {0.049}                    {0.058}                 {0.055}
Observations                       451                  451                           618
                                           PANEL C: Medical Care Experience

            X=             No Recent Screening             ER Visits            Medical Mistrust

                                  0.113                      0.010                   0.047
Black Doctor * X
                                 {0.044}                    {0.006}                 {0.032}
                                  -0.003                     -0.005                  -0.009
X
                                 {0.034}                    {0.004}                 {0.017}
                                  0.144                      0.151                   0.092
Black Doctor
                                 {0.047}                    {0.050}                 {0.061}

Observations                       604                        511                     611
Note : Table reports OLS estimates from a modied version of Equation 1 including interactions be-
tween black doctor and certain baseline characteristics. The outcome variable for every specication
is the delta in demand for the share of invasive preventives. Observation count varies due to missing
responses in the baseline survey. Indicators for incentive levels are included but not reported. See
Data Appendix and text for variable denitions.       Robust standard errors clustered at the doctor
level in curly brackets.




                                                 43
                        Table 8: Perceptions of Doctors among Black and White Male Respondents
                           (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)              (10)

                                    Quality                         Communication                        Access                   Communication
                                                                                                                                    vs. Quality
                            Which MD most qualified?          Which MD understands me?         Which MD available near me?

                         Black MD   White MD Concordance   Black MD    White MD Concordance   Black MD   White MD Concordance       Concordance

                          0.350                 -0.055      0.531                   -0.001     0.241                -0.255            -0.028
     Black Respondent
                         (0.025)               (0.030)     (0.024)                  (0.029)   (0.024)               (0.029)          {0.025}

                                     0.273                              0.479                             0.175
     White Respondent
                                    (0.029)                            (0.027)                           (0.030)
                                                                                                                                      0.171
     Communication
                                                                                                                                     {0.014}
     Mean                  0.11       0.27       0.54       0.12        0.19        0.69       0.11       0.43       0.62             0.54
     R-squared             0.12      0.08        0.03       0.23        0.24        0.04       0.09       0.04       0.07             0.06
     Observations         1,490      1,490      1,490       1,490       1,490       1,490      1,490      1,490      1,490            2,980
44




     Note : Columns (1), (2), (4), (5), (7), and (8) report OLS estimates of Equation 2a, testing whether respondents have a preference for
     doctors of the same race with respect to three domains of healthcare: quality, communication, and access, respectively. Columns (3), (6),
     and (9) report OLS estimates of Equation 2b testing whether preference for own race varies across black and white respondents. Column
     (10) reports OLS estimates of Equation 2c comparing preference across domain and race. The comparison group mean is the average white
     respondents who prefer black doctors in Columns (1), (4), and (7); the average black respondents who prefer white doctors in Columns
     (2), (5), and (8); the average white respondents who prefer white doctors in Columns (3), (6), and (9); and the average white respondents
     who select concordance in regards to quality in Column (10).     See Data Appendix and text for variable denitions.       All specications
     include categorical controls for age, education, and household income levels. Robust standard errors in parentheses for Columns (1)(9).
     Robust standard errors clustered at the respondent level in curly brackets for panel analysis (Column (10)).
                  Table 9: Doctor Characteristics and Quality
                             (1)           (2)               (3)                (4)
                                    PANEL A: Occupational Characteristics
                          Years of    Medical School                      Board Question
                                                          Internist
                         Experience       Rank                             Performance
Black Mean                 15.17          24.00             0.67               0.78
Non-Black Mean             12.25          11.00             1.00               0.83
p -value                    0.74            0.85              0.09               0.66
                            PANEL B: Persuasiveness and Patient Panel Characteristics
                       Persuade Black  Persuade White                    >5 Black Patients
                                                          Most Comply
                            Men             Men                                / Week
Black Mean                  0.50            0.33              0.50               0.67
Non-Black Mean              0.75            0.75              1.00               0.38
p -value                    0.35               0.13               0.03               0.30
Observations                 14                 14                 14                 14
Note : Table reports mean doctor characteristics by race. See Data Appendix and text for variable
denitions. Wilcoxon rank-sum test p-values are reported in row 3 and 6.




                                               45
                             Table 10: Examining Doctor Fixed Effects
                                                (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)

                                                                      Doctor Fixed Effects

                                               0.142     0.135     0.143     0.137      0.151     0.177
Black Doctor
                                              (0.049)   (0.043)   (0.054)   (0.050)    (0.069)   (0.068)
                                                         0.023                                    -0.037
>5 Black Patients / Week
                                                        (0.039)                                  (0.073)
                                                                   -0.005                         -0.008
Top 10 Ranked Medical School
                                                                  (0.052)                        (0.065)
                                                                             0.002                0.004
Years of Experience
                                                                            (0.002)              (0.004)
                                                                                        0.028     0.102
Internist
                                                                                       (0.071)   (0.079)

Prob(| β RI: Black Dr | > | β Study Est. |)   0.010      0.024    0.021      0.025      0.008    0.019
R-squared                                     0.445      0.455    0.445      0.472      0.451    0.516
Observations                                   14         14       14         14         14       14
Note : Table reports OLS estimates. The outcome variable is the individual doctor xed eects
for the delta share invasives. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Prob indicates randomization
                                  14
                                    
inference p -value based on 3,003
                                   6 combinations of doctors.




                                                        46
                                    Figure 1: Study Design and Flow



                                                  1,374 recruited
                                       At Oakland barbershops & flea markets



                             667                                                 707
                 Did not redeem clinic coupon                            Redeemed clinic coupon



                                                                                                    70
                                                                                                 Excluded:
                                                         637                        12 self-identify as not African-American
                                                  Completed the study                       2 self-identify as women
                                                                                            6 missing consent forms
                                                                                          50 attrit (did not see doctor)




                    324                                                                  313
        Randomized to non-black doctor                                         Randomized to black doctor



        120                96                108                     96               106                       111
    No vaccine         $5 vaccine        $10 vaccine             No vaccine        $5 vaccine               $10 vaccine
     incentive          incentive         incentive               incentive         incentive                incentive



Pre-
Consultation:            BMI             BP              DIA            CHO             FLU                 NONE
Tablet
Selection

                                                VISIT WITH DOCTOR

Post-
Consultation:            BMI             BP              DIA            CHO             FLU                 NONE
Receive
Services

                                            SUBJECT FEEDBACK

Note : Two-stage randomization design and ow of subjects from recruitment through clinic exit.
Note that 70 subjects were randomized but are not included in the analysis study either because
they did not meet criteria (i.e. they self-identied as a dierent race/ethnicity or as a female, were
underage, or did not consent) or they left before the clinic encounter (i.e. attrited).




                                                         47
                            Figure 2: Tablet Photos




                  (a)                                       (b)




                  (c)                                       (d)
Note : Screenshots of clinic survey tablet: Panel (A) introduces subject's doctor;
Panel (B) presents the non-incentivized screenings available (the order was
randomized); Panel (C) informs the subject about the u shot and associated
incentive (if applicable); Panel (D) asks the subject whether he would like to
receive a u vaccination.    Screenshots not shown to scale; tablet screen was
                                       48
approximately 10 inches.
                                         Figure 3: Demand for Preventives


  100%                                                               100%



    80                                                                 80



    60                                                                 60



    40                                                                 40



    20                                                                 20



     0                                                                  0
          Pre-Consultation                  Post-Consultation                 Pre-Consultation               Post-Consultation

                      Non-Black Doctor       Black Doctor                                 Non-Black Doctor   Black Doctor



                 (a) Blood Pressure                                                              (b) BMI

  100%                                                               100%



    80                                                                 80



    60                                                                 60



    40                                                                 40



    20                                                                 20



     0                                                                  0
          Pre-Consultation                  Post-Consultation                 Pre-Consultation               Post-Consultation

                      Non-Black Doctor       Black Doctor                                 Non-Black Doctor   Black Doctor



                    (c) Cholesterol                                                        (d) Diabetes

  100%                                                               100%



    80                                                                 80



    60                                                                 60



    40                                                                 40



    20                                                                 20



     0                                                                  0
          Pre-Consultation                  Post-Consultation                 Pre-Consultation               Post-Consultation

                      Non-Black Doctor       Black Doctor                                 Non-Black Doctor   Black Doctor



         (e) Flu Shot: With Incentive                                       (f) Flu Shot: Without Incentive
Note : Pre- and post-consultation selection for preventives by randomized doctor race.




                                                                49
      Figure 4: Post-Consultation Take-Up and Persuasion Rates by Preventive


                                                         100%




               Post Selection: Black vs. Non-Black (%)
                                                              80
                                                                                                   Invasive

                                                              60



                                                              40
                                                                   Non-invasive


                                                              20



                                                               0
                                                                   BP         BMI              Diabetes       Flu No $    Chol




                                                                    (a) Post % Dierences by Preventives

                                                         40




                                                         30
               Persuasion Rate (%)




                                                         20




                                                         10




                                                          0
                                                                                  DG Studies              Oakland Study




                                                                             (b) Persuasion Rates
Note : Panel (A) plots the percent dierence between black doctors vs. non-black doctors in post-
consultation demand by preventive.                                           Note that the percent dierence in demand for the u with
an incentive (not shown) is equal to about 25%. The preventives are ordered by their y-axis value.
Panel (B) plots persuasion rates (see text for more details). Each blue bar represents the persuasion
rate for one of the ve non-incentivized clinic screenings: from left to right, blood pressure, body
mass index, diabetes, u without an incentive, and cholesterol. Gray bars represent persuasion rates
of studies from Table 1 of DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010).




                                                                                          50
                  Figure 5: Non-Experimental Preference for Concordance




                                                                    Which doctor would...
                      understand your concerns best?




        you be comfortable discussing concerns with?




                     give you appropriate treatment?




                              be the most qualified?




                              be available near you?

                                                   35   40     45       50      55     60      65    70   75
                                                              Percentage selecting MD of same race

                                                             Black Respondent        White Respondent




Note : Figure plots the percent of black and white survey respondents who select a doctor of the
same race in response to various questions. Choice set included black, white, or Asian male doctors.




                                                        51
 Figure 6: Permutation Test of Black Doctor Eect on Non-Criteria Sample


            15%
                                             Non-Criteria Sample, <97%




              10




               5




               0
                   -1.2   -.9   -.6    -.3       0         .3       .6        .9   1.2
                                             Coefficient



                                         (a) Post

            15%
                                                  Non-Criteria Sample, <89%




              10




               5




               0
                   -1.2   -.9   -.6    -.3       0         .3       .6        .9   1.2
                                             Coefficient



                                        (b) Delta
Note : Figure plots the black doctor coecient on a random selection of N subjects with
replacement, where  N = 12. We limit the random selection to subjects who were assigned
to the eight doctors who saw the 12 out-of-sample subjects. Permutation test runs the main
regression (Equation 1) 1,000 times.   Vertical (red) line signies the coecient from the
subjects who did not meet study criteria.




                                             52
                                                       Figure 7: Distribution of Medical Screening Results


       60%                                                                                       60%
                                                                                                                             Overweight

                                Pre-Hyp.        Hypertension         Hypertensive Crisis

                                                                                                                                        Obese

         40                                                                                       40




         20                                                                                       20




          0                                                                                        0
                   100                           150                             200                   10       20                   30                 40          50           60
                                                                                                                                                   2
                                 Systolic Blood Pressure (mm Hg)                                                                          BMI (kg/m )

                                Non-Black Doctor               Black Doctor                                                Non-Black Doctor                  Black Doctor


                         (a) Blood Pressure: Systolic                                                                  (b) Body Mass Index
53




       60%                                                                                       60%
                                                                                                                     Pre-diabetes

                                           High Choletserol

                                                                                                                             Diabetes

         40                                                                                       40




         20                                                                                       20




          0                                                                                        0
                100       150        200          250         300         350              400              4          6                   8                  10            12
                                    Total Cholesterol (mg/dL)                                                                       Hemoglobin A1c (%)

                                Non-Black Doctor               Black Doctor                                                Non-Black Doctor                  Black Doctor


                                  (c) Cholesterol                                                                              (d) Diabetes
     Note : Distribution of medical screening results for subjects who elected to receive preventives by race of doctor.
            Figure 8: Health of Study Sample vs U.S. Population




  Hypertension (BP)




     Obesity (BMI)




   High Cholesterol




           Diabetes


                  0       10                20                    30          40              50
                                            Prevalence of Condition (%)

                          White Male Pop.            Black Male Pop.      Black Male Sample




Note : Figure plots the percentage of each demographic group diagnosed with
the listed conditions. Hypertension is dened as a systolic blood pressure value
greater or equal to 140 mm Hg, obesity as a BMI greater or equal to 30 kg/m ,
                                                                                                   2
high cholesterol as a cholesterol value greater or equal to 200 mg/dL, and diabetes
as an A1c value greater or equal to 6.5%. Study sample values are for subjects
who opted to receive a screening. Values for the U.S. population are from Fryar
et al. (2017), Hales et al. (2017), and CDC (2017b, 2017c).




                                             54
