NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

JOB MARKET SIGNALING THROUGH OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING
Peter Q. Blair
Bobby W. Chung
Working Paper 24791
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24791

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018

We received helpful comments from: Isaiah Andrews, Ainhoa Aparicio, Joshua Angrist, David
Autor, Eduardo Azevedo, Scott Barkowski, Patrick Bayer, Thummim Cho, William Cong,
William Darity Jr., David Deming, Michael Dinerstein, Jennifer Doleac, William Dougan, Joseph
Doyle, Steven Durlauf, Susan Dynarski, Molly Espey, Robert Fleck, Amy Finkelstein, Alexander
Gelber, Stefano Giglio, Edward Glaeser, Claudia Goldin, Sarena Goodman, Arnold Harberger,
James Heckman, Nathaniel Hendren, Caroline Hoxby, Kirabo Jackson, Damon Jones, Lawrence
Katz, Mark Klee, Morris Kleiner, Tom Lam, Clarence Lee, Glenn Loury, Michael Makowsky,
Alexandre Mas, Jonathan Meer, Conrad Miller, Richard Murnane, David Neumark, Oyebola
Olabisi Okunogbe, Joseph Price, Mark Shepard, Curtis Simon, Todd Sinai, Michael Sinkinson,
Kent Smetters, William Spriggs, Robert Tollison, Stan Veuger, Shing-Yi Wang, Matthew
Weinzierl, Kyle Welch, Justin Wolfers. We also received helpful comments from the seminar
participants at NBER Labor Studies Meeting, Harvard, Columbia, Cornell, Brown, Clemson,
West Point Military Academy, Collegio Carlo Alberto, Clemson University, Bowdoin College,
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, AEA Annual Meeting, Economic Demography Workshop,
Southern Economic Association Conference, and the South Carolina Applied Micro Day
Conference. We also thank Jennifer Moore, Brian Trainer, Andrew Mannheimer, Benjamin
Posmanick, Elijah Neilson, Kenneth Whaley, Majid Hashemi, Mickey Whitzer, Jhacova
Williams, and Rafael Luna (Scientific Storytelling) for help with the manuscript. All remaining
errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Peter Q. Blair and Bobby W. Chung. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Job Market Signaling through Occupational Licensing
Peter Q. Blair and Bobby W. Chung
NBER Working Paper No. 24791
July 2018
JEL No. D21,D82,D86,J24,J31,J70,K23,K31,L51
ABSTRACT
We show that an occupational license serves as a job market signal, similar to education in the
Spence model. In the presence of occupational licensing, we find evidence that firms rely less on
observable characteristics such as race and gender in determining employee wages. As a result,
licensed minorities and women experience smaller wage gaps than their unlicensed peers. Black
men benefit from licenses that signal non-felony status, whereas white women benefit from
licenses with a human capital requirement. Certification, a less distortionary alternative to
licensing, generates an equivalent wage premium for white men, but lower wage premiums than
licensing for women and black men.

Peter Q. Blair
Harvard University
Graduate School of Education
407 Gutman Library
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
peter_blair@gse.harvard.edu
Bobby W. Chung
208 Sirrine Hall
Clemson University
wingyic@g.clemson.edu

A website is available at www.peterqblair.com

1

Introduction

Occupational licensing requirements affect 1 in 4 workers in the United States (Gittleman et al., 2018). Similarly, in the European Union 22% of workers report having an
occupational license (Koumenta and Pagliero, 2018).1 In this paper we study whether an
occupational license can serve as a job market signal in a role analogous to the role played
by education in the Spence model of job market signaling (Spence, 1973).
In the Spence model of job market signaling, and in standard models of statistical discrimination, a key source of asymmetric information between firms and workers is a potential employee’s productivity (Akerlof 1970; Phelps 1972; Arrow 1973; Coate and Loury
1993; Neal and Johnson 1996; Arcidiacono et al. 2010; Lang and Manove 2011). In the
absence of a sufficiently strong signal of ability, employers may rely on observable characteristics such as race or gender to infer worker productivity. The literature shows that
these inferences are often inaccurate (De Tray 1982; Altonji and Pierret 2001; Goldsmith
et al. 2006; Autor and Scarborough 2008). For instance, Agan and Starr (2018) and Doleac
and Hansen (2016) show that the black-white gaps in resume callbacks and employment
increase in states where employers were restricted from including questions about worker
criminal history on job applications (“ban-the-box” states). These studies provide evidence that withholding information from the labor market may exacerbate inequality. On
the other hand, we posit that occupational licensing may reduce inequality by supplying information to the labor market. This is not a normative statement that occupational
licensing is a good labor market institution, but only that it is a potentially informative one.
Using a new data set on ex-offender restrictions governing occupational licensing,
which we constructed; detailed licensing data from the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP); and data on “ban-the-box” state regulations from Doleac and Hansen
(2016), we provide evidence that occupational licensing is an informative job market signal for African-American men. The license serves as a signal of non-felony status, result1 In

licensed occupations, it is illegal to work for pay without possessing a license.

2

ing in a higher licensing premium for African-American men in occupations that preclude
felons from having a license. In fact, the positive wage benefits of occupational licenses
with felony bans are largest for African-American men in ban-the-box states where nonfelony status is harder for employers to deduce. In addition to signaling non-felony status
for African-American men, we find that licensing reduces the wage gap between women
and white men. Some of this reduction in the gender wage gap happens through a human
capital channel: many licenses require training and women experience higher returns to
this training than do men.
Since we do not have an instrument for licensing, we seriously consider a series of
alternative explanations for why racial and gender wages gaps are lower among licensed
workers than unlicensed workers. We show that the returns to occupational licenses that
signal non-felony status for African-American men are not driven by selection of educated African-American men into licensed occupations with felony restrictions (as opposed to licensed occupations without such restrictions) or by differentially higher returns to human capital in licensed occupations with felony restrictions. Moreover, it is
not due to differentially higher returns to African-American men in public sector work,
labor unions or occupations with a high fraction of white workers – all job and individual
characteristics associated with higher wages.
One limitation of our study is that it relies on cross-sectional variation in licensing laws
and ex-offender restrictions to identify the impact of licensing on gender and racial wage
gaps. Although Pizzola and Tabarrok (2017) show that the cross-sectional estimates of
the wage effects of licensing mirror the true causal effects that they obtain from a natural
experiment, we were still worried that our results could be affected by selection bias,
measurement error, or both. In fact, these are the two most common criticisms of studies
of the wage impacts of occupational licensing.
To control for selection on unobservables, we exploit the richness of SIPP data relative
to other licensing data sets and construct a set of new proxies for unobserved ability, which

3

is potentially the most serious source of endogeneity in our setup. We show that our
proxies of unobserved ability are positively correlated with wages and that they influence
the licensing decision; however, controlling flexibly for unobserved ability using these
proxies does not change our main result, which is that occupational licenses reduce the
racial wage gap among men through signaling non-felony status for African-American
men. We also directly control for a self-reported measure of a worker’s taste for licensing
and this does not change our results.
To test for the effect of measurement error in the licensing variable on our results we:
(i) control for the match quality of each felony occupation observation using data from an
occupation matching algorithm, (ii) include a dummy variable for partially licensed occupations in our regression, (iii) drop all partially licensed occupations from our regression,
and (iv) run a series of placebo tests in which we randomize the licensing attainment variables, keeping the fraction of licensed workers constant at first the national level, then the
state level and finally the state-by-occupation level. The battery of tests that we perform
convince us that our results provide evidence that occupational licensing is a labor market
signal that reduces statistical discrimination faced by African-American men.
A compelling alternative to occupational licensing proposed in Friedman (1962) is certification. Under a certification regime, there is open entry into the occupation with the
caveat that only workers who have passed a set of requirements for certification (typically
set by a private body) can use the professional title accompanying the certification.2 Consistent with Friedman’s hypothesis, we find that there is no difference in the wage gains
from licenses relative to the wage gains from certifications for white men. For women and
African-American men, however, depending on the human capital and felony context of
the license, we find that the wage gains to having an occupational license are significantly
larger than the wage gains of having just a certificate. This is not to suggest that occupational licensing is the only way or the best way to reduce wage inequality.
2 For

example, any worker can engage in book-keeping activities but only workers who have passed the
Uniform Certified Public Accountant Examination can refer to themselves as an “accountant.”

4

2

Related Literature

According to the market power story of Adam Smith and Milton Friedman, occupational
licensing creates economic rents through a quantity restriction on the labor supply (Smith
1937; Friedman 1962; Kleiner and Krueger 2013; Thornton and Timmons 2013). An alternative view is that occupational licensing increases wages because it imposes a quality
restriction on the labor supply (Leland 1979; Ronnen 1991; Anderson et al. 2016; Deming
et al. 2016), and the wage premium earned by licensed workers reflects the higher average
quality of licensed workers relative to their unlicensed peers.3
Our work contributes to the empirical literature on statistical discrimination and blackwhite labor market disparities. Our results on the wage premium for black men in occupations that ban felons provide further evidence that reducing asymmetric information
between firms and workers can reduce racial wage and employment disparities (De Tray,
1982; Holzer et al., 2006; Agan and Starr, 2018; Miller, 2016). Recent studies of ban-thebox efforts, which remove criminal check-boxes from job applications, focus on the role of
asymmetric information on the probability of employment (extensive margin), but here
we focus on the effect of asymmetric information on wages (intensive margin) (Shoag and
Veuger, 2016; Agan and Starr, 2018). A notable exception is Wozniak (2015), who looks at
both the intensive and extensive margin effects of increased drug testing on employment
and wages, and De Tray (1982), who showed that veteran status confers a higher wage
premium to black veterans than to white veterans, because of firm screening on veteran
status.
Our work is related to the work of Neal and Johnson (1996) who were the first to show
that the racial wage gap among men is eliminated after controlling for Armed Forces
Qualification Test (AFQT) scores as a measure of ability. This finding was modified in
Lang and Manove (2011), where the authors found that the racial wage gap among men
3 Friedman

(1962) was skeptical of this view, arguing that restricting supply necessarily restricts the
potential for labor specialization within an occupation and hence diminishes quality.

5

persisted after controlling for both level of education and AFQT scores, since conditional
on AFQT scores African-American men have higher levels of education than white men.
In this literature on black-white earnings inequality, our paper is most similar to Arcidiacono et al. (2010), who show that African-American men with college degrees do not
face a racial wage penalty relative to their white peers whereas African-American men
with a high school diploma, or less, do. To complete the analogy with Arcidiacono et al.
(2010), occupational licenses that restrict felons in our study play the same wage equalizing and ability revelation role for African-American men as does college completion in
their study.
We also contribute to the literature on measuring the licensing premium. Kleiner and
Krueger (2010) and Kleiner and Krueger (2013) provided the first such measures of the
licensing premium using nationally representative data – an approach in the literature
that they pioneered by doing the important work of collecting primary survey data and
making it publicly available.4 The most recent measurement is the estimated premium of
7% in Gittleman et al. (2018), which is an average premium across both race and gender.
Breaking out the licensing premium by race and gender, we find that the licensing premium for white women (12%), black women (15%), and black men (14%), is higher than
the licensing premium for white men (4%). This heterogeneity in the licensing premiums
is responsible for the smaller wage gaps among licensed women and minorities when
compared to the wage gaps experienced by their unlicensed peers.
Law and Marks (2009) empirically tested the impact of licensing on female and minority labor force participation using individual-level data spanning nine decades: (18701960). They found that licensing increased the employment of black and female workers
in skilled occupations including engineers, pharmacists, plumbers, and registered and
practical nurses. Looking at a more recent sample, we find negative labor supply effects
of licensing for both white workers but weaker evidence for negative labor supply effect
4A

notable exception to the literature of positive wage effects of licensing is Redbird (2017). She finds a
negative effect of licensing on wages and a positive effect of licensing on employment.

6

of licensing on black workers (Blair and Chung, 2018).
Our work also contributes to the theoretical literature on occupational licensing by
providing an analytically tractable model of licensing as a job market signal in the spirit
of Spence (1973). The standard model of occupational licensing is Leland (1979), which
studied licensing from an optimal legislation vantage point. Whereas Leland (1979) focused on whether it is socially optimal to have quality standards, Persico (2015) studied
the incentives of incumbent workers to impose occupational requirements for new entrants. We build a micro-founded model in which the licensing decision of workers and
the wages offered by firms are endogenous outcomes of a two-period sequential screening game played by firms and workers.

3

A Screening Model of Occupational Licensing

Our model is a two-sector, two-period model of firms and workers, consisting of a unit
measure of risk neutral workers and an occupational licensing requirement for workers
in sector 1. but not sector 2. In each sector there is a single representative firm. Firms
do not observe a worker’s ability but firms do observe whether a worker has a license or
not. Because licensing is costly and more easily accessible for workers of higher ability, an
occupational license acts as a signal of ability in an analogous way to education in Spence
(1973).
In period 1, firms set wages to maximize profits, namely ω L for the licensed sector
and ωU for the unlicensed sector. In period 2, workers choose the sector that delivers
the highest utility given the wages offered by firms and given the relative preferences of
workers over employment in the two sectors. The equilibrium of the model is a vector
∗ ) and fraction of licensed workers f ∗ that satisfy the utility maximizaof wages (ω L∗ , ωU

tion motive of workers and the profit-maximizing motive of firms. Because firms, which
are the uninformed party in our model, move first, our model falls under the technical

7

definition of a screening model (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1990).

3.1

Description of Workers’ Tastes and Abilities

Each worker, indexed by the subscript i, is endowed with an ability ai and a relative taste
for the unlicensed sector ei . The ability type and the relative sector preference are independently and identically distributed across workers and drawn from the following two
uniform distributions: ai ∼ U [µ a − σa , µ a + σa ] and ei ∼ U [µe − σe , µe + σe ]. We assume
uniform distributions for the sake of analytical tractability. The sector taste parameters
µe and σe , are measured in units of dollars so that they enter the worker’s utility function on the same footing as wages. The ability and preference distribution are allowed to
be different for workers of different racial and gender groups. For notational simplicity,
however, we suppress the group index and solve the model separately for each group.
Obtaining an occupational license is costly for workers of all abilities. To obtain an
occupational license, a worker of ability ai incurs a cost:
c ( a i ) = c0 − θ ( a i − µ a ).

(1)

The parameter c0 > 0 is the unconditional average cost of obtaining an occupational
license for workers of a given group.5 For example, the average cost of obtaining a license
in an occupation with a felony restriction will be higher on average for workers from
groups that face higher incarceration rates. The parameter θ is the marginal benefit of
ability. Each unit increase in ability lowers the cost of licensing by an amount θ. For ability
measures that make it easier for a worker to obtain an occupational license (e.g., I.Q.) we
will assume a positive marginal benefit of ability (i.e., θ > 0). For ability measures such as
a worker’s level of criminality or criminal history, which make obtaining an occupational
license more difficult, we assume a negative marginal benefit of ability (i.e., θ < 0).
5 It

is also the cost of licensing for the worker of average ability ai = µ a .

8

In the unlicensed sector, a worker i receives utility VU,i , which is the sum of the wages
earned in the unlicensed sector, ωU , and the relative taste that she has for the unlicensed
sector ei :
VU,i = ωU + ei .

(2)

In the licensed sector, a worker i receives utility VL,i , which is the difference between the
wages earned in the licensed sector, ω L , and the cost, c( ai ), that she incurred in order to
obtain the license:
VL,i = ω L − [c0 − θ ( ai − µ a )].

3.2

(3)

Firms

Each firm, j, possesses a technology that converts one unit of worker ability into ω̄ dollars
worth of goods. In the licensed sector, j = 1, the occupational license is also bundled with
an exogenous level of useful human capital (training) 0 ≤ h ≤ 1, which augments the
worker’s ability to utilize the technology by a factor of (1 + h).6 The expected profit for
the representative firm in the licensed occupation is given by:
Avg. Output per Worker

Measure of Workers

}|
{ z
}|
{
z
E[π1 ] = ω̄ (1 + h) × E[ ai | Li = 1] × E[ P( Li = 1| ai )] − ω L E[ P( Li = 1| ai )],
{z
} |
{z
}
|
Expected Revenue

(4)

Expected Labor Cost

where E[ ai | Li = 1] is the expected ability of a worker conditional on employment in the
licensed sector and E[ P( Li = 1| ai )] is the fraction of workers in the licensed sector. The
expected profit for the representative firm in the unlicensed occupation is given by:

E[π2 ] = ω̄ × E[ ai | Li = 0] × E[ P( Li = 0| ai )] − ωU E[ P( Li = 0| ai )],
|
{z
} |
{z
}
Expected Revenue

6 The

Expected Labor Cost

cost of acquiring this human capital is borne by the workers as in equation (1).

9

(5)

where E[ ai | Li = 0] is the expected ability of a worker conditional on employment in
the unlicensed sector, and E[ P( Li = 0| ai )] is the fraction of workers employed in the
unlicensed sector.
Proposition 1. If the average cost of licensing c0 ∈ (c, c̄), where c ≡ hω̄µ a − µe − 3σe and
c̄ ≡ hω̄µ a − µe + 3σe , ∃ a unique subgame perfect Nash equilibrium with wages:
1
∗
= ω̄µ a − (c0 − c),
ωU
3
1
1
2
ω L∗ = ω̄µ a − (c0 − c) + hω̄µ a + (c0 + µe )
3
3
{z
} |3
{z
}
|
∗
ωU

(6a)
(6b)

Wage Benefit of Licensing

where the fraction of workers with an occupational license is an interior point given by:


∗

f ≡ E[ P( Li = 1| ai )] =

c̄ − c0
6σe


.

(7)

Proof. See Appendix.
If c0 ≥ c̄, it is not worthwhile to have a license even for the highest ability workers,
hence all workers pool on not having a license, i.e., f ∗ = 0. If the cost of licensing is
sufficiently low, i.e., c0 ≤ c, then licensing is cost-effective even for the lowest ability type
and all workers pool on having a license, i.e., f ∗ = 1. In between these two extremes, we
have an interior solution in which a fraction, 0 < f ∗ < 1, of the workers select into the
licensed sector.
Definition 1. The licensing premium α is defined as:

α≡

1
2
∗
ω L∗ − ωU
a h + 3 ( c0 + µ e )
3 ω̄µ


=
.
∗
ωU
1 + 13 h ω̄µ a − 13 (c0 + µe ) − σe

(8)

Proposition 2. The licensing premium is unambiguously increasing in the average cost of the
license, i.e.

dα
dc0

> 0.
10

Proof.
dα
1
=
dc0
3



ω L − ωU
ωu2



> 0.

(9)

It makes sense that the higher the cost of licensing, the costlier it is for lower ability
workers to obtain the license and hence the stronger the signaling value of the occupational license. In the empirical section of the paper, we will think of felony restrictions as
imposing a differentially higher cost of licensing on workers from groups that face higher
average rates of incarceration – in particular black men. We will find that it is primarily in
the occupations where there is a restriction on ex-offenders that the occupational license
provides a larger licensing premium to black men than white men. Moreover, we will
find that the signaling value of these licenses will be largest for black men in states where
firms are not allowed to ask about criminal history on job applications.
Proposition 3. The licensing premium is increasing in the level of human capital bundled with the
license (h), if the licensing premium is less than 100%. The licensing premium is unambiguously
decreasing in the average ability of workers (µ a ).
Proof. See Appendix.
Intuitively, the more human capital that is bundled with the license, the higher the
marginal product of labor and hence the higher the equilibrium wage. Moreover, the
license is more informative when the expected ability of the worker is lower; hence the
higher premium.
Proposition 4. Define the industry surplus as the sum of firm profits and worker wages net of
the licensing cost. The industry surplus is maximized by a non-negative average cost of licensing:
c0∗ =

1
(c̄ + hω̄µ a ) .
2

Proof. See Appendix.
11

(10)

The intuition for this result is similar to the intuition for the result in Spence (1973)
— a license is informative because it is costly; therefore, in a market with workers of heterogeneous abilities, an occupational license functions as a labor market signal that is the
result of workers sorting on unobserved ability.7

4

Data & Descriptive Statistics

Our data comes from Wave 13 to Wave 16 of the SIPP 2008 Panel.8 To select our sample, we follow the criterion adopted by Gittleman et al. (2018). Our sample is restricted
to individuals between the ages of 18 and 64 who have an implied hourly wage of between $5 and $100.9 We dropped observations with imputed wages and imputed license
status because using imputed wages would bias our estimates of the license premium
toward zero since license status is not included in the imputation process (Hirsch and
Schumacher, 2004).
To test our felony hypothesis, we supplement SIPP with a new data set which we
assembled using a database from the Criminal Justice Section of the American Bar Association (ABA) that contains the universe of license restrictions that felons face when
applying for an occupational license in each occupation and in each state of the US. In
total there are 16,343 such restrictions. We organize legal felony restrictions into three
categories: those imposing a permanent ban on felons from ever having an occupational
license, those imposing a temporary ban on felons, and those imposing no ban at all on
a felon’s ability to hold an occupational license.10 For each state-occupation pair, if there
7 One

important caveat here is that the industry surplus differs from the typical social surplus in that
it abstracts from the welfare loss experienced by customers from higher prices. In this respect, this welfare calculation is closer in spirit to the producer surplus in Persico (2015), where the goal is to determine
whether firms and incumbent workers, acting collusively, benefit from licensing, given that workers will
endure the cost of licensing.
8 The occupational licensing topical module of the SIPP was conducted during Wave 13.
9 The hourly wage is implied by the monthly earnings of the main job, hours worked per week, and
number of weeks worked in that month.
10 Most of the bans involve denying applications and suspending current license holders.

12

are multiple offenses that result in different consequences for licensing eligibility, we code
our felony variable to correspond to the most severe punishment. This biases us against
finding different effects between the most severe category (i.e., permanent ban) and the
least severe category (i.e., no ban). In essence, our felony results are by construction a
lower bound on the true felony effects.11
In creating this new data set, we use an online tool developed by the Department of
Labor, O*net SOC auto coder, and a web-scraping application to sort each of the 16,343
citations into correct 6-digit SOC codes. Figure 1 illustrates, for each state, the number
of bans affecting a felon’s ability to hold an occupational license. Ohio, the most restrictive state, has 83 such bans: 59 permanent and 24 temporary. The least restrictive state,
Wyoming, has 23 such bans: 13 permanent and 10 temporary.12 Figure 2 illustrate the
extent of occupational licensing of any type across the U.S.

4.1

Summary Statistics

In Table I, we report a summary of the demographic and wage data for workers who
are unlicensed, licensed in occupations without felony bans, licensed in occupations with
felony bans, and workers who are certified. Overall, when compared to unlicensed workers, workers who are licensed are on average older, more educated, more likely to be
female, self-employed, and working in a service industry or for the government. Moreover, on average, workers with a license earn more than unlicensed workers of the same
race and gender. In particular, workers in occupations with felony bans outearn workers
in occupations with licensing requirements that do not exclude felons. When we cut the
data by race and gender, in Table II, a similar pattern emerges for white men, black men,
11 For

example in New Jersey there are 4 legal citations for offenses that would affect an attorney’s eligibility to practice law. Since “suspend attorney for any felony permanently and without discretion” is one
of the four consequences, we code the attorney occupation in NJ as one with a permanent ban on felons.
12 Felons are barred from holding licenses as truck drivers in every state, while felons are restricted from
being nursing aides in 48 states. Eight of the 10 most restricted occupations involve the licensee as a direct
personal advocate or helper of the customer. The remaining two concern the operation of motor vehicles.

13

white women, and black women: increasing mean wages for licensed workers relative
to their unlicensed counterparts. The unconditional licensing premiums in occupations
without felony bans are: 15% for white men, 24% for black men, 32% for white women,
and 38% for black women (Table II). For each group, except for black women, the unconditional licensing premium is higher yet in occupations with felony restrictions.

5

Empirical Specification

The goal of our empirical model is to estimate the occupational license premium, allowing for heterogeneity by race and gender. Given the estimates of the model, we test
whether occupational licensing reduces or exacerbates the wage gap between white men
and the three other demographic groups that we study: black men, white women, and
black women. We also test whether the source of any changes in the racial and gender
earning gaps is due to the reduction in asymmetric information in the labor market or
due to heterogeneity in the returns to human capital, skills, or training that is bundled
with the occupational license.
In our full specification, we estimate the following wage regression:

log(wageijsm ) =τ0 + τ1 BMi + τ2 WFi + τ3 BFi

+τ4 licensei + τ5 licensei × BMi + τ6 licensei × WFi + τ7 licensei × BFi
{z
}
|
Baseline Model

+ τ8 bani + τ9 bani × BMi + τ10 bani × WFi + τ11 bani × BFi
+ τ12 hcapi + τ13 hcapi × BMi + τ14 hcapi × WFi + τ15 hcapi × BFi
+ΓXi + θs + θo + θm +eijsm
|
{z
}
Controls

The dependent variable is the log of hourly wages for individual i working in profession
j in state s in month m. The indicators BMi , WFi , and BFi equal 1 if individual i is a black

14

man, white woman or black woman, respectively. X is a vector of standard demographic
characteristics including a quadratic in age, education levels (indicators for high school
dropout, some college degree, college graduate, and post-graduate), indicators for union
membership, government workers, and self-employment. θS , θm , and θO are state, month,
and occupation fixed effects. In our context, profession j is defined by 6-digit SOC code
while occupation o is defined by a 3-digit SOC code.13 We also include a separate indicator for certified workers, i.e., workers whose credential is issued by a private body. When
we compare the licensing and certification premiums, we fully interact our certification
indicator with our race and gender dummies.
Our empirical model is similar to Wozniak (2015) in that we have mutually exclusive
indicators for each racial and gender group. This specification facilitates clear comparisons of racial and gender wage gaps by licensing regime. The parameters τ1 , τ2 , and
τ3 represent the mean wage gap between unlicensed white men and unlicensed black
men, white women, and black women (respectively). The license indicator equals 1 if the
worker reports having a license that is required for his/her current or most recent job, and
the ban indicator equals 1 if the worker reports a license and working in a profession that
has mandatory bans against felons. The indicator hcapi equals 1 if the worker reports
that a license has a human capital requirement such as continuous education, training,
or an exam.14 Therefore, τ4 indicates the license premium in non-banned professions for
white men while the parameters τ5 to τ7 capture the heterogeneity of license premium in
13 In

the SOC, there are twenty-three 2-digit major groups. Each 2-digit major SOC group in turn has detailed 3-digit SOC subgroups that contain professions with similar characteristics. Each 3-digit occupation
code can further be dis-aggregated to collection of occupations with 6-digit SOC numbers. For example,
the 2-digit SOC group (21) “Community and Social Service Occupations” nests the 3-digit sub group (21-1)
“Counselors, Social Workers, and Other Community and Social Service Specialists.” This 3-digit subgroup
in turn contains two separate 6-digit SOC codes for “Social Worker” (21-1020) and “Counsellor” (21-1020).
Our occupation fixed effects are based on the 3-digit detailed subgroups, whereas our licensing variable is
reported as a 6-digit SOC value. The license premium that we estimate is thus estimated by comparing the
wages of workers in the same occupation who work in states that vary in whether a license is required to
practice said occupation. We also test that our estimates are robust to including 6-digit occupation fixed
effects.
14 In the regression analysis we will specify which human capital requirement we control for in the regression.

15

non-banned professions for black men, white women, and black women. The parameters
τ8 to τ11 refer to the additional license premiums from working in banned professions.
Likewise the parameters τ12 to τ15 capture the additional license premiums from working in licensed occupations where obtaining the license is bundled with a human capital
requirement. For example, the expected license premium for black men in a profession
without felony restrictions equals τ4 + τ5 while the license premium for black men in occupations with felony restrictions equals τ4 + τ5 + τ8 + τ9 . All standards errors that we
report are clustered at the state level.

6

Results

6.1

Occupational Licensing Reduces Gender and Racial Wage Gaps

In Table III we present the results from our baseline wage regression. In column (1), we
first estimate the license premium using a specification in which we do not distinguish
between licenses in occupations with felony bans and licenses in occupations with no
felony ban. Under this specification, the license premium for white men is 7.5%, whereas
the license premium for black men equals 12.5%. White women and black women also
receive higher license premiums than white men: 13.7% and 15.9%, respectively.15 The
returns to occupational licensing are uniformly higher for women and minorities when
compared to white men; moreover, this results in a reduction in both the racial and gender wage gaps for licensed workers when compared to the gender and racial wage gaps
experienced by their unlicensed counterparts.
The gender wage gaps for unlicensed white women and unlicensed black women,
when compared to unlicensed white men, are 15.1% and 23.3% (respectively), and the
racial wage gap between unlicensed black men and unlicensed white men is 11.6%. By
15 Gittleman et al. (2018), who employed the same data set, and further pooled their license premiums
across both race and gender, found an average license premium of 7.57%.

16

contrast, the gender wage gap for licensed white women is 40% lower, while that for
licensed black women is 36% lower, and the racial wage gap for licensed black men is
43% lower. In fact, we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no wage gap between licensed
black men and licensed white men.
In cases of estimating heterogeneous effects Solon et al. (2015) recommend reporting
the results from both unweighted and weighted regressions. The results that we have
presented so far are from the unweighted regressions. In Table IV, we present the results
using the survey sample weights. Consistent with the empirical guidance in Solon et al.
(2015), we find that the regression results for the unweighted and weighted specifications
are most dissimilar when there is unmodeled heterogeneity. For example, when we regress
the log of wages on license status without accounting for whether the licensed occupation
permanently bans felons, we find an insignificant positive effect of licensing on the wages
of white women in our weighted specification. In our unweighted specification, which
we first reported, we find a positive significant effect of licensing on white women’s wages.
After including interactions to account for heterogeneity in the licensing premiums due
to the existence of permanent felony bans, we find a positive significant effect of licensing
on white women’s wages in both the weighted an unweighted samples.16 In our particular case, in the presence of unmodeled heterogeneity, we find that the results from the
unweighted regression are more stable as we add more heterogeneity.
Continuing with the unweighted regressions in remainder of our results sections has
two expository advantages relative to using the weighted regressions. First, the results in
the base case with unmodeled heterogeneity closely parallel the final results in the model
with richer heterogeneity. Second, the point estimates are more precisely estimated, as
noted in Solon et al. (2015). This is important for what we will do next. In the follow16 The

same is true when we look at the license premium for black men: for the weighted regressions,
the black male license premium flips sign from negative to positive as we go from the base case to the case
with the permanent felony ban interactions. The sign on the coefficient for the black male license premium
for the unweighted regressions, by contrast, maintains a positive sign in both specifications. Moreover,
it is similar in magnitude to the coefficient from the weighted regressions with the permanent felony ban
interactions included in the model.

17

ing sections we decompose the relative wages gains to occupational licensing into two
primary channels: the license as a signal of non-felony status, and the license as a supplement to the human capital of workers. One way to think of this is that in subsequent
sections we add other components of the occupational license, which as of now, are unmodeled heterogeneity. When we reach our most saturated regression model in Section
7, which includes interactions for felony restrictions, human capital bundled with the license, and new individual level variables, which allow us to account for selection into
licensing for personal reasons, we will again report both the results from the weighted
regression and the unweighted regression, following the guidance in Solon et al. (2015).
We will find that for this fully-saturated model that the results are very similar. Moreover,
we include all of the results from the weighted regressions in the online appendix to the
paper for the reader to see how weighting the results affects the magnitude and signs of
the coefficients that we estimate for the intermediate results.

6.2

License Signals Non-Felony Status for African-American Men

When we categorize licenses into those with felony bans and those without felony bans,
we find that all workers in occupations with felony bans earn more than their counterparts in licensed occupations without felony restrictions. As reported in column (2) of
Table III, white men in banned occupations earn an additional 3.2% wage premium, black
men earn a 16.4% wage premium on top of this baseline premium earned by white men,
for an overall total of 19.6%. The additional wage premium for white women in occupations with felony restrictions is 1.6 p.p. less than the wage premium of their white male
counterparts.17 Likewise, black women in occupations that bar felons experience an additional wage premium that is 0.4 p.p. smaller than the wage premium of their white male
counterparts.
When we further refine our definition of occupations with felony bans to include only
17 We

use the abbreviation p.p. for percentage points.

18

those occupations with permanent bans on felons, the wage gains for women in banned
occupations are erased.18 Under both measurements of felony bans in column (2) and
(3) of Table III, we find that men, in particular black men, benefit from the positive nonfelony signal of an occupational license. In fact, black men in occupations with felony bans
earn, on average 5% more than their white male counterparts. By contrast, black men in
licensed occupations without permanent felony bans earn 10.4% less than white men. This
result is consistent with a key prediction of our model in Section 3: licensed workers from
a demographic group that faces a higher average cost of licensing earns higher wages, ceteris paribus. Because black men are 6 times more likely to have a felony record than white
men, felony restrictions on occupational licenses impose a higher average cost burden on
black men than white men.
If the licensing premium experienced by black men is due to the license as a signal of
non-felony status, then this signal ought to be more valuable in states with “ban-the-box”
laws that make it illegal for employers to ask job applicants about their criminal history.
To test this theory, we regress wages on worker characteristics, as in our main regression
specification, and allow for the wage premium for licenses that bar felons to be different in
states with ban-the-box laws and states without these laws.19 As reported in Figure 3, we
find that the licensing premium in occupations with felony restrictions is 3 times larger
for black men in states with ban-the-box laws as compared to those in states without
these laws. Moreover, in states where firms can legally ask about a worker’s criminal
history, the wage premium for occupational licenses that preclude felons is statistically
indistinguishable from zero for workers of all types – not just black men.
Moreover, if the licensing premium experienced by black men is due to the license
as a signal of non-felony status, then this signal ought to be more valuable to smaller
18 As reported in column 3 of Table III, white women in licensed occupations with permanent felony bans

earn 0.4 p.p. less than white women in licensed occupations without permanent felony bans. Similarly,
black women in licensed occupations with permanent felony bans earn 1.4 p.p. less than black women in
licensed occupations without permanent felony bans.
19 In this regression, we also include a control for a proxy of unobservable ability, which we explain the
in robustness section of the paper.

19

firms than larger firms. The key idea behind this test is that larger firms will have better
employee screening technology than smaller firms and hence should be less reliant on
the occupational licensing as a substitute for background checks by the firm.20 We test
for evidence of firm screening by looking at whether the license premium for black men
in occupations that preclude felons decreases in firm size. In Table V, we split the sample
into different firm sizes. As shown from column (1) to (4), when firm size gets larger
(> 100), the additional ban premium for black men is at first stable, at around 22%, then
begins to fall off monotonically for firms with > 500 and > 1000 employees.

6.2.1

Exploring Alternative Explanations

The wage premium for black men in occupations with felony bans is very large, so naturally we were concerned that the occupations with felony bans were different from those
without felony bans in ways that could explain this very large wage premium. For example, we were concerned that states with felony restrictions on occupational licenses
have higher instances of black-white discrepancies in arrests, which could have caused
the felony restrictions in the first place. We were also concerned that occupations with
felony restrictions were disproportionately in government jobs, where wage discrimination is more closely monitored because of the strict enforcement of anti-discrimination
employment laws (Miller, 2016). In light of Goldin’s pollution theory of discrimination,
we were also concerned that felony restrictions would be more likely to appear in occupations with a higher fraction of white workers as a means of shielding white workers
from competition with black workers (Goldin, 2014). Likewise, we were concerned that
20 Victor et al. (2012) conducted a study on the use of criminal background checks in hiring decisions.
Their sample includes 544 randomly selected firms from the membership of the Society for Human Resources Management. The study indicated that 52% of small firms (<100 employees), 31% of medium firms
(100 to 499 employees), and 17% of large firms (>2,500 employees) did not conduct background checks for
all job candidates. Firms may not perform background checks on all job applicants for at least three reasons: (i) each background check is costly and total cost scales with the number of applicants rather than the
number of job openings, (ii) background checks by private services are susceptible to human error, and (iii)
some states have restrictions on using criminal records in the job search process (US Department of Labor
2001; Cavico et al. 2014).

20

bans might appear in union jobs where wages are naturally higher, on average, and differentially so for black men.
In Table VI, we test these competing hypotheses by running four separate regressions
in which we control for heterogeneous returns to wages by race and gender of: (i) the
differences in the log of the disparity in arrest rates between blacks and whites, (ii) the
fraction of whites in the worker’s current occupation, (iii) whether the worker is employed by the government, and (iv) the worker’s union status. Our key finding here is
that the wage premium experienced by black men in occupations with felony restrictions
is robust even after controlling for these four factors. Previously we found a wage premium of 18.9% for black men in licensed occupations with felony restrictions when we
did not control for these factors. After controlling for these factors, the estimated wage
premium for black men in licensed occupations with felony restrictions ranges from 17%
to 19%. To put this licensing premium into context, it is 24% larger than the premium that
black men earn from working in the public sector and one third smaller than the union
wage premium for black men. It is also equivalent to the wage increase associated with
working in an occupation that is 30% whiter than his current occupation. Most strikingly,
the wage premium for black men in licensed occupations with felony bans is equivalent
to the wage gains that a black man would earn due to moving from a state where black
men are 6 times more likely to be arrested than white men to a state where white men are
1.7 times more likely to be arrested than black men.
As an additional check on our results, we also test whether heterogeneous returns to
education can rule out the ban premium that we estimate. In Table I, we saw that the
fraction of workers with a college degree was higher in licensed occupations with felony
restrictions when compared to licensed occupations without felony restrictions and unlicensed workers.21 In Table VII we run three separate wage regressions — one for licensed
21 The

education gradient is even steeper for the fraction of workers with postgraduate degrees. Workers
in licensed occupations with felony restrictions are 1.5 times more likely to have postgraduate training
than workers in licensed occupations without felony restrictions and more than 3 times as likely to have
postgraduate training when compared to unlicensed workers.

21

workers in occupations with felony bans, one for licensed workers in occupations without felony bans, and one for unlicensed workers. As our education control, we include
a dummy variable postHS, which equals one if the worker has postsecondary education,
and zero otherwise. In the regressions we also include interactions between this dummy
variable and race and gender, which allows for heterogeneous returns to education by
race and gender. While black men in licensed occupations with felony restrictions earn
on average 7% higher wages than white men, we find no evidence for higher returns to
education for black men relative to white men. The estimated coefficient on the interaction between postHS and the indicator variable for black male is -0.36% and statistically
insignificant.

6.3

Returns to the Human Capital Bundled with Licenses

In addition to signaling felony status, licensing can affect worker wages and racial and
gender wage gaps through a human capital channel. Occupational licensing, because it is
costly, can signal unobserved ability. Moreover, some occupational licenses require workers to undergo training, pass an exam,22 or engage in continuing education as a condition
of obtaining and maintaining the license. We think of training and continuing education
requirements of licenses as primary observable forms of human capital for which workers may be compensated. Heterogeneity in the returns these observable forms of human
capital by race and gender could arise if firms believe that there are differences in the
underlying stock of this human capital by race and gender.
In Table VIII we regress log wages on licensing and on controls for whether the license
has a training requirement, a continuous education requirement, and a mandated examination. Comparing the results of these three regressions in columns (2)-(4) with the results
from the baseline regression model in column (1), we find that training and continuous
22 Pagliero

(2010) showed that there is a positive correlation between wages and the difficulty of licensing

exams.

22

education account for some of the license premium that we estimate in the baseline model
for all workers. White men in licensed occupations with training requirements earn 4.2%
more than white men in licensed occupations with no training requirements. The license
training premiums are higher still for black men (7.1%), white women (7.9%), and black
women (6.2%). As shown in column (5) of Table VIII, these results are similar when we
control for the skill content of the occupations using the occupation-specific skill indexes
developed by the Occupational Information Network (O*NET).23
When taken together, these results suggest that differentially higher returns for women
and minorities to the human capital that is bundled with licensing is in part responsible
for the narrowing of the racial and gender wage gaps that we document. To be clear, all
workers, including white men, earn a wage premium because of the training and continuous education undertaken to obtain a license.24

7

Robustness: Unobserved Ability & Measurement Error

7.1

New Proxies for Unobserved Ability

A key concern in any Mincer wage regression is that the estimated returns could be biased
due to unobserved ability (Ashenfelter and Rouse, 1998). We are particularly sensitive to
this concern because in the model section of our paper, the decision to obtain a license
23 This

data uses comprehensive information on worker skills in each 6-digit occupation that is developed by occupational analysts using the information from a randomly selected pool of incumbent workers.
The skill attributes are: content skills which include reading, listening, writing, speaking, mathematics,
and science; process skills which include critical thinking, active learning, learning strategy, and monitoring; complex skills which refer to complex problem solving; social skills which include coordination,
instructing, negotiation, persuasion, service orientation, and social perceptiveness; system skills which
include judging and decision making, systems analysis, and systems evaluation; resource management
skills which include time and management of financial. material, and personal resources; technical skills
which include equipment maintenance and selection, installation, operation control and monitoring, operations analysis, programming, quality control analysis, repairing, technology design, and troubleshooting.
To ensure that the measures accurately reflect workers’ job requirements in our sample, we use the July
2014 version, which is contemporaneous with our extract of the SIPP data.
24 Passing an exam to qualify for a license appears to have a significant impact only on the wages of white
women.

23

is driven by the positive returns to licensing and the fact that more skilled workers, on
average, face a lower cost of licensing. In the data, we observe whether an individual
pursued advanced math, advanced science and advanced English classes in high school.
We construct a proxy for unobserved ability by regressing each of these choices to pursue
advanced course work on observable individual characteristics excluding the licensing decision. In Figure 4, we plot histograms for each of the ability proxies that we constructed,
including a histogram of the sum of ability measures.
From Table, IX we note that all 3 ability measures are positively correlated. As expected, the correlation between unobserved math ability and unobserved science ability
(0.63) is stronger than the correlation between unobserved English ability and unobserved
science ability (0.38). Although all three ability measures are positively correlated, controlling for all three in a regression of licensing on proxies for unobserved ability in Table
X reveals that each ability measure induces different variation in the observed licensing
decision. This is also evident in Figures 5 – 7, where we present non-parametric bin scatter plots of the licensing decisions of workers against our proxy of unobserved ability.25
Moreover, we find that higher ability is associated with higher wages, which suggest that
our proxy is capturing useful wage variation in the data. A worker of average math or
English ability earns 2%-3% higher wages than a worker of the lowest ability (Table XI).
This ability wage premium is non-trivial. In fact, it is comparable to returns to licensing
for a white man in an occupation with no human capital requirement or restriction on
felons.
After controlling for ability in Table XI, we find that the returns to occupational licensing for white men look similar to our baseline results with no ability controls. For black
25 For

example, science ability is positively and significantly correlated with the decision to obtain a license, whereas math ability is negatively and significantly correlated with this licensing decision and English ability is not significantly associated with licensing (column 1). By contrast, the decision to select an
occupational license that has a continuous education requirement is positively and significantly correlated
with both English and science ability, but not significantly correlated with math ability (column 3). The
decision to pursue a license for personal reasons, which is a variable reported in the SIPP and a proxy for
relative taste for the licensed sector (µe ), is not significantly correlated with any of the three ability measures
(column 4).

24

men in occupations with felony restrictions, controlling for unobserved ability, in column
(2), results in an increase in the differential licensing premium of 0.9 percentage points
relative to white men in similar occupations. This is the largest change of any of the point
estimates. The overall licensing premium for black men in occupations with felony restrictions increases by 0.5 p.p.26 The returns to licensing for women in licenses of all types
change by 0.1-0.3 p.p. with the ability controls. When we add 5th order polynomials in
all three ability types, as a way of accounting for any non-linearity in the relationship
between our ability proxies and wages, we find similar results to our linear specification
(column 3).27 From this exercise we learn that controlling for ability yields a positive
wage return to ability but does not alter the licensing wage premiums that we previously
estimated. Moreover, these new proxies for unobserved ability that we develop can be
used by other researchers to study the effect of unobservable ability on wages.

7.2

Addressing Measurement Error

In our empirical setting we were also concerned that measurement error could affect our
results. Given our understanding of the data and what other researchers have documented in the literature, we were particularly concerned with four possible types of measurement error: (i) 3-digit occupation codes are too broad (ii) imperfect matching of felony
restrictions on occupations (iii) partial licensing of occupations and (iv) misreporting of
licensing status (v) attrition bias in the sample.
1. Occupational Level Controls: the standard in the literature is to use 3-digit occupation fixed effects, however, since licensing occurs at the 6-digit level, 3-digit
controls may introduce measurement error and also mask heterogeneity in occupational selection. In Figure 8, we report the estimated gender and racial wage gaps
26 This

increase is partially offset by a 0.4 p.p. reduction in the licensing premium for black men in occupations without felony restrictions.
27 The one exception is that the negative ban premium for white women goes from being negative and
significant to negative and insignificant.

25

for both unlicensed and licensed workers for differing level of occupational controls:
ranging from no occupational fixed effects 2-digit, 3-digit and 6-digit occupational
controls. Going from no occupational fixed effects to 2-digit occupational controls
makes a meaningful difference in the estimated wage gaps. However, going from 2digit to 3-digit and then 6-digit occupational fixed effects, the estimated wage gaps
are relatively stable for licensed black men and for white women. For example, the
estimated wage gap for licensed black men goes from 9.3% to 8.5% when we go
from 3-digit to 6-digit occupational fixed effects. This bounds the bias due to occupational selection to less than 1 percentage point. For all of the subsequent measurement
error test, we adopt the 6-digit occupation controls, as a way of imposing the most stringent
requirement that we can on our estimated wage gaps.
2. Imperfect matching of legal felony bans to occupations: to perform this matching we use the online SOC auto-coder, which matches description of jobs to occupations within some tolerance level, which is reported on a scale from 0%-100%.
We adopt two approaches to test whether imperfect match quality of felony restrictions affects our estimates. First, we include an indicator variable “poor quality’,
which equals 1 if the reported match quality is below the median match quality of
68%. Second, we construct a continuous measure of match quality by taking the
log of 101-quality score. This measure equals zero if the quality of the match is
100%, and hence if we had a perfect match rate to all of our professions, we would
see no difference between the coefficient estimates in our baseline model and our
match-quality-adjusted model. For match quality close to 100, this function is approximately linear, however as the match quality declines to zero, the penalty for a
poor match increases non-linearly. In both specifications the binary specification for
poor match quality and the continuous measure, we find that a poor match reduces
predicted wages (Table XII). However, we find that the estimated licensing premiums are the same as the results from our baseline specification. This suggests that
26

measurement error from imperfect match does not explain the results that we get.
3. Partial licensing of occupations: There are 6 digit SOC codes that correspond to
multiple sub-occupations, some of which may be licensed and others of which may
be unlicensed. Since we only control for occupation fixed effects at the 6-digit level,
we were concerned that our licensing premium could reflect differences in the composition of industries rather than differences in wages directly. To address this concern, we do two things. First, we include a dummy variable into our regression
which equals 1 if the individual is in a partially licensed occupation and 0 if not. We
define a partially licensed occupation, as a 6-digit SOC code in which the fraction of
licensed workers in the state-occupation observation is not 0 or 1. This allows us to
test for differences in average wages between occupations that are partially licensed
and those which are fully licensed or fully unlicensed. In our second approach, we
drop all observations of workers in partially licensed occupations – 83,000 in total
or 32% of the full sample. Controlling for partial licensing produces results that are
similar to the baseline model (Table XII, column 6). Dropping the observations in
the partially licensed occupations does not affect the differential license premium
experienced by black men in occupations that bar felons, but it does reduce the return to uninformative licenses for black women and black men, and also reduces
the differential return to licenses with human capital for black men and women
when compared to white men (column 7).28 This exercise suggests that the felony
results for black men are less susceptible to partial licensing concerns than the other
licensing premiums.
4. Misreporting of license attainment: Gittleman et al. (2018) find that just 63% of
28 The differential ban premium for black men in felony restricted occupations is an imprecisely estimated

14.5%, as compared to a precisely estimated 14.0% at baseline. By contrast, the wage premium for uninformative licenses drops by 9 p.p. and 6.4 p.p. for black men and black women relative to baseline and
relative to including a control for partial licensing of the occupation. For white women, the overall benefit of continuing education requirement is unchanged in absolute terms, the relative advantage of white
women over white men is reduced by 2.3 p.p.; and in absolute terms there is no benefit of a continuous
education requirement of a license to black men.

27

lawyers in the SIPP report having a license, even though having a license is a universal requirement for lawyers to practice. In order to quantify the potential impact
of measurement error on our results, we estimate wage regressions from 1000 random samples of our data in which the licensing variable is randomly assigned but
all other observable characteristics of the individual worker are keep fixed at their
reported value in the SIPP data. For consistency we require that the fraction of
licensed workers in the random samples equals the observed fraction of licensed
workers in the data at three levels of aggregation 1) the national level 2) the statelevel 3) the state-by-occupation level. These requirements allow for an individual
worker to misreport her license status while holding the overall fraction of licensed
workers fixed.29
From these regressions we report the empirical distribution of the race-by-gender
wage premium of: (i) licenses with no human capital component and no felony
restriction, (ii) licenses with a continuing education requirement, and (iii) licenses
with felony restrictions. For each level of randomization there are 12 premiums
corresponding with the 2 gender, 2 racial, and 3 licensing type categories. Overall,
34 of the 36 premiums have p-values < 1%. For all levels of randomization, the
felony ban premium for black men in licensed occupations and the human capital
premium for both black and white women in licensed occupations have p-values

< 1% (Table XIII). In Figure 9 , we show the results of this exercise for the expected
wage premium for workers in occupations with felony restrictions, where we match
the fraction licensed at the national level.30 The results of these placebo tests suggest that even extreme realizations of measurement error would not produce the
licensing premiums that we find.
29 We also match the fraction of licenses held by workers that require a continuous education requirement

and that are in occupations with felony restrictions by randomly assigning these attributes conditional on
licensing.
30 We include all of the placebo plots for each license type and at each aggregation level in the online
appendix of the paper.

28

5. Attrition bias: In our main specifications, we ran our results on Waves 13-16 of the
data. Over time, the sample size is falling as households drop out of the sample.
As reported in Table XIV 92% of the sample remain in wave 14, 90% by wave 15,
however by wave 16, we only retain 63% of the original sample. Running our main
specification (inclusive of ability controls and 6-digit occupational fixed effects), on
waves 13-15, where more than 90% of the sample remains, we find that black men
earn a statistically significant 20% licensing premium relative to white men in occupations that preclude felons. In wave 16, where we have lost close to 40% of the
sample, the licensing premium for black men in occupations precluding felons, relative to that of white men, falls to just 2% and is not statistically significant. This
suggest that the results that we reported previously are biased downwards because
of attrition bias in the sample.

8

Comparison of Licenses and Certificates

To summarize our results, in Figure 10, we report bar graphs of the licensing premium
by license type for white men, black men, white women, and black women as well as
the certificate premium for each demographic group. In Figure 11, we graph the difference between the license premium and the certificate premium by race and gender group
complete with 95% confidence intervals. These results are the fully saturated model with
3-digit and 6-digit occupation fixed effects as well as controls for unobserved ability and
unobserved taste for licensing. For white men, the licensing premiums are small and
uniform in magnitude across the three different types of licenses and indistinguishable
from the certificate premium. For black men, the licensing premium is largest and significant for the occupations with felony restrictions and substantially different from the
certificate premium in the model with 3-digit occupational controls. Moreover, as shown
in Figure 3, the license premium for black men in occupations that preclude felons is

29

largest in “ban-the-box” states that regulate whether a firm can ask job applicants questions about criminal history. For women both the ordinary licenses and the licenses with
a continuing education requirement produce larger returns than the certificate, whereas
the licenses with felony restrictions produce comparable returns to the certificates.

9

Conclusion

Whereas economists have traditionally viewed occupational licensing primarily through
the lens of it being a labor market friction, the evidence in this paper suggests that it is
also an informative labor market signal because it is costly to obtain. A key implication of
our work is that efforts to reform occupational licensing will be Pareto improving if these
efforts can reduce the barriers to entry for the licensed occupations using a mechanism
that informs the labor market of worker productivity as well. Our results on certifications suggest that certification is a viable alternative to occupational licensing for white
men, but not for women or black men, who in many cases earn more with licenses that
certificates. As licensing reform efforts build, we require further work on the extent to
which the official nature of occupational licenses as a state-issued credential matters differentially for women and black men, as compared to white men, given their historical
experience of the labor market frictions of gender and racial discrimination.

30

Figures
State Variation in the Intensity of Felony Restrictions on Occupational Licenses

Figure 1: This map is a color-coded depiction of the United States. The states shaded in
with darker colors are the states where the intensity of felony restrictions on occupational
licensing is the strongest, whereas the states that are lightly shaded are the states where
the intensity of felony restrictions on occupational licensing are the weakest. California,
for example has over 70 occupations that preclude felons from obtaining an occupational
license, while Iowa has fewer than 35 occupations that preclude felons from obtaining an
occupational license.

31

State Variation Occupational Licenses of All Types

Figure 2: This map is a color-coded depiction of the United States. The states shaded
in with darker colors are the states where the number of professions with occupational
licensing requirements is greatest.

32

Effect of Ban-the-Box Laws on Licensing Premiums

License premium

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

−0.2
BTB
White men

non-BTB

Black men

White women

−0.4
Black women

Figure 3: This figure reports the wage premium of licenses with felony restrictions in
ban-the-box (BTB) states and non-ban-the-box (non-BTB) states. In BTB states, it is illegal
for an employer to ask about a worker’s criminal past on a job application. The estimated
licensing premiums come from a standard Mincer wage regression that also includes controls for a proxy of unobserved ability.

33

Distribution of Unobserved Ability Proxies

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.

Figure 4: This figure consists of four separate plots of the distribution of unobserved
ability by ability type in our data. In the uppermost right-hand plot is the distribution of
unobserved science ability in the population. Continuing counter-clockwise, we report
a histogram of unobserved math ability, followed by a histogram of unobserved English
language ability and finishing with a histogram of the sum the three previous unobserved
abilities.

34

Bin Scatter Plots of Licensing and Unobserved Science Ability

Figure 5: We show the bin scatter plots of the licensing decision of workers against our
proxy for unobserved science ability. Starting from the top left graph going clockwise are
the bin scatter plots of any license, a license with a restriction on felons, pursuing a license
for personal reasons and pursuing a license with a continuous education requirement.

35

Bin Scatter Plots of Licensing and Unobserved Math Ability

Figure 6: We show the bin scatter plots of the licensing decision of workers against our
proxy for unobserved Math ability. Starting from the top left graph going clockwise are
the bin scatter plots of any license, a license with a restriction on felons, pursuing a license
for personal reasons and pursuing a license with a continuous education requirement.

36

Bin Scatter Plots of Licensing and Unobserved English Ability

Figure 7: We show the bin scatter plots of the licensing decision of workers against our
proxy for unobserved English ability. Starting from the top left graph going clockwise are
the bin scatter plots of any license, a license with a restriction on felons, pursuing a license
for personal reasons and pursuing a license with a continuous education requirement.

37

Expected Wage Gaps Converge with Detailed Occupation Controls

Figure 8: The graph displays the difference in predicted mean log wages between black
men, black women, and white women when compared to white men in occupations that
require an occupational license. Each predicted wage gap is reported on the figure along
with error bars representing a 95% confidence interval around the expected racial and
gender wage gaps.

38

Empirical Distribution of Ban Premium from Placebo Tests

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.

Figure 9: To construct these figures, we generate N = 1, 000 samples of the data in which
we randomize the license status of each worker, holding the overall fraction of licensed
workers in the sample fixed. Our randomization also holds constant the fraction of licensed workers who require continuing education to maintain their license and the fraction of workers with licenses in occupations that preclude felons. For each random sample we regress wages on license status and observables. We then use the coefficients to
calculate the expected wage premium for having a license in an occupation with a felony
restriction for each sample and report the empirical distribution of these license premium
for (clockwise): white men, black men, white women, and black women. The dashed red
line is the value from the observed data, the two blue vertical lines denote the estimated
wage premium for the 1% and 99% of the empirical distribution of the placebo estimates.

39

40

Figure 10: Each tile in this graph summarizes the average license premiums and certificate premium for workers of a given
demographic group, from our main regression specification, breaking out the license premium by the license type. The error
bar indicates 95% confidence intervals from regressions with 3-digit and 6-digit occupation fixed effects.

License and Certificate Wage Premium By Race, Gender, and Type of License/Certificate

41

Figure 11: The bars represent the difference in the expected license premium with certification. They are calculated by
combining the corresponding coefficients in the fully saturated model. The error bar indicates 95% confidence interval from
saturated regressions with 3-digit and 6-digit occupation fixed effects.

Difference in Licensing and Certificate Premiums

Tables
Table I: Summary of Wages and Demographic Characteristics by License Status
Unlicensed

hourly wage
white man
black man
white woman
black woman
other ethnicity
age
hispanic
high school drop-out
some college
college
post-graduate
union member
government worker
self-employed
service worker
Observations

mean
sd
20.89 14.33
0.42
0.49
0.05
0.22
0.38
0.49
0.06
0.24
0.08
0.27
41.42 12.63
0.14
0.35
0.08
0.26
0.18
0.38
0.21
0.41
0.08
0.28
0.10
0.29
0.15
0.36
0.02
0.14
0.49
0.50
213,549

Licensed
(no felony bans)
mean
sd
25.14
14.42
0.39
0.49
0.03
0.18
0.45
0.50
0.06
0.23
0.06
0.24
43.82
11.47
0.07
0.25
0.02
0.13
0.12
0.32
0.28
0.45
0.20
0.40
0.20
0.40
0.32
0.47
0.04
0.19
0.67
0.47
23,376

Licensed
(with felony bans)
mean
sd
27.96
15.68
0.28
0.45
0.02
0.14
0.56
0.50
0.07
0.26
0.07
0.25
44.04
11.10
0.08
0.26
0.01
0.12
0.07
0.25
0.32
0.47
0.30
0.46
0.26
0.44
0.35
0.48
0.03
0.17
0.82
0.39
38,736

Certified
mean
sd
25.88 15.73
0.48
0.50
0.04
0.20
0.35
0.48
0.05
0.21
0.08
0.27
42.68 11.34
0.08
0.27
0.02
0.15
0.14
0.34
0.22
0.42
0.16
0.36
0.13
0.34
0.12
0.32
0.03
0.18
0.59
0.49
18,573

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
Note: This table reports summary statistics of the wage and demographic data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, covering May 2012 through November 2013. Following the literature, we restrict the sample to individuals aged between
18 to 64 with implied hourly wage from $5 to $100 on the main job (Gittleman et al., 2018). Observations with imputed wages and
license status are dropped.

42

Table II: Summary of Wages by Race, Gender and Licensing Status
mean

sd

min

max

N

Unlicensed
White men
Black men
White women
Black women
Other
Subtotal

23.73
18.63
18.33
15.92
22.70
20.84

15.60
12.40
12.02
10.31
16.20
14.22

5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00

100.00
100.00
98.00
100.00
100.00
100.00

80,492
9,152
72,644
11,738
15,599
189,625

Certified
White men
Black men
White women
Black women
Other
Subtotal

27.72
23.23
24.47
21.05
25.82
25.93

15.17
14.09
15.35
12.52
17.33
15.37

5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00

100.00
81.00
98.00
59.00
91.00
100.00

10,000
804
7,433
981
1,507
20,725

Licensed (without felony bans)
White men
27.27 14.87
Black men
23.08 13.14
White women
24.23 13.43
Black women
21.89 13.46
Other
24.45 17.26
Subtotal
25.26 14.36

5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00

100.00
87.00
98.00
100.00
100.00
100.00

13,709
1,142
16,019
1,992
2,159
35,021

Licensed (with felony bans)
White men
29.90 16.18
Black men
25.46 14.33
White women
27.14 14.22
Black women
21.49 13.23
Other
34.83 21.55
Subtotal
28.00 15.58

5.00
6.00
5.00
5.00
6.00
5.00

100.00
88.00
100.00
71.00
100.00
100.00

4,714
332
9,419
1,184
1,146
16,795

Total

5.00

100.00

262,166

22.30

14.62

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
Note: This table reports summary statistics of wages by race and gender and
licensing status using data from wave 13 to wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008, which
covers May 2012 through November 2013. We restrict the sample to individuals
aged between 18 to 64 with implied hourly wage from $5 to $100 on the main job.
Observations with imputed wages and license status are dropped.

43

Table III: Women and Black Men Earn Larger Licensing Premium than White Men

blackman

(1)
Base Model

(2)
All Felony Bans

(3)
Permanent Felony Bans

-0.116
(0.0144)
-0.151
(0.00888)
-0.233
(0.0175)
0.0754
(0.0129)
0.0497
(0.0401)
0.0611
(0.0157)
0.0838
(0.0249)

-0.116
(0.0144)
-0.151
(0.00889)
-0.233
(0.0175)
0.0664
(0.0158)
0.0122
(0.0479)
0.0728
(0.0183)
0.0993
(0.0293)
0.0327
(0.0232)
0.156
(0.0644)
-0.0375
(0.0273)
-0.0471
(0.0391)
1.830
(0.0528)
262,166
0.526

Constant

1.828
(0.0527)

-0.115
(0.0144)
-0.151
(0.00887)
-0.233
(0.0174)
0.0632
(0.0176)
-0.0152
(0.0546)
0.0668
(0.0211)
0.0815
(0.0276)
0.0320
(0.0189)
0.164
(0.0805)
-0.0166
(0.0259)
-0.00420
(0.0438)
1.829
(0.0528)

Observations
R-squared

262,166
0.526

262,166
0.526

whitewoman
blackwoman
license
license × blackman
license × whitewoman
license × blackwoman
ban
ban × blackman
ban × whitewoman
ban × blackwoman

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
Notes: This table reports a regression of log hourly wages on license status of the worker. The results demonstrate
that all workers earn a license premium. The license premium earned by black men and both black and white
women are larger than the license premium earned by white men. The license premium for black men comes
through most strongly in occupations with licenses that preclude felons. All regressions include month fixed
effects, a quadratic in age, education levels, a Hispanic indicator, ‘Other race’ indicator, union status, a government
worker indicator, a self-employed indicator, a service worker indicator, as well as state and 3-digit occupation
fixed effects. In addition, indicators for ‘certification’ and ‘license not required for jobs’ are included. The sample
is restricted to respondents aged 18-64 with hourly wages on the main job between $5 and $100 from May 2012
through November 2013. Observations with imputed wages and license status are dropped. (Robust standard
errors clustered at state level.)

44

Table IV: Women and Black Men Earn Larger Premium than White Men (Weighted)

blackmen

(1)
Base Model

(2)
All Felony Bans

(3)
Permanent Felony Bans

-0.0972
(0.0161)
-0.134
(0.00858)
-0.206
(0.0162)
0.0614
(0.0165)
-0.0422
(0.0703)
0.0329
(0.0225)
0.103
(0.0406)

-0.101
(0.0158)
-0.139
(0.00864)
-0.212
(0.0175)
0.0790
(0.0157)
0.00564
(0.0609)
0.0639
(0.0194)
0.121
(0.0329)
0.103
(0.0183)
0.134
(0.0470)
0.0300
(0.0227)
0.0518
(0.0315)
1.790
(0.0616)
262,166
0.525

Constant

1.778
(0.0606)

-0.101
(0.0159)
-0.139
(0.00860)
-0.212
(0.0174)
0.0779
(0.0168)
-0.0382
(0.0706)
0.0535
(0.0232)
0.124
(0.0394)
0.0993
(0.0143)
0.146
(0.0625)
0.0479
(0.0198)
0.0696
(0.0331)
1.790
(0.0615)

Observations
R-squared

262,166
0.523

262,166
0.525

whitewomen
blackwomen
license
license × blackmen
license × whitewomen
license × blackwomen
ban
ban × blackmen
ban × whitewomen
ban × blackwomen

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
Notes: This table reports a regression of log hourly wages on license status of the worker using the survey sample
weights. The results demonstrate that all workers earn a license premium. The license premium earned by
black men and both black and white women are larger than the license premium earned by white men. The
license premium for black men comes through most strongly in occupations with licenses that preclude felons.
All regressions include month fixed effects, a quadratic in age, education levels, a Hispanic indicator, ‘Other race’
indicator, union status, a government worker indicator, a self-employed indicator, a service worker indicator,
as well as state and 3-digit occupation fixed effects. In addition, indicators for ‘certification’ and ‘license not
required for jobs’ are included. The sample is restricted to respondents aged 18-64 with hourly wages on the main
job between $5 and $100 from May 2012 through November 2013. Observations with imputed wages and license
status are dropped. (Robust standard errors clustered at state level.)

45

Table V: Ban Premium for Black Men Decreasing in Firm Size

ban
ban × blackmen
ban × whitewomen
ban × blackwomen

>100
0.00720
(0.0102)
0.218
(0.0449)
-0.00457
(0.0133)
0.00353
(0.0252)

Observations
R-squared

102,860
0.540

Firm size
>200
>500
0.0122
0.0387
(0.0122) (0.0154)
0.221
0.164
(0.0558) (0.0719)
0.00338 -0.0172
(0.0159) (0.0198)
-0.0640
-0.101
(0.0307) (0.0370)
74,967
0.545

49,020
0.550

>1000
0.0317
(0.0183)
0.132
(0.0808)
-0.0310
(0.0236)
-0.117
(0.0436)
35,724
0.552

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
Notes: This table reports a wage regression on license status conditional on firm size. The focal result
here is that the ban premium for black men is decreasing in firm size as we go from companies with
200 employees to companies with 500 and 1000 employees. (Robust standard errors are clustered at
state level.)

Table VI: Wage Premium for Black Men in Banned Occupations Robust

ban
ban × blackmen
ban × whitewomen
ban × blackwomen

Observations
R-squared

(1)
Racial Disparity
in Arrest
0.0335
(0.0234)
0.139
(0.0634)
-0.0388
(0.0274)
-0.0460
(0.0394)

(2)
Frac. White
in Occupation Employment
0.0407
(0.0237)
0.133
(0.0649)
-0.0422
(0.0271)
-0.0683
(0.0396)

(3)
Government
Employment
0.0325
(0.0233)
0.156
(0.0707)
-0.0375
(0.0278)
-0.0456
(0.0390)

(4)
Union
Status
0.0305
(0.0233)
0.154
(0.0685)
-0.0344
(0.0282)
-0.0447
(0.0394)

261,617
0.526

262,166
0.531

262,166
0.526

262,166
0.526

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
Notes: This table reports a regression of wages on licensing status. To test whether the ban premium experienced by black men
is robust, we control for heterogeneity by race and gender in four key variables that could also be correlated with whether an
occupation has a felony ban: (i) the log of the racial disparity in arrest between blacks and whites, (ii) public sector employment,
(iii) fraction of whites in occupation and (iv) worker union status. (We use robust standard errors clustered at state level.)

46

Table VII: Ban Premium for Black Men not due to Higher Returns to Education

blackman
whitewoman
blackwoman
postHS
postHS × blackman
postHS × whitewoman
postHS × blackwoman
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Licensed
(with felony bans)

(2)
Licensed
(no felony bans)

(3)
Unlicensed

0.0702
(0.0901)
-0.168
(0.0927)
-0.224
(0.0814)
0.0477
(0.0622)
-0.00362
(0.129)
0.0747
(0.0982)
0.0808
(0.0967)
14,878
0.511

-0.170
(0.0795)
-0.127
(0.0517)
-0.283
(0.144)
0.103
(0.0276)
0.0798
(0.109)
0.0566
(0.0491)
0.156
(0.135)
28,065
0.446

-0.105
(0.0195)
-0.143
(0.00883)
-0.226
(0.0225)
0.0943
(0.00885)
-0.0152
(0.0297)
-0.0191
(0.0130)
-0.0178
(0.0237)
198,412
0.534

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
This table reports three separate wage regressions conditional on license status. The goal
of these regressions is to test whether the licensing premium to black men in occupations
with felony bans is driven by differentially higher returns to post-secondary education for
black men in these occupations. We find that black men in these occupations do not experience differentially higher returns to post-secondary education relative to white men.
(Robust standard errors are clustered at state level.)

47

Table VIII: White Women Benefit from Human Capital Bundled with Licensing

ban
ban × blackmen
ban × whitewomen
ban × blackwomen

(1)
Base Model

(2)
training

(3)
continuous
education

(4)
exams

(5)
training

(6)
continuous
education

(7)
exams

0.0327
(0.0232)
0.156
(0.0644)
-0.0375
(0.0273)
-0.0471
(0.0391)

0.0335
(0.0234)
0.152
(0.0648)
-0.0365
(0.0275)
-0.0492
(0.0391)
0.0423
(0.0218)
0.0293
(0.0488)
0.0362
(0.0144)
0.0193
(0.0299)
1.832
(0.0528)

0.0327
(0.0237)
0.154
(0.0649)
-0.0376
(0.0274)
-0.0493
(0.0393)
0.0352
(0.0168)
0.0342
(0.0555)
0.0409
(0.0164)
-0.000825
(0.0291)
1.838
(0.0525)

0.0329
(0.0235)
0.154
(0.0644)
-0.0373
(0.0276)
-0.0476
(0.0390)
0.0155
(0.0270)
0.0389
(0.0537)
0.0321
(0.0148)
0.0158
(0.0348)
1.832
(0.0525)

0.0212
(0.0219)
0.170
(0.0731)
-0.0274
(0.0271)
-0.0382
(0.0380)
0.0372
(0.0227)
0.0294
(0.0466)
0.0370
(0.0151)
0.0241
(0.0308)
1.274
(0.0872)

0.0206
(0.0221)
0.171
(0.0730)
-0.0285
(0.0269)
-0.0384
(0.0382)
0.0307
(0.0171)
0.0285
(0.0574)
0.0446
(0.0159)
0.00547
(0.0302)
1.282
(0.0865)

0.0208
(0.0220)
0.172
(0.0727)
-0.0282
(0.0272)
-0.0366
(0.0379)
0.00647
(0.0266)
0.0395
(0.0513)
0.0337
(0.0146)
0.0212
(0.0360)
1.273
(0.0870)

X

X

X

257,286
0.540

257,286
0.541

257,286
0.540

requirement
requirement × blackmen
requirement × whitewomen
requirement × blackwomen
Constant

1.830
(0.0528)

Skill
Observations
R-squared

262,166
0.526

262,166
0.526

262,166
0.526

262,166
0.526

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
Notes: This table reports wage regressions in which we to test whether the licensing premium is due to occupational licensing increasing the human capital of
workers. All regressions include month fixed effects, a quadratic in age, education levels, a Hispanic indicator, ‘Other race’ indicator, union status, a government
worker indicator, a self-employed indicator, a service worker indicator, as well as state and 3-digit occupation fixed effects. In addition, indicators for ‘certification’
and ‘license not required for jobs’ are included. that are heterogeneous by race and gender. The sample is restricted to respondents aged 18-64 with hourly wages
on the main job between $5 and $100 from May 2012 through November 2013. Observations with imputed wages and license status are dropped. (Robust standard
errors are clustered at state level.)

48

Table IX: Proxy Measures of Unobserved Ability Positively Correlated

Math Ability
Science Ability
English Ability

Math Ability
1.00
0.6242
0.3686

Science Ability

English Ability

1.00
0.4165

1.00

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
This table reports the correlations between the proxies for unobserved ability. These proxies are the
residuals from three separate regressions of an indicator for advanced course work in math, science
and English on observables (excluding whether the individual has a license).

Table X: Correlation Between Licensing Decision and Ability

(1)
license
Science Ability
Math Ability
English Ability
Constant

Observations
R-squared
control

(2)
con edu

(3)
ban

(4)
person

0.0265
0.0227
0.0126
-0.000299
(0.00834) (0.00980) (0.00465) (0.00202)
-0.0157
-0.00271
-0.0130 -0.000630
(0.00903) (0.00910) (0.00545) (0.00217)
0.0103
0.0192
0.00488 0.000475
(0.0102) (0.00967) (0.00470) (0.00128)
0.0655
0.0769
0.0326
0.00163
(0.0118)
(0.0116) (0.00854) (0.00354)
18,881
0.058
X

18,881
0.068
X

18,881
0.045
X

18,881
0.004
X

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
This table reports the correlations between the proxies for unobserved ability and licensing decision
by type: all licenses, licenses with continuous education requirement, licenses with felony restriction
and licenses pursued for personal rather than professional reasons.

49

Table XI: Licensing Premiums with Ability Controls

license
license × blackmen
license × whitewomen
license × blackwomen
ban
ban × blackmen
ban × whitewomen
ban × blackwomen
con edu
con edu × blackmen
con edu × whitewomen
con edu × blackwomen

Base model
0.0241
(0.0138)
0.00691
(0.0699)
0.0588
(0.0157)
0.109
(0.0304)
0.0354
(0.0235)
0.131
(0.0725)
-0.0475
(0.0271)
-0.0728
(0.0388)
0.0349
(0.0163)
0.0120
(0.0609)
0.0369
(0.0176)
0.00905
(0.0303)

Math Ability
Science Ability
English Ability
Ability Polynomial
Observations
R-squared

Ability (Linear)
0.0239
(0.0138)
0.00281
(0.0695)
0.0588
(0.0155)
0.111
(0.0314)
0.0354
(0.0228)
0.140
(0.0735)
-0.0456
(0.0269)
-0.0756
(0.0392)
0.0336
(0.0163)
0.0130
(0.0607)
0.0364
(0.0178)
0.0126
(0.0318)
0.0278
(0.00679)
0.0132
(0.00912)
0.0200
(0.00619)

262,166
0.565

262,166
0.566

Ability (Polynomial)
0.0231
(0.0140)
0.00307
(0.0704)
0.0613
(0.0160)
0.111
(0.0321)
0.0336
(0.0228)
0.139
(0.0743)
-0.0417
(0.0270)
-0.0765
(0.0393)
0.0332
(0.0162)
0.0104
(0.0609)
0.0379
(0.0174)
0.00942
(0.0321)

X
262,166
0.567

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008. This table reports Mincer wage regressions of log wages on
licensing status interacted with race and gender and license characteristics. In column 1 we report the results
from our baseline model with controls for unobserved ability and whether an individual obtained a license for
personal reasons. In column 2, we include linear controls for science, math and English ability. In column 3, we
include 5th order controls for ability. The race-by-gender dummies are identical across all specifications, so we do
not report them to conserve space. (Robust standard errors are clustered at state level.)

50

51
262,166
0.565

-0.108
(0.0143)
-0.143
(0.00791)
-0.207
(0.0147)
0.0241
(0.0138)
0.00691
(0.0699)
0.0588
(0.0157)
0.109
(0.0304)
0.0354
(0.0235)
0.131
(0.0725)
-0.0475
(0.0271)
-0.0728
(0.0388)
0.0349
(0.0163)
0.0120
(0.0609)
0.0369
(0.0176)
0.00905
(0.0303)
2.444
(0.0543)
262,166
0.566

-0.109
(0.0144)
-0.143
(0.00807)
-0.208
(0.0148)
0.0239
(0.0138)
0.00281
(0.0695)
0.0588
(0.0155)
0.111
(0.0314)
0.0354
(0.0228)
0.140
(0.0735)
-0.0456
(0.0269)
-0.0756
(0.0392)
0.0336
(0.0163)
0.0130
(0.0607)
0.0364
(0.0178)
0.0126
(0.0318)
2.441
(0.0538)
262,166
0.567

-0.103
(0.0146)
-0.144
(0.00855)
-0.206
(0.0149)
0.0231
(0.0140)
0.00307
(0.0704)
0.0613
(0.0160)
0.111
(0.0321)
0.0336
(0.0228)
0.139
(0.0743)
-0.0417
(0.0270)
-0.0765
(0.0393)
0.0332
(0.0162)
0.0104
(0.0609)
0.0379
(0.0174)
0.00942
(0.0321)
2.519
(0.0521)

(2)
(3)
Ability control
Linear
Non-linear

262,166
0.567

-0.103
(0.0146)
-0.144
(0.00852)
-0.206
(0.0149)
0.0222
(0.0134)
0.00320
(0.0704)
0.0606
(0.0161)
0.110
(0.0328)
0.0296
(0.0257)
0.139
(0.0741)
-0.0414
(0.0272)
-0.0755
(0.0397)
0.0331
(0.0162)
0.0107
(0.0608)
0.0380
(0.0175)
0.00926
(0.0322)
2.518
(0.0522)
262,166
0.567

-0.103
(0.0146)
-0.144
(0.00852)
-0.206
(0.0149)
0.0222
(0.0134)
0.00320
(0.0704)
0.0606
(0.0161)
0.110
(0.0328)
0.0296
(0.0257)
0.139
(0.0741)
-0.0414
(0.0272)
-0.0755
(0.0397)
0.0331
(0.0162)
0.0107
(0.0608)
0.0380
(0.0175)
0.00926
(0.0322)
2.518
(0.0522)

(4)
(5)
Match Quality
Binary
Continuous

262,166
0.567

-0.103
(0.0146)
-0.144
(0.00858)
-0.206
(0.0149)
0.0214
(0.0155)
0.00338
(0.0705)
0.0616
(0.0164)
0.112
(0.0322)
0.0342
(0.0229)
0.139
(0.0743)
-0.0420
(0.0270)
-0.0766
(0.0394)
0.0332
(0.0162)
0.0106
(0.0610)
0.0378
(0.0174)
0.00917
(0.0321)
2.518
(0.0519)
179,417
0.586

-0.121
(0.0170)
-0.145
(0.0110)
-0.210
(0.0178)
0.0203
(0.0405)
-0.0922
(0.113)
0.0590
(0.0458)
0.0467
(0.0867)
0.0474
(0.0459)
0.145
(0.133)
-0.0898
(0.0664)
-0.185
(0.172)
0.0506
(0.0245)
-0.0565
(0.0744)
0.0145
(0.0285)
-0.00861
(0.0611)
2.562
(0.0681)

(7)
Partial licensing
Dummy control Partial dropped

(6)

Ability
X
X
X
X
X
X
Personal
X
X
X
X
X
X
Match quality
X
X
Partial dummy
X
Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
This table reports results from our robustness tests. In each column we report results from a regression of log wages on licensing using
6-digit occupational fixed effects. In column (1) we report our results from our base model. In column (2) and (3) we include linear and
polynomial controls for science, math and English ability. In column (4), we include a dummy variable that equals 1 if the match quality of
the occupation from our felony database exceeds the median match quality value of 68%. In column (5) we include a non-linear control of
match quality log(101-quality) in order to penalize worse matches more. In column (6) and (7) we include a dummy for partially licensed
occupations and drop all observations from partially licensed occupations, respectively. (Robust standard errors are clustered at state
level.)

Observations
R-squared

Constant

con edu × blackwomen

con edu × whitewomen

con edu × blackmen

con edu

ban × blackwomen

ban × whitewomen

ban × blackmen

ban

license × blackwomen

license × whitewomen

license × blackmen

license

blackwomen

whitewomen

blackmen

(1)
Base Model

Table XII: Results Controlling for Ability, Occupation Match Quality & Partial Licensing

Table XIII: Placebo Tests with Random Licensing

National level:
whitemen
p-value
z score
blackmen
p-value
z score
whitewomen p-value
z score
blackwomen p-value
z score

License

Con. Edu

Felony Ban

0.187
-1.000
0.001
7.450
0.001
15.406
0.001
10.477

0.001
4.920
0.001
5.437
0.001
11.288
0.001
9.729

0.001
6.228
0.001
10.195
0.001
11.076
0.001
5.778

0.005
2.66
0.001
3.84
0.001
12.20
0.001
9.18

0.001
5.31
0.001
5.18
0.001
10.38
0.001
7.69

0.001
8.95
0.001
8.79
0.001
5.06
0.001
4.73

0.001
3.98
0.001
-2.66
0.001
10.28
0.001
6.11

0.001
12.13
0.085
1.44
0.006
2.68
0.001
4.05

0.001
5.78
0.001
6.02
0.001
7.51
0.009
2.39

State level:
whitemen

p-value
z score
blackmen
p-value
z score
whitewomen p-value
z score
blackwomen p-value
z score
State-by-occupation:
whitemen

p-value
z score
blackmen
p-value
z score
whitewomen p-value
z score
blackwomen p-value
z score

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
To construct this table, first we generate N = 1000 samples of the data in which we randomize the
license status of each worker, holding the overall fraction of licensed workers in the sample fixed. We
then compute a p-value and a z-score for each of the license premium coefficients from our Mincer
equation using the moments of the empirical distribution from our random sampling procedure. The
columns name the coefficient for which the z-score is calculated and the row the demographic group
for which the z-score is being calculated.

52

Table XIV: Felony Results Running Separately by Wave

ban
ban × blackmen
ban × whitewomen
ban × blackwomen
Observations
R-squared

Wave 13
0.0226
(0.0288)
0.202***
(0.0737)
-0.0123
(0.0365)
-0.00804
(0.0496)
75,843
0.527

Wave 14
0.0188
(0.0312)
0.202**
(0.100)
-0.00619
(0.0448)
-0.0338
(0.0525)
69,881
0.523

Wave 15
0.0340
(0.0283)
0.195*
(0.100)
-0.0355
(0.0385)
-0.0389
(0.0554)
68,497
0.529

Wave 16
0.00603
(0.0402)
0.0254
(0.126)
-0.0172
(0.0530)
-0.0930
(0.0761)
47,945
0.532

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008. This table reports separate Mincer wage regressions of
log wages on licensing status interacted with race and gender and license characteristics for each wave of the
SIPP in the sample. In each regression we included controls for unobserved ability and whether an individual
obtained a license for personal reasons as well as 6-digit occupational fixed effects. In the first three waves, we
retain upwards of 90% of the sample and we find that black men earn a large licensing premium from having
occupational licenses that preclude felons, when compared to white men. In wave 16, when we have lost close
to 40% of the sample, the licensing premium for black men in these occupations is substantially reduced, which
suggest that our main results are a lower bound, due to attrition bias. (Robust standard errors are clustered at
state level.)

53

References
A GAN , A. AND S. S TARR (2018): “Ban the Box, Criminal Records and Statistical Discrimination: A Field Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 191–235.
A KERLOF, G. A. (1970): “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 488–500.
A LTONJI , J. G. AND C. R. P IERRET (2001): “Employer Learning and Statistical Discrimination,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 313–50.
A NDERSON , D. M., R. B ROWN , K. K. C HARLES , AND D. I. R EES (2016): “The Effect of
Occupational Licensing on Consumer Welfare: Early Midwifery Laws and Maternal
Mortality,” NBER Working Papers.
A RCIDIACONO , P., P. B AYER , AND A. H IZMO (2010): “Beyond Signaling and Human
Capital: Education and the Revelation of Ability,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 2, 76–104.
A RROW, K. (1973): “The Theory of Discrimination,” in Discrimination in Labor Markets, ed.
by O. Ashenfelter and A. Rees, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
A SHENFELTER , O. AND C. R OUSE (1998): “Income, Schooling, and Ability: Evidence
from a New Sample of Identical Twins,” 113, 253–284.
A UTOR , D. H. AND D. S CARBOROUGH (2008): “Does Job Testing Harm Minority Workers? Evidence from Retail Establishments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 219–77.
B LAIR , P. Q. AND B. W. C HUNG (2018): “How Much of a Barrier to Entry is Occupational
Licensing?” NBER Working Papers.
C AVICO , F. J., B. G. M UJTABA , AND S. C. M UFFLER (2014): “Criminal Background Checks
in Employment: An Unfolding Legal Quandary for Employers,” Journal of Law and
Criminal Justice, 2, 41–103.
C OATE , S. AND G. C. L OURY (1993): “Will Affirmative Action Policies Eliminate Negative
Stereotypes?” American Economic Review, 83, 1220–40.
D E T RAY , D. (1982): “Veteran Status as a Screening Device,” American Economic Review,
72, 133–142.
D EMING , D. J., N. Y UCHTMAN , A. A BULAFI , C. G OLDIN , AND L. F. K ATZ (2016): “The
Value of Post Secondary Credential in the Labor Market: An Experimental Study,”
American Economic Review, 106, 778–806.
D OLEAC , J. L. AND B. H ANSEN (2016): “Does “Ban the Box” Help or Hurt Low-Skilled
Workers? Statistical Discrimination and Employment Outcomes when Criminal Histories are Hidden,” NBER Working Papers.
F RIEDMAN , M. (1962): Capitalism and Freedom, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
54

G ITTLEMAN , M., M. A. K LEE , AND M. M. K LEINER (2018): “Analyzing the Labor Market Outcome of Occupational Licensing,” Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and
Society, 57, 57–100.
G OLDIN , C. (2014): “A Pollution Theory of Discrimination: Male and Female Differences
in Occupations and Earnings,” in Human Capital in History: The American Record, ed. by
C. F. Platt Boustan, Leah and R. A. Margo, Oxford: University of Chicago Press, chap. 9,
313–348.
G OLDSMITH , A. H., D. H AMILTON , AND W. D ARITY J R . (2006): “Does a Foot in the
Door Matter? White-Nonwhite Differences in the Wage Return to Tenure and Prior
Workplace Experience,” The Southern Economic Journal, 73, 267–306.
H AN , S. AND M. M. K LEINER (2016): “Analyzing the Influence of Occupational Licensing
Duration on Labor Market Outcomes,” NBER Working Papers.
H IRSCH , B. T. AND E. J. S CHUMACHER (2004): “Match bias in wage gap estimates due to
earnings imputation,” Journal of Labor Economics, 22, 689–722.
H OLZER , H. J., S. R APHAEL , AND M. A. S TOLL (2006): “Perceived Criminality, Criminal
Background Checks, and the Racial Hiring Practices of Employers*,” Journal of Law and
Economics, 49, 451–480.
K LEINER , M. AND A. K RUEGER (2010): “The Prevalence and Effects of Occupational Licensing,” British Journal of Industrial Relations, 48, 676–687.
——— (2013): “Analyzing the Extent and Influence of Occupational Licensing on the
Labor Market,” Journal of Labor Economics, 31, S173–S202.
K OUMENTA , M. AND M. PAGLIERO (2018): “Occupational Licensing in the European
Union: Coverage and Wage Effects,” CEPR Discussion Paper.
L ANG , K. AND M. M ANOVE (2011): “Education and Labor Market Discrimination,”
American Economic Review, 101, 1467–1496.
L AW, M. AND M. M ARKS (2009): “Effects of Occupational Licensing Laws on Minorities:
Evidence from the Progressive Era,” Journal of Law and Economics, 52, 351–366.
L ELAND , H. (1979): “Quacks, Lemons and Licensing: A Theory of Minimum Quality
Standards,” Journal of Political Economy, 87, 1328–46.
M ILLER , C. (2016): “The Persistent Effect of Temporary Affirmative Action,” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
N EAL , D. A. AND W. R. J OHNSON (1996): “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White
Wage Differences,” Journal of Political Economy, 104, 869–895.
PAGLIERO , M. (2010): “Licensing Exam Difficulty and Entry Salaries in the US Market for
Lawyers,” British Journal of Industrial Relations, 48, 313–50.
55

P ERSICO , N. (2015): “The Political Economy of Occupational Licensing Associations,”
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 31, 213–241.
P HELPS , E. (1972): “The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism,” American Economic
Review, 62, 659–661.
P IZZOLA , B. AND A. TABARROK (2017): “Occupational Licensing Causes a Wage Premium: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Colorados Funeral Services Industry,”
International Review of Law and Economics, 50, 50–59.
R EDBIRD , B. (2017): “The New Closed Shop? The Economic and Structural Effects of
Occupational Licensure,” American Sociological Review, 82, 600–624.
R ONNEN , U. (1991): “Minimum Quality Standards, Fixed Costs, and Competition,” The
RAND Journal of Economics, 490–504.
S AKALA , L. (2014): “Breaking Down Mass Incarceration in the 2010 Census: State-byState Incarceration Rates by Race/Ethnicity,” Tech. rep., University of Zurich, Department of Informatics.
S HOAG , D. AND S. V EUGER (2016): “No Woman No Crime: Ban the Box, Employment
and Upskilling,” HKS Working Paper No. 16-015.
S MITH , A. (1937): The Wealth of Nations, New York: Random House.
S OLON , G., S. J. H AIDER , AND J. M. W OOLDRIDGE (2015): “What are We Weighting
For?” Journal of Human Resources, 50, 301–16.
S PENCE , M. (1973): “Job Market Signaling,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87, 355–74.
S TIGLITZ , J. AND A. W EISS (1990): “Innovation and Intellectual Property Rights,” in
Mathematical Models in Economics, ed. by M. D. Bacharach, Michael and J. Enos, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, chap. 4, 1–34.
T HORNTON , R. J. AND E. J. T IMMONS (2013): “Licensing one of the World’s Oldest Professions: Massage,” Journal of Law and Economics, 56, 371–388.
US D EPARTMENT OF L ABOR (2001): “From Hard Time to Full Time: Strategies to Help
Move Ex- Offenders from Welfare to Work,” Tech. rep.
V ICTOR , J., E. E SEN , AND M. S CHMIT (2012): “Background Checking – The Use of Criminal Background Checks in Hiring Decisions,” Tech. rep., Society for Human Resource
Management.
W OZNIAK , A. (2015): “Discrimination and the Effects of Drug Testing on Black Employment,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 97, 548–566.

56

10
10.1

Appendix: For Online Publication
Proof of Theorem 1

To solve this sequential game, we use the solution concept of sub-game perfect equilibrium (SPE). In an SPE, we solve the model using backwards induction. First, workers
in period 2 sort in to the sector that produces the highest net return, given wages and
their preferences. Next in period 1, the representative firm in each sector chooses the
corresponding wage to maximize firm profits, given the sorting of workers.
10.1.1

Period #2: Workers Choose Sector

Starting in period 2, the probability that a worker of ability ai sorts into the licensed sector,
P( L = 1| ai ), is given by the probability that the net benefit of working in the licensed
sector is greater than the net benefit of working in the unlicensed sector:
P( Li = 1| ai ) = Prob(VL,i > VU,i )
= Prob(ω L − c0 − ωU + θ ( ai − µ a ) > ei )
1 ∆ω + θ ( ai − µ a )
,
= +
2
2σe

(11)
(12)
(13)

where, ∆ω ≡ (ω L − c0 ) − (ωU + µe ) is the expected net benefit of licensing across workers
of all types. The conditional probability of licensing in increasing the expected net benefit
of licensing. It is also increasing in worker ability for cases where worker ability lowers
the cost of licensing θ > 0 but decreasing in worker ability in cases where worker ability
increases the cost of licensing θ < 0.
10.1.2

Period #1: Firms Choose Wages

Next, we must compute firm profits given the sorting decisions of workers. In order to
compute profits for the representative firms in both the licensed and unlicensed sectors,
we first compute the fraction of workers who sort into the licensed profession and the
unlicensed profession, i.e., E[ P( Li = 1| ai )] and E[ P( Li = 0| ai )], because these quantities
enter the expect labor cost of the firms.

57

µ a +σa
1
E[ P( Li = 1| ai )] =
P( Li = 1| ai )dai
2σa µa −σa

Z µa +σa 
1
1 ∆ω + θ ( ai − µ a )
+
dai
=
2σa µa −σa 2
2σe




Z µa +σa
Z µa +σa
1 ∆ω
θ
1
1
=
+
dai +
( a − µ a )dai
2 2σe 2σa µa −σa
2σe 2σa µa −σa i
{z
}
{z
}
|
|

Z

=

(15)
(16)

=0

=1

1 ∆ω
+
2 2σe

(14)

(17)

Given that we have a two-sector model, a worker is either employed in the licensed or in
the unlicensed sector. Consequently:
E[ P( Li = 0| ai )] = 1 − E[ P( Li = 1| ai )]
1 ∆ω
= −
2 2σe

(18)
(19)

To compute firm profits, we must also compute the expected ability level of a worker
given that she has a license E( ai | Li = 1) and given that she does not have a license
E( ai | Li = 0) both of which contribute to firm revenue:
E [ a i | L i = 1] =

=
=
=
=
=
=

Z µ+σa
µ−σa
Z µ+σa

ai P( ai | Li = 1)dai

P ( L i = 1| a i ) P ( a i )
dai
P ( L i = 1)
µ−σa
i
h
∆ω +θ ( ai −µ a )
1
Z µ+σa
+
2
2σe
1
dai
ai
1
∆ω
2σa µ−σa
2 + 2σe

Z µ+σa 
1
θ ( ai − µ a )
a 1+
dai
2σa µ−σa i
(σe + ∆ω )
Z µ+σa
Z µ+σa
1
θ
a da +
( a2 − ai µ a )dai
2σa µ−σa i i 2σa (σe + ∆ω ) µ−σa i


2 3
θ
2
2
µa +
2σa µ a + σa − 2σa µ a
2σa (σe + ∆ω )
3
θσa2
µa +
3(σe + ∆ω )
ai

(20)
(21)

(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)

58

Similarly,
E [ a i | L i = 0] =

=
=
=
=
=
=

Z µ+σa
µ−σa
Z µ+σa

ai P( ai | Li = 0)dai

(28)

P ( L i = 0| a i ) P ( a i )
dai
P ( L i = 0)
µ−σa
i
h
∆ω +θ ( ai −µ a )
1
Z µ+σa
2 −
2σe
1
dai
ai
∆ω
1
2σa µ−σa
2 − 2σe

Z µ+σa 
1
θ ( ai − µ a )
dai
a 1−
2σa µ−σa i
(σe − ∆ω )
Z µ+σa
Z µ+σa
1
θ
a da −
( a2 − ai µ a )dai
2σa µ−σa i i 2σa (σe − ∆ω ) µ−σa i


2 3
θ
2
2
2σa µ a + σa − 2σa µ a
µa −
2σa (σe − ∆ω )
3
θσa2
µa −
3(σe − ∆ω )
ai

(29)

(30)
(31)
(32)
(33)
(34)
(35)

Putting this all together, we get that profits in the licensed sector are given by:






θσa2
1 ∆ω
π1 = (1 + h)ω̄ µ a +
− ωL ×
+
,
3(σe + ∆ω )
2 2σe
{z
}
| {z }
|
Expected Profit per. licensed worker

(36)

Frac. Licensed workers

Firm profits in the unlicensed sector are given by:
 
π2 = ω̄ µ a −




θσa2
1 ∆ω
− ωU
−
3(σe − ∆ω )
2 2σe

(37)

Firm 1 chooses ω L to maximize its profits, π1 . This results in the following first order
∂π1
condition, ∂ω
= 0:
L

(1 + h)ω̄θσa2
− 1+
3(σe + ∆ω )2
{z
|




 

Decrease in Unit Profit






1 ∆ω
1
θσa2
+
+
(1 + h)ω̄ µ a +
− ωL = 0
2 2σe
2σe
3(σe + ∆ω )
{z
}
} |
Increase in Volume

(38)


=⇒ − σe + ∆ω +




(1 + h)ω̄θσa2
3(σe + ∆ω )





+ (1 + h)ω̄ µ a +

θσa2

3(σe + ∆ω )





− ωL

= 0.
(39)

=⇒ −σe − ∆ω + (1 + h)ω̄µ a − ω L = 0
=⇒ ω L = −σe − ∆ω + (1 + h)ω̄µ a

(40)
(41)
59

To get the best response function of the firm in the licensed sector, we re-arrange the
expression above and substitute in the definition for the net benefit of licensing ∆ω =
( ω L − c 0 ) − ( ωU + µ e ) :
ω L ( ωU ) =

1
[(1 + h)ω̄µ a + ωU + c0 + (µe − σe )]
2

(42)

The best response function for the wages in the licensed sector is increasing in the level
of human capital that is bundled with the license h and with the quality of the firm’s
technology ω̄. It is also increasing in the wage offered by the unlicensed firm, the cost of
licensing and the minimum taste for the unlicensed sector, µe − σe .
To find the best response function for firm 2, we assert that firm 2 chooses ωU to
∂π2
= 0:
maximize its profits, π2 . This results in the following first order condition ∂ω
U




 


1
ω̄θσa2
1 ∆ω
θσa2
+
−
−1
ω̄ µ a −
− ωU = 0.
2 2σe
2σe
3(σe − ∆ω )
3(σe − ∆ω )2
{z
}
{z
} |
|


Change in Volume

Change in Unit Profit



=⇒

ω̄θσa2



(43)



 
− (σe − ∆ω ) + ω̄ µ a −

3(σe + ∆ω )
=⇒ −(σe − ∆ω ) + ω̄µ a − ωU = 0
=⇒ ωU = −σe + ∆ω + ω̄µ a



θσa2
− ωU = 0
3(σe − ∆ω )

(44)
(45)
(46)
(47)

To get the best response function of the firm 2, we re-arrange the expression above and
use the definition for the net benefit of licensing ∆ω = (ω L − c0 ) − (ωU + µe ):
ωU ( ω L ) =

1
[ω̄µ a + (ω L − c0 ) − (µe + σe )]
2

(48)

The best response function for the wages in the unlicensed sector is increasing with the
quality of the firm’s technology ω̄, the average ability of all workers, and the competing
wages in the licensed sector. It is decreasing in the cost of obtaining a license and the
maximum taste for the unlicensed sector by workers, µe + σe . At the Nash equilibrium
both firms wages are mutual best responses. Substituting the best response of the firm in
the licensed sector into the best response function for the firm in the unlicensed sector, we

60

∗.
solve for the equilibrium wage in the unlicensed sector ωU

1
[ω̄µ a + (ω L − c0 ) − (µe + σe )]
2


1
1 1
[(1 + h)ω̄µ a + ωU + c0 + (µe − σe )]
=⇒ ωU = [ω̄µ a + −c0 − (µe + σe )] +
2
2 2


3 1
1
1
3
3
+ h ω̄µ a − c0 − µe − σe
=⇒ ωU =
4
4 4
4
4
4


1
1
1
∗
=⇒ ωU
= 1 + h ω̄µ a − c0 − µe − σe
3
3
3

ωU ( ω L ) =

(49)
(50)
(51)
(52)

To solve for the equilibrium wages in the licensed sector, we insert equilibrium wages
from the unlicensed sector into the best response function for the licensed sector:
1
[(1 + h)ω̄µ a + ωU + c0 + (µe − σe )]
(53)
2



1
1
1
1
1
=⇒ ω L = [(1 + h)ω̄µ a + c0 + (µe − σe )] +
1 + h ω̄µ a − c0 − µe − σe
2
2
3
3
3
(54)


2
1
1
=⇒ ω L∗ = 1 + h ω̄µ a + c0 + µe − σe
(55)
3
3
3

ωL =

Comment: Wages in the licensed sector are larger than wages in the unlicensed sector,
∗ > 0 =⇒ ω ∗ > 0.
assuming c0 , µe , σe , µ a are all positive. Hence of ωU
L
To solve for the fraction of licensed workers, we substitute equilibrium wages into the
expression for the fraction of licensed workers in equation (56):
f∗ =

1 ω̄µ a h − c0 − µe
+
.
2
6σe

(56)

Defining c ≡ hω̄µ a − µe − 3σe , it is straight forward to show that if the average cost of
licensing, c0 , is lower than c that licensing is sufficiently cheap that all workers obtain a
license and work in the licensed sector, hence f = 1. Likewise, defining c̄ ≡ hω̄µ a − µe +
3σe , it is straight forward to show that if the average cost of licensing, c0 , is higher than c̄
that licensing is sufficiently onerous that all workers prefer not to obtain a license, hence
f = 0. It is only for intermediate value c0 ∈ (c, c̄), that we observe a non-zero fraction of
workers in both the licensed and unlicensed sectors.
We further simplify the expression for the fraction of licensed workers in equation (56)
and the equilibrium wages for workers in equations using the definitions for c̄ and c:
∗

f =



c̄ − c0
6σe

61


,

(57)

1
∗
ωU
= ω̄µ a − (c0 − c) ,
3

(58)

1
2
∗
+ hω̄µ a + (c0 + µe ) .
ω L∗ = ωU
3
3

(59)

Corollary 1. Wages are unambiguously higher in the licensed sector than in the unlicensed sector,
and the wedge between these two wages is increasing in the cost of licensing. In equilibrium,
unlicensed workers also experience a wage benefit from the human capital that is bundled with the
licensing. This wage benefit is half the human capital benefit experienced by licensed workers.
The fact that licensing is bundled with human capital h increases the market return
to licensed labor and, in doing so, increases the value of the outside option of workers
who opt not to become licensed. Consistent with this prediction of the model, Han and
Kleiner (2016) provide evidence that workers in a licensed occupation who do not possess
a license but can practice because of grandfathering provisions experience a 5% increase
in wages as a result of their occupation becoming licensed, when compared to similar
unlicensed workers in occupations with no licensing requirements. By contrast, the wage
premium to licensed workers in the occupation, when compared to similar unlicensed
workers in occupations with no licensing requirements, is 12 percentage points higher
than the wage premium experienced by grandfathered workers.
Corollary 2. Given two distinct groups of workers B and W such that the average cost of licensing is greater for group B than for group W (i.e., co,B > c0,W ) unlicensed B workers earn less
than unlicensed W workers, whereas licensed B workers earn more than licensed W workers, ceteris paribus. This follows from the fact that wages are decreasing in c0 for unlicensed workers
(equation 6a) but increasing in c0 for licensed workers (equation 6b).
The result of this corollary maps into the empirical fact that we documented in Section 6.2, which is that unlicensed black men earn less, on average, than unlicensed white
men, whereas licensed black men working in occupations with felony restrictions earn,
on average, slightly more than licensed white men in similar occupations. The presumption here is that the felony restriction imposes a higher average cost of licensing on black
men relative to white men. Using data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sakala (2014)
documents that black men are six times more likely to be incarcerated than white men,
which is consistent with this assumption.

10.2

Proof of Proposition 3

Proof. By definition the license premium is:
α≡

1
2
∗
ω L∗ − ωU
a h + 3 ( c0 + µ e )
3 ω̄µ


=
.
∗
1
1
ωU
1 + 3 h ω̄µ a − 3 (c0 + µe ) − σe

(60)

The license premium increases in c0 because the wage gap (numerator) increases in c0
and the wage in the unlicensed sector (denominator) is decreasing in c0 . In particular, the
62

derivative of the licensing premium with respect to c0 is:


1 ω L − ωU
dα
=
> 0.
dc0
3
ωu2

(61)

The derivative of the licensing premium with respect to the mean ability is:
dα
ω̄ [h(µe + σe + c0 ) + 2(c0 + µe )]
dα
=−
< 0.
=⇒
∗
2
dµ a
dµ a
3ωU

(62)

The derivative of the licensing premium with respect to h is:
∗ − ω∗ ]
ω̄µ a [2ωU
dα
L
=
∗
2
dh
3ωU

(63)
ω ∗ −ω ∗

∗
∗
L
U
< 1 (i.e., α < 1).
Therefore dα
∗
ωU
dh > 0 =⇒ 2ωU − ω L > 0, which holds when
The positive relationship between the licensing premium and the dispersion in sector
taste comes from the fact that wages in the unlicensed sector (denominator) fall with
σe .

10.3

Proof of Proposition 4

The total social surplus is the sum of the firms revenue minus the expected cost of licensing. Since the expected wages of employees is a cost to firms and a benefit to workers, it
nets out in the social surplus calculation, in the case where we place an equal weighting
on firm profits and net worker wages:
θσa2
SS = (1 + h)ω̄ µ a +
3(σe + ∆ω )
|
{z




1 ∆ω
+
2 2σe

Firm 1 Revenue

θσa2
+ ω̄ µ a −
3(σe − ∆ω )
} |
{z







1 ∆ω
−
2 2σe

Firm 2 Revenue


}
(64)



θ 2 σa2

− c0 −
3(σe + ∆ω )
|
{z



1 ∆ω
+
2 2σe

Expected Licensing Costs


(65)
}





1
1
1 2
1 2
=
(1 + h)ω̄ µ a (σe + ∆ω ) + θσa +
ω̄ µ a (σe − ∆ω ) − θσa
2σe
3
2σe
3


1
1
−
c0 (σe + ∆ω ) − θσa2
2σe
3

(66)
(67)
(68)

63

To find the socially optimally cost of licensing, we take the derivative of the social surplus
with respect to the cost, c0 . Recall the following:
∆ω =

d∆ω
1
1
(ω̄µ a h − c0 − µe ) =⇒
=−
3
dc0
3

(69)

Therefore
d(SS)
=0
dc0
1
1
1
1
=⇒ −
(1 + h)ω̄µ a +
ω̄µ a −
(σe + ∆ω ) +
c0 = 0
6σe
6σe
2σe
6σe
1
1
1
hω̄µ a −
(σe + ∆ω ) +
c0 = 0
=⇒ −
6σe
2σe
6σe
=⇒ hω̄µ a + 3(σe + ∆ω ) − c0 = 0
=⇒ hω̄µ a + 3σe + ω̄µ a h − c0 − µe − c0 = 0
=⇒ 2c0 = 2hω̄µ a + 3σe − µe = 0
3
1
=⇒ c0∗ = hω̄µ a + σe − µe
2
2
1
=⇒ c0∗ = (c̄ + hω̄µ a )
2

64

(70)
(71)
(72)
(73)
(74)
(75)
(76)
(77)

Table XV: Ban Premium for Black Men Decreasing in Firm Size (Weighted)
(1)
>100
blackmen
whitewomen
blackwomen
license
license × blackmen
license × whitewomen
license × blackwomen
ban
ban × blackmen
ban × whitewomen
ban × blackwomen
Constant

Observations
R-squared

Firm size
(2)
(3)
>200
>500

(4)
>1000

-0.105
(0.0210)
-0.127
(0.00961)
-0.219
(0.0283)
0.0624
(0.0265)
-0.0284
(0.0885)
0.0699
(0.0346)
0.143
(0.0529)
0.0665
(0.0235)
0.161
(0.0543)
0.0697
(0.0429)
0.0831
(0.0463)
1.670
(0.0997)

-0.100
(0.0234)
-0.119
(0.0120)
-0.212
(0.0300)
0.0574
(0.0336)
-0.0751
(0.119)
0.0620
(0.0396)
0.122
(0.0552)
0.0740
(0.0313)
0.102
(0.104)
0.0738
(0.0522)
0.0142
(0.0796)
1.580
(0.109)

-0.104
(0.0294)
-0.117
(0.0151)
-0.224
(0.0278)
0.0558
(0.0426)
0.0275
(0.0996)
0.0627
(0.0504)
0.0915
(0.0762)
0.0888
(0.0382)
0.0872
(0.116)
0.0647
(0.0526)
-0.00637
(0.0906)
1.548
(0.106)

-0.122
(0.0367)
-0.113
(0.0189)
-0.193
(0.0295)
0.0397
(0.0488)
0.0613
(0.122)
0.0757
(0.0584)
0.109
(0.0933)
0.0629
(0.0452)
0.0930
(0.134)
0.0707
(0.0487)
0.00347
(0.100)
1.522
(0.114)

102,860
0.535

74,967
0.541

49,020
0.551

35,724
0.557

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
Notes: This table reports a wage regression on license status conditional on
firm size using the survey sample weights. The focal result here is that the
ban premium for black men is decreasing in firm size as we go from companies with 200 employees to companies with 500 and 1000 employees. All
regressions include month fixed effects, a quadratic in age, education levels, a Hispanic indicator, ‘other race’ indicator, union status, a government
worker indicator, a self-employed indicator, a service worker indicator, as
well as state and 3-digit occupation fixed effects. In addition, indicators for
‘certification’ and ‘license not required for jobs’ are included. The sample is
restricted to respondents aged 18-64 with hourly wages on the main job between $5 and $100 from May 2012 through November 2013. Observations
with imputed wages and license status are dropped. (Robust standard errors
are clustered at state level.)

65

Table XVI: Wage Premium for Black Men in Banned Occupations Robust (Weighted)

ban
ban × blackmen
ban × whitewomen
ban × blackwomen
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Racial Disparity
in Arrest
0.106
(0.0184)
0.119
(0.0465)
0.0268
(0.0229)
0.0485
(0.0330)
261,617
0.525

(2)
Government
Employment
0.102
(0.0191)
0.123
(0.0476)
0.0277
(0.0237)
0.0467
(0.0314)
262,166
0.530

(3)
Frac. White
in Occupation
0.104
(0.0187)
0.102
(0.0513)
0.0328
(0.0246)
0.0408
(0.0325)
262,166
0.526

(4)
Union
Status
0.0992
(0.0182)
0.128
(0.0502)
0.0409
(0.0223)
0.0543
(0.0321)
262,166
0.525

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
Notes: This table reports a regression of wages on licensing status, using survey sample weights. To test
whether the ban premium experienced by black men is robust, we control for heterogeneity by race and
gender in four key variables that could also be correlated with whether an occupation has a felony ban: (i)
the log of the racial disparity in arrest between blacks and whites, (ii) public sector employment, (iii) fraction
of whites in occupation and (iv) worker union status. (We use robust standard errors that are clustered at
state level.)

66

Table XVII: Ban Premium for Black Men not Due to Returns to Education (Weighted)
(1)
Licensed
(with felony bans)
blackmen
whitewomen
blackwomen
postHS
postHS × blackmen
postHS × whitewomen
postHS × blackwomen
Constant

Observations
R-squared

(2)
(3)
Licensed
Unlicensed
(no felony bans)

0.0467
(0.0847)
-0.211
(0.0828)
-0.180
(0.0828)
0.0365
(0.0564)
0.0241
(0.129)
0.119
(0.0848)
0.0367
(0.0878)
1.891
(0.169)

-0.199
(0.116)
-0.0891
(0.0521)
-0.246
(0.136)
0.113
(0.0293)
0.128
(0.149)
0.0277
(0.0535)
0.151
(0.129)
1.710
(0.160)

-0.0886
(0.0268)
-0.134
(0.00848)
-0.209
(0.0271)
0.0900
(0.0113)
-0.0209
(0.0388)
-0.0166
(0.0149)
-0.0135
(0.0304)
1.752
(0.0582)

14,878
0.522

28,065
0.453

198,412
0.532

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
This table reports three separate wage regressions conditional on license status using survey sample
weights. The goal of these regressions is to test whether the licensing premium to black men in
occupations with felony bans is driven by differentially higher returns to post-secondary education
for black men in these occupations. We find that black men in these occupations do not experience
differentially higher returns to post-secondary education relative to white men. (Robust standard
errors are clustered at state level.)

67

Table XVIII: Women Benefit from Human Capital Bundled with Licensing (Weighted)

blackmen
whitewomen
blackwomen
license
license × blackmen
license × whitewomen
license × blackwomen
ban
ban × blackmen
ban × whitewomen
ban × blackwomen

(1)
Base Model

(2)
training

(3)
continuous
education

(4)
exams

(5)
training

(6)
continuous
education

(7)
exams

-0.101
(0.0158)
-0.139
(0.00864)
-0.212
(0.0175)
0.0790
(0.0157)
0.00564
(0.0609)
0.0639
(0.0194)
0.121
(0.0329)
0.103
(0.0183)
0.134
(0.0470)
0.0300
(0.0227)
0.0518
(0.0315)

-0.105
(0.0190)
-0.145
(0.00883)
-0.214
(0.0180)
0.0218
(0.0223)
-0.0237
(0.0737)
0.0272
(0.0234)
0.105
(0.0430)
0.0472
(0.0255)
0.101
(0.0812)
-0.00568
(0.0287)
0.0339
(0.0378)
0.0603
(0.0243)
0.0333
(0.0576)
0.0443
(0.0174)
0.0171
(0.0367)
1.763
(0.0612)

-0.102
(0.0166)
-0.144
(0.00926)
-0.213
(0.0163)
0.0498
(0.0160)
-0.00454
(0.0830)
0.0322
(0.0205)
0.114
(0.0385)
0.0746
(0.0217)
0.122
(0.0683)
-0.00350
(0.0256)
0.0404
(0.0494)
0.0403
(0.0188)
0.0135
(0.0628)
0.0462
(0.0211)
0.00867
(0.0419)
1.770
(0.0607)

-0.107
(0.0194)
-0.144
(0.00923)
-0.214
(0.0184)
0.0561
(0.0268)
-0.0448
(0.0806)
0.0333
(0.0220)
0.111
(0.0411)
0.0806
(0.0364)
0.0802
(0.0881)
-0.000205
(0.0310)
0.0407
(0.0360)
0.0232
(0.0302)
0.0581
(0.0622)
0.0393
(0.0185)
0.0120
(0.0402)
1.764
(0.0614)

-0.0959
(0.0183)
-0.144
(0.00810)
-0.205
(0.0177)
0.0162
(0.0236)
-0.0298
(0.0777)
0.0293
(0.0242)
0.100
(0.0432)
0.0306
(0.0276)
0.113
(0.0871)
0.00559
(0.0294)
0.0392
(0.0378)
0.0582
(0.0256)
0.0250
(0.0556)
0.0459
(0.0177)
0.0172
(0.0370)
1.245
(0.119)

-0.0927
(0.0162)
-0.144
(0.00859)
-0.204
(0.0162)
0.0453
(0.0168)
-0.00915
(0.0873)
0.0327
(0.0212)
0.108
(0.0381)
0.0590
(0.0222)
0.135
(0.0781)
0.00596
(0.0256)
0.0440
(0.0480)
0.0361
(0.0186)
0.000927
(0.0648)
0.0507
(0.0207)
0.0114
(0.0414)
1.252
(0.116)

-0.0980
(0.0188)
-0.143
(0.00851)
-0.204
(0.0182)
0.0554
(0.0290)
-0.0499
(0.0849)
0.0355
(0.0227)
0.106
(0.0415)
0.0690
(0.0377)
0.0937
(0.0950)
0.0111
(0.0311)
0.0456
(0.0362)
0.0155
(0.0303)
0.0488
(0.0610)
0.0407
(0.0179)
0.0130
(0.0408)
1.245
(0.118)

X

X

X

257,286
0.539

257,286
0.539

257,286
0.539

requirement
requirement × blackmen
requirement × whitewomen
requirement × blackwomen
Constant

1.761
(0.0611)

Skill
Observations
R-squared

262,166
0.525

262,166
0.526

262,166
0.526

262,166
0.525

Data Source: Wave 13 to Wave 16 of SIPP Panel 2008.
Notes: This table reports wage regressions in which we to test whether the licensing premium is due to occupational licensing increasing the human capital of
workers. All regressions include month fixed effects, a quadratic in age, education levels, a Hispanic indicator, ‘Other race’ indicator, union status, a government
worker indicator, a self-employed indicator, a service worker indicator, as well as state and 3-digit occupation fixed effects and use survey sample weights. In
addition, indicators for ‘certification’ and ‘license not required for jobs’ are included. that are heterogeneous by race and gender. The sample is restricted to
respondents aged 18-64 with hourly wages on the main job between $5 and $100 from May 2012 through November 2013. Observations with imputed wages and
license status are dropped. (Robust standard errors are clustered at state level.)

68

